AN ANTIDOTE OR TREATISE OF THIRTY CONTROVERSIES: With a large Discourse of
the Church.

IN WHICH The sovereign truth of Catholic doctrine, is faithfully delivered:
against the pestiferous writings of all English Sectaryes.

AND In particular, against D. WHITAKER, D. FVLKE, D. RIYNOLDS, D. BILSON, D.
ROBERT ABBOT, D. SPARKS, and D. FIELD, the chief vpholders, some of
Protestancy, some of Puritanisme, some of both.

Divided into three Parts.

By S. N. Doctor of Divinity.

THE FIRST PART.

Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 30. How should one be able to pursue a thousand, and two put
tenthousand to flight? Is it not therefore, because their God has sold them,
and our Lord has enclosed, and made them thrall? Permissu Superiorum, M. DC.
XXII.

THE principal maintainers of Protestancy, of whom I spoke in the former
page, are D. BILSON, and D. FIELD. THE pillars of Puritanisme, are D. REYNOLDS,
and D. SPARKS, who were chosen Proctours, for the Pre^isian faction, in the
Conference before his Majesty, at Hampton Court. THE abbettours of both, are D.
WHITAKER, D. FVLKE, and D. ROBERT ABBOT, who sometimes defend the articles of
the one, sometimes of the other.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY STVDENTS OF THE TWO FAMOVS UNIVERSITIES, OXFORD, AND
CAMBRIDGE.
ARISTOTLE in penning his Moral Instructions of Arist. l. r. Eth. cap. 1.
Philosophy, thought all his endeauours well bestowed, if he might profit (as
he says) any one thereby; much more if Towns, and Cities: How happy then may
I think my labors employed, if by these small pains I may rightly instruct
some few of You, not in Moral Virtues, but in Divine and Heavenly Verities:
not in Precepts of Manners only, but in Articles of Faith, in Mysteries of true
Belief, on which, I will not say the civil Nurture, or gay Deportment of the
outward man, but the inward Carriage, and Grace of the Holy Ghost, the life of
your Souls, the love of God, and hope of all eternity depends. By
instructing You, I shall clear the beams, which give light to thousands: I
shall purify the Waters and purge the Fountain of which many must drink. You
are the Seeds, you are the Lights of the Kingdom: you are the Mines, whose
treasures are to be dispensed, and riches of learning hereafter derived to the
whole body of the Realm. Wherefore least you should both beguile others, and be
your selves deceived with counterfeite dross, in lieu of true and perfect
metal; I have opened unto you these veins of Gold, with which, if you covet
to enrich your souls, two things I request at your hands. The one is, not to
frame an ouerweening conceit, or bear too partial Affection to the men of
your own side: the other, to peruse this Treatise with an indifferent and
single eye, and with a greedy zeal of embracing Truth, from whose mouth soever.

2. You are not (I hope) of Agesicles the Lacedemonian his mind, who taking
great pleasure to hear smooth and eloque^t discourses, would not intertaine
Philophanes Plutarch in his Laconike Apophtheg.
the famous Rhetoricia^, being a stranger unto him, because (as Plutarch
reports) he would be Scholar only to them, whose son he was: that is, he
would learn of them alone, amongst whom he was borne. Much less can I think
you bewitched with Philostorgius the Eunomian his folly, who was so besotted of
his Master Eunomius, as he admired his very natural defects, and set the
gloss of virtue on them. For, his faltering tongue (as Nicephorus writes) he
vainly Niceph. l. 12. c. 29.
commended, as the Key of Eloquence; his flow words he prized as precious
Margarites: the spots and blemishes of his leaprous face, what did he account
them, but the rarest marks and ornaments of beauty? If any of you should be
infected with these bastardly humors, if you would hear none but those, in
whose bosoms ye have been bred, or be so far enamoured of your first
Teachers wits, as to love their errors, applaud their forgeries, and praise
the beauty of their deformed writings; little hope should I have to gain your
souls. But if ye be (as I trust ye are) lovers of truth, enemies of falsehood,
desirous of your own salvation; then here you may discover that Euangelical
Pearl, which Ma^^. 13. verse. 4^.
he that finds, sells all that he has to buy so rare a Jewel.

3. I know the subtilty of Satan, and snare of Heretics has ever been, as
the Romans 16. v. 18. 2. Petr. 2. v. 3.
Apostle says, By sweet speeches and benedictions to seduce the hearts of
Innocents. By feigned words to make merchandise of You. Their chiefest project
and principal study is with meretricious and painted eloquence to intertaine
their followers: and whilst they fill their ears with delight, to instill
into their souls most poisoned doctrine. But a great The saying of
Demosthenes, mentioned by S. Aug. con. Crescon. Gram. l. 2. cap. 1. 1. Cor. 2.
v. 1. 4. 5. and ver. 13.
Orator can tell you: That the riches of Greece consist not in words. And the
Apostle pronounces: Not in loftiness and sublimity of speech, not in the
perswasible words of human wisdom, are the Mysteries of Christ; but in the
power of God, and Doctrine of the spirit. Be not therefore, be not (I beseech
you) inueagled with the smooth tongue, or filed style of your flourishing
Sect-maisters, but consider the matter, weigh the reasons, examine the proofs
they allege, and you shall find such silly arguments, Aug. l. 5. confess. c. 2.
such slender stuff, as S. Augustine espied in the eloquent and lofty
discourses of Faustus Manichaeus, and the rest of his crew: when not regarding
(as he says) what gallant dish, or vessel of speech, but what food of
knowledge he propounded unto him; not harkening to the sound of words, but to
the pith of matter. Albeit they bragged much, and promised nothing more then
Truth, Truth: yet he discovered, as he witnesses, No truth amongst Ibid. l. 3.
c. 9.
them: nothing but Lies, Vanities, and vile Superstitions.

4. The like shall you discern in the Ghospellers of our time. For although
they vaunt of the word of God, vaunt of Scriptures, and Scriptures only seem
to follow: Ambr. in c. 3. ep. ad Titum.
yet because, as S. Ambrose teaches, By the word of the law they impugn the
law, framing their private sense and construction to countenance the peruersity
of their minds, by the authority of the law, it is more then evident they
follow not the Oracles of God, but rather the Fancies of their own brain, the
suggestion of Satan. For by perverse interpretation (as S. Hierome testifies)
of ^^ier. l. ^. in ^. 1. ep. ad Galat.
the Gospel of Christ, is made the Ghospel of man; or which is worse, the
Gospel of the Devil. And Martial the Poet speaks to this purpose.

Quem recitas meus est, ^ Fidentine, libellus:
Sed male cum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
The Book thou do recite, o Fidentine, is mine: Reciting it amiss, it
grows to be thine.

5. Secondly, they boast of the pure preaching of the Word, whereas you shall
discover in my third Part, that they have no authority to preach, no mission,
no vocation at all: They are Thieves, who enter Joan. 10. v. 2. and 10.
not by the door, but climb another way to steal, kill, and destroy your
souls. They are the Ezech. 13: v. 3. 6, and 7.
false Prophets who cry: Thus says our Lord, when our Lord said it not, nor
sent them, nor gave them commission to speak. And the purity of which they
crake, is (as Hieremy Hierem. 14. 1 v. 4.
declares) A lying Vision, and Divination, and Deceit, and Beguiling of their
heart, which they prophecy unto you. Thirdly, they glory to have purged and
reformed the Church of many errors, which by little and little have crept into
her, and restored her again to the ancient integrity of the Apostolic Faith:
But you shall see their Reformations have been al corruptions, abuses,
innouations: they have broken the peace, departed from the unity of the flock
of Christ, and are indeed no Church at all, but a Rebellious Faction, an
Heretical Assembly. You shall find their Ancient Faith, a new Belief, as S.
Gregory Nazianzen said of the Arians; their refined Greg. Nazian. orat. in
Aria^os.
Doctrines mere novelties, new broached Heresies, which I pray God both you,
and all others may have grace to discern in time, least you open your eyes,
and begin to lament these things to late, as Constantius the Emperor did, of
whom the same S. Gregory Nazianzen writes: That lying on his deathbed, he
repented him of three things: Greg. Nazian. in Laudem Athanas.
First, that he had commanded his Son- in law to be slain: The other, that
he had nominated Julian the Apostata to succeed him in his Imperial Throne:
The third, that he had given ear to new devised Doctrines. And with these
words he yielded up his ghost.

9. O ye flourishing Academians! But what should I restrain my speech to you?
O England, my dearest Country, I would to God this fearful president might so
move thy Heart, as to make Thee, now whilst time serves, and grace is
offered, more fruitfully bewail the like, or more grievous crimes committed by
Thee! Thou perchance have not murdered thy carnal Kinsfolks or Allies, but
thy spiritual Pastors, Guides, and Curates of thy soul. Some thou have
spoiled, vexed, imprisoned, and pined away with extremest misery: some thou
have arraigned, executed, and barbarously massacred as Rebels to thy Prince,
and Traitors to thy Crown: their blood like water thou Psalm. 78. v. 3.
have powered forth, round about Jerusalem: and their quarters thou have set up
as preyes to be devoured by birds and fowls of the air. Thou have unjustly
nominated and entitled others to inherit their rooms, possess their
benefices, discharge their functions; many of them revolted Apostata's; many
mercinary Hirelings; all tyrannical Usurpers; who seek not so much to
oppress the bodies, as exercise their tyranny over the souls of thy
subjects, and pitifully enthral them to everlasting servitude. Lastly, thou
have dammed up the passage, by which the clear waters of Antiquity should flow
into thy Kingdom, and thou have opened the sluse to the puddles of nouelty, to
new floods of Doctrine, new feigned Sacraments, new Articles of Faith, new
worship of God; which I beseech his Divine Piety thou may have grace to
detest, and learn of the Lacedaemonians (who would not permit any strange
merchandise, or unusual wares to be transported into their City) to banish and
abandon these unwonted Doctrines: and embrace again that ancient Faith, which
once thy whole Realm, then happy Island, daughter of God, and Dowry of the B.
Virgin, devoutly sucked from the breast of Rome; which all thy former Kings and
Princes, until now of late, supported, thy Laws established, thy People
honored, thy Universities defended. To this end I present you (Noble Students)
with these first fruits of my labors, and will not cease to sacrifice unto
God, my continual prayers.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
TWO of the first and stoutest Champions of the Primitive Church, Tertullian
and Arnobius writing against the Pagans, avouch, Tertul. and Arno. co^tra Gent.
that many of them impugned at the beginning our Christian faith, not so much
of inueterate hatred, as either of ignorance not knowing what we maintainde: or
of weakness, transported by the stream of Idolatry, which every where
disgraced, and opposed it self against it. S. Augustine likewise writes of
himself, Aug. l. 7^ Confess. c. 19.
and his friend Alipius, how slowly they embraced, or rather refrained from the
Catholic Church, by reason of some erroneous conceits they framed of our
belief; the one, that we were infected with the heresy of Apollinaris; the
other, not discerning the purity of our doctrine, from the dregs of Photinus.

2. The same opinion I have of sundry Protestants, who renounce our Religion,
not of any malicious mind, but for that they ignorantly mistake the true
grounds of faith, or easily give ear to the pernicious obloquies of their
fayth-lesse Ministers, who without fear of God or regard of conscience
perfidiously appeach us of innumerable Sacriledges; of such worship of Images
as was used by Reyn. de ido. Romans Eccles. lib. 1. c. 2. etc. Fulke in c. 2. ad
Col. sect. 3. Fulke in 1. ad Tim. c. 4. sect. 4. and 5. Sutclif. in his survey
of Popery cap. 8. Sparks in his answer to M. John D'Albines p. 219. 120.
Whitaker. contro. 1. quaest. 5. Rich. Stoch in his ep. Dedica. to the Lord
Knowles prefixed before M. Whitaker. answer to M. Camp. 10. reasons Bills. in
his book of Christian subjection etc: 4. par and part. 1. Reyn. in his
conference with M. Heart.
the Carpocratians; of such invocation of Angels as the Apostolikes practiced;
of denial of Marriage with the Tatians, and Encratites; of selling the gifts
of the holy Ghost with Simon Magus; of honoring our Blessed Lady, in offering
her a wafer cake with the Collyridians; and of many such execrable blasphemies,
which our hearts detest far more then theirs. Wherefore after the excellent
and worthy labors of diverse memorable men, both foreign and domestical, who
with large volumes and invincible reasons have purged us of these slanders and
manifestly defended the unconquerable truth of our ancient belief: I have
endeavored to make a short abridgment of all our most weighty and important
proofs, that here the Reader may see as in a map described, or pourtraited
in a table, what in the spacious field of sundry men's works, is in diverse
things more amply enlarged.

3. My purpose is not severally to encounter any one particul^r adversary, but
to trace the steps, and jointly to des^ry the errors of many, according as
the project of my intended discourse, or force of their opposition shall
minister occasion: for my intention is to wade, by Gods help, into the maine
Ocean of all the greatest and most difficult questions controuerted at this day
between our English Protestants and us. Therefore because I could not single
forth any one person unanswered, who learnedly, methodically and sufficiently
treats of them all; I made choice to enter combat with diverse the most
eminent I could find in every particular point, that overthrowing them, I might
easily put their adherents to flight. To uphold, for example, the Scripture
alone to be Judge of Controversies, who spends more time, shows more skill,
imployeth better talents, then M. Whitaker, styled by one of his fauourits, An
excellent instrument of Gods glory, and one of the most glorious lights of our
English Church? To deprive the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Real Presence, has any
used like art, bestowed more diligence, mustered more objections, then M.
Bilson? who need not borrow any praise from the pens of flatterers, he has I
confess, too many good gifts for such ill employments.

4. Again, who trauaileth more painfully, then he, and M. Reynolds, to shake
(if it were possible) the impregnable rock of S. Peter, but chiesly of the
Popes Supremacy? Is there any at length (not to instance any further) more
eager against Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, then M. Fulke, and M. Field;
He, in his Confutation of Purgatory, and in diverse other works; This, in his
third book of the Church, and in his Appendixor ansivere to M. Higgons? And
are not these the chief Captains and Coronels of Protestant rebellion, in
whom the life breaths, and main strength of their faction consists?
Wherefore if he who often gives victory to the weakest on his side, shall give
me grace to vanquish these his stoutest enemies, little need we fear the
after-skirmishing of other their scattered and appaled troops. Notwithstanding
you must not expect I should run through all their erring paths, or ferret
every one out of their starting holes: my drift is only to overthrow their
grounds, and blunt the edge of their sharpest weapons, yet with such evident
conquest and demonstration of our Catholic Doctrine, as may be in all points
sufficient to instruct the ignorant, strengthen the weak, discomfort the
proud, and recall the straied to the right way of life.

5. For besides the assaults I make against them, the arguments I produce on my
own side shall in every Controversy be chiefly drawn out of the Word of God,
the heavenly treasure and touchstone of truth, out of the ancient Fathers, and
for the most part Aug. con* Donatist* post Collation. c. 34. Matthew. c. 12. v.
27. Lact. divine. insti. Arnob. aduers. Ge^tes. Eusebius. de praep. Euang. Clemens
Alex l. Strom. Cicero pro A. Caecin.
also out of General Counsels, out of the secret bowels and instinct of
Nature, out of the discourse of reason, and lastly out of the undeniable
writings and testimonies of our Adversaries; who, as S. Augustine heretofore
noted of the Donatists, write and speak many things in our behalf, forced by
truth, not invited by Charity. Therefore as Christ alleged the Pharisees
Children to be judge against the Pharisees, as Lactantius, Arnobius, Eusebius,
Clemens Alexandrinus, and many more did bring the writings of Hermes, Orpheus,
the Sybils, and other Gentiles, To convince (says S. Augustine) by them the
vanities of the Gentiles: So we propound the chief Authors and Promoters of
Protestancy to bear witness against the Protestants; with this prouiso, which
the Prince of Orators Marcus Tullius made in like case, who using in his own
behalf the confession of one of his Opponents, entreated the Judges, Not to
believe him the less, because he was a man of himself little worthy of
credit; but rather to believe him the more, because he spoke in that point,
both repugnant to his cause, and contrary to himself.

6. So I desire my Reader, not to make less reckoning of the testimony of
Protestants in favor of us, for that their authority of it self is of small
account; but to esteem it the rather, because their own consciences induce
them, in matters of such weight, to depose against themselves, and against the
oath of their own confederacy. Especially, seeing M. Whitaker (with many of
his Whitaker. de Eccles. cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 10. Tertul. de testimonio animae
aduersus gentes.
associates, whom I let pass) contesteth; It must needs be a strong and
forcible argument, which is taken from the confession of the adverse part. It
must needs move any reasonable man, as Tertullian upon an occosion not much
different affirms, to see, The very enuiers and persecutors of Christian
verity condemned by their own records, as guilty of error in themselves, and
iniquity against us. Which when many of my dear Countrymen shall read and
peruse, few I trust will be so wilfully bent, as to persist in their folly, so
many festly opened and discovered unto them. Few will be such enemies to their
souls, as to forsake the path, which assuredly leads to the house of
Salvation. August. in Psalm. 32.
The giver of light and God of all goodness open their eyes, and inspire their
hearts, That they may recover themselves, and see, that they have nothing at
all, to oppose against the Truth.

THE TABLE Showing the Controuersyes discussed, and maintained in this first
Part.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The first Controversy.
DECLARES, how neither the holy Scripture by it self, nor by any means the
Protestants assign, can be judge of Controuersyes; against D. Whitaker, D.
Reynoldes, and all other Protestants. page 1. The 2. Chapter. VVherin all that
which D. Reynoldes, D. Sparks, and M. Whitaker devise, to bolster their former
position, is refuted. page 27. The 2. Controversy. That all things necessary to
salvation are not contained in Scripture; against D. Reynoldes, D. Bilson, and
D. Field. page 42. The 3. Controversy. Wherein the Real Presence is
maintained, against D. Bilson, and D. Sparks. page 58. The 2 Chapter. In which
D. Bilson, D. Sparks, and all Sacramentaryes, are more particulerly refelled,
and other their chiefest arguments answered. page 77. The 4. Controversy.
Wherein is vpholden the Sacrifice of the Mass; against D. Bilson, D.
Reynoldes, and D. Sparks. page 93. The 5. Controversy. VVherin the Communion
under one kind is defended; against D. Bilson, D. Fulk, and all other
Protestants. p. 116 The 6. Controversy. Conuinceth the necessity of Confession,
against D. Sparks, and D. Fulke. page 129. The 7. Controversy. Establishes
Satisfaction, against D. Field, and D. Fulke. p. 144. The 8. Countrouersy,
Approves the doctrine and practice of Indulgences, against D. Fulke, and other
Sectaryes. page 160.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The ninth Controversy.
MANIFESTS how Christ our Savior performed not the office of Mediation,
according to both his Natures; against D. Fulke, and D. Field. The 10
Controversy. Demonstrateth the Primacy of S. Peter; against D. Bilson, and D.
Reynoldes. page 191. The 11. Controversy. Vpholdeth the Popes Supremacy;
against D. Bilson, and D. Reynoldes. page 209.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The tweluth Controversy.
FREETH the true worship of Saints, of their Shrines, and Relics, from
Idolatry; against D. Bilson, D. Reynoldes, and D. Fulke. page 233. The 13.
Controversy, Proves Invocation of Saints to be lawful; against D. Reynolds,
D. Field, and D. Fulke. page 255. The 14. Controversy. Establishes the lawful
worship of Images, against D. Bilson, and D. Reynoldes. page 276. The 15.
Controversy. Maintains Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, against D. Field,
and D. Fulke. page 296. The 2. Chapter. VVherin Prayer for the dead is
defended; against the foresaid Doctors M. Field, and M. Fulke. page 316.
THE FIRST BOOK.
THE FIRST CONTROVERSY DECLARES, That neither the Holy Scripture by it self,
nor by any means the Protestants do assign, can be Judge of Controuersyes.
AGAINST Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Reynolds, and all other Protestants.
CHAP. I.
THe extreme and miserable refuge of al guilty persons who either mistrust the
equity of their cause, or fear the weakness of their own defense, has ever
been to decline the bar of indifferent trial, and cleave to the succor of
some such Tribunal as will not, or cannot give sentence against them. This was
the wonted fraud of all ancient Heretics: this was the retraite of the Iran.
l. 3. cont. haer Tertul l. 8. depraescrip Basil. l. de Spir. sanct. cap. 27.
Aug. l. 1. cont Max. VVbitak. co^t. 1. q. 5. c. 8. Reyn. in bis co^f. c. 2.
diuis 2. p. 45. etc. 8. diuis. 1. p. 396. etc. Bezainan. noui Test. 1556. in c.
10. Matthew. and in c. 22. Luc. Iran. l. 1. c. 10. 20. 29. Aug. l. 32. con.
Faust. c. 19. and 21. Philast. c. 36. Eusebius. l. 4. hist. c. 29. Epiph. haer. 30.
Valentinians, Eunomians, Marcionists, and the like. This was the voice of
Maximinus the Arian Bishop, as S. Augustine reports, writing against him. And
this is now the common cry of M. Whitaker, M. Reynolds, and their
fellow-Sectaryes, who will not stand to the general arbitrament of Fathers,
Doctors, Counsels, Historyes, or former Churches: not to the prescription of
times, presidents or approved customs; not to any roll, record, or monument of
antiquity. They only appeal in all matters of Controversy, to the sole and
silent majesty of Gods sacred Style, and that for two chief and principal
causes. The one is, to cloak and cover their new devises under the mysteryes of
holy Writ; The other, with a cunning and guilefull slight to avoid indeed all
manner of trial, not to admit any Judge at all. For as long as they reserve in
themselves this singular power to construe and expound Gods word as they list,
to receive or reject what Scriptures they please, let us produce any evidence
against the^ never so clear, they will either cloud it with some colorable
answer, or wrest it to another sense, or charge it with corruption (as Beza
does in the Greek text in many places) or utterly discard it as no Canonical
write, as Heretics usually do such Oracles of God as condemn^ their errors.

2. Allege for example the old Testament against the Marcionists, against the
Manichees the new; the Acts of the Apostles against Tatian and Cerinthus,
against the Ebionites the Epistles of S. Paul, they peremptorily deny these
books of Scripture. Pose Faustus the Manichee with these Ad Romans 1. v. 3. Aug.
l. ^0. con. Paust. c. 2. 2. Iac. 24. Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 17.
words of the Apostle to the Romans: The son of God was borne of the seed of
David, according to the flesh; his reply, says S. Augustine, is, the book is
forged, it is not Paul's. Prove against the Centurists out of S. James, That by
works a man is iustisyed not by faith alone; they discredit the authority of
his Epistle, saying: It is an adulterous and bastard Epistle. Allege in like
manner against M. Whitaker Intercession of Saints, out of the vision of Judas
Machabeus concerning Onias: he answers, His dream of Onias I let pass as
Whitaker: in resp. ad Ration. c. Camp. Whitaker. ibidem. Cyp. l. 3. ep. 9. Ambr.
l. 4. de side cap. 4. Aug. l. ad Oros. Clem. Alex. c. 7. strom. Whitaker: de sa.
Scrip. cont. 1. q. 1. cap. 14. Orig. l. 2. de princ. c. 1. Dionys. Areop. do
Call. hier. ^. 2. Cyp. ep ^ 55. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 8. de ciut. Dei
l. 18. c. 36.
a dream: As though God had not often revealed to Joseph and diverse of his
Prophets many things in their sleep. Urge him out of Ecclesiasticus with the
liberty of Free Will, he answers: That place of Ecclesiasticus I little
regard: neither will I believe the liberty of Free Will, albeit he affirm it
an hundred times: Then S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Clemens
Alexandrinus were of light belief, who credited this work as the revealed
write. Press him at length with prayer for the dead out of the books of the
Machabees, he still replyeth: I discover in them a human Spirit, a human wit, a
human confession, all things human: Then Origin, Dionysius, S. Cyprian, S.
Augustine were much deceived, who descryed in them the character, style, and
spirit of the Holy Ghost.

3. But grant, our Adversaries admitted all those books of holy Writ the
Church approves, or that they would be tried by them: we both embrace: yet I
say the Scripture alone cannot be Idge or Vmpire between us. Which that I may
more strongly euince, and proceed more smoothly without rubb or incombrance, in
so weighty a question; before I come to the period or full point of our
variance, I will briefly premise some certain positions of our consent and
agreement. We accord then with Protestants. 1. That the Scriptures are a divine
and infallible rule of faith, yet not the sole and only rule, as they affirm.
2. We grant with them, that nothing is to be believed The state of the
question explained. Deutr. 17. v. 9.
contrary and repugnant to those oracles of God, no traditions, revelations, or
interpretations whatsoever. 3. We teach, that the universal judgment, and
general definitions of the Church, are always leueled, and directed according
to the inerrable prescript of holy Writ. Therefore at her Oecumenicall
Consistoryes, she places They shall teach the^ according to the law
the Bible in some high eminent and honorable seat, as the chief and special
guide of her counsayles and decrees 4. We yield, that the letter of Scripture,
or to use their phrase of speech, that God speaking by that letter, may
improperly be termed the voice of our supreme Judge, in such manner, as I
shall explicate hereafter. But our maine difference and dispute is, whether it
be such a voice, and sentence of his, as when any doubt or Co^trouersy arises,
about the meaning of his word; it may without any further external and open
declaration (for of inward Inspirations in the Chapter ensuing) give a final,
evident, certain, and irresistible decision, of all such doubts and
controuersyes, to every humble, diligent, skillfull, and pious Reader, and
conferrer of places. Our Adversaries say it is, we say it is not, proposing our
arguments in this manner.

4. The Scripture is the written word or outward rule by which sentence is, or
ought to be guided; therefore not the Judge himself that pronounces sentence.
For in all Courts, Commonwealths, or public Tribunals, besides the written
Law, or outward evidence, by which verdict is given, some speaking-Iudge or
other Magistrate is requisite, who as the lively rule, or square of Justice (to
use Aristotle's words) ought to expound and deliver the true meaning of the law:
so much more in the Church of God, which is a Kingdom, a City, a Camp well
ordered, Arist. l. 5. Etb. and l. 4. Polit. Plat. l. de repub. and de lege. Read
Philo Iud. l. de legate. ad Caiu^ prope finem.
the like must needs be granted; especially seeing Plato writes: That good
Governors are more to be regarded and accounted of, then good laws, because a
good law without a good Judge which may execute it, is a dead law: but a good
Judge without a written law is both to himself and others a lively law. The
reason hereof is manifest, because it belongs to the Judge, who may decide
and end debates. 1. To hear, understand, and compare together the arguments
of the parties in strife. 2. By explayning the true sense and meaning of the
law, to deliver a definitive sentence agreeable thereunto. 3. To compel and
enforce the contentious to accept and obey his censure. But this neither
Scripture, nor any written law can perform: Therefore some other intelligent,
authentical, and public Arbiter is likewise necessary.

5. M. Whitaker our Protestant-writer, and Hunnius a Lutheran Doctor both
agree, That the holy Ghost, as speaking Whitaker. cont. 1. q. 5. cap. 8. Hunnius
in act. Col. Ratis. s^s^. 9.
in Scripture, or the voice of God as uttered therein, is this public and
soueraygne Judge. Very vainly, very idly. The voice of God as speaking in
Scripture is no way distinguished from the Scripture, no more then the
commandment of the King promulgated in his law is any way different from the
law. Therefore, as besides the King speaking in his law, either himself
speaking in a more lively manner, or some other Judge is requisite to satisfy
the doubts which arise of the law: so besides the holy Ghost speaking precisely
by Scripture, either himself speaking in a more distinct and public fashion,
or some other infallible Judge is necessary to end the controversies which
arise Hunnius ibidem. Reyn. c. 2. diuis. 2. p. 63. and 64.
out of Scripture. Hunnius adds; That the Scripture it self, or the voice of
God delivered by learned Ministers and expounders of the word, (By them (says
Reynoldes) who have in under Christ committed unto them) is at least a
sufficient and competent Judge. As vainly, as idly as before.

6. For who are they to whom Christ has given this commission of Iudgmet? They
are (as M Reynolds subnecteth) Reyn. lo^o citato.
of two sorts. The one private; the other public. Private; all the faithful,
and Spiritual. Public; the assemblies of Pastors and Elders. Of these I
reason thus. Either he allows both, or one of these sorts supreme,
sovereign, and infallible authority to decide debates, and expound the word
without further appeal, and so admits another Judge besides Scripture: or he
assigns them not the Sovereignty of Judgment (as himself and all other
Protestants define) but, the ministry of interpreting the written will, and
sentence of the Judge: And so makes the Church a maimed, wauoring, and
imperfect Commonwealth, without any judicial, visible and public Tribunal,
without any profitable means of settling peace in time of discord. For seeing
these Ministers neither in private nor public are (as they confess) so
assisted always by the holy Ghost, but that they may (being men subject to
error) sometimes propound their own dreams instead of Gods undoubted
truths, who shall determine whether the voice of Christ, or sentence of our
Judge be truly delivered by them, or no? Rein. c. 2. diuis. ^. page 64.
The written will or letter of Scripture? It cannot speak or declare her
Judgment. Whitaker. cont. 5. q. 5. c. 9. and 13.
The diligent Reader and conferrer of places? He may both read and confer
amiss. Hunn. in act. Col. Ratis. ses. 9
The pious Magistrate and executioner of Justice? May not he both execute and
command an error? Sutclif. in his answer to the sixth c. of his Survey.
A General Council proceeding according to Gods word? And who shall judge when
it proceeds according to his word? The parties who contend and stand in
debate? Then they must be plaintiffs and Judges both. And whilst each of them
swayeth on his own side, what end of strife? What decision of truth? Such as
Lawyers, such as Attournyes make in behalf of their clients, who would never
end their Plea, unless some vmpire were appointed to arbitrate the cause. Now
to go forward.

7. The Judge of Controuersyes ought to be infallible, because it must breed a
certain and infallible assurance, as M. Whitaker agrees with us, in doubts of
Whitaker. cont. 1 q. 5. cap. 8. and ^. 3. c. 11.
faith: but albeit the Scriptures be so in themselves, yet in respect of us
they are fallible: they may be erroneously printed, corruptly translated,
falsely suborned, not well expounded, not rightly understood. And although the
voice and doctrine of the Church may be somety me fallible in respect of us, as
one objected against this argument, An objection made against the Church,
solued.
because a particular pastor may deliver unto the people his own fantasies
for the Churches decrees, he may persuade them, and they may give credit unto
him that his private assertions are the general and Catholic doctrines, that
they were taught by the ancient church, and that many miracles have bin
wrought in confirmation of them: yet here is a notable disparity between this
and that fallibility: for this proceeds not from the repair to our judge,
either true or so taken, but from a falsifier and wrong relatour of the judges
sentence; that immediately comes from appealing to their true reputed judge.
This happens to the ignorant only or Catecumens who begin to believe; to
others the Catholic tenent in necessary points is so generally known, as they
cannot be deluded: That to the learned also and most expect in matters of
religion; for such they are who often misconster and wrongfully expound the
holy scriptures. This may easily be discovered, and avoided by conference with
other pastors, by perusing the Churches decrees, or hearing the oracle of her
voice, which can manifestly explain herself, and disprove those forged
relations: That can hardly be espied, more hardly be avoided, because private
interpreters by conferring, reasoning and disputing the case without submission
to the Church, are often times more confirmed, and strengthened in their
erroneous expositions: neither can the Scripture open her own meaning, and
condemn their false constructions. Our danger therefore of being deceaned is
little or nothing to be feared; theirs very pernicious, and irremediable.

8. The Judge of Controversies supreme, and general, of which we now speak,
should be able to compose all questionable matters. The Scripture cannot
determine this important point on our belief; Whether the Gospel of S. John,
the Epistles of S. Paul, or any other volume of holy Writ be the Canon of
Scripture or no. If in these weightiest causes it is needful to recurre to
another Tribunal, in matters of less moment wholly as needful.

9. The Judge of Controuersyes ought to be so clear and facile, as all both
learned and unlearned might have access unto it and easily understand it: the
Scriptures are hard, dark, hidden. Hidden not only to the illiterate Aug l 12.
Confess. c, 14. Ambroseepist. 44.
and vulgar sort, but to the great and deepest Clerks. Hidden to S. August.
who cries out, O the wonderful depth of thy speeches etc. O the wonderful
depth! Hidden to S. Ambrose, calling it, A sea containing most profound senses,
the depth of Prophetical riddles. Hidden to Clemens Alexandrinus, to which
Clemens Alex. l. 6. strom. Psalm. 13. Orig. hom. 11. in Exo. Iraen. l. 2. cap
47. Russiaus l. 11. List. c. 9. Apoc. 5. v. ^^ Ezeeh. 2. v. 9. 2. Pet^^^^t. v.
16. and,
he elegantly applies those words of the psa^me: Dark is the water in the
clouds of the air. Hidden to Origin, to Irenaus to S. Basil, to S. Gregory
Nazianzen, who being both rarely accomplished in all humane literature, after
13. years study heerin, would not adventure as Russinus testi^yeth) to
interpret the same, but according to the rule and uniform consent of their
forefathers. They knew it was that hidden and concealed book, which S. John
describes to be clasped with seven seals, which Ezechiel terms, the
enrolled volume written within and without. They knew S. Peter avouched,
certain things hard to understand in the Epistles of S. Paul, which the
unlearned deprane, as other Scriptures, to their own perdition. If certain
things in his Epistles, how many in other books? How many in the whole
Scripture? Notwithstanding our illuminated Ad^ersaries, Whitaker. cont. l. q. 3.
and cap. 3. Aug. l. 2. de doctrine. Christ. c. 6. and epist. ^^9. de side and
oper. c. 15. and 16. Ambr^s. epist. 44. Hier. ep. Vincent. Liri^^. c. 2.
to whom the holy Ghost has disclosed all his heavenly secrets, find no such
difficulty, no proverb in it. Yet to smooth the Fathers speeches they answer:
That the mysteries therein treated, are dark and obscure, the discourse easy,
the text clear, the sentence plain. But S. Augustine as deeply enlightened as
any of them, affirms, The style and manner of enduing to be hard, the
discourse and places hard. The sentences (says S. Ambrose) hard. The text
(says S. Hierome) has a shell to be broken, before we can taste the sweetness
of the kernel. The Hebrew phrase hard, the Tropes and figures hard. Hard and
difficult by reason of sundry and manisold senses it begets. For which cause
alone Vincentius Lirinensis necessarily requires some other Judge, demanding
in his Golden Treatise against the profane novelties of Heresies, why to the
Canon of Scripture, which is perfect, and of it self sufficient enough for all
things, it behooves to add the authority and explication of the Church?
Because (says he) all take not holy Scripture, by reason of her depth, in one
and the self same sense: but her speeches, some interpret one way, some
another In so much as there may seem to be puked out as many senses as men.
For Nonatus, does expound one way, and Sabellius another way: otherwise
Donatus, otherwise Ar^^s, Eunomius, Macedonius; otherwise Photinus, Apollinaris
etc. Therefore very necessary it is for Tertul. in praescript.
the manifold turnings and by-ways of errors, that the line of Prophetical
and Apostolical interpretation be leuelled according to the square of
Ecclesiastic all and Catholic sense or understanding. Because Tertullian
says: The sense adulterated is a like perilous, as the style corrupted. Yea
much more perilous, in that it may be more easily wrested, more variously
turned, more hardly espied. But to proceed.

10. The Judge of Controuersyes ought so to determine and deliver his mind in
all ambiguous cases, as the parties in strife may evidently know when they
hear his censure, whether they be cast or quit, condemned or assoyled in
respect of his verdict: But neither Scripture, or the holy Ghost as he speaks
by Scripture, is ever able to pronounce such sentence. Or if it can, as Gretser
a famous Grets. act. colloq. Ratisbon. sess. 2. fol. 110.
writer of the Society of Jesus pithily urged in the conference at Ratisbone,
let it now speak and pronounce us guilty. Here (says he) we Catholics, and
Protestants, both appeal to the high Tribunal of Scripture, here we stand in
the sight of the sacred Bible, in the presence of the holy Ghost. If he be
Judge, as he precisely speaks by Scripture alone, let it give sentence, let
it say: Thou James Gretser are cast in thy cause: Thou This was the name of the
Heretic Respondent.
Hailbronner have gotten the victory: And I will presently yield unto you. But
if it cannot execute this judicial act; if by reading, hearing, or perusing
his sentence we cannot perceive whom he condemns; how can it challenge the
high preroga^iue and doom of Judgment? Which argument he confirmed with
another a like invincible as the former. For whereas Grets. in Act colloq.
Ratisbon: s^ss. to. sol. 120.
Protestants mantaine, that the voice of God as uttered in Scripture, gives
plain sentence of condemnation against heresies and errors, thus he disputes
on the contrary side: No guilty persons repair to that Judge, by whom they
are evidently and sufficiently condemned: But all Heretics are guilty persons,
yet boldly appeal to the sentence of holy Scripture. Therefore the Scripture
(...) that Judge, by whom they are evidently and sufficiently (...) What reply
could Hunnine the Aug. l. 2. cont. Max. Aug. orat. in ps. 10. Mat. 15. v. 11.
Respon^^^^ make to this? Not any - Unless which S. Augustine objected against
Maximinus the Arian: By talking much, and nothing to the purpose, he might be
counted able to answer, who was not able to hold his (...).

11. In sine the Scripture, though in it self most holy; yetby reason of her
sublimity, depth, and variety of senses, has bin partly through the weakness,
partly through the malice, pride, and presumption of men, the root of strifes,
the spring of debates, the occasion of many detestable and blasphemous errors;
rather then the stay, atonement, or subversion of them. Whereupon S. Augustine
compares Scripture, to a cloud, which often times out of the same words
raineth showers of snares to the wicked, and showers of fortillty and
fruitfulites in the Lust. As he exemplifieth in that sentence of S. Mattheu,
which our Protestants abuse to the liberty of their diet, and breach of
Ecclesiastical fast: Not that which enters the mouth defiles a man, but that
which proceeds out of the mouth. The Sinne^ (says he) hears this, and he
stirs up his app^^^^ to ravenous gluttony; the Just man hears this, and he
is sensed from Note that Catbolikes abstain not from meat, of any
superstition, as the Jews and Manichees, but for the chastisment of
concupis^^ce or exercise of virtue. Aug. hom. 8. tract. 18. in Joan.
the superstition of discerning (...). And in another place S. Augustine
writes. Neither have heresies, or certain doctrines (...) the mind, strong
from other h^^d, then from good Scriptures not well understood. To specify
some particulers.

12. Aug. contra aduers. lig. et Prophet. l. 1. and 2. c. 4. Joan 10.
Marcian despised Moses, the Prophets, their lives and writings; what
pretended he? Scripture: How many soever have come before me, are thieves and
robbers. The Guido d^ error ib a Armen. Ephesians. 4. ver. 11.
Armenians taught we should all rise in the day of Judgment in the state of
mankind, and that the femal sex of women should be wholly extinct. What ground
had they? Scripture: Until we all meet in a perfect man. What was cited by
the Iraen. l. 2. cap. 14. and Tertul. lib. de anima. cap 35. Matthew. 5.
Carpocratians contending the soul of man to be united to the body, to
perpetrate sin, and not to be divorced from it, until it achieue all kind of
wickedness? Scripture: Thou shall not depart from thence until thou defray the
last farthing. The Aug. tract. 34. in Joan. Joan. 8.
Manichees affirmed our Savior Christ to be this material sin, which
compasses the earth, and affoardeth light to our corporal eyes. What color
had they? Scripture: I am the light of the world. By Scripture the Alphonsus de
Castr. 110 aduer haer. verbo Occidere. Exodus 20..
Waldenses taught, that no man could be put to death, no not by the lawful
authority of a Judge. Thou shall not kill. By Scripture the August. tract. 53.
in Joan. Joan. 12. v. 25. Mat. 16. v. 25 Luth. con. Art. Louanien. These. 27.
and l. de Caena dom. To. 2 Ger. fol. 17. 4. Whitaker. in his answer to Campians
8. reason: page 259. Vincent. Lyr. c. 35. Genna. in catalogo Eccl. Scri.
Circumcellians held, that every Christian might not only murder his fellow,
but lay violent hands also on himself: He that hates his soul in this life,
preserves it to everlasting life. And not to be over tedions in a matter
perspicuous; by Scripture Luther excommunicateth all Sacramentaries, as arrant
Heretics, and already damned to the pit of hell. By the same Scripture our
Protestants make both Lutherans and Sacramentaries faithful Christians, and if
they once believe, sure of salvation. What? has Scripture been in this sort
the origin of these foul Contradictions, horrible Blasphemies, and a thousand
more, and yet must it be the sovereign and only means to end and suppress
them? When they, who are silenced by it, make greatest show and ostentation of
it? When, you shall see (says Vincentius) Heretics so abound with Scripture,
as they fly through all the volumes of the holy Law, through Moses, the books
of the Kings, the Psalms and Prophets etc. Read the works of Paulus
Samosatenus, Priscillian, Eunomius etc. You shall not find a page which is not
colored and painted with the sentences of old and new Testament. Nestorius to
support his private heresy gloried as Gennadius reports) in the evidence of
threescore testimonies, which he produced.

13. Arius likewise boasted of the patronage of Scripture, yea of the collation
of places, our Sectaries chiesest refuge. And when the Prelates of the first
Council of Nice proved the Essential Equality of the Son of God with his
Father, which he denied, out of those words of S. John: I and my Father am all
one; he answered: They were all one in the unity of wlll and affection, not in
the unity Io. ca. 10 verse. 30.
of nature and essence: which by Conference of places he bolstered in this
manner: Christ prayed for his disciples Ioh. 17. v. 21.
that they might be one with him, as he, and his Father were one; But he
demanded not, neither was it possible for them to be one in substance with God
the Father. Therefore the Son himself was not the same in substance, but only
in will, love, and obedience, as he desired his Disciples to be. In so much as
the Fathers could never have vanquished that wicked heresy, if they had not
beaten it down by the authority of the Church, more then by testimony of
Scripture, as appears by S. Athanasius a chief Atha. ep. decres. con. Arian.
haer.
impugner of that impious heresy.

14. Yet because our new Ghospellers build the tower of their Babell, and will
climb to the knowledge of all heavenly truth by this collation of places, and
diligent recourse to the original fountains; let them tell me, when the
Reader doubts of any particular passage of Scripture, how the Collatour
knows by what other sentence that ought to be interpreted? The dark and
obscure places (as Whitaker and Reynolds instruct us) are to Whitaker. contro.
1. q. 5. ca. 23. Rein. c. 1. diuis. 2. p. 60.
be lightened by the plain and perspicuous. Grant it be so. How shall I be
certain, whether the hard place I doubt of, ought to be explained by the
clear and evident text I choose to that purpose, or by some other? What
certain rule set you down I may not err in my choice? Eutiches doubted of
the meaning of those words: Verbum caro factum: The word was made flesh, which
you suppose (I Joan. 1. v. 14. See Suarez in 3 p. d. 7. ses. 2. fol. 132. Joan
2. v. 9. 1. 10. 3. v. 9. Aug l. de haer. ad Quoduult. haer. 82.
doubt not) a point requisite to be believed. And by reason of the propinquity
and alliance of speech, he expounded them by those of S. John: Aquam vinum
factum: The water was made wine; and fell into his detestable blasphemy, that
the Deity of God was changed into the flesh of man, as the water was turned and
converted into wine, Iouinian doubted of the intelligence of an hard saying he
read in the first epistle of S. John, to wit: He that is borne of God, does not
sin; Where, by the connection of the text, by the conference of other places
he framed this desperate and hateful exposition: That a Christian once
regenerated and purified by the water of Baptism, cannot after receive any
tainture of sin, or offend God any more, although he would never so feign. A
thousand such errors in matters of importance necessary to salvation have
enemies sucked out of the clear brooks of holy writ, by the deceauable search
and weighing of places.

15. I might urge, That the sentences which are plain and open to some, seem
dark and obscure to others. What text more clear then that of S. Matthew,
Mat. 26, Mark. 14. Luc. ^2. 1. Cor. 11.
This is my Body; repeated again by S. Mark, recorded by S. Luke, confirmed
by S. Paul? And yet our Sacramentaries rejecting the agreement and approbation
of them al, endeavor to interpret it by far more hard and hidden passages.
Others do not only misconster, but utterly deny most apparent places,
undeniable testimonies. For is there any thing more often inculcated, or more
largly amplifyed by the Prophets, then the glory of the Messiah, and benefits
we were to receive by the coming of Christ? Is there any thing more evidently
expressed by the Eua^gelists, then his genealogy, his nativity, his humane
pedigree from the line of David? Yet Faustus the Manichee had his eyes darkened,
as S. Augustine testifyeth, with presumptuous arrogance, that he said:
Searching the Scrippures, Aug. lib. 16. con. Paust cap. 2. and 14. lib. 12. c.
2. lib. 2. cap. 2.
I find there no Prophesyes of Christ; The Prophets fortel nothing of him; the
Gospel mentions not his temporal birth, or procreation from man. Howbeit,
says S. Augustine, he every where avouches himself the son of man. But as
Faustus was thus blinded, and would not see a mystery so clear; what if
Protestants be blinded in an article of Faith, no less clear and perspicuous?
We found not in Scripture the predictions of Christ, neither do they discern
the Aug. ep. 165. ad Donat.
Church of Christ, as plainly described as Christ himself. For in the
Scriptures, says S. Augustine, we learn Christ, in the Scriptures we learn
the Church. And then. How do we believe we have received out of the divine
writings Christ manifest, Aug. epist. 48 ad vin^e^t Rogat ^
unless we haae also received from thence the Church manifest? Truly we have
received it so manifest, as all Nations see it, all nations flock unto it, all
reverence and obey it, by the direction of Scripture; only they see it not, who
would be ignorant of nothing by their search of Scripture. They see not I say,
the Catholic and universal Church, visibly dispersed thoughout all the world,
lineally descended from the Apostles, infallibly assisted by the spirit of God
etc. often recommended in holy Write unto us.

16. Secondly, I might allege the copiousnes of Gods sacred word, how some
one (...) is often times so fruitfully impregned, that as it is delivered by
the divine Math. 7. v. 18.
Interpreters of many true litterall senses: so it is brought forth by private
expositors, with the untimely birth of sundry heresies. Let that sole text of
S. Matthew serve for an example: A good ^ee cannot yield evil fruits etc. For
by this Hier. l. 2. aduers. Iouin.
Iouinian underpropped his fornamed fancy, That a good and just man could not
produce the fruits of sin. The Pelagians Aug. l. 2. de nup. and concup. cap.
26.
from thence concluded, That the good and sacred tree of Marriage, that the
pure and faithful married couple cannot ^ngender evil Children, infected with
the contagiou of original sin. Others Aug. l. 1. de great. Christ c. 18
of that crew by the force of the same words, and those that follow, Nor an
evil tree yield good fruits, peruersly inferred, That the good tree of
Free Will might of it self, without Gods grace procreate the fruits of goods
works, as the evil tree blossometh the fruits of evil. Others Aug. l. 3.
cont. lit. Petil. cap^^ 44.
either Pelagians, or Donatists picked from thence, That a good Priest could
not minister wrongfully the Sacrament of Baptism, nor an evil Priest rightly.
Out of the same clause Hier. ^^ comment. ad hunc loc. Aug. in disp. 2. cont.
Fortunat.
the Manichees strained their impious dotage, That some men were good by
nature, and could not be evil, some evil by nature, and could not be good.
From whence also the Caluinists gathered two pernicious heresies. The Sea both
these objections proposed, and answered in the 21. and 27. Controversy.
one, That man being an evil tree, has no freewill to be converted to God,
aided by his grace, nor to cooperate thereunto, before he be justified. The
other, That as the fruits do only declare the goodness of the tree, and do not
make it good or bad: so the virtuous and pious works of the just, are mere
signs and remonstrances; but no true causes of their inherent justice. If this
short and heavenly saying through the rashness of willfulmen: has bred so many
false constructiours, al^ which notwithstanding were bolstened with other the
like misapplyed passages; how can Protestants presume to aim aright at the
mark of Truth, in all questions controuer^ed, by this uncertain rule of
expounding Scripture by Scripture alone?

17. Thirdly, I might produce the diversity not only of the literal, but of
the literal and figurative speeches, and demand of our Adversaries, how the
Collatours should discern the one from the other, when the words should be
literally, when figuratively understood? Origin was more skillfull in tongues,
more diligent in reading, more wise in observing the course and connection
Basil. hom. 3. in Hex. st^^ in Gonesim.
of Scripture, then ever any Protestant^: and yet S. Basil notes him of gross
oversight, in imagining figures and Allegoryes, in the first of Genesis, in
lieu of the letter. ^estorius on the contrary side was dazelled with the letter
instead of the figure, in that speech of S. John: Dissolve Joan. 2. v. 19.
ye this Temple, and after three days I will raise it again: Whereby he
contended that the Son of God only dwelled in Christ, as in his Temple.
Marcions strove for Romans 5. v. 20. Joan. 1. v. 14. Philip. 2. v. 7. Haeb. 4. v.
15. Romans 8. v. 3. Matthew. 3. v. ^^.
the pure letter, where S. Paul writes: The law has entered, that sin may
abound. Munichaeus dreamed of a figure, where S. John said: The word is made
flesh, that is (as he proved by conference of sundry places) in the habit,
likeness, and similitude of flesh. The Iacobits were illuded with the grossnes
of the letter, when they baptized, or rather seared with burning yrons, their
sect-mates in their foreheads, because it is written in the 3. of S. Matthew:
He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost, and fire. Eutychius the Patriarcke of
Constantinople, was beguiled with the inanity of a figure, when impugning the
corporal resurrection of our flesh, he expounded of a subtle, spiritual, and
ethereall body, that which S. Paul spoke of a true and natural.

18. And the matter is the harder not to be mistaken herein, because some time
in the self same sentence, one and the self same word ought here properly,
there metaphorically be expounded, as learned Maldonate wisely observes Mald.
in eum loc. Matthew. 8. v. 22. Joan. 3. v. 13.
in that saying of Christ: Let the dead bury their dead: or, not to depart from
the chiefest articles of faith, of which I have hitherto spoken. The like is
showed in S. John: No man has ascended into heaven, but he that descended from
heaven, the Son of man, who is in heaven: Which words Valentine and
Apollinaris misconstruing, gainsayd the miste^ry See Medina introduct. in ^. p.
q. 3. and Th^op. in hunc loc.
of Christ's Incarnation, and would needs have his flesh to have descended from
heaven, as his manhood after ascended thither. Neither did they want semblance
of places, the card of Protestancy, to direct them: for matching this text with
another of S. Paul to the Ephesians, they found coherence: He that descended,
the same is also he Ephesians. c. 4. v. 10.
that is ascended. And least the obscurity of either might darken their
understanding, they opened them both by this plain, obuious, and evident
sentence, Primus homo de ^, Cor. 15. v. 47.
terra, terrenus: Secundus homo de caelo, caelestis. The first man of earth,
earthly: the second man of heaven, heavenly.

19. Let our Ghospellers vaunt, as long as they list of the perspicuity and
patronage of Scripture, never can they bring in any controversy whatsoever so
many in their behalf, or one so clear a place as this. Or if they could,
might they not be blinded, might they not be inueigled as these impes of Satan
were? M. Fields opinion is, they might. We confess (says he) that neither
conference Field l. 4. c. 19. page ^^4.
of places, nor consideration of the things precedent and subsequent, nor
looking into the originalls are of any force, unless we find the things, which
we conceive to be vaderstood and meant in the places interpreted, to be
consonant to the rule of faith. And this rule of faith (as he further teaches)
must be tried, Field l. 4. ibid. page 242.
either by the General practice of the Church, the renowned of all ages, or
the Pastors of an Apostolical Church. Which (to omit all other examples) is
clearly seen in the Translatours of our English Protestants Bible. Who
although they had skill in tongues, studied Scriptures, ransacked Originalls,
examined places; yet rouing from the mark ( M. Field prescribes) most
pitiously erred in their vulgar Translation. Witness hereof.

20. D. Reinolds, who disputed against it in his Majesty's Rein. in the
Conference at Hampt. Court. p. 45. 46 etc. Burges in his Apol. sect. 6.
Carleile in his book that Christ went not down to Hellp. 116. 144. Broughton
in his epistle to the Counsel.
presence at Hampton Court. M. Burges a man of the same sect, who affirme^h:
That the approved English Protestant translation has many omissions, many
additions, which sometime obscureth, sometime peruerteth the sense. M. Carleile
another brother of this disordred crew, having discovered many faults in the
English Bible, of them infers: That the English Protestants in many places
detort the Scriptures from their right sense, and show themselves to love
darkness more then light, and falsehood more then truth. They have corrupted
and depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceived the ignorant, and
supplanted the simple. Likewise M. Broughton one of the chiefest Linguists
amongst our late Precisians, who not many years ago wrote an Epistle to the
Lords of the Counsel, which is yet extant, desires them to procure speedily a
new translation: Because that (quoth he) which is now in England is full of
errors. And in his aduertisment of Corruptions, he denounces to the
Protestant Bishops, Broughto^ in his Aduert. to the Bishops.
That their public translation of Scripturs into English is such, as it
peruerteth the text of the old Testament in 848. places: And that it causes
millions of millions to reject the new Testament, and to run to eternal
flames.

21. So that if these rare men, furnished with so manifold helps, endued with
the knowledge of sundry tongues, guided by their own rules to attain the
right sense and meaning of holy write, and allowed by public authority to
translate the same, swa^ued notwithstanding and sunk into the gulf of such
detestable errors: what shall we think of others of meaner talents? What hope
can any one have not to stray in this vast wilderness of conferring places? And
if the English Bible, which now is commonly read in Churches, and expounded in
pulpits be every where stained with the spots of pestilent, and pernicious
falsehood, in what woeful case are they, who credit it as the Oracle of God?
They who repair unto it as to the treasure of life, the touchstone of truth?
They who neither understanding the Greek, Latin, or Hebrew, ought to appeal
in all doubts of faith to the high Tribunal of this corrupted Judge? Whose
sentence, as their own Ghospellers testify, is depraved, obscured, detorted
from the right sense, deceaueth the ignorant, supplanteth the simple,
peruerteth the text in so many places, as it carries millions of millions to
eternal flames. Open therefore your eyes (my beloved Countrymen) and see in
what danger you live, danger of receiving the doom of falsehood, the sentence
of death, in lieu of the sovereign verdict of Gods sacred truth.

22. Since the first edition of this work was published, I have seen a
certain abrupt, and broken answer secretly spread abroad to many of my former
arguments, the sum whereof is this: That there is a great difference beweene
the word of God, and man; for the later fills the ear with the sound, and
the hearers mind with a like conceit, clear, or obscure, conformable to the
signification it bears: but the word of God works not only in the ear
immediately, but also in the Certain shifts of the adversaries refuted.
heart, in such sort, that although the exterior word be dark, and ambiguous,
yet by interior inspiration, it may produce a clear conceit of the thing
signified in the hearers mind. By which means (says this Respondent) the
spirit of God speaking in his divine word, and working interiourly in the heart,
is the supreme rule, or Judge of all Controuersyes. By which means, it
hears, understands, explaineth, and compels the Appellants to receive
the sentence given: By which means it causes infallible certainty, utters
it self clearly, manifestly condemns the guilty persons, and performs
such things as are necessary, to the office of a Judge. So he. Yet all in
covert, not deeming his reply polished enough for open view; because our
question is not, what God may do, or what his inspiration may produce; but what
he ordinarily does, and whom he has established his ordinary Judge in
determining debates; what public, and universal rule, what infallible ground,
or foundation we have of our belief. which we ought to follow, to which others
are bound to submit themselves, and by which we are always directed the right
way of Truth. This is not (as I have showed) the outward word, or the inward
working of the holy Ghost in the hearts of every particular man. 1. Because the
faithful cannot, without some other particular help, be infallibly assured of
that inspiration, or working of the holy Ghost, whether it be natural, or
supernatural, from God or not: they cannot be infallibly assured, that they
truly conceive the sense revealed, and believe it a right, as they ought to do:
which ignorance of theirs, partly proceeds from the weakness of our
Understanding, partly from the depth, and sublimity of the misteryes proposed,
partly also from the vnsearchablenes of Gods ways, and secrecy of his
unacquainted motions, of which Job said: If God come unto me, I shall not see
him; and if he depart away from me, I shall not understand it. Wherefore Job. 9.
^^. Field* lib. 4. cap. 7.
seeing, No man (as M. Field does witness) proves a thing doubtful by that
which is as much doubted of, as it self; No man can be assured of the true
sense and signification of Scripture by the internal working of God in his
heart, which is as much to be doubted of, and alike hard to be discerned, as the
very sense it self, and meaning of the Scripture.

23. Secondly: we are counseled, Not to believe every 2^ Io^. 4. ^.
spirit, but to prove the spirits if they be of God: But if the spirits must be
brought to the touchstone of trial, if they must be approved and judged by
some other well known, and undoubted authority, they are not themselves the
trial, and Judge of our differences. Nay suppose we were assured of the
inspiration, assured of the holy Ghost speaking in our hearts; yet that speech
is invisible, that motion invisible, that judgment invisible; it cannot hear
the causes, examine the arguments, or pronounce any desinitiue VVhita^^^ adu.
St^pl l. 2. ^ 6.
sentence at all, by which the contentious may be silenced, the innocent
acquitted, the guilty condemned. The testimony of the spirit (says Whitaker)
being private, and secret is unfit to teach, or refell others: if unfit to
teach, unfit to refell, then wholly unfit, wholly unable to clear doubts, decide
Controuersyes, or end the quarrels of the pa^tyes in strife.

24. Thirdly. The rule, and guide of our belief, ought to have some near
affinity and connection with that which it guides: The measure (as the
Philosophers teach) must be always proportionable to the thing measured. But
the inward inspiration has no such affinity, and proportion with our Catholic
faith: because, that is secret, this public: that particular, this
universal: that merely interior, and working only in the heart; this exterior
Hooker of Ecclesi. Policy lib. 1. sect. 14. lib. 2. sect. 8. lib. 3. sect. 8.
page 149. 147. lib. 2. sect. 7 page 116. Whitaker. aduers. Staplet. lib. 2. c.
4. page 330. and p. 29^. Za^cb in his confess. cap. 1. Brent. in prolegom.
Kemnit. in exam. Conc. Tri. Aug. l. con. ep. Fuxda^. c. 5 and de vtil. cre.
^en. c. 14.
also, and professed by the word of mouth. In so much as that cannot possibly
be a competent rule, or proportionable measure to mete, or square out the
misteryes of our says. Fourthly, M. Hooker a Protestant of no small account,
consta^tly avouches (with who^ M. Whitak. and other sectaryes heerin agree)
that the outward letter sealed with the inward witness of the spirit, is not a
sufficient warrant for every particular man, to judge, and approve the Scripture
to be Canonical; the ghospel itself to be the gospel of Christ; but the
authority of gods Church (as he acknowledges) is necessarily required
thereunto: Therefore neither are they sufficient to judge of the sense, or
meaning of the Scripture: for, that (says S. Augustine) which we obey, and
believe, testifying this book to be the Gospel; the same must we believe
witnessing this to be the sense of the Ghospel: because it were no less then
madness to repair to the Catholic Church for the approbation of Gods word, and
run to her rebels for the sense of his word; to her public censure for that,
and their private judgment for this: yea a mere madness, to think that every
Sectary should be endued with a divine spirit to interpret holy writ, and that
the whole Church of Christ, all her pastors, and doctors jointly united should
be deprived of the same.

25. Fyfthly. The ordinary way, by which God instructs us in matters of
belief, is by publik preaching- Faith (says S. Paul) is by hearing: it is to
be received from the lips of the priests, from the mouth of Saints, Ad Romans
10. verse. 17. Malae. 2: Luc. 1. Ad Ephesians. 4.
from the pastors, and teachers, whom Christ has appointed in his Church, and
not from private reading of Scripture, joined with the secret inspiration. For
that noble man of Aethiopia the Eunuch disige^tly perused the oracles of God,
and wanted not, without doubt, the inward operation of the holy Ghost, being so
religious, as he had bin on pilgrimage at Jerusalem to adore; and Act. 8. v.
30. and 3^.
so devout, as he read the Scriptures riding in his chariot: yet when S. Philip
asked him, Trowest thou that thou understand the things that thou read?
he said: And how can I unless some man show me. Therefore besides the outward
reading and inward working, a public interpreter, and expounde^ is necessary
for the true understanding of holy writ.

26. Sixthly. The standing to the Judgment of the hidden Spirit, is the very
root of dissension, and fountain of discord in the vain chalengers, and
boasters thereof: it affoardeth every sectary his private weights, his
particular forge to coin and allow what doctrine he pleases: it licenseth the
members to control their heads; the scholars to contradict and chang their
masters Tertul. de praescript. cap. 420
principles; which Tertullian reproves in the Heretics of his days, saying:
That has bin lawful to the Valentinians which was lawful for Valentinus:
that to the Marcionites which to Marcion, of their own accord to alter, and
innouate their belief. Of their own accord, he says; because the teaching of
the holy Ghost is uniform and the same; he could not be author of such chops,
and changes, of such schisms and divisions. And yet they al pretended, as our
Ghospellers August. tract. 4^. in Ioan^ La^^h. ep ad Antwerp. tom. 2. Germ.
Ie^. fol. 10^,
do, his heavenly illumination: There are innumerable (says S. Augustine) who
do not only boast that they are Videntes, or Prophets, but will seem to be
illuminated, or enlightened by Christ; but are Heretics. And Luther, the
ringleader of Protestants conformably writes: There is no Ass in this time
so so^rish, and blockish, but will have the dreams of his own head, and his
opinion accepted for the instinct of the Holy Ghost, and himself esteemed as a
Prophet. Whence it comes (as he immediately before complayneth,) That there be
as many sects, Osiand. in confut. Script. Melancth. contra ipsum edit. and l.
cont. Nicticor. Aug. ep. 222. ad Consent.
and Religions among us, as there be men: That such variances arise between
the professors of the same Religion, as Osiander a Protestant tells us, That
among the Confessionists only there were twenty different opinions concerning
the formal cause of justification: and that every one is affirmed to be
deduced, and proved out of the word of God: by the holy Ghost surely, as they
imagined secretly speaking to their hearts: By which, All Heretics, according
to S. Augustine, who receive the authority of the Scriptures, persuade
themselves they follow them; whereas they rather follow their own errors.

27. Hence it also proceeds, that if no other ground, or foundation be
assigned, no heretic could be noted, or condemned of heresy: nay as Suarez
that great Suarez l. 1. defens. fid. cap. 11.
Divine hereupon infers, No heretic should be, or heresy at all; no man
ought to be compelled to the unity of says, and fellowship of one Religion, to
which the Scripture so often exhorts, and God requires as necessary to
salvation. For if it be enough for every one to appeal to the tribunal of his
own (as he deemeth) inspired conscience, who can decline from the rule of
Faith? Who can swerve from his own particular judgment, and forsake that
guide, and foundation of belief, which himself broacheth, and boldly vaunteth
to come from God? Who then can be an heretic, or what heresy be vented? If
that be the square of faith, who ought to be compelled, by forsaking that rule,
to conform himself to another profession? Every one may safely remain in his
own religion, as long as they verily think (which all men easily do) that
they have received the riches of the spirit in as great measure as any other.
For this reason D. Whitguift alleged, why the Church of England need VVhitg.
in his defens against Cart^r.
not submit it self to the Church of Geneua. The same reason may the Brownist
allege why he should not yield to the Puritan; the Puritan for not conforming
himself to the Protestant, and one Protestant why he should not subscribe to
the judgment of another. Therefore besides the inward inspiration there must be
some other outward vndeceauable, and ouer-ruling Judge, or else God has not
sufficiently provided for the necessityes of his Church not for her peace,
concord, and stability, not for her unity in faith, certainty of belief, not
for the obedience, and submission of her children, not for the ending of
quarrels, decision of doubts, and rooting out of errors. But of this again
in the next chapter, where my Adversary might have read this very objection
answered, if he had not here importunly urged it out of due order, time, and
place.

28. The show of reason which this Respondent Objections. The first.
brings to prove the judgment of the secret spirit, is to this effect. First
(says he) the Church receaueth from God inspiring her, the right sense of
Scripture: he must first decide the co^trouersy in her mind, before she can
exteriourly decide what they are bound to believe; therefore the spirit of God
speaking in her heart is the supreme Judge of Controuersyes, even in the opinion
of us Catholics. Secondly, he proves that the same spirit speaking The second.
in the divine word to every particular man, was likewise judge in the law of
Nature, because at that time there were no other ordinations, then such as did
necessarily follow out of the eleuating of mankind to a supernatural end: but
out of that it no way follows, that all the faithful were to obey one supreme
Pastor. Thirdly, The third
in the law written there was not one Governor, the faithful among the Jews
being without any subordination to any one among the Gentills: And the Gentiles
had no subordination to the high Priest of the Jews. The fourth.
Fourthly, it must be acknowledged (says he) by the adverse part, that the
spirit of God as speaking in particular to every man, decideth which company of
the professors of Christianity is the true Church, and by consequence Answers.
To the first.
the same spirit determines in the same manner all other controversies. Thus
he. To the first I answer, that the motions inwardly inspired to the pastors
of the church, are no judicial sentences, nor final decisions of matters
controuerted: they are not any infallible rules, neither to others to whom they
are unknown, nor to themselves to whom they are uncertain, until they be
outwardly decreed and jointly subscribed unto, by the suffrages of all both
head, and members. For until then, they be not made one common voice, one
publik law, one general consent, or definitive sentence pronounced by them
all; they are not the last, and highest Tribunal of the Church, to which every
one is bound to submit himself without further appeal. To the second, I reply
with D. Sanders, and other learned Deuines. It is false, that To the second.
Sander. de visib. Monar. l. 4. c. 3. and 4.
there was no other ordinary Judge in the law of Nature then Gods private
instruction: for Adam during his life was the chief head, and supreme
directour of Gods people in points of faith. Then Seth; after Enos etc. And so
in succeeding ages, the first borne, or eldest among the faithful by the
prerogative of his primogeniture, or some other by Gods special election,
discharged that office: which did also necessarily follow out of the elevation
of mankind to a supernatural end, supposing the sweetness of divine providence
after man's fall, and want of faith. To the third, I answer, that God himmselfe
in the written To the third. Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 12.
law, appointed one high Priest, and supreme Judge among the Jews: He that
shallbe proud, refusing to obey the Commandment of the Priest, which at that
time ministers to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Judge, that man
shall dye. To whom notwithstanding the faithful amongst the Gentiles, were not
subject, because they had no such positive precept imposed upon them: they were
then separated, and divided from that chosen company, by which the lineall and
visible succession of the Church was propagated, and continued. Yet if they
lived according to the prescript of reason and light of nature, the necessary
mysteryes of faith were revealed unto them, either by God himself, or by an
Angel, or by some other inviolable tradition. Which being an extraordinary
course can neither be a warrant for particular men to challeng the like,, nor
prejudice the ordinary way which the divine wisdom, uses in instructing his
servants: especially now in the law of grace in which he has subjected both
Jew, and Gentile to the obedience of one head, and supreme pastor, according
to that which our savior said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold;
them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there Joan. 10. 16.
shall be made one fold, and one pastor. Which cannot be understood of Christ
as he inuisibly feeds, and governs his flock, for so there was always one
fold, Cyprian. l. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum.
and one pastor; but of his visible headship, and of his secondary also, and
visible pastor, who now succeeds him, of whom S. Cyprian interprets those
words.

27. To the fourth, I deny the Antecedent: for that which first decideth what
society of Christians is the To the Fourth.
true Church, are certain publik notes, and known signs by which the spouse of
Christ is evidently marked, and discribed unto us. Then it is true that we also
acknowledge a supernatural help, or inward working of the holy ghost to believe
the Catholic Church, and all the articles she proposes; yet in a far
different manner, from that which our sectaries pretend: for we require the
interior working to move our will, and eleuate our understanding to believe
the mysteries already revealed; our sectaries require it to reveal the very
mysteries, which are to be believed: we, to receive the expositions of
Scripture publikly, and vniformily made by the divine interpreters; they
privately to expound, and particularly to interpret the scriptures themselves:
We have moreover prudentiall motives, or arguments of credibility prudently to
induce us to those acts of faith; they have no such arguments, but of the
contrary side many reasons to distrust their private spirits. We, besides the
inward unction, and outward letter, have the safe conduct of a common, public,
and inerrable directour: they have no other publik, and outward guide then the
bare letter subject to a thousand false constructions. Ours, is the spirit of
peace, and union, uniting us all in the same belief: theirs of strife, and
dissension, making them infinitely to vary in points of faith. Ours of
submission, theirs of presumption. Ours inclines us to obey, and humbly
embrace; theirs proudly to judge, and peremptorily to conrroule the true
preachers doctrine. So that the heavenly inspiration, which we allow, has not
any link of affinity, with their private spirit.

THE SECOND CHAPTER* WHEREIN All that which D. Reynolds, D. Sparks, and M.
Whitaker devise to bolster their former, Position, is refuted.
BECAUSE so many windinges and crosse-wayes occur in this wild desert of
scanning words, unfolding texts, and searching original fountaynes; our
Adversaries strive to assign some lines to lead us aright in this maze of
difficulties. D. Reynolds and D. Sparks prescribe not only search, but
deligent Rein c. 2. diuis. 2. p. 60. and 62. Sparks pa. 246. etc. Joan. 5. v.
36. Mart. 7. v. 7. Iac. 1. v. 5.
search, and earnest prayer to God. Of the one it is said: Search the
scriptures etc. and they shall be opened unto you. Of the other: If any of you
want Wisdom, let him ask it of God etc. and it shall be given him. Soueraygne
helps I grant, but no assured rules. For how many have trodden these paths,
who wandered and miserably perished amongst the briars of error? Pelagius,
Photinus, Eunomius prayed earnestly, and most diligently searched the Canon of
Scripture, who vented notwithstanding infamous heresies.

2. M. Reynolds replyeth, that the fault of these and others ^rring must be:
Not in conferring places most diligently* but not in conferring them d^ligently
enough. In not praying as they Rein. c. 2. diuis. 2. p. 60. and p 45 1. Joan c.
5. v. 14. Romans c. 12. v. 13.
should, and searching as they ought, in the spirit of faith and modesty. But
you that carpe so often at the Schoolemens Quiddi^es, what mean you now by
this nice distinction between most diligently, and diligently enough? Or what
degree of diligence attribute you to that which is enough, above the
superlatiue exactnes of that which is most? Further, what do you understand by
searching as they ought, in the spirit of Faith and modesty? Do you think it
necessary the Collatour should believe the thing he searches, before he
begins to search? To what end then does he search? And what shall he do, who
belieneth not, or doubts of the matter? But not to demure in these deep
subtiltyes, or mere fooleryes rather, who can tell (I beseech you) when he
prays in faith and modesty as he should? When he uses diligence enough in
searching as he ought? Or how can others be warranted, who they be that
perform these things? Is not this as hidden, as intricate, as inscrutable as
the truth of Gods word for which we labor? I think you suppose S. Iraeneus,
S. Cyprian, S Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Augustine prayed to God,
and weighed his word in faith and modesty as they ought. By what means then
swarued they so far from the true sense of Scripture, as to be spotted with
so many The Centurie writers Cen. 2. 4. 5.
wennes, and warts (as you call them) of superstitious Popery; to wit, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Invocation of Saints, Free Will, Merit, Purgatory,
Prayer for the dead etc? You will answer again; They failed in their prayers,
and slacked of their diligence, when out of the pure fountains of holy Write,
they derived these Romish dregs. Well let it be they failed; at least your late
reformers Luther, Calvin, Beza etc. failed not. They prayed in faith, and
modesty, they marked, they examined Scripture as they ought. How comes it
then to pass, they have not obtained so much wisdom from God, as to agree in
their exposition? How do they who follow the right rules of interpreting
Scripture, vary so infinitely as to dissent in above 80. several expositions of
these four words, This is my body, which Claudius de Xainctes reckons
Xainct. repet. 1. cap. vltimo.
up, besides innumerable other most irreconciliable iarres?

3. I know not with what brazen face or steeled conscience D. Field, and M.
Sparks depose: That these their divisions are imaginary and merely
accidental, not in points fundamental, Field in his appendix 1. par. page 23.
and. 24. Sparks in his answer to M. John Albins.
not in matters necessary to salvation. Whereas they differ in number of
Sacraments, nature of the Church, essential manner of her government, in the
article of Christ's descension into hell, of his Passion, Mediation, of his
equality with his Father, our regeneration by Baptism, Justification by faith,
as I shall by Gods grace discover hereafter. And if these be not fundamental
points, what points will you make fundamental? Or if your diligence, your
prayer, with other helps may mislead you in these, why not in others? Why
define you not what articles they be, in which ye are freed from error? Are
you all privileged not to fail in fundamental points, and can no man tell,
nor your selves accord in what points your privilege consists?

4. For (answer O thou Protestant) are they fundamental points, which make
men forfait their salvation? which carry millions of millions to eternal
flames? Then whosoever Broughto^ vb^ supra.
imbraceth your English translation of the Bible, differs (as I have proved)
from his own companions in points fundamental. Are they fundamental points
which are necessary to be believed? And, All points necessary to be believed
(as M. Whitaker strayneth out of S. Augustines Whitaker. c. 1 q. 4. c. 4 pa 29^.
words) so clear in Scripture, as they cannot be mistaken? You square among
your selves in points fundamental, some assigning these some others to be
essential, capital, and necessary to be believed. Nay you vary in so plain
and perspicuous points, as you cannot mistake them; and by your own division
subvert your own assertion. Are they fundamental points, which undermine the
foundation and shake the groundwork of true Religion? The^ Calvin and his
pupills dissent from their Grand^^res in fundamental Hun^ius in his book
entitled, Caluinus Iudaizans. Luth cont. art. Louan. these. 27.
points, by the censure of Hunnius a Protestant writer, who brandeth him with
Arianisme, Iudaisme, and the like. Are they fundamental points, which
whosoever defends is estranged from God, ranged amongst heretics, and
banished the company of men? Then all Sacramentaryes, whom Luther for their
Tropicall construction of the words of the Sacrament, seriously censureth as
Heretics, and aliens from the Church of God; All Lutheranes Calvin lib. 4.
instit. c. ^7.
whom Calvin attacheth of the Eutichian heresy, for auouching the immensity of
Christ's body answerable to his Deity; All English Puritans, whom their
fellow-Protestants excommunicate by their Canons and cassiere their Canon 4. 6.
7. etc.
Society, are among themselves dismembered in fundamental points. Lo the peace
of our new Ghospellers: Lo their agreement in points fundamental: Lo the
marks they observe in expounding Scripture, which bear them headlong on these
rocks of dissension.

5. M. Whitaker therefore propounds a surer ankerhold to stay them in these
storms: The direction (to wit) of the holy Ghost, the supreme interpreter of
his sacred will, which Whitaker ^^^t. 1. q. 3. c. ^^. and q. 5. cap. 3.
whosoever follows cannot but escape the danger of shipwreck. Who if he
understood by this direction the infallible assistance of that divine spirit,
as he guides the head, or governs the whole body of the Church, we willingly
subscribe unto it. But his meaning is far otherwise. He means heerby the
private motion of the holy Ghost, as he secretly inspireth every particular
faithful man, commonly called the private spirit, of which all Protestants
vaunt so much, and against which the Prophets and Apostles generally exclaim.
Ezechiel cries out: Woe be to Ezech. 13. v. ^. 2. Pet. ^. v. 20
the foolish Prophets, who follow their own spirit. S. Peter says: No
Prophesy of Scripture is made by private interpretation. And although you reply
that the spirit you arrogate is not private, not the spirit of man, but the
spirit of God, which is public and divine: yet seeing you do not assign any
Whitaker. cont. 1. q. 5. cap. 4.
public person, whom this spirit infallibly assisteth, but ascribe it to
every particular and private man, it can be no other then that private spirit,
so frequently rejected in holy Write.

6. For tell me M. Whitaker, what is this spirit of Whitaker cont. 1. q. 5. c.
^. prope finem. Ibid. quaest 3. c. 1^. and cont. 1. q. 2. c. 3.
which you brag? An inward persuasion (you say) of Truth. From whom? From
the holy Ghost. Where? In the secret closet of the belieuers heart. When? When
he hears, or reads the word of God. Is this all? Is not this a private and
uncertain spirit subject to a thousand fantastical illusions? There comes
Montanus with his minion Maximilla; there comes Marcion; there comes
Valentinus; every one chalengeth the prerogative of his spirit, and spirit (as
he pretends) of God. The first his prophesy, the second Tertul. de
praescript. cap. 4^.
the visions of his Paraclet, the third the dreams of his Ae^nes. Were they
not illuded by the wicked spirit? And may not Protestants be deceived as well
as these? Their persuasion is private, it may be mistrusted: their spirit
hidden, it cannot be proved.

7. M. Whitaker yeildeth: That it cannot be proved or demonstrated Whitaker
cont. 1. q. 5. c. 3. prop^ finem.
to others: but it may be a sufficient warrant to them, that have it, of the
true sense of Scripture it opens unto them. Against both which I dispute.
First if it cannot be manifested or proved to others, then in respect of them,
they have no certain ground to believe the Gospel of the Protestants, rather
then the prophesy of Montanus, the visions of the Marcionists. Again if it
cannot be manifested or proved to others, and no true interpretation can be
made without it, no means have Protestants to teach, to preach, to assure
their Brethren, or persuade any others Whitaker cont. 1. q. 3. c. 11. and q.
5. c. 10. Reyn. in his conf. c. 2. diui^. 2.
the light of their Gospel. Which if you do not perspicuously see, I will set
before you a glass to view it in, by a collection or two, gathered out of M.
Whitaker.

8. He grants, and D. Reynolds herein accords with him, that neither
recourse to places so often mentioned, nor survey of Originals, nor
consideration of words, phrase and style, are auailable to aim aright at the
mark of Truth, unless the holy Ghost level and direct unto it: unless he go
before with his torch of light. He Whitaker cont. ^. q. 5. cap. 10.
grants moreover that no inspired minister can demonstrate to others, the
holy Ghost, with his lincke, to have enlightened his heart. It rests therefore
(by this own Logike) that no Minister can give assurance of the doctrine he
preaches, and consequently no faith can be taught, no belief received from
the mouth of our Ghospellers. It rests, that no Judge can be amongst them, no
vmpier of controversies, no Pastor, no preacher able to convert souls, plant
faith, end debates, which necessarily requires infallible assurance to
convince the hearers of the truth delivered.

9. Secondly, I show, that this inward spirit can never be a warrant sufficient
in the search of Scripture to guide them that enjoy it. For either it guides
them sometime fallibly, or always infallibly. Say sometime fallibly; It is
never to be credited, unless you prescribe some rule to know when it fails,
when not; and this prescription you make either by some deceauable, or
vndeceauable spirit, and so we are as far to seek as we were at the
beginning. Say always infallibly; Whatsoever you expound, speak, or write by
the instruction of this spirit, ought to be embraced as Canonical Scripture,
as the heavenly writings, or Oracles of God: and since you often vary from your
selves, and contradict one the other, you profane the Divine oracles with
horrible contradictions. Besides, if the spirit of every faithful belieuer be
a safe conduct to lead him to the understanding of Scripture, to what end are
the doctors and interpreters of Gods word? To what end did S. Paul say; to one
by the spirit is given the grace of working miracles; to another Prophesy; 1.
Cor. 12. v. 9. and 10. Ad Haeb. ^3. v. 17.
to another discerning of spirits etc. Why did he restrain to some which is
extended to all? To what end were people commanded, to obey their Prelates? To
what end was it pronounced, He that hears you, hears me etc. And, He that
hears not the Church, let him be to thee like an Ethnike and publican? To
what end were these things spoken, if to Luc. 10. v. 16. Matthew. 18. v. 17.
all be granted the spirit of Prophesy? If members must judge of their heads,
and people examine their Pastors doctrine?

10. In fine, to rippe up the bowels and break the very sinews of this
answer in pieces; the inward Spirit, which moves the Collatour in the
exposition of Gods word may be caused three several ways. 1. God may inspire
it. 2. The Devil suggest it. 3. The discourse of reason gather and collect it.
Now, aread me this doubt, you that ground your faith hereon; how do you know
the persuasion you follow to be an inspiratio^ 2. Cor. 1^. verse. 14*
from God, a suggestion of Satan, or a discourse of reason? The Devil may
transfigure himself into an Angel of light: many falsehoods (as the
Philosopher teaches) may seem more probable then truths. Diverse have been
undoubtedly persuaded that the spirit of God guided them aright, when they were
ignorantly missed by the spirit of deceit; wherein if you believe not me,
believe a judicious and learned Protestant; believe M. Hooker a famous writer
of your own, who has published these words in print: Such as are readiest to
cite for one thing five hundred Hook. in his 2. Book sess. 7. fol, ^18.
sentences of holy Scriptur, what warrant have they that any one of the^ does
mean the thing for which it is alleged? Is not their surest ground most
commonly either some probable conjecture of their own, or the judgment of
others, taking those Scriptures as they do? which notwithstanding to mean
otherwise then they take them, it is not still altogether impossible. So that
now and then they ground themselves on humane authority, even when they most
pretend divine. Who could say more against the vanity of our Sectaries, against
their obstinate arrogance in expounding the word by their own private sense
and judgment? for if amongst five hundred sentences they have no warrant for
one, to mean the thing for which it is alleged: If now and then they ground
themselves on humane authority, even when they most pretend divine, by the
pretense no doubt and direction of the spirit; what notes does he or his mates
assign? what marks do they propose to discern the Divine spirit of God, from
the humane spirit of man, or illusion of the Devil?

11. Marry, some Protestants prescribe the Analogy of Scripture: That the
spirit ought to be tried by Canon of holy writ; which is nothing else then to
allow the circle so often hissed out of schools: by the spirit to interpret
the Scripture, and by the Scripture to discern the spirit: Nothing else, then
to make a fair show, where no hope can be had of escape. For either I
understand before the sense of the Scripture, to which I judge my spirit
agreeable; or understand it not. Suppose I understand it; in vain is the
instruction of the spirit. Suppose I know it not; how shall I judge of the
conformity of my spirit to that which I do not my self conceive? Others
therefore teach: That the spirit needs not the touch - stone of Scripture, but
may by it self be descried as black from white, light from darkness. If this
be so, why are we commanded, Not to trust every Spirit, when none can deceive
us? Why is it ^. Joan. 4. v. 1. Ibide^
said: Try the Spirits, when they need no trial? How falls it out so many
mistake the spirit of truth? How is our sight so dimmed, that we cannot
perceive the distinction of spirits, the dark night from the clearest day?

12. We for example, believe with Protestants the Council of Nice, we believe
the mystery of the holy Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, and with the same
spirit which they count erroneous, we believe the Counsel of Lateran, of
Florence, the Real presence, the Sacrifice of the mass; neither can we see
any difference in this our spirit. Not we perchance, but you the sharpsighted
eagles, who soar so high as to gaze on the sun, you no doubt can bewray the
different marks. Ask then the Lutheran what clouds of darkness he
discovers in the spirit of defiance he has with the Caluinist, from the
bright beams of light, which jointly shine in points of their agreement? he
answers: None at all. Ask the Caluinist what foggie mist he espieth in his
spirit of variance from the Lutheran? he answers: none at all. Ask the
divine - spirited Protestant; Ask the Puritan the like question. The
Protestant contendeth, that the spirit which causes him to dissent from the
Puritan, is the spirit of light, the illustration of the Holy Ghost. The
Puritan protests the same of his. And whereas the one must needs be a
Satanicall illusion, since it wholly crosses and contradicts the other, who
sees not, that the spirit of truth cannot by it self be discerned from the
spirit of deceit, no not by the grand-maisters themselves, and boasters of the
spirit?

13. When our Ghospellers are thus beaten out of all their forts or strong
holds of succor, when they are convinced, that neither Scripture alone, nor
perusal of places, nor examination of Greek and Hebrew fountains, nor prayer
to God with the direction of the private spirit can safely conduct them to the
true knowledge and Rein. ^. 2. diuis. 2. p. 62. (...) in act. Col. Ratis. ses
14. p. 1^2. Vvh^taker desa. Scrip. Controu. 1. q 4. c 4. and q. 5. ^ 8. Joan.
^o. v. 17. 1. Cor. 2. v. 15.
sense of Scripture, will you hear their last and most desperate refuge?
Listen and learn to detest their fraud. Albeit (say they) these former helps
be not always effectual to the reprobate or wicked sinner: yet they are
sufficient enough to the elect of God. If the Lord (says Reynolds) take
delight in us, he will bring us to the food of life, he will give us the bread
of our souls, and make us learned in the Scriptures. For it is written (quoth
Hunnius and Whitaker) My sheep hear my voice, and, The spiritual man judges
all things. O ye children of darkness! O ye enemies of light! How long will
ye seek these cloudy euasions? How long will ye run from one maze of
obscurity into another? As from search of Scripture to secret prayer; from
secret prayer, to private spirit; from private spirit, to hidden grace. And how
shall I learn who is endued with this celestial grace, in whom God is
pleased? How shall I know the spiritual man, or sheep of Christ? Eccles. 9. v.
^.
Solomon said: No man can tell whether he be worthy of love or hatred. S. Paul:
I am guilty of nothing, yet in this I am not justified. But thou more wise then
Solomon, more illuminated then 1. Cor. 4. v. 4.
S. Paul, describe me the marks, show me the badge and cognizance of Christ,
that I may see whether I am a sheep of his flock or no. Thou say, if I had a
strong and fervent faith, if I believed aright, I should be infallibly
acertainted of Gods present grace, and eternal favor. And who (I pray) has
this fervent faith? He that imbraceth the reformed Gospel? O rounds! O
circles! Are you not ashamed still to trace this endless Labyrinth? Calu. in
argumento Epist. and l. ^. Inst. c. 8. anno 1554. Luther in prolog. Epist.
Rogers in his book to the Kings Majesty.
I desire to know how I might believe aright, how I might be sure to hear my
shepherds voice, and you at length resolve me; if I be a sheep of your fold,
and believe as you do, I shall believe aright, and be sure to hear his voice.
A feat of Sophistry tooto common amongst you; yet such a feat as with slender
skill may be defeated.

14. Calvin your Ringleader approved, and partly broached your reformed
Gospel; he was a sheep of Christ, who reading the epistle of S. Paul to the
Hebrews, the epistle of S. James, heard in them the voice of Christ, the voice
of God. And Luther your fore-father, what, was he a goat of Satan, who
perusing the same epistles heard no such voice, nothing but dry and dusty
stuff, nothing worthy an Apostolical spirit? Our English Protestants are
sheep of Christ, who reverence the whole vulgar translation of their Bible as
the pure word of God. The Millenary Plaintiffes what are they? All goats of
Satan, who lament therein many false corruptions in matters of faith, as M.
Rogers testifyeth in his book dedicated to this Majesty. Not to speak of the
Precisians, the Protestants among themselves are all no doubt sheep of Christ.
How hear they then the voice of their Pastor? One in this sort, another in
that, quite opposite to the former. One hears Christ Bi^^on. in his survey of
Christ's sufferings pa. 650. 651. etc.
descended into hell; another: He Vvi^let in his book entitled Lymbomas^ix.
descended not. One: The Field l. 1. of the Church.
Church to be always visible; another: sometimes Willet in his Synopfis* p.
48. and all protestants generally.
invisible. One gathers out of Gods words two Melanc^hon in lo. commun.
Sacraments; another: Calvin. l. 4. inst. c. 19.
Tree; another: Melancth* in locis editis* an. 36. an. 52.
four etc. One affirms: The Sacraments do not only signify, but ^ilso^ in
his book of Christ subjection. 4. p. page 51.
confer grace; another: condemns Fulke against purg^tor, p. 35. Sparks in
his answer to M. John A^bins p. ^46.
the same as Popish. What? Is the voice of Christ repugnant to it self etc. Or
are some Protestants also goats of Satan? Or is it true, the sheep of Christ
do not certainly hear their shep-heards voice?

15. Moreover the sheep of Christ are of two sorts: some are sheep by present
grace: others by eternal election: of neither of these can your maxim be
verifyed. Not of the first. For if they only know their Pastors voice, woe be
to all Infidels, woe to all notorious and obstinate sinners, in vain are they
persuaded and preached unto. Woe had it been to S. Matthew, to S. Mary
Magdalen, and thousands of Saints, who once deprived of present grace, could
never have heard their shepherds call. Happy the Reprobate in respect of them,
who being often sheep by present grace, might perfectly know, and easily stoop
to the^^ ^aisters lure. Not of the second kind of sheep; because S. Augustine a
Manich^e, S. Paul a persecutour even then ^^re sheep of Christ, by eternal
election, even then they studied and examined the text of Scripture, even then
they were both infused with the inward persuasion and spirit of Protestants,
that they followed their Pastor and obeyed his precepts; yet were both
deceived by the voice of a stranger. You answer, they could not be finally
deceived: They hear the true voice of their spouse (says M. Sparks) at one
time or another. At one time or another? And who has revealed unto you, that
this is the time of your vocation? Imagine you be as they were, Gods chosen
sheep, may you not now be bewitched with some deceitful charm? May not your
dreams seem his Oracles? And may you not (as God grant you may) be
hereafter vncharmed and lament with S. Augustine: My error was my God, and
the siction Aug* l. 4. confess. cap. 7.
of my brains the voice of my shepherd?

16. Again if this second sort only of elected sheep are undoubtedly grounded
in the true knowledge of holy writ, none according to you can be infallibly
instructed in necessary points of faith, until God admit him, as S. Paul
says, to the Counsel of his inscrutable judgments; until Romans 11. v. 3^.
he show his name engrossed in the book of Li^e. Which because you ordinarily
hold impossible to be believed without your Solifidian and all-working faith,
faith requires election, and election presupposes faith. And seeing the one
can never be obtained without assurance of the other, you may search long
enough before you can attain to either.

17. What construction then (quoth Whitaker) will you make of those words: My
sheep hear my voice? Of those: The spiritual man judges all things? I
answer: that Whitaker locis ci^^tis.
the sheep of Christ hear his voice not at all times, not when they list, but
how, and when it pleases God. Sometime by secret inspiration, other while by
outwa^d hearing, or reading his word: yet so, as they have never infallible
certitude heerof, but when it is confirmed by extraordinary revelation, or by
the public Judgment and approbation of the Church, by whose authority the
spiritual man judges all things. Or he may be said to Whitaker cont. 1. q.
5. c. 8. Rein c. 2. diuis. 2. Act. 17. v. 1^ 1. Joan. 2. v. 27.
judge all things, not infallibly, but prudently and discreetly, as the
testimony of his conscience and instinct of the holy Ghost shall teach and
persuade him. Whitaker, and Reynoldes again: The men of Beroea are commended
for trying the doctrine of S. Paul by the judgment of Scripture. It is written:
You have no need that any man teach you, but as his unction teaches you of all
things. Lastly: All are said to be taught of God. I answer. The men of Beroea,
or as some say of Thessalonica, which were the more noble and wiser sort, Esaias.
54. v. 3. John. 6. v. 4^. Whitaker ibid^m q. 3. ca. ^^.
either believed not before (as many hold) and then they took a judicious and
prudent course in searching the places S. Paul alleged to procure, as the
Deuines require, arguments of credibility, whereby they might be induced
maturely to embrace the truth he delivered, which S. Pa^l no doubt exhorted
them unto. And in like case having produced testimonies out of the Sybills and
Hystapsis against See Lorinus upon this place of the Acts, and Staple^on in
Antidoto. ^^^n. ^. strom ^ 1.
the Gentills, he counsaileth them, as S. Clemens Alexandrinus testifyeth, to
read and consider the allegations, how strongly they concluded, and made for
his purpose. Or if they already believed (as others mantain) then nothing
doubting of the truth he preached, they searched only for their confort and
confirmation, to nourish and strengthen their belief, to arm themselves the
better against the assaults of the enemy. Both which are allowable upon these
supposal; neither are warrantable for the faithful to judge and censure their
Pastors doctrine.

18. To the second, and third instance, I answer: S. John wrote to those that
had received the faith, and needed not another master to teach them a new
doctrine contrary thereunto. Isay prophesied of them that were to receive it;
and both, as S. Augustine commenteth, speak of the inward unction of Gods
grace, and inspiration of Aug. tract 3. in ep. 1. Joan. and l. de gra. Christi.
c. 13 and 14.
the Holy Ghost, which together with the outward preaching sweetly moves,
strengthens, and confirms the faithful, not to examine, judge, or try, but
humbly to believe and joyfully to embrace the message of truth delivered unto
them. Shall I repeat S. Augustines words*? Shall I propound the question he
makes to S. John upon occasion of this speech, wherein he excellently refu^eth
this objection of Protestants? Thou sa^est Tract. 3. vbi supra.
(quoth he) his unction teaches you of all things: why then did thou write
that Epistle? Why did thou teach them? Why did thou instruct? See here my
Brethren, a great mystery: the no^se of our words pass unto the ears, the
Master is within etc. Outward instructions are helps and admonitions, he has
his chair in heaven who teaches the heart. Christ teaches, his inspiration
teaches: where his inspiration and unction is not, in vain is the sound of
words without.

19. Besides if we read that place of Isay, All shall be taught of God, as our
Adversaries press the Greek. I answer Cyril in (...) lo^^^
again with S. Cyril: That it is a Prophesy of Christ's coming, to teach
Christians in his own person, who before taught the Jews by the mouth of his
Prophets. If we read: All shall be docible of God, as Maldonate more faithfully
Maldonat in cap. 6. Joan.
gathered out of the Hebrew and Chaldean word, it was spoken, as he notably
proves by the testimony of Leontius Ammonius, and S. John Chrysostom, for
that God of himself is most ready to instruct, and the Euangelical Law more
fit to be infused into the heart by the unction of the holy Ghost, then to be
uttered by words, or imprinted in books.

20. Lastly, M. Whitaker, M. Reynolds, and their adherents Whitaker 1. cont.
q. 5. Cap. 8. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 1. Basil Epist. 80. Tul. l. 3 de leg. Aug de
nup. and co^. cup. ^ 2. c. 33. Opt. l. 5. cont. Parmen. Aug. co^c. 2. in Psalm.
35.
object sundry Fathers allowing the sufficiency of Scripture to end disputes,
to whose authorities I shall answer in my next discourse Now I reply to the
testimonies of S. Basil, S. Augustine, and Optatus. S. Basil summoneth his
Adversaries to the arbitrament of holy Writ, in a thing most clearly revealed
concerning the Trinity in which case he may call the Scripture arbiter or
Judge, as the Lawyers sometimes term the civil law, or Justinian the compiler
of them, Vmpier, and Judge: And as Tully calls, The Law, a dumb Magistrate:
and the Magistrate, a lively Law. After which sort S. Augustine says: Let
Christ judge, let the Apostles judge etc. Optatus likewise in the question of
Rebaptization provoked the Donatists to the Judgment of Gods written word,
because there were most evident testimonies thereof; and because the Donatists
would admit no indifferent trial by any lawful sentence, but still appealed,
as S. Augustine witnesses, from one another, from Melchiades the Pope to the
assembly of Bishops: from the Bishops to the Emperor: from the Emperor to
others; disclayming from all by whom they were vanquished. Secondly I answer.
That these and many other Fathers often refer themselves to the vmpiershippe
of Scripture, for that it is the silent and outward law, by which the voice of
our speaking Judge ought and always is uttered and pronounced; and for that it
directs us to the Church, the true, sovereign, and lively Judge of all
debats.

21. Thus we are so far from derogating from the prerogative of holy writ, as
we grant it is, A perfect light and lantern to our feet; The entire rule and
square of faith; The supreme and absolute Judge of Controversies. Thus we
grant it is the Mine of truth, the fountain of life, the sea of wisdom, the
Armary of the holy Ghost. It is the promptuary of God fully stored with all
spiritual treasures: yet such as are to be dispensed by the Opta. l. 5. con.
Parm.
Stewards of his house. It is, as Optatus notes, The will and Testament of
Christ, yet to be interpreted by those his executours whom he appointed to
expound his mind, and dispose of his legacy. It is the book of heaven signed
with seven seals, as Origin says, but not to be opened Orig. hom. 12. in Exo.
by any, but by the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; or them to who^ he gives
commission. It is, as another auerreth, The light of the world, not to be
hidden under the bushel of any private or fantastical brain, but to be
placed on the candlestick of Gods Church, to give light unto all her obedient
children. Esaias. 35. verse. ^.


22. After this manner the repair to Scripture is a plain, easy, general,
and certain highway, In which fools cannot err, or step awry; whereas the
search our Sectaries applaud, is, as you see, hidden, dark, variable,
unconstant, not public, not universal. It has been the path of Heretics to
damnable errors. It is a field to themselves of interminable strifes; and it
may be to all that follow it, as well a train to draw them unto the wiles of
perdition, as a line to guide them to the port of bliss, to the true knowledge
of God, as shall more amply appear by the Chapter ensuing.

THE SECOND CONTROVERSY. THAT All things necessary to Salvation are not
contained in Scripture: AGAINST D. Reynolds, D. Bilson, and D. Field.
CHAP. I.
ARIGHT wise, and laudable endeavor it has been, amongst the learned of all
ages, rather to imprint their chiefest points of doctrine in the minds Casar l.
6. de Bello Gallico. ^lut. in vita Numae. And in his first oration of the fort.
or virtues of Alexan.
and memories of well disposed auditors, then engraue them in curious tables,
or blaze them with the pens of industrious writers. So we read that our
ancient Druides, renowned for learning throughout all the world, never
committed anything to the casualty of writing, but entrusted all the riches of
their knowledge to the treasury of their disciples hearts. Pithagoras, Socrates,
and many other famous philosophers are deservedly praised, and commended for
the like. What do I speak of men? God himself long taught and instructed his
servants from Adam even until Moses for the space of 2000. years without
recording any one precept or instruction he gave. And when Jesus Christ his
only Son came into this world, he called his Apostles, planted his Church,
Mar. 16. v. 15. Luc. 10. 16. Math. 18 v. 7. and Matthew. 23. v. 3. see S. Aug.
ep. 165.
preached his heavenly doctrine, yet never penned, or so much as commanded any
one mystery to be written. He gave his Apostles commisson; to preach the
Gospel to every creature. He charged us; to hear them as himself, to give
ear to whatsoever they should teach or say. But to give credit only to what
they should write, he never gave charge. And therefore they preached many
years, converted thousands, and delivered unto them the food of life before
they compiled the books of Scripture, as all our Adversaries will confess.
Yet says D. Reynolds, after these books were once penned and published
abroad, all Reyn in his first Conclusion p. 616.
things requisite to salvation are there contained, which thus he labors to
prove. The Prophets taught the old Church the way of Salvation, the Apostles
with the Prophets together teach the new more plenteously and fully. The
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is comprised in the holy Scripture; the
Scripture therefore teaches the Church whatsoever is behoofull to Salvation. Oh
deceiptfull disputant, who in so weighty a matter uses such Sophistry! How
creeps the Pronoune (whatsoever) into your conclusion, not avouched in the
premises? But if you will have it understood, I deny your Minor. I deny that
the whole doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is comprised in holy Scripture.

2. To begin with the doctrine of the Prophets; Moses the first Scribe and
chief Secretary of the holy Ghost was so far from setting down all things
he received Orig ho. 5. in Number. Hilar. in Ps. 2.
from the mouth of God, that whereas he was taught by him the law and true
sense, which is the life and soul of the law, the law he engrossed in writing,
but the sense and exposition thereof (as Origin and S. Hilary affirm) he
secretly delivered by inviolable tradition to his Successors, even by the
express will and commandment of God, as he seemed by Esdras (whose testimony
Esd ^. 4. c. 14. v. 5. and 6.
as a most holy and learned man must needs bear sway) in these plain terms
to declare: I have disclosed unto Moses many marvelous things etc. And I have
charged him, saying: These words shall thou lay open, and these shall thou
conceal. Among which he concealed, what means God provided for the saving and
purging of women from original infection, what for children before the eight
day of circumcision, things not mentioned in Scripture, as D. Field with
Andradius willingly confesses, and proves by Field. l. 4. page 236. Andrad.
defen. l. 2.
the authority of S. Gregory: That children then were saved by the faith of
their parents. Yet when Andradius infers, that this at least could not be
known but by Tradition, D. Field rejects his inference as frivolous, and
says most fondly and contrary to himself: That it was known and concluded
out of the general and common rules of reason, and equity. Field page 237.
Most fondly. For what necessary sequel have the incomprehensible secrets of
Gods hidden election in things supernatural, with the common rules of natural
reason? Are his ways and means of salvation any way tied to the discourse of
man? S. Paul who was rapt into the third heaven, amiddest all his revelations
thought them far above the reach of humane wit, when he cried out: O alt tudo
etc. O the depth of the riches of Gods wisdom and knowledge, how inscrutable
are his judgments, and his ways unsearchable! And were they made plain before
to Romans 11. v. 33.
the Jews by the common rules of reason and equity? Most contrary to himself;
because if the sovereign and necessary means of saving the aforesaid parties
not specifyed in holy writ be deduced from these general grounds, some
behoofull thing necessary to salvation against Bilson, against Reynoldes,
against himself, is not contained in Scripture.

3. To these and such like close and hidden Traditions Eccles. 8. v. 11. and.
12.
King Solomon referred the Children of Israel, when he said: Let not pass the
narration of thy elders, for they have been taught by their fathers, and of
them thou shall learn understanding. Of these King David spoke: How many
things has Psalm. 77. ^.
he commanded our Fathers to make known to their children? Of these the whole
Scripture is so full, as M. Reynolds, and M. Bilson languishing in this
Controversy for want of proofs are feign to allege such texts to warrant
their assertion, as their adversaries might produce to diswarrant Rein. Con. ^.
p. 616. Bills. 2. p. page 267.
the same. M. Reynolds obiecteth that saying of Moses: Give ear, O Israel, to
the ordinances which I teach. Bilson that of Deutronomy: Whatsoever I command,
that shall ye do. Do not these places make for me? What Rein, page 616. 617.
I teach, what I command (says God) not what I write. Reynoldes urges out of
Jeremy: How Idolators are condemned for doing in their Sacrifices things which
our Lord commanded Bills. 2. pa^^ page 206. Mala. 2. Bills. 2. par. p. 289.
peru^^ts this place translating the Priests lips should preserve: whereas it is
expressly in H^brew jj^hmeru, in Greek (...), in Latin custodie^t, shall
preserve. Joan. ep. 2. v 12. 1. Cor. cap. 11. ^4.
not. Which he commanded not, I grant, neither by word nor writing. D. Bilson
alleges King David: How the word of God is a lantern to our feet. Reynolds
cyteth Malachy: Willing the people to remember the law of Moses. The word, the
law I confess, as well recorded in hearts, as printed in books, which Malachy
himself witnesses: The lipes of the Priests (not the leaves of paper only)
shall keep, or preserve knowledge, and thou shall require the law from his
mouth. Could they have chosen better weapons for my advantage then these they
bring forth in their own defense. Perchance they reserve their forces to
mantaine at least, that after the Apostles and Evangelists penned their
preaching, nothing auailable to salvation is left unwritten. But their weakness
also herein shall openly appear, as soon as I have proved that the Apostles
thought it not expedient to set down all things in writing, that they often
refer us to unwritten Traditions, that reason conuinceth the necessity of
them, and the Fathers mention many which we must needs embrace.

5. S. John says: Having more things to write unto you, I would not impart
them by paper and ink. S. Paul left some holy decrees and ordinances vnpenned,
of which he spoke to the Corinthians: The rest I will dispose when I come: some
deep points of Christ's Priesthood insinuated to the Hebrews: Of whom I have
great speech, and inexplicable to utter. Haeb. 5. 22. Joan. 16. v. 12.
And herein they traced the footsteps of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
who said to his Disciples: Many things I have to say to you, but you cannot
bear them now. Whereupon S. Gregory Nazianzen affirms the Divinity of the
holy Ghost to be one of the misteryes Christ revealed Greg. de theol. orat. ^.
not to his Disciples at that time. Which moved the Eunomians to term him
(...), The unwritten God. Yea S. Paul himself refers, exhorts, and
recommendeth unto us besides his written word, many unwritten 1. ad Tim. c.
vltimo 1. Cor. 11. 2. 2 These. c. 2. 14. B^sil. de Spir. Sancto. c. 29. Basil.
ibid. cap. 27.
verityes. To Timothy: O Timothy, keep the Depositum. To the Corinthians: I
praise you brethren, that in all things you be mindful of me, and as I have
delivered unto you keep my precepts, or Traditions according to the Greek. To
the Tessalonians: Hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it be by
word or epistle. Upon which words S. Basil accounts it: Apostolic to
persevere firmly even in unwritten Traditions. And a little before: Of such
articles of Religion as are kept, and preached in the Church, some were taught
by the written word, other some we have received by the tradition of the
Apostles delivered unto us as it were from hand to hand in misteryes, both
which be of one force to godliness: and these things no man will deny. S.
Epiphanius cyting the forenamed place of S. Epiphan. har. 61. Chrysostom. in 2.
ad These. ^om. 4. Hieron. aduers. Lucifer. Orig. in proem. l. ^. de Prin. Aug
ep. 86. ad Casulan.
Paul says: We must use traditions, for the Scripture conteyneth not all
things; and therefore the Apostles delivered certain things by writing,
certain by Tradition. S. Chrysostom upon the same text: The Apostles did not
deliver all things by writing, but many things without, and these be as
worthy of credit as the other. S. Hierome: Although there were no authority o^
proof out of Scripture, the consent of the whole world in this behalf should
stand in lieu of a precept. For many other things also which by tradition are
observed in the Church, have gotten the force and strength of a written law.
Origin: That truth is only to be believed, which in nothing swarueth from
Ecclesiastical tradition. S. Augustine: Concerning those things of which the
Scripture makes no mention, the custom of Gods people, or the constitutions
of our Ancestors are to be held in place of a law.

6. Some of these Fathers M. Reynoldes faithfully Reyn. conclus. 1. p. 689.
Reyn. ibid. page 620.
cyteth; yet for that they utterly exclude his fond and feigned gloss of the
Apostles words above mentioned; he one while answers: I took not upon me to
control them, but let the Church judge, if they considered with advice enough
etc. And some few leaves before of S. Basil and S. Epiphanins he malepartly
protests, They were deceived. But if they were deceived, S. Cyprian,
Tertullian, S. Chrysostom, S. Fulke against purgatory p. 362. 303. etc.
Vvh^tak* de sacra Scriptura. p. 678. 68^. 683. 685. Tertul. l. de cor mil.
Chrysostom. ho. 1. in Acta* Hier* l. co^^. Lucif. c. 4. and ep. 28. ad Lic^. Aug. de
Ge ad lit. l* 20. cap. 23, ^. Cor. 3. 20 lere. 31. 33. Eusebius. l. r. de dem^n.
cap. 8. Tull. l. de l^g. Isocra. ep. ad Philip. Maced.
Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Leo, whom M. Fulke, and Whitaker reprove for
affirming the like, were likewise deceived. S. Paul himself was deceived, who
for this cause terms the Corinthians, the Epistleof Christ, written not with
ink, but with the Spirit of the living God: not in tables of stone, but in the
tables carnal of the heart. The holy Ghost also was deceived, who prophesing of
the new Testament by the mouth of Jeremy says: I will put my law into their
bowels, and in their hearts will I write it. The reasons are manifest; because
our hearts are far surer Registers of Gods word, far less subject to
destruction then leaves of paper. Because it is not meet that the perfect
documents of the new law, of the law of spirit, life, and truth should be wholly
figured in dead and senseles Characters. Because the infinite knowledge of the
holy Ghost daily teaching and instructing his Church was not to be restrained
to any limited volumes. Because, as new doubts, new clouds of diffi^^ltyes
arise amongst us, so new beams of light, new instructions or explications are
needful to clear those mists. Because precepts of manners (as Tully
observes) are more sweetly sowed and engrafted in a Commonwealth by
observation and custom, then by restraint of Jaws. Because (as Isocrates
teaches) the lively voice and oracles of the mind are more forcible to
persuade, of greater account and estimation, then the records of writing.

7. And therefore, as the Romans locked up in the Capitol the Oracles of the
Sybils, and permitted them not Fenestella l. 1. cap 13. de magist. Clemens
Alex. strom. 5. Dion. Bas. Eus. us infra. 1. Cor. cap. 2. 6. Bills. 2. part.
page 265. Reyn. conclus. 1. Dyon. Eccles. hier. cap. 1. Basil. locis citatis.
Leo. ep. 8. ad Flauia. Eusebius. l. 1. de demonst. euang. c. 8. 1. Cor. 11. v. 2.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 14. 1. Tim. vlt. v. 20. 1. Cor. 2. 6. and 1. Cor. 11. v. 34. Ad
Tit. 1. v. 5. Haeb. 5. v. 11. Aug. l. ^on^. epist. Fund c. 4, and 5.
to the view of any, but only their Priests: as the Egyptians, according to
Clemens Alexandrinus report, did not publish the knowledge of their divine
secrets but only to them as were to be advanced either to Royal or Priestly
dignity: so S. Dionyse, S. Basil, and Eusebius witness that the Apostles
thought meet to cover some hidden misteryes of our faith from the contempt of
the vulgar, and by secret Tradition to deliver them only to such as were more
fit and capable. Of whom S. Paul said: We speak wisdom among the perfect.
Notwithstanding M. Bilson cauelleth: That albeit the Church had some Rites and
Ceremonies: yet no matter of faith (says he.) Nothing necessary to salvation
(says M. Reynolds) unwritten. Mere cauils. For S. Dionyse calls the
concealed misteryes, Chief and supersubstantiall. S. Basil: Principal parts
of our Faith. S. Leo: Constitutions which appertain to the pith and substance
of faith. Eusebius: All the precepts which Christ gave as it were to the wiser,
and most spiritual sort of men; which the testimonies themselves seem to
pronounce. For can we think the Traditions which S. Paul equally balanced
with his own Epistle, the Depositum he so earnestly recommended to Timothy, the
wisdom he uttered among the perfect only, and among such as were fit to teach
others; can we think the things he had to prescribe concerning the use and
administration of the Blessed Sacrament, the form he appointed about the
ordering of Priests, the speech touching Christ so high, so inexplicable, so
far above the reach of the Jews, were not necessary if not for every
particular member, yet for the salvation of the body of the Church.

8. Moreover to draw to some particular issue. First to believe the Scriptures
themselves, the Gospel of S. John, the Epstls of S. Paul, all the books of
holy Writ, is necessary to salvation, which notwithstanding we only know (as S.
Augustine teaches) by the Tradition of the Church. Secondly, to believe and
embrace the true sense of Scripture is necessary to salvation, which as S.
Ambrose, S. Ambser. 25. 34. Iero Epist. ad Mar. Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 12.
Jerome, and S. Cyprian accord, we are undoubtedly taught by the Traditions of
the Church. Thirdly, to believe the baptism of Infants. Fourthly, the
pepetuall virginity of our Blessed Lady. Fistly the procession of the holy
Ghost from the Father and the Son. Sixthly, The celebration of the Feast of
Easter upon a Sunday. Seauenthly, the Father to be unbegotten. Eighthly, the
Son to be consubstantiall, is necessary to salvation: and yet where do we
learn them but from the Traditions of the Church? For although the substance
of some of these points be Rein. c. 2. diuis. 2. p. 51. 52.
darkly insinuated in Holy Writ: (as M. Reynolds answers to the latter
instances, and others reply to the former) yet the precise terms, and clear
explication, the Aug. Ep. 174 ^^n. Max. Ari*
subversion of error, and light of our profession, we read not expressed (as
S. Augustine argues) in the divine Scriptures.

9. Lastly to be able to convince heretics, is necessary to the salvation of
the Church: yet Tertullian and Vincentius Field l. citato. Eusebius. l. 5. histor:
Lirinensis (with whom D. Field also closes herein) show that they cannot be
refuted but by Tradition. By which the same Tertullian repressed the
Marcionists, Irenaeus the Valentinians, S. Cyprian the Nouatians, Epiphanius
the Apostolikes, S. Hierome the Heluidians, S. Augustine the Donatists, and S.
Athanasius which other Doctors of his Epiphani haer. ^1. Beza con. Trinitar.
Whitgift cont. Cart. Barlow in the conference p. 10 13. p. 68. Beza epist.
Theol 8^. p. 334. and 335.
time the Arians. Yea the Sectaries themselves at this day to refell their
Adversaries, run to the supply of unwritten Traditions. Beza against the
Trinitaries, Whitgift against Cartwight, our Protestant ministers in the
conference before the Kings Majesty against the Puritans, where by Tradition
they prove Confirmation, Absolution, the sign of the Cross in Baptism, and
the like. Beza adds, that without the terms of Essence, Person, Nature,
Property etc. borrowed from men, the blasphemous Arian, Nestorian, and
Eutichian heresies cannot sufficiently be reproved. In fine, all you who
profess the exact following of the written word, against the same written word
embrace the Tradition and practice of the Church. The word of God commands
us to abstain from blood and strangled meats, which all Christians observed
fot some hundred years together; you contrary to the word of God, contrary to
the primitive Church Act. 15. v. 20. Exodus 31. v. 17. Iere. 17. v. 24. Field l.
4. cap. 20.
presume to feed on these forbidden meats, only warranted by our Tradition.
The word of God commands Saturday to be the Saboath-day of our Lord, and to
be kept holy, as an everlasting covenant; you without any precept of Scripture
(to use D. Fields own words) change it into Sunday, only authorized by our
Tradition.

10. Diverse English Puritans oppose against this point, that the observation of
Sunday is proved out of Scripture. Act. ^0. verse. 7.
Out of the acts of the Apostles, where it is said, In the first of the
Saboath, when we were assembled to break bread: out of the first to the
Corinthians, In the Saboath let every one of you put apart with himself: out
the Apocalips, I was in spirit ^. Cor. 16. v. 2.
in the Dominicall day. Have they not spon a fair third in quoting these
places? If we should produce no better for Purgatory, prayer for the dead,
invocation of Saints, and the like, they might have good cause indeed to laugh
Apoc. cap. ^. v. 10.
us to scorn: for where is it written that these were festival days, in
which those meetings were kept? Or where is it ordained they should be always
hereafter observed? Or which is the sum of all, where is it decreed that the
observation of our Lords day, or of the first of the Saboath should abrogate
and abolish the sanctifying of the Saboath which God commanded, everlastingly
to be kept? Not one of these is expressed in the written word. Notwithstanding
such stuff as this, others bring to prove the Baptism of infants also out of
Scripture, to wit: Circumcision was ministered to infants, but Baptism
succedeth in the place of Circumcision, therefore Baptism ought to be
ministered unto them. Sure a subtle kind of reasoning, Calu. l. 4. instis. c.
16.. 16. and. 6. and 7.
by which it follows that women ought not to be baptized, nor children,
neither before nor after the eight day. But women (says) Calvin are of the
sanctified seed of Israel, they are comprehended in the covenant made to
Abraham. They are so: And are now in the new law contained therein, as much as
they were in the old. How chances it then they may not in these days be made
heirs of Gods promise without the Sacrament of Baptism, as well as in those
without the seal of Circumcision; if you have no better auctority for
baptizing female infants then the abrogated precept of Circumcision, which
never could oblige their sex at all?

11. M. Field wisely considering the force of these replies, Field l. 4. cap.
20.
and weak oppositions of his fellow-Ghospellers, leaving them, co^plyeth with
us so far in this point, as if the dregs of their foul ingredients had not
filled his Pen, he might have been graced with the name of a Catholic writer:
We admit (says he) first the books of Scripture Canonical as delivered by
Tradition: secondly, the chief heads of Christian doctrine contained in the
Creed: thirdly, the form of Christian dostrine, and distinct explication of
many things somewhat obscurely contained in Scripture etc. fourthly, the
continued practice of such things as are not expressed in Scripture: fifthly,
such observations as are not particulerly commanded in Scripture. Among these
and the former he reckons the fast of Lent, the Baptism of Infants, and
Observation of our Lords day: he adds also some few leaves after: That many
other things there are, which the Apostles doubtless delivered by Tradition.
Such is the force of truth, as is often breaks forth out of the mouths of her
enemies.

12. Well then, if the sense and explication of many obscure places of
Scripture, if these chief heads and articles of our belief, if diverse
practices, observations and sundry other things not decreed in Scripture are to
be learned by Tradition, even by the testimony of so great a master in Israel,
why blame you us for approving what your selves allow? Why appeal you to
Scripture alone, and yet subscribe to such and so many points of faith not
comprised in Scripture? Or if these Traditions be necessary to be embraced,
what mean you (M. Field) to renounce others as ancient, as behoofull, as
warrantable as these, even by the rules your self prescribe, which are: Field
l. 4. cap. 19. pa. 242, Iran. lib. 4. c. 32. ^ulke in his confut. of Purgat. p.
362. 303. 393. August. tract. 84. in Joan. Chrysostom* bo. 21. in act. Council.
Nicen. 2. Damas. lib. 4. c. 17. Hiero. con. Vigil. c. 2. Middl^ton Papis. page
^34. Bills. part. 2. page 265. Romans 10. 17. Basil. de spir. Sanct. c. 27. Chris*
ho. 4. in ^. These. 5. Aug. Ep. 119 and 86. Field l. 4. cap. 20. Rein. conclus.
1. page ^17.
The authority and custom of the Church, Consent of Fathers, or testimony of
an Apostolical Church? By these Irenaeus allows the new oblation of Christ's
body and blood as a Tradition from the Apostles. Why reject you this?
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Augustine approve (as M.
Fulke your great Golias grants) the Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, as an
Apostolical tradition. Why disprove it you? S. Augustiue, S. Chrysostom admit
a memory or Invocation of Saints in the self same sacrifice. Three hundred
Fathers of the second Council of Nice defend with S. John Damascen the
adoration of Images, as a Tradition from the Apostles. S. Hierome, by the
custom of the Church, and consent of Fathers ( D. Fields rules for true
Traditions) mantaineth against Vigilantius the religious worship of holy
Relics. By the same Tradition of the Church, and consent of the Fathers, M.
Middleton auerreth vows of Chastity to be observed. What mean you to make no
reckoning of these? Are you only privileged to admit or discard what
Traditions you please? to countenance or deface whatsoever you list? But an ill
cause without cosenage cannot be vpholden. I acknowledge the shifts of poverty
and falsehood.

13. Against these unanswerable grounds M. Bilson opposes in this weak and
impertinent manner: Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,
therefore S. Paul allows not matters of faith unwritten* How often shall I
repeat and inculcate a truth, that the word of God is partly written, partly
unwritten, and this (as S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine affirm is as
worthy to be credited as the other. Which speech albeit M. Whitaker notes in S
Chrysostom, as inconsiderate, and unworthy so great a Father: yet M. Field
approves it, and reason persuades it, unless you believe that letters figured
with ink and paper add awe of reverence to Gods hidden verityes. M. Reynolds
obiecteth out of S. John: These things are written, that ye may believe that
Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that believing, you may have life in his
name. Hereupon M. Reynolds infers, Joan. 20. v. vlt.
that S. John's Gospel alone is sufficient to faith, and salvation. What may
not be proved where such illations go current? S. John speaks of signs and
miracles; M. Reynoldes extends himself to many other matters. S. John
writes there of one principal point of faith; he concludes all necessary to
salvation. S. John disputing against Cerinthus, who denied the divinity of
Christ, affirms that he has written sufficient to prove that Christ is the
son of God; M. Reynoldes arguing against us, forces him to say, that he has
written enough concerning that, and all other necessary articles of our
belief. Again, if S. John's Gospel alone have sufficient to salvation,
needless are the rest of the Evangelists, the Epistles of S. Paul, of S.
Peter, of S. Jude, the Revelations of S. John wholly needless. If S. John's
Gospel alone have sufficient, the Nativity and birth of Christ, his
Circumcision, Apparition, the Institution of our Lords supper, and many other
things of which S. John writes nothing, are not necessary to salvation. Which
to confess is utterly to subvert all Christian Religion; to deny is plainly
to overthwart M. Reynoldes assertion. Rein. con ^ 1. p. 618 ^ 619. 2. Cor. 3.
16.


14. Secondly, he alleges out of S. Paul: That all Scripture inspired by God
is profitable to teach, argue etc. That the man of God may be perfect,
instructed to every good work. Our Adversaries boast much of the pregnancy of
this place, and yet if it made any thing in their behalf, it would convince
that all and every Scripture, every Epistle, every Chapter, every sentence,
which is some Scripture, were The Greek has (...), the Latin Omnis, Al or
every.
auailable to these foresaid effects. Which they perceauing resolve rather to
abuse the word of God, then loose the force of their argument, when instead of
all, or every Scripture, they most fraudulently translate the whole Scripture,
contrary both to the Greek and Latin text. But no deceit will serve to betray
the truth. The whole Scripture was not finished when S. Paul wrote that
Epistle, the Gospel of S. John, which by it self alone (as M. Reynolds
auerreth) ^ sufficient to salvation; the Apocalips, and other books of
Scripture were wanting at that time; he could Rein. loc. citat.
not then speak of the whole Scripture before the whole was extant; or if he
meant of the whole that was written, it makes nothing against us. For S. Paul
speaks of the profitablenes of Scripture to instruct, argue etc. and not of
1. Tim. 4. v. 8.
the sufficiency thereof. Many things are profitable to promote us to
perfection, which are not sufficient to atchieue the same. Piety (as S. Paul
writes) is profitable to all things; yet not alone sufficient, nor only
profitable. You cannot deny, but that rain is profitable for the fruits of the
earth; yet without the labor of men, fertility of soil, heat of the sun,
not sufficient to make them increase. So as when M. Reynolds disgraceth this as
a mincing distinction, he discrediteth not us, but S. Paul for mincing in this
manner.

15. Fourthly others object: That Christ reprehendeth the Traditions of men, S.
Paul condemns them, and S. Peter exempteth all Christians from them. They
mistake. Christ Mat. 15. v. 9. Colos. 2. v. 22.
only reprehendeth the fond and frivolous Pharisaicall traditions or
deprauations of the law called Deuteroses. Of which also S. Peter speaks, or
of the superstitious errors of the Gentiles, from which we are redeemed by the
blood of Christ. S. Paul forewarneth us of the vain Sophismes 1. Pet. 1. ^. 18.
and fallacyes of the Philosophers, which impaireth not the authority of our
sovereign and holy Traditions derived from the Apostles and their successors
inspired by the holy Ghost.

16. Yet M. Field will needs endite us of two heinous faults. 1. That we charge
the Scriptures with imperfection. 2. Field. l. 4. c. 15.
That therefore we rely upon humane interpretations, and uncertain Traditions.
Both false depositions, both wrongfully imposed crimes. A wrongful crime it is
that we traduce the Scriptures as imperfect. We grant with Vincentius
Lyrinensis Vincen. Ly^^nen. cap. 2.
that the Canon of Scripture is perfect, a perfect light and lantern to our
feet, a perfect rule and direction of says, if (as he notes) the line of
Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation be leuelled according to the square
of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. As great a wrong that we cleave to
humane and uncertain Traditions. We anchor on such as are divine, certain, and
infallible, authentically warranted (by the rules himself approves) to
descend from Christ, or the Church his holy and undoubted Spouse.

17. A like wrongful crime M. Sparks fastneth upon Sparks. p. 82. and 83.
us, when he says: That we prefer the authority of the Church, the wife
before Christ the husband: that we make the written word of God inferior in
authority to the Church, and to have his Canonical credit from thence. Sure
you are (as Solomon censureth) a guilfull witness, who furnish your cause
Proverb. cap. 14. Testis fidelis non mentitur. Profert mendaci^^ dolosus
testis. Io. 4, 3. Reg. 3.
with such shameful lies. When many believed in Christ induced by the speech
of the Samaritan woman, was her authority prefe^^ed before Christ? When King
Solomon decreed the infant for which the two harlots contended, to belong to
her, whose bowels were moved at the sentence of his death, did he make her
thereby the mother of the child, or declare her to be the mother who was the
mother indeed? So when we embrace Gods written word by the external
approbation and testimony of the Church answerable to that of S. Augustine: Ego
Euangelio non crederem etc. I would not believe the Gospel, unless the
authority of the Church moved me thereunto: we extol not the Aug con: ep.
Fund. cap. 5.
voice of the Spouse, before the voice of Christ. Nor the Church when it
defyneth any book to be Canonical Scripture, does give it thereby divine and
Canonical credit, Bills. part. 4. page ^81. Rem cont. 1. page 619 and 6^9. Field
l. 4, Stapleton cont. 5. de po^. Eccles. quaest. ^.
but commands that to be received by others as Canonical, which has in
itself Canonical authority.

18. Lastly our Adversaries arm themselves with the weapons of the Fathers,
and M. Bilson marshalleth six together in a rank, S. Athanasius, S.
Chrysostom, S. Cyrill, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and Vincentius, who
conformably mantaine the sufficiency of Scripture in all necessary points of
faith. Many other to the like purpose are alleged by M. Reynolds and M.
Field, To all which I answer: First, that the Scripture is taught to contain
all things necessary to salvation, as the universal ground, Cyril. l. 12. c.
vltimo. Chrysostom. ho. 3. in 2. These 2. Vincent. aduersus prophan. hae. nouit. c.
2. Bafil. ep. 80 Cyril. de rect. fide ad Regi. Hieron. in Psalm. 86. Aug. l 3.
con. lit. Petil. Tert. lib. cont. haer. Athan. l. cont. Gent. Aug. l. 2. cap.
9. Rein in his conf. c. 2. diuis. 2. Aug. l. 10. de Genesis ad lit. c. 23. Bills.
4. par, p. 582. and 583. Field. in appen. 2. p.. 8. Aug. l. 4. c. 24. Dio. l.
E^c. bier. c. vlt. Orig. in 12. Leuit. bom 8. and in cap. 6. epist. ad Romans
seed, or root from which whatsoever we believe may either mediately or
immediately be gatheted, as S. Cyril and S. Chrysostom avouch. Secondly, as it
teaches and directs us to the authority of the Church, and doctrine of her
Pastors, by which every point is, of may be particulerly and clearly
explained: Thus Vincentius and others are to be interpreted. Thirdly, it is
affirmed to contain all things, and that nothing besides the Scripture is to
be admitted, to wit, no private customs, or particular Traditions not
agreeable, or repugnant to the written word, as S. Basil, S. Cyrill, S. Hierome,
S. Augustines meaning is in his book against Petilian. Fourthly, the Fathers
often acknowledge the sufficiency of Scripture to conclude, even in plain and
express words, certain maine principles of our faith; as that God created
all things of nothing, of which Tertullian against Hermogenes; That Christ is
the true God; That Idols are not God, of which Athanasius writes. Or they
teach, it clearly comprehends the chief articles of our Creed, and ten
Commandments, of which S. Augustine only speaks in his book of Christian
doctrine, so often quoted by M. Reynolds.

19. Besides which, many other things are necessary to be embraced, as by
Fathers, Reason, and Scripture I have already convinced; and therefore will
close up my whole discourse with one or two sentences of S. Augustine and
Origin. S. Augustine says: The custom of the Church in baptizing Infants is
not at all to be believed, unless it were an Apostolical Tradition. M. Bilson,
and M. Field, have no other shift to trauerse the evidence of this place, then
by accusing it of some secret corruption. But what, was he corrupted also in
his book of Baptism against the Donatists, where he repeateth it again? Was
Dionysius, was Origin corrupted too, who says: The Church received a Tradition
from the Apostles to minister Baptism also to Infants? Was this other passage
of S. Augustine corrupted likewise, Aug. de. Bap. con Donat. l. 5^ c. 23. It is
an article of faith to believe this Baptism to be valide. Orig. in c. 3. ad
Tit. test Pamphilo in Apol. pr^ Orig.
of the validity of Baptism ministered by Heretics? The Apostles commanded
nothing hereof, yet the custom, which was opposed herein against Cyprian is to
bebelieued to proceed from their Tradition, even as many things be which the
whole Church holds, and are therefore well believed to be commanded of the
Apostles, although they be not written. I may then conclude with Origin: He is
an Heretic, who professes himself to believe in Christ; yet belieueth
otherwise of the truth of Christian faith, then the definition of Ecclesiastic
all Tradition contains.

20. Notwithstanding to reprove our Adversaries, and satisfy all indifferent
Readers, that we fly not to the succor of Traditions, for want of proofs out
of holy writ; I will uphold the right of our cause, in every ensuing
Controversy, as I promised in my Preface, by the irreprouable testimonies of
Gods written word.

THE THIRD CONTROVERSY. WHEREIN The Real Presence is maintained, against D.
Bilson, and D. Sparks.
CHAP. I.
AS the unspeakable riches of Gods infinite love in no mystery of our faith
appears more bount^full, then in the true and real Fresence of Christ's
sacred Body contained in the holy Eucharist: so the insatiable malice of our
deadly enemy no where more hatefully bewrays it self, then in seeking to
abolish this most blessed, dreadful, and admirable Sacrament. For besides the
Armenians, Messalians, Grecians, and Aquarians, Althons. de Cast. l. 9. adu.
haer. v Eucharist. Aug. de haer. Epiph haer. 26.
whose errors Alphonsus de Castro diligently recites, and as learnedly
disproueth; some he suggested to profane and defile it with most vile and
execrable ceremonies, as the Manichies, the Pepuzians, the Guostickes, of whom
S. Augustine and Epiphanius. Others to mingle it with the terren and earthly
substance of bread and wine, as Berengarius, who having recanted and abiured
his former heresy against Bills in his. book of Christian Subjection 4. par. p.
720 727 728. Sparks in his answer to M. Joan. Albines p. 114 115. 116. Aelius
La^pridiu^ de Anton. Heliogabalo. Matt. 26* Melancth. in l. de ver. Corp.
Christi in Sacra. Reyn. in his conferenco with M. Heart. c. 2. diuis. 2. p. 82.
Cyr. l. ^. in Joan. ^. 4. Beza in c. 17. Matt. in ^iew of those words, hic est
filiu^ meus dilectus, transla^^th out of the ^reek, hic est silius ille meus
dilectus ille.
the Real presence, presently brake forth into this wicked Blasphemy, embraced
fince by Luther and his followers. Some others he excited to rob and despoile
it of all true virtue, fruit and dignity, as Wiclesse, Calvin, Beza, with their
suruiuing offspring, D. Bilson. D. Sparks and such like, who only furnish this
heavenly table with void and empty dishes of faith, containing neither the
body, nor blood of our Savior Christ. But as Heliogabalus the Emperor,
inuiting the Roman Princes to a feast, set painted and artificial dainties
before them, which could neither delight their taste, nor satisfy their hungry
appetites: so our Adversaries in this divine banquet, prepared by the hand of
our B. Redecmer, devise figured and Metaphorical meats unworthy the master
thereof, unworthy the Majesty of God, not answerable to his love, not agreeable
to the necessities of his invited guests.

2. Yea most dissonant to the words himself used at the institution of the
same, where he took bread, as S. Matthew records, blessed, brake, gave to
his Disciples, and said: This is my Body. Which words seemed so forcible to
Luther, and his adherents, as Melancthon one of his chiefest Scholars says:
fulmina erunt, they will be like thunderbolts against him that shall deny the
received opinion of Christ's true body in the Sacrament. And not without cause.
For if we examine them even by the rules our Adversaries themselves prescribe
in the interpreting of Scripture, to wit: By conference of places, connection of
texts, agreement of Translations, they all notwithstanding open and unfold the
approved sense of the Catholic Church.

3. To begin with the translations, the Greek has (...), where the article
(...) ( this) restrains the nowne (...) ( body) to his determinate and proper
signification, as S Cyril in the like case learnedly notes of the article
(...), and Beza puts great Emphasy in the same article in diverse places. The
Syriake or vulgar Hebrew of S. Matthew, in which he first wrote, reads: This
is the substance S. Mark. has this particle (reuera) in the Syriach tongue. 1.
Cor. 11. Mat. 16. Mar. 1 Luc. 2^. 4. Bills. 4. par: p. 754. and. 755.
of my body. The Syriake of S. Mark: This truly is my body. The connection of
the text recorded by S. Paul and the three Evangelists conuinceth it more
plainly, he speaking of the body: This is my body which shall be delinered for
you. Where I demand how, in what sense that Nowne ( Body) is taken; whether
properly for Christ's true body, or improperly for the sign of his body?
Properly you will not say, lest you accord with us; improperly you cannot say
without heinous blasphemy. For when S. Paul said: This is my body, to express
what body, he adds, which shall be delivered for you.

4. Therefore if a sign only called by the name of the thing signed (as M.
Bilson fayneth) was then given; a sign only bearing the name of the thing (as
the Manichees dreamed) was after delivered and crucified for us, seeing the
same body was ministered to the Apostles at the supper, which was afterward
hanged, and dyed on the Aug. in exposit. Ps. 33. Read him also in Psalm. 65. and
93. con. Faust. l. 12. c. 10. l. 3. de trin. c. 10. l. 6. confess. cap. 1^.
Chrysostom. him. 24. in. 1 Cor c. 10. Dam. l 4. de fi. ort. c. 14.
Cross, as the Evangelists likewise testify, writing of the blood: This is my
blood of the new Testament, which shall be shed for many, into remission of
sins. For which cause S. Augustine greatly commended the goodness of God, in
that he gives us the same body to eat: In quo tam mu^^ a perpessus est; In
which he endured and suffered so much: And his blood to drink, which he
affirms to be: The same liquor which flowed from his pierced side. In another
place he teaches the same victim, or boly sacr fice to be dispensed from the
Altar, whereby the handwriting is defaced which was contrary unto us. S. John
Chrysostom auerreth that to be in the Chalice: Quod exlatere fluxit, which
issued from his side. And the same body to be in the Eucharist, which was
whipped, imbrued with blood, wounded with a spear, and which the Sun seeing
crucified, withdrew his beams. S. John Damascen writes, that Christ said not:
This bread is a figure of my body; but, This is Epiph. in Nic. Synodo. 2. act 6.
my body etc. Epiphanius, Theophilact, and Euthymius have almost the same
words, who because they utterly reject all figurative glozes, M. Bilson so
far enrageth against them as he says: Damascen minceth and strayneth the
words of Christ: Epiphanius (that famous Proloquutour in the second Council
of Nice) was a prattling Deacon, of more tongue then Theop. and Euthym. in Matt.
26. Bills. 4. par. page 752. and 753. Conc. Nic. 2. act. 6.
wit, more face then learning. Theophilact and Enthymius he discardeth as
younger Writers. To omit therefore these learned men, and to insist upon the
ceremonies Christ observed at his last supper: The blessing of bread, the
circumstances of time and place, the matter of which he spoke, the persons to
whom, all things concur to strengthen and confirm this infallible truth of
his Real Presence.

5. First, our heavenly Bishop never blessed any earthly element in which he
wrought not some admirable effect; as his blessing of five loaves and two
fishes in the 8. of S. Mark make manifest proof. And yet this action is here
performed in such special manner, as the Sacrament often from it borrows his
name. So it is Cyr. l. 4. in Joan. c. 16. and 19. Ambr. de ^js quiinitiantur ca
9. Greg. orat: cate. Bills. 4. par. p. 660. 661. 662. and 663 1. Cor. 10. Cyp.
de coena dom.
termed by S. Cyrill: The blessing of the mystery, the blessing of Christ, or
the mystical blessing. By S. Ambrose: The blessing of the heavenly words. And
the same S. Ambrose, with S. Gregory Nissen, by virtue of this blessing,
affirm: The sulstance of bread and wine to be turned into the body and blood
of Christ. But what strange effect do our Protestants here assign? Even none
at all. For M. Bilson will have blessing to be nothing else but earnest prayer
to God, and no action at all immediately applied to work any effect in the
element of bread. And so makes the Evangelists vainly to confound
thanksgiving to God, with blessing of his creatures; checketh S. Paul, who
appropriateth the blessing directly to the Chalice it self; controlleth S.
Cypria^ calling it, The cup consecrated with solemn blessing.

6. If we urge some other circumstances; the place was miraculously chosen to
be betoken a rarer miracle to ensue; The time was that very night, in which he
was betrayed, Marc. ^4. Luc. 22.
a time when the Law of figures was to be abolished and law of truth began; The
persons to whom he spak were the twelve Apostles, the chiefest Prelates and
Governors of his Church; the matter of which he treated, was concerning a law,
which then he enacted, as appears by those words of command, Take, eat, Do
this. It was touching his last Will* and Testament, which then he made, as
himself avouches: This is my blood of Matthew. 2^.
the new Testament. It was belonging to the perpetual memory, and everlasting
inheritance he then bequeathed to the whole Church his beloved Spouse. Excuse
us then (O Lord) excuse and free us from the calumniations of our Adversaries,
if we attribute so much wisdom unto thee, as to think that in such a place,
at such a time, to such persons, concerning such weighty affairs, thou
would not disclose thy mind in any secret, hidden, or ambiguous terms.

7. We see all Lawmakers most careful in penning the Statutes, Canons and
Decrees of their laws, which must be observed by their subjects, according to
the native sound and construction of the words. We find all Testatours exact
and diligent in setting down their last Wills and Testaments, least any cauils
arise after their decease. And shall we not grant this care and providence to
our Savior Christ? Shall we either think he wanted words to express, or
diligence to record, or power to perform his will in this behalf? When an
earthly Testatour Inleg. Non afiter ff. delega. 3.
for examples sake bestows a Precious stone upon any one of his friends,
which he determinately names, the Executors, whom the law commands not to
depart from the proper signification of the words, cannot satisfy him with a
painted pearl: and when our heavenly Testatour namely leaves and bequeatheth
unto us the divine legacy, the inestimable Jewel of his own sacred body, may we
be contented with the sign, shadow, and seal thereof? May we think he meant
a figurative body? By conference of places we shall discover no doubt the drift
of his meaning.

8. Before Christ instituted this Sacrament, he promised it, John 6. The bread
which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World,
according to the Greek. (...). ^.
Now what construction can our Adversaries here make of these words, without
appeaching our Savior Christ of manifest falsehood. For he avouches that the
bread which he will give, is his flesh, using the word ( est) (is) in the
present tense, and yet it was not then a sign of his flesh, neither could it
take the name of the thing signed, which is M. Bilsons common answer. For the
Sacrament was Bills. 4. ^ar page 754. etc.
not then instituted, but only promised, as the word ( dabo) I will give, does
demonstrate. Most falsely then had Christ said: The bread which I will give is
my flesh: to wit, is a sign or seal of my flesh, seeing then it was neither
sign; seal, or token, except you will have it a sign before it was made a
sign, before the Sacrament was instituted, or Bills. 4 par page 753.
Consecration used, which is impossible, as M. Bilson himself will instruct
you.

9. Again, our Savior inculcateth the same with an oath, or solemn
asseueration, saying: Amen, Amen, I say Joan. 6.
unto you, except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
you shall have no life in you. And then, that no doubt, as S. Hilary teaches,
might be made of the truth Hilar. l. 8. de Trinit. This word (vere) may be
translated (truly) or indeed. Chrysostom. hom. 46 in Ioa^. and hom. 60 ad popu and
83 in Mat. Cyr. Alex. l. 10. in Io. c. ^^. and l. 1^. c. 26. 27. item l. 4. c.
17.
of his flesh and blood, he adds: My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink iadeed. Hearken M. Bilson, hearken M. Sparks, harken all ye
Sacramentaryes: my flesh is not figuratively nor metaphorically, but truly
meat, and my blood truly drink. Where S. Chrysostom says: That Christ
uses these words, that he might not be thought to speak parabolically. And
in another place: By eating his flesh he reduces us (as he writes) into one,
and the self same mass with him. Neque id fide tantum, sed reipsa nos corpus
suum efficit: And that not only by faith, but he makes us his body indeed. S.
Cyril of Alexandria: Christ dwells corporally in us: And a little after: He
is in us, non habitudine tantum, verum etiam participatione naturali: Not by
relation only, but by natural participation also. And in other places he
affirms him to be naturally, substantially, carnally (or according to the
flesh) united unto us.

10. As the promise was agreeable to the performance, the performance answerable
to the promise: so the practice ^. Cor. cap 10. v. 1^. Iren. l. 5. cont. haer.
c. 2. Note his words.
of the Apostles mentioned by S. Paul is correspondent to both: The chalice of
benediction which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ?
And the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body of our
Lord? Whereupon S. Irenaeus infers: That our bodies are capable of
incorruption by partaking of the body and blood of Christ, not according to the
spiritual and invisible man, but according to the true man, who consisted of
flesh, bones, and sinews. Again S. Paul says: ^. Cor. 11. v. ^9.
Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the Chalice of our Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. But how can we
incur this heinous guilt, but only as Theodoret affirms: By taking Christ's
holy body with unclean Theod. upon this place. Cypr. sermon. de laps. Chrysostom ho.
de non cont^m. Eccle.
hands, and by putting it into a defiled and unchaste mouth. By offering
violence (as S. Cyprian teaches) to his body and blood. Yea, and villainy (as
S. Chrysostom says) to Christ's own Person. Which cannot be verifyed by our
Adversaries any more in this Sacrament then in Baptism, in which our Savior
in their opinion is as much present as here. Let us now confer Moses with
Christ, the Prophets with the Apostles, the shaddows with the truth, and see
whether any place, sentence, or syllable of holy Writ disadvantage our cause.
The bread and wine of Melchisedech Genesis 14. v. 18. Exodus 12. and 16. Deuter. 8.
the Pascall Lamb, the Manna, which God rayned from heaven, were figures of
this Sacrament, as the ancient Fathers witness. But what? Were they figures of
any other figure? Were they shadows of a shadow only? Again, figures are as
far inferior to the thing figured, as the Image or picture of the King to the
King himself. For which cause our Savior prefers the Eucharist many
degrees before Manna, in the sixth of S. John. And yet such as make it a sign
or resemblance do not prefer it, but much debase it beneath the excellent
food of Manna, whereby the Jews fed upon Christ by faith, far more daintily
then the Protestants by their bare Communion, of which the Prophesyes also make
tooto honorable mention to accord with them.

11. The Prophet Esaias speaking in commendation of Esa. 25. v. 6.
this feast, calls it A banquet of fat things, of fat things full of marrow,
of purified and refined wines. Zachary terms it: The wheat of Gods elect:
the wine which springs Virgins: Malachy: A clean oblation. Jacob: The
delight of King. S John: Zach. 9. v. 17. Mala. 1. v. 11. Genesis 49. v. 20. Apoc.
2. v. 17. Psalm. 77. 110. and 71.
Hidden Manna. Holy David: the bread of Angels, the memory of Gods marvelous
works, the stability or strength in earth upon tops of Mountains? Now upon
what table did these blessed Prophets look when they so highly praised this
Celestial feast? Did they commend the poor and beggarly supper of the
Caluinists? their Wheaten bread which has no prerogative above the Jewish
naked Elements? their wine of grapes, which may be fitlier termed wine in
which lechery reigns (to use Saint Paul's phrase) then wine which springs
Virgins? No, no. They looked upon ad Ephesians. 5. 18.
this divine and heavenly table of ours. This, this is that magnificall
banquet, that memorable Wheat, those refined wines, that clean Oblation, that
bread of Angels, those delights of Kings, which worthily deserve such Our Real
Presence is manifestly gathered out of the Acts of the 1. Nicen, out of the
general Council of Ephesus, vo constat ex ep. Cyr. ad Nestorium. out of the
Council of Chalcedon, art. 3.
admirable titles.

12. I will not here speak of innumerable miracles, of general Councels, of
authentical Histories, of the Sibillian Oracles, truly recorded in
confirmation of this truth. I only add that the whole Lutheran sect, until
this day, the whole Church of England, in the time of King Henry, even after
his revolt, in public Parliament decred the Real Presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament. And now of late, after the repealing of that, and certain other
Articles, after the utter abolishment, and manifold condemnation, for many
years, of the former doctrine, it is, with great applause, revived again by
the Bishop of Ely; who writing of the Real Presence in the holy Eucharist,
against Cardinal Bellarmine, says: We agree with you concerning the object,
all the strife is about the manner. And then, We believe the Presence, we
believe, I say, the true Presence as well as you: concerning the manner of the
Presence we do not unadvisedly define. Which private assertion of his Casaubon
allows, in his Majesty's name, and co^fidently Casaubo^ in the answer to the
Card. Peron, to the first instance, fol. 31. in English* Moys. Ha. com. in Ps.
36. Symeon l. qui inscribitur Reuelatio s^cretor. Caha. in Genesis c. 49.
graceth with this publik approbation: This is the faith of the King, this is
the faith of the church of England: which being so I might surcease my pains,
and spare the search of further proofs, in a matter already confessed by the
adverse part.

13. But I add, that the ancient Jewish Rabbis ratify and confirm the same;
as Rabby Moses Hadarsan, Rabby Simeon, Rabby Cahana, whose words (to let pass
many others) are these: In the Sacrifice which shall be made of bread
notwithstanding it be white as milk, the substance shall be turned into the
substance of the body of the Messiah: And there shall be in the sacrifice it self
the substance of the blood of the Messiah, red as wine: There shall be also in
the sacrifice, the blood and flesh of the Messiah, and both shall be in the
bread, because the body of the Messiah cannot be divided. And then he assigns
another reason: Because the flesh without the blood, and so again, the blood
without the flesh, are dead things. But the Body of the Messiah, after his
Resurrection, because it shall be glorified, shall always live.

14. Doctor Sparks, and sundry others of the learned Protestants, vanquished
with these evident, and irreprouable Sparks in his answer to M. John Albines.
pa. 108. 10^. 110. etc.
testimonies, confess the Real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, but
to the faith (forsooth) of the right Receiver, not to the mouth of every
Communicant. D. Sparks further boasts: That he learned of Christ, of his
Apostles, of all the ancient writers of credit and account in the Church, for
700. or 800. years together, to deny our Real Presence to the mouth of all
Receivers. I wonder he blushed not to publish so vain a brag; when Christ,
when the Apostles, when all the famous writers (as I have already convinced)
most manifestly teach the contrary: when S. Cypria^ says, speaking of the
lapsed: That they more offended our Lord with their hands and mouth, who
unworthily receive, then Cyp. ser. 5. de lap. Aug. ^i^. co^. adu. leg and
Proph. ^ap. 9.
when they denied him. S. Augustine: We receive, with a faithful heart and
mouth, the Mediator of God and man Christ Jesus, giving us his flesh to eat,
and blood to drink. S. Leo: This is taken with the mouth, which is believed
with faith. S. Gregory: What is the blood of the Lamb, now not by hearing, but
by drinking you have learned; which blood is sprinkled upon both posts, Leo.
ser. ^. de i^iu. 7. menfis. Greg. ho. 22. in euan. Tertu l. de resur. car. cap.
8. Nyss. ora. cate. c. 37. Cyril. l. 10. in Io. c. 13. Chrysostom. ho. 69. ad po.
Idem de Eu cha* in En. caen. Aug. in Ps. 33. Cyr. Alex. li. 10. in Joan. c. 23.
when not only with the mouth of the body, but with the mouth of the heart it
is drunk. When Tertullian writes. That the flesh is fed with the body and
blood of Christ. S. Gregory Nissen: That the body of Christ is admitted into
the bowels of man. S. Cyril: That it is tempered, mingled, and joined with us,
like other wax powered into melted wax. S. Chrysostom: That our hand deuideth
his flesh, and our tongue becomes red with his tooto dreadful blood. And in
another place: Imagine, says he, that wholesome blood to flow out of the divine
and undefiled breast, and approaching, receive it with pure lips. S. Augustine:
That Christ carried his own body in his own hands, when he said: This is my
body; and that, secundum literam, according to the letter: and so, as King
David, could not carry himself. Which two points are worthily noted, because
the Apostles eat with their corporal mouths what Christ held in his corporal
hands. In fine, S. Cyril says: We do not deny our selves with assured faith
and sincere charity to be spiritually conjoined to Christ; but that we have no
manner of conjunction with him according unto the flesh, this truly we deny.

15. Is it not strange, M. Sparks should vaunt of all these learned Writers
within eight hundred years, when all disclaim his false imputation, when all
confess the Real Presence not only to faith, but also to the mouth, Bills. 4.
par page 754. 755. etc.
to the tongue, to the lips, to the hands, to the flesh, to the bowels of all
Communicants? Is it not as strange, M. Bilson should go about to defeat
these, and the former authotityes, with his accustomed sleight of Seals and
Sacraments, bearing the names of the things themselves? For if the outward
seals only were received into the mouth, the outward seals only were eaten
by faith, bare figures and seals nourish the soul, seeing the same flesh, the
same blood, the same body, the same Mediator of God and Man Christ Jesus,
which is believed by faith, is avouched (as you see) to be received into the
hands, mouths, hearts, and bowels of the faithful. Deny then M. Bilson, the
true and real flesh to the mouth of the body; deny it also to the mouth of the
soul, and so become a Manichee, a Marcionist, a denyer of Christ. Or give
leave at least, to them and other Heretics to subvert by like sophistry, the
chief principles of our belief. License them to expound, by sound of names
without sense of words, whatsoever is written of the true flesh, blood, and
body of our Lord, of his Incarnation, Passion, and glorious Resurrection.

16. What pretense then can any Protestant make, (unless he open the gate to a
flood of blasphemies) why he should delude such inevitable proofs? Why he
should discredit so many lights, Lamps, and Ornaments of the Church; and
prefer the hard wrested construction of some new fangled teachers, before
such undeniable texts of Fathers, and testimonies of Scripture? Perchance he
may pretend with D. Bilson, and D. Sparks, the impossibilty, inconueniency,
and contradictions our doctrine Bills. 4. par. page 790. 794. 795. 796. Sparks
p. 180. and sequentibus.
implies. To which I might answer: Philosophers and Infidells objected such
stuff against the true Incarnation and Passion of our Lord: I might say, that
he yields assent to diverse articles of our faith, more contrary and repugnant
to the reach of our natural reason; as to the mystery of the holy Trinity, to
the fecundity of our B. Lady remaining a Virgin, to the Resurrection of
putrifyed and decayed flesh etc. I might also reply, that we should not measure
the works of the Almighty, by the weakness of our feeble understanding, as S.
Basil singulerly teaches against Eunomius by the example of the Emmet. Basil.
Epist. ^68.
But what if I demonstrate the Real Presence to be possible, convenient, and
without any repugnance or contradiction at all?

17. To begin with the possibility of our conversion or Transubstantiation; We
do not (as M. Bilson injuriously fathereth upon us) make the creature the
Creator, or the dead Bills. 4. par. page 729.
element of bread the Son of God. We only teach the bread and wine to be
changed into the flesh and blood of Christ. And that one substance may be
turned into another, yea and bread into flesh, experience it self abundantly
teaches. For the bread which we eat, and wine which we drink by the natural
heat, and concoction of our stomach is converted into the flesh and blood of
man: the same effect had the food which Christ received. Likewise the grain of
seed sowed in the ground alters in nature and buddeth up into a fair ear of
Corn. Wax cast Niss. orat. cate. ca. 37. Damas. l. 4 defi. c. 14. Irenaus l.
5. cap. 2. Chryshom. de Eu^h. Centurywrit. c. 4. col. 4^6. Ambro de init. mist.
cap. 9. Cyr. Iero. cate. 4. mystag.
into fire is melted, consumed and turned into fire. Which similitudes the
Fathers of former ages have used to illustrate this mystery. S. Gregory Nissen,
and S. John Damascen the first, S. Irenaeus the second, S. Chrysostom the
third, who annexeth thereunto, that as, Nothing of the substance of Wax
remains: so here the Misteryes are consumed by the substance of the body. By
which passage (if the Centurywriters may be credited) S. Chrysostom does seem
to confirm Transubsta^tiation. S. Ambrose, whom they likewise reprove for not
writing well of the same matter, sometime co^pareth the substantial mutatio^
of bread in the Eucharist, to the creation of heaven and earth of nothing;
Otherwhile to the conversion of the Rod of Moses into a serpent, of blood into
water, water into blood, and the like. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem conuinceth it by
the miraculous change our Savior made of water into wine, disputing thus:
Christ confirming and saying, this is my blood, who Gauden. tract. 2. de. Exo.
will ever doubt and say, it is not his blood? He once converted water into
wine in Cana of Galily; and is he not worthy to be believed that he has
changed wine into blood?, S. Gaudentius has the like, who flourished within
the 400 years after Christ: He that produces bread out of the earth, of bread
again makes Greg. Nyssen oracate. cap. 37.
his own body (for he is both able and promised it) and he that made of water
wine, makes of wine his own blood. S. Gregory Nissen: We rightly believe the
sanctified bread, to be changed by the word of God, into the body of the Son
of God. S. Ambrose: Thou say perhaps to me, I see another manner of thing:
How Ambro. lib. de ^js qui ini^. mist. cap. ^*
then tellest thou me, that I receive Christ's body? Then this is yet to be
established by us. And how many exampls may we use to prove (...) is not that,
which nature framed, but that which the blessing consecrated, and that the
power of blessing over comes nature, because by blessing even the very nature
it self is changed. Behold that is not, says, S. Ambrose, which nature made,
but what did nature make? The substance of bread: what becomes of it? It is
changed, quoth he: how? by blessing: into what? Into that which the blessing
consecrateth. What it that? The body of Christ: for he took Ciryl. ep. ad
Colas.
bread, blessed, and said: This is my body. S. Cyrill of Alexandria who
succeeded them in the next age: God condescending to our frailtyes instilleth
into the things offered the power of life, Conuertens ea in veritatem propriae
carnis, onuerting them into his true and proper flesh: that the body of life
may be in us as a certain quickening seed. Eusebius Emissenus: The invisible
Eusebius Emiss. ser. de cor. Domi. Cyp. de coens Dom.
Priest (Christ Jesus) turns by his word, with a secret power, the visible
creatures into the substance of his body and blood, saying: Take, and eat; for
this is my body. S. Cyprian who lived before any of these: This bread which our
Lord gave to his Disciples not in outward appearance, but in nature changed, by
the omnipotency of the word is made flesh. The like he has in other places. In
so much as a famous Vrsin, in commonef. cuiusdam Theol. de sacra Coen. Aug.
ser. citato a Bedain. c. 10. ^. Cor. Humfrey Jesus. p^. 2^ ca. 5. page 626.
Matthew. 4. v. ^.
Protestant confesses: That in Cyprian are many sayings which seem to
conform Tra^substantiation. S. Augustine, and sundry others evidently also
grant our Real mutation or Transubstantiation of the elements. Which doctrine
Gregory the Great, and Augustine our Apostle brought into England, as D.
Humphrey teaches, and the Devil himself acknowledged to be possible, when he
said unto Christ: Dic vt lapides isti panes fiant: Command that these stones
be made bread.

18. Secondly if we respect the conueniency, it was meet we should really eat,
and really drink of the real victime truly slain and offered for us. It was
meet that he who became our companion in the manger, our teacher in the Temple,
our Priest at the Altar, our price, sacrifice and ransom on the Cross, should
likewise be our food and sustenance at the table. It was most meet that he who
imparted his own divine person, and all the riches of his Godhead by
Hypostaticall union to the flesh and blood of a pure and unspotted man, should
also communicate the same flesh and blood and all the treasures of his divine
and human nature to the souls and bodies of As our first Parents were not
infected by a Metaphorical, but by a true eating of the accursed Tree, so we
cannot be healed by a Metaphorical but by a true eating of the Tree of life.
Nisse^. orat. catech. ca. 37. Ignatius Ep. ad Ephesians. Athan. de hu^^atur.
suscep. Cyril. in Io. and ^p ad Calosy. ^re. 1. 4. c. ^4. and l. 5. c. 2, and
alibi. Cyr. Alex. 1. 10. in ^o. c. 13. Spa^kes in his answer to M. John
d'Albins page no. and 257.
his faithful servants. The wisdom of God requires that as our Forefathers
and we were first impoisoned not by the desire, but by the true and real eating
of the forbidden apple: so we should be cured by the true and substanciall
feeding of this blessed fruit. For S. Gregory Nissen proves: After the manner
of the poison: so likewise the medicine must enter into our bowels, and the
virtue thereof be tra^sfused into all parts of the body.

19. Again, the poison which Adam received, was a venomous fountain of a
double contagion, jointly infecting both body and soul, two wounds it
inflicted, it defiled our soul with sin, our body it enthralled to death and
corruption. What could be more behoofull for our Redeemer then to prepare a
medicine against both these wounds? A medicine to wash our souls from sin, and
raise our body from dust, to beautify the one with grace, and cloth the other
with incorruptio^? And what could sooner work this admirable cure then the
glorious flesh of this holy Sacrament? Which is not only the Ocean of Grace,
but the medicine of immortality, the preservative, as S. Ignatius calls it,
against death. The first fruits of glory, as Athanasius writes. The lively
and reviving seed of our bodies, as S. Cyrill says. The pledge, the earnest,
the hope, or expectation of Immortal life, as Irenaeus affirms; According to
that of Christ: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life
everlasting, and I will raise him at the later day. The body then must eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, that it may partake the benefit of Resurrection;
our soul by faith might enjoy the dowryes of bliss. But this terrestrial
nature of our body cannot (as S. Cyrill of Alexandria teaches) be advanced to
immortality, except the body of natural life be conjoined unto it.

20. Yet D. Sparks, maugre S. Cyril, or whosoever else obstinatly persisteth,
that the body of Christ cannot be really conjoined with ours: Because Christ is
ascended into heaven, sitting at the right hand of his Father, and the heavens
must Bills. 4. par. page 788. 789. etc. Joan. 20. Read S. Aug. ep. 3. ad Volus
Amb. l. 10. in cap. 24. Luc. Hila. l. 3 de Tri. Justin. q. 117. Cyril. l. 12.
in Io. c. 53. Bid Theoph. Euthym. Ruper. boc loco. whoproue Christ's entrance
the doors being shut.
contain him until the restitution of all things. As though (good Sir) he
could not be at the same time in diverse places, to wit, in heaven sitting on
the right hand of his Father, and here upon earth in every consecrated host:
not naturally, as the Fathers copiously quoted by M. Bilson constantly teach,
but supernaturally by the power of him unto whom nothing is impossible. For so
he has wrought many wonderful works above the course of nature. He came
forth of the Virgins womb preserving her virginity; rose out of the sepulcher,
not removing the stone, entered into his Disciples the door being shut, ascended
to his Father not dividing the heavens when he penetrated them. But as in these
examples diverse bodies were supernaturally in one place, so by the same
supernatural power one body may likewise be at the same time in diverse places;
for it is a common Axiom approved by Philosophers, that Contrariorum eadem est
ratio: Amongst contraryes the same reason holds on both sides. Moreover we
are instructed by faith, that the single person of Christ is united to most
distinct and diverse natures; to the nature of God, and to the nature of man;
that the sole essence of God is in three persons really distinct; that one and
the self same moment of eternity is answerable and correspondent to most
different and contrary times, to time past, time present, and time to come. But
as one person sustaineth diverse natures, one nature is communicated to diverse
persons, one moment coexisteth to diverse Amb. orat in Auxen. Aeges. l. 3. de
exid. vrbis Hieros. cap. 2. ^o. Dams. orat. de B. Virgin.
times, why cannot one body be resident in diverse places?

21. Else how could our Savior after his Ascension have met S. Peter flying the
persecution of Rome, as S. Ambrose and Aegesippus record? How could he have
descended to honor the funerals of our B. Lady, as S. John Damascen and
Nicephorus witness? How could he appear to S. Paul, as in the 9. Chap. of the
Acts of the Apostles, in the 22. and 23. For in none of these apparitions
could he Calu. in c. 9. act. and. l. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 29. Act. 9. v. 17. Act.
23. v. 11. 1. Cor 15. v. 5. Act. 23. v. 11. Act. 22. v. 78. 15.
depart from the right hand of his Father, as Scripture teaches, and
Protestants do confess. He must needs therefore be at the same time in heaven
and upon earth in most remote and separate places. For if M. Sparks answer
with Calvin and his consortes, that Christ appeared either in the heavens to S.
Paul, or that these were not true but imaginary apparitions, S. Luke himself
reproves them saying: That Christ appeared to S. Paul not in the heavens, but
in via, in the way. Not a far^e off, but near at hand, assistens ei, standing
by him. Not as to S. Steven, but as to Cephas, to James, to the fifty brethren.
Not above the clouds in any unknown place, but upon the earth in the Castle
of Claudius Lysias Tribune of the soldiers. Not in a trance or illusion by
night, but in a clear vision, in a plain conference at noone day; so as he
might see the just one, and hear his voice out of his own mouth. Lastly not
by any imaginary repr^sentation, but by such a true and perfect apparition as
the Resurrection of Christ is proved thereby. 1. Cor. 15. Chrysostom. hom 38. in c,
15. 1. Cor. Tho. 3. p. 4. 57. art. 6. ad 3. Bills. 4. par page 793. Chrysostom. lib.
3. de Sacer.
For which cause, either at some of these times he appeared truly to S. Paul
(as S. Chrysostom and S. Thomas conclude) even in his own proper person, and
with his natural body; or S. Paul deceiptfully proves Christ's Resurrection by
his apparition unto him. To accuse S. Paul is to appeach the holy Ghost of
fraud and deceit: to grant he truly appeared, is to subscribe to his being in
many places. And consequently that of S. Chrysostom, which M. Bilson phraseth,
an Hyberbolicall vehemence, is an absolute verity: In the time of our Sacrifice
he that sits above with his Father, at that very instant and moment of time
is handled with the hands of all.

22. Another repugnance, against which M. Bilson Bills. 4. par page 794. 795.
etc.
mightily inueygheth, is: That we make the body of Christ in the Eucharist
without the propertyes of humane shape, length, extension etc. because we
defend it to be wholly and indivisible in every part of the Blessed Host, as the
soul of man is wholly in the head, wholly in the feet, and wholly in every part
of the body. But this likewise, by the Almighty hand of God, may easily be
effectuated. For to be corporally or locally confined to any determinate place,
is no such absolute and inherent necessity, no essential Bills. locis citatis.
property (as M. Bilson, how diligent soever in other points, not diuing in
this into depth of Philosophy, inconsideratly mantayneth) but only an
accidental quality, relation or sequel, which naturally follows every bodily
substance, as heat flows from the nature of fire, and gravity or weight from
the condition of any earthly or heavy thing. Yet as God supernaturally
suspended Dan. 3. v. ^0. Matthew. 14. v. 26.
the actio^ of heat, in the Furnace of Babylon, from burning the three
Children, and the poyse of his earthly body when he walked upon the waters: so
he may also separate and seclude all local extension from the quantity of his
flesh and blood, whose essence only consists in the inward proportion of
shape, extension of parts in respect of themselves, whereby one part is truly
distinguished and immediately conjoined to this, and not to that other; which
inward extension, distinction, and proportion, the body of Christ retayneth,
albeit it be wholly in the whole, and wholly in every part of the consecrated
Host. Eutychius the Patriarch of Constantinople, Euty. apud Nic. lib. 3. ^nnal.
about one thousand years ago, expressed this by the voice of man, which
being one only collision or beating of the air, is wholly notwithstanding,
heard of many hundred together, and wholly received into the Organ of every
particular man's hearing, as the body of Christ is wholly contained under every
particle of the sacred host.

23. The third false supposed implicancy by our Adversaries, is, the separation
we affirm of the external forms of bread and wine, and making them abide
without their substances; for therein we destroy as they imagine the Nature it
self of accidents, whose innate and essential property is in their conceit,
to inhere in their subjects. But here in they bewray the like ignorance as
before. Because all the best Philosophers deny inherency to be any essential
condition of an accident: and the chief of Peripatetickes, Aristotle himself
Arist. lib. 3. de anima tex. 9.
says: greatness is one thing, and the existency of greatness another. Now if
the existency be different, much more the inherency, which is the quality and
manner of existency. Basil. in Hexam. ho. 6.
The same is taught and proved by S. Basil, who affirms that the accident of
light, was first created in the beginning and remained without a subject; and
that the sphere or globe of the Sun was after made, as a wagon or chariot
for that original light. Then meeting with this our Protestants cauillation,
that an accident cannot be without a subject, he adds: Say not unto me it is
impossible, that the light should be separated from the body of the Sun. For
neither do I affirm this separation possible to thee or me; but I judge it
auoucheable that such things as by the thought and cogitation of the mind, may
be severed, the power of him that created both can actually and indeed part and
disseuer. The adustine and burning force of the fire, thou truly can not
separate from the gloming brightness thereof; but God divided them, in the fiery
bush, wherein he appeared to his servant Moses. Yea and the like strange
anatomy his mighty hand will make, as that great Doctor goes forward, of the
whole element of fire, when in the later day, he will separate according to
him, The hot and scorching violence, from the clear light or Basil. ibid.
splendor thereof; and depute that to hell for the due punishment of the
reprobate, and advance this to heaven for the comfort of his elect. Besides al
learned deuines aver the personality of Christ S. Thom. ^. part q. 4 art. 2.
Cyril epist. ad Nestor. 5. Synod. can. 5. ^ulg. lib. de incar. c. 4.
which is a substantial mode or manner of being (alike intrinsecal to
substance, as inherency is to any accident) to be secluded from his humane
nature, and the humane nature to subsist without his proper person: which
although it be a greater and deeper mystery, the^ that we have now in hand; yet
this parity I find between them, that as the humane nature of Christ, does
efficiently subsist supported by the person of the word, without the formal
effect of subsistency: so the accidents of bread and wine do here remain,
efficiently preserved by the body of Christ without the formal effect of their
inherency. Which is an example so fit and suitable to my purpose, as our
Adversaries have nothing to oppose against it, unless they overthrow that
article of our faith, and by attributing unto Christ the person of man,
annihilate with Nestorius the value of his sufferings, and work of our
Redemption.

24. Many other objections M. Bilson and his fellows make, as the
vnseemlinesse of Christ's passage through vile and loathsome Bills. 4. par page
78. etc.
places; But he that thought it not unseemly to be torn with whips, wounded
with nails, massacred by his cruel enemies to purchase our Redemption, he that
makes the beams of the Sun to shine undefiled, upon the foulest d^^ghil,
will not fear for the benefit of our souls to enter without horror, and pass
without infection the vncleanest harbor of our hearts. Then (says he) the
elements Aug. l. de fide and sym. cap. 4.
may putrify, the flesh of Christ cannot. Neither do we say it can, but when
the forms of Bread and Wine, are putrifyed or destroyed, the body without
putrefaction, detriment or consumptio^ cease to be under them, as the soul
without Bills. 4. par page 783.
destruction leaves to inform any dead, decayed, or divided member. For when
our finger or arm is cut or rotten away, the soul neither rotteth nor
receaueth hurt: no more does the flesh of Christ, when the Accidents of bread
are putrified, stabbed, and consumed to dust, because it existeth in the
Eucharist, albeit in substance truly, yet after an indivisible, impassible, and
now glorious manner.

25. Others demand how the body of Christ is not wholly spent and devoured, so
many daily feeding thereof. To which Innocentius the third briefly answers: As
the Innocen. l. 3. de offio. miss^e. 3. Reg. 17.
Widow of Sarep^ha did daily eat, and never diminish the Meal of her Pot, or
Oil of her vessel: so the universal Church does daily receive and never
consume the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ. Let not then (Gentle Reader) any
faygned difficulty or forged incouenience, any seeming repugnance ever withdraw
thee from allowing our Real Presence, evidently defined in holy writ, strongely
warranted by the Fathers, honorably recorded in all Antiquity.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, IN WHICH D. Bilson, D. Sparks, and all Sacramentaries are
more particulerly refelled, and other their chiefest arguments answered.
ALMIGHTY God accounts it not sufficient to have his Temples raised, and true
worship advanced, unless the Altars of Jeroboam be destroyed, 3. Reg. 22.
and the prophanations of Idolators utterly abolished. It is not then i^nough
for me to have confirmed the right and Orthodoxall belief of the Catholic
Church in this chiefest point of faith, except I beat down the errors and
raze the fortresses our enemies mantaine to strengthen Bi^s. 4. par page 725.
cum seque^tibus. Sparks page* 116. Bills. 4. par. page 785.
their follies. Which will seem by so much more intricate and cumbersome unto
me, by how much I find them in this question most slippery and inconstant. For
M. Bilson utterly renounceth the Real Presence. M. Sparks, with their
Communion-Booke allows it. M. Bilson will have us mount like Eagles with the
wings of faith, to fasten on the Lords flesh. Calvin will have Christ descend,
and feed us, not by faith alone, but with the substance of his Body. M. Bilson
with Calu. in c. 16. Mat. Bills 4. par. page 783. 785. 786. etc. Sparks p. 114.
115. Bills. 4. par page 710. 711. 712.
his Adherents hold: That we are nourished in the Sacrament, wi^h the lively
and impassible body and blood of Christ. M. Sparks, with others contend, that
we have not here to do with his impassible and glorified, but with his dead,
passible, and broken body and blood shed upon the Cross. Zuingilus and
Oecolampadius teach; the Eucharist to be a bare sign or figure of our Lord. M.
Bilson, not pleased with that, admits besides: some divine virtue thereunto
annexed. Thus the builders of Babylon are divided, thus they say and gainsay,
auerre and reuerse like men amazed, they know not what.

2. For ask M. Bilson, what he means when he said: That we must mount with
wings of faith to eat Christ in the Sacrament. If his meaning be that to lift
up our thoughts and hearts to Christ, to believe in him, be to eat him: Then
the Patriarchs and Prophets, who reposed their affiance in the Messiah to come,
were partakers of this Sacrament long before it was instituted. Then the
Heretics, who should deny the Eucharist, yet believed and reverenced our
Savior Christ, should both reverence and dishonor, partake and detest the
benefit of their Communion. Then, likewise to believe the Devils, were to eat
the Devils, to believe the fire and torments of Hell, were to be fed with
flames, to be nourished with torments. Then what need we run to your
Churches? What need we be sollicitous of your morsels of bread, when in every
corner, by the faithful remembrance of Christ's death and Passion, we may far
easilier enjoy the Bills. 4. par page 763. Calu. lib. 4. instit. c. 14. and
alibi.
fruit of your Sacrament? We ought to repair (says Bilson) to the Communion
table, to receive the confirmation and seal of Gods mercies: Or the assurance
(as Calvin writes) of our belief, and incorporation with Christ. Is it only
so? And what if we should not receive this outward seal and testimony of
grace, would God be so injurious, as to deprive us of his gifts bestowed upon
us, or so faithless as not to fulfill his promise, unless he assured it by
his letters Patents? Nay how often by this means should Truth it self deceive
and beguile us, by sealing a false warrant to all those Romans 11. Cor. 11.
as receive unworthily, eating, as S. Paul says, their Judgment, yea their
death and damnation? To these God should become a lying witness, a pernicious
surety affoarding them that outward communion as a public assurance of his
inwrad grace and their right belief when notwithstanding they are utterly void
and deprived of them. Oh times most perilous, what monstrous heresies have you
hatched? what men are these, who cannot acquit themselves of folly without
viperlike appeaching their Creator of so great impiety.

3. Another train M. Bilson lays to beguile with Bills. 4. par page 71^.
more cunning, yet to beguile too. For finding the Eucharist honored by the
Fathers above the baseness of a figure he allows not with them the Divine
presence of Christ, but he deuiseth, Some divine virtue annexed to the outward
signs. A mere devise. For what virtue I pray will you have it, of what
quality or condition? Spiritual or Corporal? If Spiritual, how is it
conjoined to corporal elements of bread and wine? What union without
proportion? What proportion will you make between this spiritual virtue and
those bodily things? If Corporal; either the same you add to every element,
or several virtues, according to the multitude of external seals. Not the
same; least one and the self same thing (which you abhor) should be at the
same time in sundry places. Not several, unless you make many several and
distinct Communions, not all to partake (as S. Paul says) of the 1. Cor. ^o^
Bills. 4. par page 7^0* 711 712. etc.
same bread. And therefore when neither of these retraites will serve, M.
Bilsons last craft and subtilty is: That Christ is present in the Sacrament,
not mixing his substance with the elements, but entering the hearts of the
faithful. Then tell me, I beseech you, how does he enter? Accidentally, by
some supernatural quality infused into our souls? Or Substantially, by the
entrance of his substance it self? What? Accidentally? Then the Holy Eucharist
is not, as S. Paul waits: The Communion of the blood, and participation of
the body of our Lord; but the participation only of your 1. Cor. 10.
new created accident. Of which I likewise demand, whether the same or distinct
accidents be produced in every soul, and so entangle you in all the former
briars? What? Substantially? How then does the substance enter? Whole or
divided into parts? If by parts; the glorious body of Christ should be mangled,
disfigured, and remain imperfect. If whole; the whole substance should be at
the same time in diverse places, cherishing the souls of diverse persons.
Besides, how is he, who sits at the right hand of his Father, substantially
united with us upon earth? Can he enter our souls (as M. Bilson dreameth) not
departing from the heavens, and can he not enter the Host, as Catholics
teach, not departing from thence?

4. M. Sparks perchance will be more dexterous and expert in avoiding these
difficulties. As intricate and perplexed every whit. For he not contented with
Christ's spiritual Sparks p. ^16.
presence only by faith, avouches him: to be also truly and really present to
the hearts of the faithful. Yet with such a strange and hidden presence, as no
terms can express, no wit conceive. For answer M. Sparks, in what sort is
Christ really present? Withal his local dimensions, or without dimension?
Without, is to destroy ( Sparks page 110. Whitaker cent. 2. q. 5. c. 7. fol.
389 Spark. page 114. 115. 116.
as you urge against us) the nature of his body. With all his dimensio^s is
impossible without penetration of Christ's body with the body of his
Communicant, without multiplication, rarefaction, condensation, and many other
in your Shoole condemned absurdities. Also how conioyne you Christ with us? Are
our hearts by the communion advanced to heaven to be really united to him above,
or does he descend to be personally conjoined with us upon earth? Without a
real conjunction no Real Presence by faith can be framed; much less such a
Real Presence as you imagine of Christ's body, broken, and blood shed of his
passible and crucified body, and blood shed (long since) upon the Cross, and
not of his glorified and impassible body, which now existeth. Especially, when
you affirm in the same place: That the body once broken, and blood shed ha^h
not been really at any time iterated, nor can be. Are you not here entrapped
in your own discourse? Do not these words imply most palpable contradiction?
Is it possible for that which neither really is, nor really can be, to be
really present? Does not Aristotle and all Philosophers accord that, Prius est
esse quam esse praesens. A thing must first be, before it can be present? What
leuity then, what ignorance is this, M. Sparks, in you and your fellows, who
avouch Christ's body broken, to be really present, and not to be at all.

5. Poor deceived souls! I lament your misery who in no trifling matters
credit such triflers as mind not what they say, nor how they write, so they
dazell the eyes, and inueigle the hearts of their unhappy followers. Yet least
their hideous outcries fright the simple from embracing the truth, I will make
answer to the residue of their pretended Calumnies. Bills. 4. par. p. 731. etc.
Exodus 7. Matthew. 11. Genesis 18. Aug. epist. 23. Amb. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 3. and 4.
Orig. in 15. Matthew. Joan. 6. Genesis 49. Psalm. 77. Matthew. 6. The greek has (...),
The Hebrew Segula.


6. First M. Bilson and his Sect-mates often argue: That the Eucharist is
called by S. Paul, and the ancient Fathers, bread; the Chalice wine, even after
Consecration. I grant that for diverse causes the elements retain these names.
First, because they were bread and wine before, as Araons rod was said to
devour the rods of the Egyptians, when they were Serpents. The men healed by
Christ were termed Blind, Lame, Deaf, and Dead, when they Saw, Walked, Heard,
and were Revived, because such they had been before. Secondly, because they
reserve the outward forms of bread and wine; as the Three that appeared to
Abraham in human shape were called men, whereas they were Angels. Thus S.
Augustine is to be understood, thus S. Ambrose, thus Origin in the places cited
in the margent, where they attribute unto the sacrament the name of bread.
Thirdly it is termed Bread, for that it co^teyneth the Bread of life; The true
Bread which came down from heaven, Christ Jesus. And therefore called in
Scripture: Fat bread: Bread of Angels: Supersubstantiall bread, according to
the Greek and Hebrew copies. S. Hierome names it: Egregious and most singular
Hier. in c. 6. Matthew. Iere. 11. v. 19. Aug. l. 1. loquutio. in Genesis n. 138.
178. 172. and quaest. 34. in Exodus
bread; And Jeremy the Prophet alluding hereunto, calls his true body (
Bread) without any Epithete, saying: Mittamus lignum in panem eius: Let us
fasten the wood on his Bread. Lastly, it is called Bread after the Hebrew
phrase, which styles all sorts of meats by the name Lechem, Bread, as in the
34. of Genesis, 4. Regum 6. Witness also S. Augustine in his speeches upon
Genesis and Exodus.

7. But M. Bilson produces some ancient writers who do not only give unto the
Eucharist the name of bread, but determinately auow the nature and substance of
bread, to abide after consecration. Among whom Gelas. co^t. Eutichen.
Gelasius leads the way, writing thus against Eutiches: The Sacraments which
we receive of the body and blood of Christ are a divine thing, and by them we
are made partakers of the divine nature: and yet for all that, cease not the
substance or nature of bread and wine to be. Then Theodoret: The mystical
signs do not after Theod. dialog. 2.
sanctification depart from their own nature. For they remain in their former
substance, figure and shape. I answer: They are said to remain because they
persevere still in virtue, power and efficacy. For the outward forms and
qualities which continue, have the same operations, and work the same effects
which the substances before performed. Or because the accidents which abide
have a miraculous, yet substantial manner of being, not stayed, not inherent
in any other thing: Somewhat like to that which the former substances enjoyed.
Thus Gelasius ought, and no otherwise can he be expounded: Gelasius answered
for he does not say, yet cease not in substance and nature etc. but using
first the word substance as a term over strict, he corecteth and enlarges it
with this addition (or nature) and after explicating of what nature he meant,
he calls the same proprietas naturae, the property, or quality of nature.
Then he affirms the Eucharist to be made a divine thing, and we by it
partakers of the divine nature: a little after he adds, The elements are
changed, by the Holy Ghost, into a divine substance: which confirms our, and
wholly subuerte^h the adversaries doctrine, therefore M. Bilson very warily le^t
it forth.

8. As touching Theodoret, the Greek in which he Theodoret answered.
wrote explaineth his meaning; for in the first place instead of nature, he
uses (...), which compriseth, as all Grecians know, the accidental nature, as
well as the substantial, and signifies sometimes the virtue, or quality of
nature. In the second place in lieu of substance, Vide dicti. Graecolat.
Conradi Gesneri, and Thesaurling. graecae H. Stephani.
he has the word (...), that is Essence, as Quin^ilian, and Budaeus out of
Philo; or nature also, as Tully translateth it. And so we grant that the true
nature, and essence of the accidents still remain. Neither can the word
nature, essence, no nor substance, which the translatour uses, be understood,
as it is divided against accident. For Theodoret says: The signs depart not
from their own nature, they remain in their former essence. But they never
had, nor could have any other then an accidental nature, an accidental
essence, or substance, if you will so call it. Because the nature and substance
of bread and Wine, was not their own nature, not their former substance, but
really distinct from theirs. Therefore Theodoret could not truly affirm, That
they remained in their former substance, which formerly they had not, but in
the accidental essence which they formerly had, and in which they still
persevere. Nor yet can any Cauiller say, that remain is here taken for
inhere, because then the accidents should also inhere in their figure, inhere
in their shape, to which the verb remain, is as necessarily referred, as it
is to their substance.

9. Although this answer fully satisfyeth, and takes Another answer to
Theodoret.
away all manner of cauillations, yet I will not omit another which Reverend
Father Cotton gave at a disputation in France, to wit, that the three Genitiues
in Greek should not all be turned into Ablatiues in Latin: but two into
Ablatiues, and the first into the Genitive case, thus: Manent enim (mystica
Symbola) (...) in prioris essentiae seu substa^tiae, (...), and figura and
specie, and videri, and tangi pessunt sicut prius: that is, The mystical signs
remain in the figure, and shape of their former substance, The real presence
and Transubsta^tiatio^ proved by Theodorets own words in the very same place
whom the Ce^turistes also reject for the same. Cent. 5. c. 4. col. 517. 1008.
and may be seen, and touched as before. Which answer somewhat varieth in
words, but is the same substance with the former; both are notably
strengthened and our Tra^substantiation established, by this ensuing sentence,
which immediately follows: But they are understood to be those things which
are made, and believed, and adored, as being those things, which are believed.
Now, what are the things believed, what adored? Not the outward signs barely
of themselves; they are seen, not believed; they cannot without Idolatry be
adored. The things believed even in our, and in the Sacramentaryes opinion,
are the body and blood of Christ: those they apprehend, those they adore by
faith: yet they believe and adore them absent, we present: but Theodoret
avouches that the mystical signs, Are made those things which are believed,
which are adored: therefore they are made the body and blood of Christ. And how
are they made? By representation, by signification only? No: but truly, and
really, As being (says he) those things which are believed. Can we devise to
speak more plainly for our selves, then this Father speaks in our behalf,
whom quarreling enemies would wrest against us. The rest of M. Bilsons
allegations I let pass, because some of them, make nothing against us, others
may be answered as these before: others are plainly of no account, as the
authority of Bertram, a late suspected author, and of the false impious, and
sacrilegious Counsel of Constantinople, under Constantinus Copronym^s, and so
alleged in the 2. Nicen Synod, even in the place quoted by M. Bilson, howbeit
his conscience served him to produce their testimonies for want of better.

10. M. Bilson urges again: The Lord took bread, Bills. page 730. 731.
brake bread. But that which he took, that which he brake, he gave to his
disciples, therefore he gave bread. The same fallacy might I return upon him:
That he took profane and common bread. Therefore he gave profane and not
Sacramental bread. With the same collusion any heathen Matthew. 9 v. 26.
might deprave the most famous miracles of Christ; That of the Gouernous
daughter raised by him; he might say for example. That Christ was invited to
the maid dead, that he entered to her dead, held her by the hand dead, spoke to
her dead, but she to whom he entered, she to whom he spoke arose. Therefore she
arose not alive, but dead. He might after the same manner delude the
resuscitation of Lazarus. For upon whom did Christ call, when he said: Lazarus
come forth? Did he call upon the living, Joan. 1^. v. 43.
or upon the dead? I know you will grant that he called upon the dead, and yet
(as you must needs confess) by the power of his Godhead, and force of his
voice, he came forth alive. So I answer unto you: That Christ took bread,
blessed bread etc. yet by the power and efficacy of his words, when he said:
This is my body, the bread was changed, and transubstantiated into his body.
Perhaps you will cavil, that the beholders saw the actions of life in the
fornamed parties; What then? Will you credit the eyes of men, which might be
deceived, witnessing them to live, and will you not believe the words of
Christ, who cannot beguile us, auouching this his body? No (says M. Bilson)
for Christ uses these words: I am the door, I am the vine; and yet he is not
really either door Chrysostom. ho. 83. in Mat. Bills. 4. par page 717. etc.
or vine. Is this your guise of arguing from a Li^erall, to a figuratine
speech? Here the things themselves, the connection of the text, faith, reason,
and whatsoever else inforceth a figure. In the words of our Lords Supper, all
things plead the property of the letter; The Collation of places, the
Conference of original texts, the promise which Christ made, the institution
of a Sacrament, the establishment of a Law, the enacting of his last Will and
Testament, convince (as I say) a most true and proper kind of speech.

11. Yet because some Protestants challenge us to assign a disparity, why
there should not be Transubstantiation, Joan. 15. v. 1.
when he said: I am a Vine, as well as when he said: This is my Body? I assign
these differences. First Transubsta^tiation is a passage from one substance
into another, which supposes two substances to be, and one to loose his being
by incompossibility with the other. So in my present case there are two
substances, Bread, and the Body of Christ, and the one by Consecration is
changed into the other; but when Christ said: I am the Door, I am the true
Vine, there is one only substance. For the Vine, the Door, does not signify
any other Door then Christ himself. He is that spiritual Door, that true
spiritual Vine, to whom some property of the corporal Vine and Door in a
most eminent degree belongs. And therefore here it is impossible any
Transubstantiation should be.

12. Further S. Augustine gives this rule to discern a Aug. l. 3. de doct.
Christ. c. 10 Vnum disparatum non potest de alto praedicari.
figurative speech from a proper, when that which is spoken in Holy Writ,
Cannot properly be referred, either to honesty of manners, or verity of faith,
it is be expounded figuratively. But it is repugnant to reason, that one
substance should be properly affirmed of another, much more so many different
substances verified of Christ, as he is said to be a Vine, a Door, a Shepherd,
and such like. Repugnant to faith, that the Son of God should be changed into
the Vine, which grows in the field: I am the Lord, says Malachy, and am
Mala. 3. v. 6.
not changed. Dishonorable to God, to change the noblest creature that ever
was, the humanity of our Savior Christ, into so ignoble as a Vine, or Door.
Disagreable to the words themselves, for in this proposition: I am the Vine,
Christ is avouched to be; therefore he cannot by transubstantiation at the same
time loose his being. And yet at our Lords supper not one of these
inco^ueniences follow. Here one different thing is not verifyed of the other,
but that which the Pronowne (this) does in general, and inderminatly
demonstrate under the forms of bread is particulerly specifyed, when the
complete signification of the words is indeed, to be the body of Christ.
Moreover this change is possible; for bread was often changed into the flesh,
and wine into the blood of Christ, when he was nourished upon earth. This
change is honorable to God, of worse to better, of an ignoble thing into a most
noble, of common bread in to the bread of life, into the immaculate flesh of
the Son of God. In this, bread is not said to reserve any being, but another
substance, that is to say, Christ's body and blood, sustayning the accidents of
bread and wine, by reason whereof they loose their being. Such and many other
reasons there are of Transubstantiation in the one, and not in the other.

13. M. Sparks presses us with that maine objection, their chief Achilles: It
is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Nothing indeed? Then
the word to become Sparks p. 109. Io. 6. Aug. tra. 27. in Io. Cyr. ad ^uo Cyr.
in Io. l. 4. c. 23. Conc. Ephesians. anath. 11. Aug. 27. in Joan and in Psalm. 98.
Chrysostom. in hunc loc. Orig. l. 3. ep ad Rom Aug. locis citatis.
flesh, benefiteth nothing. Then the flesh of Christ crucified, buried,
revived, what does it avail us? The sense therefore of these words is, that
the Capharnaites gross and carnal understanding of them profited nothing. For
they imagined they should eat dead flesh, the flesh of a mere man deprived of
the life, soul, and divinity (as Nestorius also weened) of which flesh our
Savior pronounced, that it profits nothing. But it is the Word and Spirit of
God in the flesh that quickneth and gives life, as S. Cyril against Nestorius,
S. Augustine, and the Ephesine Council declare. Secondly, they thought that
Christ would cut in pieces (says the same S. Augustine) and mangle his own
flesh, and so give us to eat, as it is commonly sold in the Butchers
shambles. Which rude and savage conceit our Savior also rejected, as
together with him, S. Chrysostom, Origin, and others observe. As though he
speaking to their thoughts had said: The flesh, after that manner, profits
nothing; It is the spirit, that quickneth, to wit, a more divine, spiritual,
and sacramental manner of eating his flesh, affoardeth us the fruit of
eternal life.

14. Our Opponents at length not able to find any footing in Scripture, take
hold of the Fathers quoting many passages, wherein the Sacrament is called: A
remembrance, a sign, a figure of Christ's body; therefore not his true body.
The like oposition Apollinaris and Marcion made against the humanity Sparks p.
110. and seq. Bills 4. par p. 716. 717
of Christ: That he was made according to the similitude, ^hape, and likeness
of man. The like others framed against his divinity, that S. Paul intitleth
him: The Image of God, the Character or figure of his Fathers substance. But as
both we Phil. 2. v. 7. Col. 1. v. 15. Haeb. 1. v. 3. Orig. in c. 15. Matt. Aug.
c^t. Adaman. 12. l. 3. de Trin. c. 4. Basil in his Liturgy. Nazi. ora. in Gorg.
Macar. hom. 27. Theod. in dialog. 1. Aug. in Psalm. 98. Aug. l. 5. de doct.
Christ. c. 13 Facinus est and tract. 25. in Io.
and you reply hereunto, that Christ had the likeness of man, and was a true
and perfect man, was the image of God, yet true God, the figure of his Fathers
substance, and the substance it self: so I say the Eucharist is a
commemoration and sign of Christ's body, and also his true and natural body.
It is a sign in respect of the external and visible elements, which do not
promise grace absent only (as our Sectaryes teach) but contain the Author of
grace, and body of our Lord inuisibly present, as Origin, Augustine, and all
others avouch.

15. Again, not only the outward forms, but the body of Christ, as under
them, is a Sacrament, Image, or Sign of his body, as offered on the Cross.
For although it be the same body in substance, yet not in show and appearance,
not endued with the same qualities of extension, passibility, circumscription
etc. In this sense S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Macharius, Theodoret call
it an Image, a Figure; In this sense S. Augustine writes: Not that body which
you see shall you eat, nor drink that blood which shallbe shed by them that
crucify me: That is, not that body in such a carnal, palpable, and bloody
sort. For this in his book of Christian Doctrine he counts an heinous and
barbarous fact. Figura ergo est: It is therefore a figure; It is a Sacrament,
because albeit the same body be really eaten, the same blood really drunk; yet
in a mystery, in a figure, in a Sacrament, after a sweet, spiritual, and
unbloody manner.

16. Nay, S. Augustine (as our Sacramentaries contend) says: What do thou
prepare thy teeth and belly? Believe and thou have eaten. True, he writes
there of the spiritual eating of Christ the bread of life by faith and belief
only, he had not begun to discourse of the Sacrament, or Sacramental eating.
At least after (say they) he speaks of the Sacrament, yet uses these words:
He that feede^h wi^h Aug. tra. 2^. in Io.
the heart, not he that grindeth with the tooth. True: not he that grindeth only
can partake the fruit of this Sacrament, he that feeds with heart without
corporal eating may benefit himself: but he that corporally eats without
faith can receive no profit at all. They urge again, that S. Aug. tra. 59. and
2^. in Joan.
Augustine says: The Apostles eat the bread our Lord, Judas the bread of our
Lord. And in another place he denies: The wicked to eat the body of Christ.
Most true. He denies the^ to eat the bread our Lord, or to feed of his body,
because they are not incorporated in his mystical body; Or because they do it
not fruitfully by grace to the benefit Psalm. ^^ Augu. de Bapt cont. Donatist.
l. 9. ^. 8. con. Pulgent. c. 6. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 20. etc. 55. Bi^s.
4. p^ page 772. 773. 774. 776.
of their souls, as King David says: The wicked shall not rise in Judgment:
Because they shall not rise to salvation, but to damnation. Otherwise S.
Augustine grants that Judas did, and the wicked do truly ea^e the body of
Christ, in his book of Baptism against the Donatists, against Fulgentius, and
against the letters of Petilian.

17. In sum, many Fathers objected by M. Bilson. exhort us to eat the
Sacrament by faith, to cleanse our souls, prepare our hearts, they call it
spiritual food, the bread of the mind, and not of the belly, no bodily but
ghostly meat, the proper nourishment of the spirit. All most true; for a lively
faith, a clean soul, a pure heart, are necessarily required in the worthy
receauer, and the purer he approaches, the more plenty he receaueth of Gods
heavenly graces. Then it is styled spiritual food, ghostly meat, the bread of
the mind, the proper nourishment of the spirit: because the spiritual repast
and refection Cyr. Alex* l. 10. in Joan. c. 13.
of our mind, the perfect vigor and increase of spirit is the chief and most
sovereign effect of this divine banquet. Nevertheless it excludes not, as S.
Cyrill notes, but presupposes the corporal, from which as from the fountain
and sea of grace the spiritual is derived. Our Adversaries reply: The Fathers
exclude it by certain negative terms which they use, calling it, No bodily
but Ghostly meat, the bread of the mind, and not of the belly. They call it so
indeed, and speak in the Scriptures phrase, even as Almighty God spoke, when
he said: I will mercy; and not sacrifice: yet thereby he neither excluded Ose.
6. v. 6. Matthew. 9. v. 13.
nor forbad sacrifice, which himself prescribed, exacted, and commanded; but
only preferred mercy, as an act of charity more acceptable unto him. So the
Fathers by the like words exclude not the bodily, but prefer the ghostly, as
the dayntiest food of our souls. Or they deny it to be any bodily sustenance,
as bodily is commonly taken for that which is opposite to ghostly. This is not
so, this is both bodily and ghostly, both spiritual and corporal meat; this
relisheth the mouth, and cheereth the heart; quickneth the body and refreshes
the soul. Therefore it is not a mere corporal, but a spiritual dainty,
because it has a spiritual manner of being, is seasoned with spiritual
qualityes, affoardeth all spiritual comfort, and is principally ordained to
our spiritual nourishment. For the flesh, as Tertullian writes, is fed
Tertul. l. de resurr. carnis.
with the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be fattened with God.

18. And if Protestants would be as ready to defend, as they are to cavil at
the former sayings, they might learn by the like speeches which the Apostle
uses, how to explain the Fathers words; for as they call the body of Christ
in the Sacrament spiritual, so he, the body which 1. Cor. 15. v. 44.
shall rise in the later day, It is sown a natural body, it shall rise a
spiritual body; as they account it a barbarous and savage thing to eat the
flesh and drink the blood of Ibid. v. 50.
Christ, so he, a thing impossible, that flesh and blood can possess the
kingdom of God; as S. Augustine says: Not that Ibid. v. 37.
body which you see shall you eat etc. so he, not the body that shall be, do
thou sow. Which place together with the former, Eutichius urged against the
corporal resurrection of our flesh, with no less colorable pretense, then
Sectaryes do the precedent sayings, against the bodily presence of Christ in
the Sacrament. But as they are constrained, unless they deny that article of our
faith, with S. Gregory, and other of our Deuines, to construe S. Paul's meaning
Greg. lib. 4. in lob. c. 32. and 33.
that the body which ryseth, shallbe both spiritual and corporal; spiritual
by reason of the glorious dowryes it shall receive; and corporal, in respect
of the true and tractable substance it shall still retain: That flesh and
blood according to humane misery and corruption cannot possess the Kingdom of
God, but according to immortality, and corruption: that, not the body which is
sowed shall rise, but another, another in quality, the same in substance;
another in perfection of glory, the same in property, and condition of nature;
another in powerful virtue, the same in corporal verity; another in manner
and form, the same in realty and essence of being. Apply the like
constructions to the fornamed sentences, written against the real presence,
and you shall rightly expound those learned writers, and soundly answer your
own objections.

19. To conclude, when these newfangled teachers with no evidence of
Scripture, or sentence of Father can disprove the truth of our doctrine, they
fall to their accustomed Pulk. in c. 6. Io. sect. 13. Bills. 4 par. page 791.
Ambr. l. 30 de Spirit. sanct. c. 12. Aug. in P^al. 24. in 1. Cor. Bills. 4. par
p. 710. etc.
railing. They term us Capharnaites, Vbiquitaries, Idolaters etc. whereas we
detest the inhumane and gross imagination of the Capharnaites, condemn the
Vbiquity or every where being of Christ, adore not with divine honor (as M.
Bilson is pleased to impose upon us) the elements of bread and wine; but we
adore (to use S. Ambrose words) the flesh of Christ in the mysteries. That
flesh, which ^ce man eats (as S. Augustine says) before he adore it. That
body (says S. Chrysostom) we adore on the Altar, which the Sages did in the
Cribbe. All impregnable proofs of our Real Presence, and as pregnant
reproves of M. Bilsons forgery. Yet some thing he must say because he will not
yield. And to S. Augustine he answers: That he takes adoring for eating,
because eating is believing. As if S. Augustine had foolishly said: No man
eats before he eats, or belieueth before he belieueth. A like miserable
shift is he feign to use to avoid S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory
Nazianzen, as all may see who have leisure to peruse them.

20. I will not here offend my Reader with the filth of Caluins, Sutclif^, and
Sparks reuiling quil, who defame us Calu. l. 4. instit. c. 17 Sutclife in his
Survey cap. 8. Sparks in his answer to M. John Albins p. 219. 220. Sap. ^. v.
^1.
with the Antichristian heresy of the Valentinians, Manichies, Eutychians and
Marcionits, as though we denied with them the solidity and other properties of
Christ's natural body, which all men know to be a most shameless calumny. Awake
then, awake you beguiled souls, and vncharme your hearts of these dangerous
enchantments; you that are bewitched with the tounges and pens not of one
venomous Spark but of many vile Calu^niators. Awake I beseech you, in the
behalf of God, and your own eternal good. Remember the words of King
Solomon: The mouth which rages with lies, kills the soul: It ruineth the
soul of the detractor, and souls of those that listen unto him. Remember that
these slanderous speeches chase you from the table of God, from the food of
Angels, and feast of heaven. They deprive you of your daintyest repast, of your
chiefest banquet, of the pledge of your salvation, of Joan. 6. v. 53.
the medicine of immortality, of the tree of life, of which our Savior says:
Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall
have no life in you.

THE FOVRTH CONTROVERSY. WHEREIN ^s vpholden the Sacrifice of the Mass;
against D. Bilson, D. Reynolds, and D. Sparks.
CHAP. I.
IT is a foul, yet common fault of our Adversaries, when they epsy the names
and words of holy Write to bewray their errors; they cavil (as in the
precedent Chapter) about the sense, meaning and construction of them: when the
meaning and thing questioned is plain and unavoidable; they contend at least
for the precise words, terms, and names themselves; as for the name
Purgatory, the name Transubstantiation etc. and M. Bilson in this present
Controversy strives much for the Bills. 4. pa^ page 70^.
name Sacrifice, demanding: Where it is expressed by the Apostle in plain
words? others for the name Mass. To whom we reply, as S. Augustine did to
Pascen^ius the Arrian: Nothing Aug. ^p* 174.
is more contentious then to quarrel about the name, when the thing it self is
apparently known. We grant that as the name (...), was first defined by the
Council of Nice against Arrius, the name (...), by the Counsel of Ephesus
against Nestorius; so the name Sacrifice, the name Mass has been frequently
used by the ancient Fathers. The Scripture indeed mentions not the wordss but
the sense and meaning of them it fully contains. Yea Christian Religion
necessarily requires some external Sacrifice, our duty to God exacteth it,
the very instinct of nature teaches it: against all which our adversaries make
war, when they labor to impugn this holy mystery.

2. If we survey foreign Countries, and search the customs of all ages past,
we can never find any nation so barbarous, any people at all (as Plato notes)
so rude and Plato de leg. dial. ^0
savage, who with vows, victimes, and outward Sacrifices have not acknowledged
the sovereignty of some God or other. For which Plutarch aduersus Colo^.
cause Plutarch says: If you pass over all the world, you may find Cities
without wales, Characters, Kings etc. without Riches, Coin, Schools, and
Theaters: but a town without Temples and Gods, to whom Sacrifices are offered,
you shall never find. Neither could this continued practice, and general
agreement Tul. l. 1. Tuscu. q.
of all nations, which Tully calls, The voice of nature, proceed from any
other fountain, then the secret work and instinct of God. All people (as
Xenophon observes) could never meet by common consent to agree Xenoph. de
dict. and fact. Socrat. 4.
in this point, or if they did meet, could they impart their minds, or being
of diverse languages understand one another. We must needs therefore conclude
with him in the like case, that it flows from the chief cause and author
Aug. epist. 49 ad Deo gra. quaest. 3.
of nature: And with S. Augustine: That this is not to be blamed in the rites
of Pagans, that they builded Temples, ordined Priests, offered Sacrifice; but
that these were exhibited to Idols and Devils, that was to be condemned.
Wherefore except our Auersaries after such plenty of grace will wholly extinguish
in us the lively sparks and fruits of nature, we cannot but allow some outward
oblation in honor of God.

3. Again, the act it self of Sacrificing, in which by the change and Note
that the body of Christ is consumed according to his sacramental manner of
being; which suffices the nature of an unbloody Sacrifice* Aug. l. 10* de
ciuit. Dei cap. 4.
consumption of some sensible Host by a lawful Minister with solemn rite
consecrated to God, we make protestation of our dependancy, service, and
submission unto him, the supreme and sovereign governor and moderatour of all
things, is so proper and peculiar to the highest Majesty, that whereas the
Religious worship of adoration, prayer, kneeling, lifting up hands have been
often challenged, and attributed to men, to Amon, Assuerus, Nabuchodonozor, and
the like: Yet the divine worship of Sacrifice (as S. Augustine witnesses) No
man living even presumed to say, it was due to any but only to the true, or
supposed God. So that to despoile him, with M. Reynolds, of this external
homage soly and principally allotted unto him, is to rob him of his especial
right, dignity and preheminency; it is to make us Christians, who above all
nations are most obliged unto our Lord, above all others, by denying him his
chiefest honor, to remain most ungrateful.

4. Moreover, every Religion, every law and government of Gods Church is so
inwardly linked with some outward form of Priesthood, with some visible manner
of Genesis 4. v. 4. 8. 20. 14. 18. Exodus 12. Number. 28. Leuit. 4. Cyp. de coena Dom.
Bills. 4 par page 699. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 4.
Sacrifice, as they can neither stand, flourish or persevere without them. In
the law of Nature there were the Sacrifices of Abel, Noe, Melchisedech etc. In
the law written diverse prescribed by Almighty God. In the law of grace what
Sacrifice grant you, by which it stands, in which it consists, by which it
is distinguished from the former laws? To abrogate all kind of Sacrifice, is
to disanull the law, to abolish our Religion, as S. Cyprian proves: And to
fly, as D. Bilson, and D. Reynolds are here constrained, to spiritual only, is
vain and frivolous. First because every true Religion is a several and
peculiar worship, whereby people united profess their duty and obedience to
God, which is not enough inwardly to acknowledge, unless we also express it
by some outward and sensible sign. And in the chiefest Religion that ever was,
by the perfectest and most principal sign of subjection, to wit, by the
external oblation I mentioned before. Secondly, we have not only, as all
Catholics teach against the Manichees, Our soul from God; we receive from him
both body and soul, both the flesh and the spirit, both our S. Iren. l. 4.
cap. 34. S. Tho. l. 4. c. 56. con. Ge^tes.
visible and invisible, our corporal and spiritual substance. Therefore
besides the secret and invisible prayers of our heart, it is necessary we
likewise serve him with corporal, bodily, and visible things, in token that he
only is Author, Creator, and Lord of all things. Thirdly, spiritual
Sacrifices of prayer, almesdeeds and the like were continually practiced and
observed by the Jews, not proper to us Christians, as that Sacrifice ought to
be, by which our Religion is established and distinguished from others.

5. D. Reynolds, D. Sparks, and their associates otherwhile Reyn. c. 8. diuis.
4. Sparks in his answer to M. Iobn Alb. p. 7. 8. 23.
answer: That the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross is the peculiar and
perpetual Host, in which our Priesthood, law, and Religion is constituted. But
they satisfy not. For that was only offered in one place, and at one time: to
that all Nations christened could not refort to do homage unto God: that was
not any rite or ceremony instituted by him; but if we speak of the action, a
detestable Sacrilege committed by the Jews, that also was common to all the
former true states of Religion, who believed in Christ's Passion to come. And
yet the external and divine worship in which Christian Religion florisheth,
and consists, ought to be appointed by God, proper to Christians, in all times
and places practiced, ought to be such unto which all faithful people might
repair, which can be Reyn. page 539. Luc. 22. v. 19. Jewel in his Reply
against the Sacrifice. Bills. 4. par. p. 690. 691.
none other then the Oblation of the holy Eucharist, as I will manifestly
prove, notwithstanding M. Reynolds impiously traduceth it as the Monster of
abomination.

6. Christ offered and instituted this Sacrifice, in S. Luke. This is my Body
which is given for you. He does not say: which shall be given hereafter only
(as M. Jewel commenteth, nor which is given in bare Mystery and signification,
as M. Bilson glozeth) but which even now in the present is given, as an Host
and Sacrifice offered to his Father truly, and really in propitiation, pardon
and forgiveness of sins; as more plainly appears by the Greek text, which
Bezae for this cause charge with corruption, where all copies read: The Cup
or blood as contained in the Chalice to be truly Cyp. l 2. Epist. 2. Aug. in
Psalm 33 ^ con. 2. Chrysostom. bo. 24. ^^. Corinth. Nisse^ orat. deresur. Andreas
Crastou^ de opif. miss l. 2. ser. 164. Cyr in 1. Cor. c. 10. bo. 24. Aug. 17 de
ciuit. Dei cap. 20.
shed, that is, offered unto God, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, in remission of
sins. Which all the Fathers with uniform consent most constantly confirm,
S. Cypryan, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and innumerable others by Coccius and
Garetius abundantly cyted. Amongst which S. Gregory Nissen whom our Adversaries
hereupon shamfully calumniate, has these words: Christ after an ineffable and
hidden manner of Sacrifice preoccupated the violent force, to wit, of his
death, and offered himself for us an Oblation and victim, the Priest to
geather and lamb of God. When was this done? When he exhibited his Body to be
eaten, and Blood to be drunk to his familiar frinds. This is that marvelous
and honorable Sacrifice, where in lieu of the slaughter of brute beasts Christ
commanded (as S. Chrysostom says) himself to be offered: this is that
Sacrifice, which succeeded all those Sacrifices of the old law, that were
offered in shadow of that to come, as S. Augustine testifyeth. This is that
sovereign worship of God in which the law of Christianity is established, as
the allusion it self imports which our Savior here makes between the
dedication of the old Testament, and this of the new.

7. Moses when he ratified and began the old law, Exodus 2^.
dedicated it in the blood of Calves: Christ beginninng to confirm the new,
solemnizeth the same in his own blood. Moses powered his blood into a goblet.
Christ consecrateth his in a Chalice. Moses took that blood and sprinkled the
people: Christ takes this and inwardly washes the hearts of his Apostles.
Moses said: This is the blood of the covenant or testament: Christ says: This
is the blood of the new Testament. Moses added: which God has delivered unto
you. Christ annexeth: which shall be shed for you. So as that which Moses
performed was an evident figure of this which Christ accomplished. And
therefore as that was a true Sacrifice: so this being the truth it self, must
be a far more true and perfect Sacrifice. As that was the blood of a victime
offered unto God before it was spinkled upon the people: so this ought to be
the blood of a purer victim of Christ himself, before it cleanses the souls
of his Disciples. As that was the solemn service, in which the state of the
Judicial law consisted: so this must be the proper and public worship of God,
on which the external form of Christian Religion depends.

8. As we may yet more manifestly gather out of that Luc. 12: v. 19.
precept of our Savior Christ, Do this for commemoration of me. By which words
we are strictly commanded to execute, 1. Some outward and visible act signified
by the Pronowne (This.) 2. That it must be an act of doing, and not of
believing only, the Verb (Do) conuinceth. 3. That the doing of this external
actio^ should represent the Passion of Christ, is manifest by the Nowne which
follows: for a commemoration of me. And by S. Paul: As often as you shall
eat this Bread, and drink the Chalice, you shall show the dead of 1. Cor. 11.
v. 26.
our Lord until he come.

9. It is not enough: To take bread and wine, to excite and stir up an inward
remembrance (as M. Bilson faigneth) of his death and Passion: We must also do,
as Christ commands Bills. 4. par. page 693. 694. and 695.
an outward action commemoratiue of him, sensibly showing, as S. Paul writes,
the death of our Lord. The Jews believed, and visibly sacrificed their Calves
and lambs in token of Christ: Wherefore least we, who are charged to make a
sensible memory of our Blessed Redeemer, should be as our Protestants are,
far short of the Jews; it is needful by some public rite we set forth his
Passion in a more excellent sort then they. As indeed we Aug. l. 26. cont.
Faust. cap. 18.
do in this most holy and mystical Oblation, where not only the action done,
but the substance of the thing (as I shall hereafter declare) and manner of
doing more nearly and lively represent the death of our Savior, then all the
Judicial or figurative Hosts. In so much as S. Augustine might well say: That
Christians now celebrate the memory of the accomplished Sacrifice with a most
holy Oblation and Act. 133. 2. (...), The Syriake participle Me^b chaschipin
signifies (as Soderius in Lexico Syri.) A Sacrificing ^ction. Mart. Ep. ad
Burdeg. cap. 3. Hesyeb. l. 1. cap. 4. Cyp. l. 2. Epist. 3. Amb. c. 10 Ep. ad
Heb. Primasius in idem. c. Anselm. in comment. c. 11. 1. Cor. Paul. ad heb c.
13 and 1. Cor. c. 10. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 4. p. 476. Aug. l. 10. de Ciu. Dei. c
20 q 57. in Leut. and l. 9. conf. c. 12. Greg. Nazi orat 3. and 4. in Iulia.
Cyr. Alex. in Con. Ephesians. a^not. 11. Ifido d. 3 ep 75.
participation of the Body of Christ. With that holy Oblation which Christ
enacted, promulgated and commanded when he said: Do this for a commemoration of
me.

10. Which the Apostles practiced when in the Acts they sacrificed to our Lord
(as the Greek and Syriak) or exercised some public ministry unto him (as the
Latin text imports.) Which their scholar S. Martial taught and followed: We
offer his Body and Blood to obtain everlasting life etc. That which the Jews
through malice immolated, we for our salvation exhibit upon the hallowed
Altar; for this our Lord charged us to do for a comemoration of him. Hesichius
says: Christ preventing his death offered himself up in Sacrifice in the
Supper of the Apostles. S. Cyprian likewise: Jesus Christ our Lord and God, he
is the High Priest of God the Father, and he first offered himself a Sacrifice
to his Father, and the same he commanded to be done in his remembrance. S.
Ambrose, Primasius, S. Anselme I I omit, because I hasten to other proofs.

11. S. Paul says: We have an Altar (and an Altar to Sacrifice on, both the
Greek and Hebrew word implies as M. Reynolds accords with us) whereof they
have no power to eat which serve the tabernacle. And in another place. You
cannot drink the Chalice of our Lord, and Chalice of Devils. Where he
discourses of the Sacrifices of Jews, Gentills, Idolatours, and in all
outward and real points matcheth ours with theirs, our Hosts with theirs, our
Chalice with theirs, our immolation with theirs, the participation which we
make of our victime, with the participation which they make of theirs. Whereby
it ensues that as theirs were true Sacrifices, true Hosts, true Victimes, true
Altars, so likewise ours, or else the comparisons were to no purpose. Hereupon
S. Augustine terms the holy Eucharist: A most true Sacrifice, by which true
remission of sins is purchased. The Sacrifice of our price or ransom. S.
Gregory Nazianzen: An unbloody Sacrifice. S. Cyril of Alexandria: A quikening
holy Sacrifice. Isidorus: The Sacrifice of an unbloody victime. S. Cyril of
Jerusalem: An holy and dreafull Sacrifice Cyr. Hier. ^ate. 5. Tert. l. de velo
Virgin. c. 7. 9. Council. Nice. C^^. 14. Chrysostom. hom. 17. in 9. ad Heb. Amb.
exhor. ad virg. Cyr. Hier. cate. 5. Leo. ser. 8. de Psalm. Iran. l. 4. ^a. 32.
Ieron. in Com. cap. ^. ad Tit. Aug. l. 9. Conf. c. 13. Optat. l. ^. ^on. Par.
Gre. Nazi^n. orat. 2. in Julian. Aug. ser. de San. 19. S. Gre. Niss. oratbap.
Eusebius. l. 1. Demonst. c. 6. and 9. Nys. de Virg. c. vl^ Orig. bo. 23 in l. Number.
Amb. l. 2. of ^^c. c. vlt. Chrysostom. bo. 2. de pa. Job. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 4. p.
472.
profiting the souls of the departed. Tertullian: A Sacrifice which no woman
can be permitted to offer, no nor Deacons according to the Council of Nice. We
have not then a spiritual sacrifice only, which women and Deacons may offer,
but a true Sacrifice in the Church of God. A true Host which cannot be
consumed, as S. Chrysostom says. Which offered on the Altar (as S. Ambrose
teaches) abolisheth the sin of the word. Which is a Propitinion, as S.
Cyrill of Jerusalem calls it, for all that need help. A true oblation, which
being only one, fullfilleth, according to S. Leo, the variety of al carnal
sacrifices. Being new, yet received from the Apostles, is offered unto God,
according to Ireneaeus, in the universal world. A true victime undefiled,
which the Bishop daily offering for his own and the peoples sins, ought to
abstain, as S Hierome writes, from the company of his wife. An holy victime
which dispensed from the Altar, as S. Augustine confesses, cancelleth the
handwriting, which was contrary unto us. True Chalices which contain the
Blood of Christ, which to break or profane, is heinous sacrilege, Optatus
against Parmenian. True Altars, such as take their name of the most pure, and
unbloody sacrifice, S. Gregory Nazianzen. Such as are consecrated with the
character of the Cross, S. Augustine. Such as by nature being common stones,
by blessing are made holy, immaculate, no longer to be handled by all sorts of
people, but only of Priests, S. Gregory Nissen. Such as Moses inhibited to be
made in any Land, but in Jury only, and that in one City thereof, Eusebius.
Which cannot be understood of the Spiritual Altars of our hearts, as our
Adversaries would shift of the matter. True Priests anointed to this end, S.
Gregory Nissen. Wedded to perpetual continency, because it only belongs to
them to offer this sacrifice, Origin. Whose immaculate ministry cannot be
violated with carnal marriage, S. Ambrose. Who ought to shine with all kind of
Chastity, S. Chrysostom: Rare privileges not appertaining to any Protestant,
much less to all Christians, whom M. Reynolds installeth in Priestly dignity,
least of all to the Ministers of his Ghospel, to whom he attributes not the
true name of a Sacrifycing Priest, which is (...); in Greek, Sacerdos in
Latin, but improperly only: yet S. Augustine, the most Aug. l. 20. deciu. Dei.
c. 10. Calvin l. 3. Insti. c. 3.. 10. ad Heb. 5. v. 1. Re^. p 477 Psalm. 109. 4
ad Heb. 7. Bills. 4. par. page 702. Sparks locis citatis Cyp. l 3. ep. 2. Prima.
in com. c. 5. ad Heb. Genesis 14. Bills. 4. par. page 702. Clem. Alex l. 4. strom.
Amb. l. 5. de Sacram. cap. 1. Cypr. l. 2. epist. 3. Aug. ep. 95. ad Innocen.
^fido. l. de voc. Genesis cap. 26. Iero. ep. ad Marcel. and ad Euag.
faithful witness of all antiquity (as Calvin reports him) purposely says:
The Priests and Bishops of our Church, are (not improperly but) properly called
Sacerdotes, sacrifycing Priests: And S. Paul teaches, That every Priest or
Bishop is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. To conclude then, whereas M.
Reynoldes himself is feign to yield: That these things are linked by nature
in relation, and mutual dependence (as I may say) one of the other, the Altar,
the Sacrifice, and the Sacrifycers; seeing I have already proved that we have
true, and real Altars, true and proper Priests, he cannot deny us, without
open shame and contradiction, a true, real, and proper Sacrifice.

12. If we look into the old Law, we shall find that King David, in the
fervor of his Prophetical spirit speaks of Christ: Thou art a Priest for
ever according to the order of Melchisedech; which S. Paul often repeateth. But
what was the order of Melchisedechs Priesthood? Wherein was he a figure and
type of Christ? M. Bilson recounteth certain prerogatives: S. Paul mentions
yet no privilege, no act of Priesthood, no sign or show of Sacrifice
properly belonging to any Priest. But S. Cyprian, and Primasius wisely tell us:
That the singularity of his order consisted in offering, not the blood of brute
beasts, but Bread and Wine. As the holy Ghost also in Genesis witnesses:
Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, for he was the Priest
of the most high: Or, and he was the Priest of the most high, agreeable to the
Greek and Hebrew copyes, where both the causall conjunction ( for) as
Copulative (and) of necessity enforce that he brought forth bread and wine as a
Priest to offer them unto God. And therein the Fathers affirm against M.
Bilson; That he figured and resembled our Saviors oblation of the holy
Eucharist; S. Clemens of Alexandria, S. Ambrose, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine,
Isidorus, S. Hierome, cyting to the same purpose many others. S. Cyprians words
are these: Our Lord Jesus Christ offered a sacrifice to God the Father, Chrysostom
hom 60. ad pop. Nos ministrorum tenemus locum: qui vero sanctificat ea and
immutat, ipse est. Arno. in Psalm. 109. Lact. l. 4. Inst. ca. 14. Prima. in com.
cap. 5. ep. ad Heb. Epiph. haer 55. Aug. in Psalm. 109. ep. 95. ad Inno. l. ^.
con. ad. le. and prophe. c. 20. Oecum. in cap. 5. ad Hebr.
and offered the same that Melchisedech did, that is, Bread and Wine, to wit,
his Body and blood.

13. Moreover Christ is not only called a Priest according to the peculiar
rank of Melchisedech, and therefore must offer a peculiar Sacrifice proper to
his order, and different from others, but he is termed also in this kind a
Priest for ever. So that herein he continues both the dignity and function of
his eternal Priesthood, because here, by his commandment, by his authority,
by his special concurrence with the Priests and Prelates of his Church, he
incessantly offers unto his Father his own body and blood, under the forms
of Melchisedechs Sacrifice. For as in the administration of other Sacraments he
is the chief and principal Agent, when we baptize: Ipse est qui bap^zat. He
is he that bap^izeth, says S. John: when we ordain or consecrate Priests, he
is he who consecrateth them: In like manner when we celebrate Mass, he is he,
who inuisibly celebrateth, he is the chief high priest, and we his Ministers;
he the true and supreme Bishop, and we the Suffragans or Substitutes, who
supply his room. We may then undoubtedly infer with Arnobius, Lactantius,
Primasius, Epiphanius, S. Augustine: That the eternity of Christ's Priesthood,
according to the singular order of Melchisedech, still perseuereth in the true
Oblation of his body and blood made at the Altar, and offered now in all parts
of the world. And if we examine the learned Protestant, what else can he assign
in which Christ does exercise at this time the proper act of his never ending
Priesthood? The Sacrifice of the Cross? That remains not, and in respect of
that Oblation and Host once offered, as Oecumenius notes, he cannot be called
a Priest for ever. The prayer and intercession he makes for us above? But this
is not any peculiar and proper act of Priesthood, much less of any
determinate and particular order. The virtue and efficacy of his bloody
Sacrifice, which he still offers and represents to his Father? But if this
everlasting effect disappoint the new Law of all proper Sacrifices, it should
by the same reason have frustrated Act. 4. v. 12.
the old. For there is no other name under heaven given to men in which we
ought to be saved; No other virtue by which our forefathers were sanctified,
then the death of Christ. Again, this representation which our Savior makes
of his Passion in the sight of his Father, is no such Sacrifice whereby he may
either challenge the name, or reserve the office of an everlasting Priest. Or if
it be any such (besides that you applaud the Real Sacrifice in heaven, which
in earth you detest) seeing this is only exercised among Angels above, and no
act of Priesthood perseuereth amongst men; no kingdom of Christ's Church, no
Commonwealth of his people, no law of Christianity now flourishes upon earth,
but is utterly disanulled, extinguished, and altogether translated to the
Court of heaven, according to that of S. Paul: Priesthood being translated,
Heb* 7. v. 12.
it is necessary also a translation of the Law be made.

14. Now if Christian hearts can never subscribe to these impietyes, if we must
of necessity grant that God has ever some Church, some inheritance, some
chosen Isa. 19. v. 21. Prou. 9. 1. Dan. 11. v. 31. Psalm. 17. 16. Hier. in
Psalm. 71.
people upon earth; we must needs allow some visible, outward, and proper law
by which, as his peculiar flock, they appertain unto him, and are combined in
mutual fellowship and society together. If a Law, a Priesthood; if a
Priesthood, a Sacrifice; if a Sacrifice, what other then this which Isay
foresaw? The Egyptians shall know their Lord in that day, and worship him in
Hosts and gifts etc. And there shall be the Altar of our Lord in the midst of
Egypt. Salomo^ shaddowed: Wisdom has built an house, imolated rictimes,
mingled wine etc. Daniel mentioned, calling it the, Daily Sacrifice which
Antichrist shall deface and abrogate, at least in public. King David
specifyed: There shall be a sirmament in the earth upon the tops of Mountains:
Where S. Hierome expounds, Firmament, Memorable wheat. The Caldaicall
translation: Supersubstantiall bread. The learned Hebricians commonly
interpret Placentam tritici, A The Hebrew word Pissathbar, signifies a Cake
of wheat, as Reuelinus says*
Cake of wheat, substantial Bread, or a sacrifice of Bread. So Rabbi Solomon:
There shall be a Cake of wheat in the earth, in the Rab. Saloin ^sa. 72. Rab.
Achilas in ^unde^ locum. Rab. Iona. l. col. in Psalm. 72. Read Gal. l. 10. de
area. cap. 4. 5. 6. 7. Mal. 1. v. 11. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 4. Bills. 4. par page
695. Alan. de Euch. Sa^. lib. 3. c. 5.
tops of mountains. Rabi Achilas: There shall be substantial Bread in the
earth, in the heads of Mountains. And Rabbi Ionathas: The Cake of Bread shall be
made a sacrifice on the heads of Priests, which are in the Church. A plain
description of our sacred Host, which under the forms of bread our Priests
reverently lift above their heads to show unto the people.

15. Malachy also most plainly prophesyeth of this unspotted sacrifice, saying:
From the rising of the sun, even to the setting, my name is great amongst
Gentiles. In every place there is sacrifyced and offered unto my name a clean
Oblation. This testimony so clear M. Reynoldes, and M. Bilson hide and
ouercast with the misty construction of spiritual sacrifices; which cloud
Cardinal Allen our famous Countryman with many reasons unanswerable, and
authorityes of Fathers irrefragable strongly rep^^^^th, and dissolueth wholly.
First, because spiritual sacrifices are many: this one. Secondly, they
succeeded not the offerings of the old Law: this does. Thirdly, they common to
the Jews: this proper to the Gentiles. Fourthly, they are named in Scripture
with addition or limitation, as the Sacrifice of Praise, of Justice, of
Contrition etc. this without any abridging term is said to be sacrifyced, to
be offered in true and proper sense, as the Hebrew word in that place
manifestly proves, where instead of Oblatio, it is Minchah, which always
signifies a proper Sacrifice, or gift of homage, and is never taken in
Scripture for an improper Oblation, such as prayers and other spiritual good
deeds are. Fifthly, they even our best and purest works in the erroneous
persuasion of our Adversaries, are soul and defiled in the sight of God,
tainted with the corruption of our sinful Natures: this so fair as the
Prophet honors it with the Epithe^e of A clean Oblation, so pleasing to God
as he glorifyeth in it above all the Hosts, and Holocausts of the Leuiticall
Law.

16. M. Reynolds albeit he ouerflorish the former reasons Reyn. c. 8. diuis 4.
p. 527.
with some show of answer; yet here in this last, he sticks so pitifully
grauelled, as one while he avouches, our best deeds not to be unclean things,
but vnperfect^y clean, defiled with the staynes of uncleanness, uillingly, yet
weakly done, less perfect, not absolutely vnpersect. And in the page
notwithstanding immediately before he grants them so faulty, as they
transgress the Commandments of God: so muddy, as they make us guilty of the
whole breach of the law. What Reyn. Ibid. 526.
strange Paradoxes? What positions be these? Who did ever hear of a work in it
self unclean, taught to be stained with the remnant of uncleanness? A die wholly
black said to be colored with the spots of blackness? For of what uncleanness
do we speak, but of that spiritual uncleanness, which is displeasing unto God?
Wherefore if the spots with which our holiest actions are infected, be not
venial (as your selves say) but mortal and deadly crimes, if they be such
deep transgressions, As they make us guilty of the whole breach of the law;
They are not weakly, but wickedly done; not imperfectly fair, but absolutely
soul; not partly festered, but wholly cankered with the contagion of sin,
worthy to be hated, unworthy to be practiced, far unworthy ( M. Reynolds) to
betoken that clean Oblation, which cannot receive the least taint of Chrysostom. in
com. Ps. 95. Eus. de demons. l. 1. c. 9. prop. fin. etc. 6. circa medium. Calu.
l. de ver. Eccles. refor. ^irca medium habetur ille liber inter eius tract.
theo. Iren. Athan. Ambros. Augu. and Arnobius prove out of Scripture the
Sacrifice of the Mass as Calvin confesses See Baron. in Annal. an. Christi.
44 nu. 28. Bed. l. 4. bist. c. 14. Abdias in bist. eius. Philact. ex lit.
Praesb. Acha. S. Athan: S. Basil. S. Chrysostom. in their litur. Cyp Ep... extat
haec S. Cornel. Ep. com. 1. ^ibl. Sanct. Conc. Vas. 2. cap. 3. Plin. l. 3, c 4.
and Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 10. In eodem. Council. Vasens. 2. c. 4.
corruption, not from it self, not from the impurity of the ungracious
Minister. Such is the divine, dreadful and most holy Sacrifice of the Mass,
to which only the Prophet alludeth as the Fathersteach.

17. S. Chrysostom citing these words of Malachy says: Behold how
excellently, how perspicuously he has set forth, and describes the Mystical
Table, which is the unbloody Host. Eusebius alleging the same place adds:
We sacrifice after a new mammer according to the new Testament, a pure Host,
for which he declares there a new law to be ueedfull, Altars to be erected not
in Jury only, but in every Country. S. Irenaeus I need not produce, because
Calvin the chief Patriarch and pillar of Protestancy acknowledges him to
expound this passage of the Sacrifice of the Mass, as S. Athanasius, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, Arnobius likewise do (according to him) the former of
Melchisedech; by his words you may guess of his intemperate spirit, therefore I
here insert them: It is usual with these knaves (so the foule-mouthed
Runnegate miscalleth our Catholic writers) to scrape together whatsoever is
unsound or corrupted in the Fathers etc. Wherefore when they object the place
of Malachie, to be expounded of the Sacrifice of the Mass by Irenaeus, the
oblation of Melchisedech to be so handled by Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine,
Arnobius, it is briefly answered, those self same writers otherwhere also
interpret the bread to be the body of Christ, but so ridiculously, that both
reason and truth makes me dissent. If this be to refute and not confirm our
doctrine, let the Reader judge, when such and so many substantial witnesses,
some within the 3. some within the 4. all within the 5. hundred years after
Christ, are confessed by one of the chiefest Protosectaries of our time to
mantain in two fundame^tal points, the same which we defend, with whom the
Apostles themselves, and Pastors of the Church in all ages have agreed.

18. For did not S. Peter, as the ancient authentical tradition delivers say
Mass as Naples? Did not he and S. Paul both appeering to an holy man of our
Country, command Masses to be said in the feast of S. Oswald our virtuous King,
as venerable Bede reports? Was not S. Matthew barbarously slain Sacrificing
at the Altar? Did not S. Andrew say Mass? S. James, did not he write a Li^urgy
or Mass? S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, did they not compose the
like? Did not the Priests in S. Cyprians time say Mass in prison? Does not
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, complain, the presecution was so cruel in his time
above 254. years after Chist, that they could not say Masses neither in
public, nor in the private grottes and caves under ground? Was it not decreed
in the second provincial Council of Vase a town in France (whereof Pliny and
Ptolemy make mention) celebrated the year of our Lord 444. that Kyrie eleison,
should be said at Mass, in the Churches of France, as it had been long before
sweetly song in the East, and in all the Provinces Council. Cart. 2. c. 3. Conc.
Agath cap. 47 Conc. Calc. act. 3. S. Cyril. cat. mist. 5. S. Amb. l. 5. epist.
33. Greg. l. 7. Ep. 63. and l. 12. Ep. 15. Bed. l. 1. hist. ^^cles. cap. 19.
Aug l. 10. conf^ss. c. 1^. ^o. l. 22. de Ciui. Dei cap. 8. Chrysostom. l. 6. de
Sacer. Bills. 4. par page 993. Calvin de coen. ^ni. the like he has lib de v^ra
Eccles. refor. and in cap. 7. ad Heb. Magdeb. C^nt. 2. c. Io. col. 107 and
Cent. ^. c. 4 col. 63. Cent. 3. c. 4. and 5. M^lanct. l. 4 Chro^i^ Henr. 4.
of Italy? Was it not there further enacted, that the thrice sacred Anthymne
Holy, Holy, should be repeated in morning Masses, in the Masses of Lent, or in
such as were offered for the dead, as it was accustomed to be in solemue
Masses? Is not our Sacrifice of the Mass, or vnbloudly Host mentioned also in
the second Council of Carthage, of Agatho, of Chalcedon, and in many others?
Did not S. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem, S. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, S.
Gregory the great Pope of Rome, did they not say Mass?

19. And the same S. Gregory, did he not send all Priestly ornaments to S.
Austen our Apostle? Did not S. Augustine likewise the Doctor say Mass? Did he
not in treat others to do the same for his fathers and mothers soul? And
which is more, does he not write of a Priest of his who sacrificed the Body of
our Lord in a house infected with evil Spirits, and the infestation ceased?
Does not S. Chrysostom teach: That the Angels themselves with reverence
assist our sacrificing Priest, in honor of him that is offered on the Altar?
Which makes me wonder how M. Bilson should ouershoot himself so far as to
avouch: That for twelve hundred years after Christ our Sacrifice was not
known to the world. Was he so little conversant, I will not say in these
learned Fathers, but in the Century-writers his Companions, in Calvin his
Coronell, in Melancthon and other his Protestant Peers, as not to know, what
they had written in this behalf? Or was he so bold, as against us, against
them all to broach this stander? Calvin says: It is well known the olf
Fathers called the Supper a Sacrifice etc. Neither can I excuse the custom of
the ancient Church, for that with gesture and outward rite, they did set forth
a certain form of Sacrifice with the same ceremonies in a manner that were
practiced in the old law, save that they used the Host of bread in lieu of a
beast.

20. The Century-writers blame Ignatius the scholar of the Apostles, Irenaeus,
S. Cyprian, Tertullian, and diverse others in all ages, within the compass M.
Bilson speci^yeth, for the like. Melancthon writes of S. Gregory the First,
who lived about the 600. year of our Lord: He allowed (says he) by public
authority the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, not only for the living but
also for the dead. M. Bale Bale in his Pageans sal. 27. Fulk in his confut. of
Purgat. p. 264. and 265. etc. Beacon in his Treat. entitled The relics of
Rome sol. 344. Luth. l. de cap. Baby. and l. de abrog. Missae
auerreth of S. Leo the first, who flourished about 440. years after Christ: He
allowed the sacrifice of the Mass, not without great blasphemy to God. M.
Fulke reprehendeth Tertullian for the same. M. Beacon concludes: The Mass was
begotten, concea^ed, and borne auone after the Apostles time, if all be true
that Historiographers write. So as it was the badnes only I suppose of M.
Bilsons cause, which made him bolster that foul report.

21. Yet I will examine, what he, and his associates pretend against us: The
Eucharist (say they) is a Sacrament which we receive from God, therefore it
cannot be likewise a Sacrifice we offer to God, because it implies, the same
thing should be both offered and received. I answer, that one and the self
same thing diversely considered, may be both offered and received, proceed from
us and be given to us, be a sacrament and a sacrifice. And so the holy
Eucharist is a Sacrament imparted unto us, in that it is a sign of inisible
grace ordained by God to nourish our souls with heavenly food. It is a
sacrifice offered unto God, in that this sign or gift consecrated with sacred
Ceremony is surrendered unto him in acknowledgment of his highest Majesty, in
protestation of our lowest duty and allegiance. In this sense Cyp. ser. de
^^n. Dom.
it is called by S. Cyprian: Medicamentum simul and Holocaustu^: Both a
medicine and a sacrifice. A medicine to heal our spiritual infirmityes: A
sacrifice to appease the wrath of God: A medicine composed by him for the
behoof of us: A 1. Para. 29. v. 14.
sacrifice offered and consumed by us in honor of him. This the Prophet David
rightly observed: when he said: All things, O Lord, are thine, and the things
we have received from thy hand, we have restored unto thee. Thus we offer our
spiritual Hosts, as S. Peter exhorts, we offer unto God ^. Pet. 2. ^ers. 5.
Iac. 1. v. ^7.
the Sacrifice of prayer, of praise, of thankefulnes etc. and yet they are all
merciful gifts, Descending from above, from the Father of Lights, from whom
every good motion and thought proceeds.

22. The second and chiefest bulwark which M. ^eynolds, M. Bilson, M. Sparks
raise to batter the Forr of our Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 4. p. 474. Bills. 4. par page
695. Spark. pa. 7. and 23. and sequen. Haeb 10 v. 12. and 14. and v. 18. and ad
Heb. c. 9. v. 28.
blessed Sacrifice, is; that S. Paul often inculcateth to the Hebrews: How
Christ by one Host, one Oblation once offered, redeemed us all. How Christ was
once offered to exhaust the sins of many. I grant that he was only once
bloudily sacrifyced in his proper form and shape; yet vnbloudily,
sacramentally, covered under the veiles of his creatures, he is daily offered
upon the Altar of his Church. Which S. Paul impugneth not, but only the
iteration of the former bloody, as may be gathered out of the drift and scope
of his discourse in that epistle to the Hebrews.

23. Secondly I answer, that S. Paul speaks of the chief, general, and
ransoming Host, of the full redeeming Heb. 10. v. 14.
sacrifice: Which once perfected on the Cross, consumated for ever them that
are sanctified. Yet it is nothing repugnant, but altogether correspondent
heereunto, that we should likewise have our particular Oblation to communicate
the privileges of that universal. For so all general Melchior Canus l. 12.
de lo. Theo. c. 12. 1. Tim. 2. v. 4.
causes, as Melchior Canus notes, are determined and restrained by their
particulers. The Sun is the general cause of light, yet we receive the
benefit thereof by many several and particular illuminations. The will of God
is the general cause of man's salvation: God will have all men to be saved: yet
besides that will, sufficient for their salvation, he must have a determinate
and special will for the saving of this, or that man in particular. The same I
auow in our present case. But M. Reynoldes replyeth: Reyn. page 463. in his
confe. with M. Hor^. Heb. 10. v. 18. and 26.
That there is not left an offering for sin, after the death of Christ. I
answer with the same forenamed Canus, that as Almighty God, having once
created the universal cause of light, need not produce a new Sun, Moon, or
Stars; as a Physician having made one general and during medicine to heal
all kind of diseases, never needs to devise any other: In like manner our
merciful Redeemer, who offered one perfect and superaboundant ranfome, by
which he defrayed the whole debt of sin, has no necessity at all to make the
like purchase any more. Which S. Paul mentions, when he says: There is not
left an offering for sin; to wit, any general offering, by which the debt of
sin should be discharged a new* Notwithstanding, as in the former examples
the Sun uses diverse succeeding illuminations, by which every Coast of the
world partaketh his light: as the Physician composeth sundry potions, to
minister unto his Patients the virtue of his sole and single medicine: after
the same manner the church of God makes many proper and peculiar Oblations, to
accomodate unto our several necessityes the sovereign fruit of that one and
principal sacrifice. We see that when the King grants a general pardon to
all guilty persons, it seldom avails any particular offender, except he sue
it forth out of the Court of Chancery, under the seal and warrant of his
Majesty: no less can that great Charter of pardon, which Christ vouchsafed to
purchased by his death, be beneficial unto us except we receive it under his
seal and signet, that is, according to his commandment, from such Officers as
he ordained to offer and dispense his heavenly blessings. Neither may we justly
be censured by this means partial redeemers or sauers of our selves, or
concur any more to our own salvation, then the Fellon concurreth to acquit
himself of his fellonyes, who sueth forth the pardon his King promulgated: Or
the sick person to the recovery of his health, who drinks the potion his his
Physician tempereth.

24. Thirdly, our Adversaries object: That the often iteration of the Jewish
Sacrifice, the continual succession and multiplication Reyn. in his Confer.
with M. Heart. c. 9. diuis. 4. Sparks in answer to M. John d'Albins.
of their Priests, bewrayed both the infirmity of the one, and defect of the
other. Wherefore if we daily repeat the sacrifice of the Cross, we profane
(says M. Reynolds) the blood of Christ. If we ordain and multiply our
Priests, we abase (says Master Sparks) the prerogative, or impeach the
sunction of Christ's priesthood. I answer, that the multitude of old Priests
was a note of imperfection, for that even the chief of them were many in
equal dignity succeeding one another, who neither by themselves (being
sinners) nor by the sanctity of any of their order, whose room they supplied,
were sufficiently gracious unto God. But the Priests of the new Law, as they
are all united amongst themselves in the same deputation and ministry: so they
have not many but one chief, they all depend of one holy and impolluted head
Christ Jesus, to whom they are not (as M. Sparks mistaketh) any successors,
but Sparks p. 7. 9. 23.
Deputyes and Viceregents, dispensers of his holy Mysteryes. And therefore
neither can the diversity of their persons, or multitude of such Ministers
import any want or defect in the eternal Priest or Bishop of our souls, when
as by them he no way loses or surceaseth, but still continues, not according
to their imperfection, but according to his own excellency, the sacred office
of his everlasting Priesthood.

25. In like manner to the other branch of their objection, I yield that the
variety of the Leuiticall Hosts bewrayed their weakness, because the Jews had
neither any holy and innocent Priest by whom they had access unto God, nor
any Host pure and unspotted: Which caused them to offer diverse poor, distinct,
and naked Elements, shadows of things to come, an evident sign of the
unprofitableness of the Law. But we do not so, we have one only Host, holy
and undefiled, this we soly sacrifice unto God. We offer not, as S. Ambrose
testifyeth, Ambr. in c. 10. ad. Haebr.
now one lamb, to morrow another, but always the self same thing etc. One
Christ in every place, here whole, and there whole, one body. Not another
sacrifice, says S. Chrysostom, as the Chrysostom. hom. 17. in epist. ad Haeb.
Sparks in the places aforenamed.
high Priest of the old law, but the self same we do always offer. Neither is
this repeated again, as though Christ had not offered it well enough (as M.
Sparks still cauilleth) neither to purchase any new price of Redemption (as
others contend) but only to dispense and apply the treasures of his mercy once
purchased for us. In which we do derogate no more from the high prehemine^ce of
that saving Host, then we detract from the absolute and general pardon of our
Prince, when by diverse Notaryes it is copied forth for the behoof and benefit
of sundry Malefactors.

26. In fine, as M. Bilson and other Sectaryes allow the Bills 4 par. page 688.
689. etc. Calvin l. 4. Insti. c. 28.
preaching of the word, the sacrament of Baptism, the supper of our Lord, to
be, not only memoryes, but also applications of Christ's bountiful merits,
without any impeachment to his bitter Passion: Why may not we by the same
authority, without any derogation to the Oblation of the Cross, approve our
sacrifice of Mass, both as a lively memorial to express in the neerenesse of
it self the death of Christ, and as an application, conduct, or conueyance to
derive the waters of grace from that ouerflowing fountain of his precious
blood.

27. Another objection M. Bell affoardeth them out of the Epistle to the
Romans: Christ rising again from the Bell in his downfall of Popery 9. p. Romans
6. v. 9
dead, henceforth dies no more. The Papists (says he) tell us a contrary
tale, that he dies every day, yea a thousand times a day in the daily
sacrifyce of their Mass. It is most false that Christ suffers in our
sacrifice, cruel, violent, and injurious death, of which S. Paul there
speaks; he only dies after an hidden, mystical, and impassible manner,
which is not contrary, but agreeable to S. Paul's doctrine, conformable to the
institution of Christ, who commanded us not only to preach, teach or believe,
but to Do that solemn and mystical action, which he performed, of Luc. 22.
consecrating the bread into his body under one kind, and wine into his blood
under another, to represent thereby his body crucified, his blood shed. And
therefore if we exactly scan the powerful and effectual words of
Consecration, which immediately produce no more then they signify, we may
truly auerre that Christ, in this svveet and admirable manner, is here daily
killed and crucified again. For if he were said to be killed in the Apoc. 5.
9. and 138.
imperfect thaddovves, and dark resemblances of the old Law, and termed by
S. John: The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; because the Goats,
Lambs, and other victimes were slain, which obscurely shadowed and resembled
him: how much more truly may he be said to be daily crucified in our dreadful
mystery of the Mass, which is not only a bare and naked figure, but so lively
an Image, so near a Character, such a perfect representation of that on the
Cross, as it is the same body, the same blood, the same Host and Oblation
which there was made. And no difference at all, but that, that was sacrificed
upon the ignominious wood of the Cross, and this upon the hallowed Altar of
the Church. That was all imbrued with blood: this clean from the effusio^ of
blood. That offered by the treacherous hands of the Jews: this by the
anointed hands of the Priests. That in his true, proper, and native shape:
this in a covert, hidden and Sacramental manner. Hereupon S. Cyprian: Cyp.
ep. 63. Pascha. de cons^. did. ^. c. Iteratur. Greg. do Conse. did. 2. c.
Quid sie. and hom. 37. in euan. Aug. de fide ad Petrum c. 19.
The Sacrifice which we offer is the Passion of Christ. Paschasius: Daily
Christ is mystically immolated for us, and the Passion of Christ in mystery is
delivered. S. Gregory: Christ in himself immortally living, dies again in
this mystery. S. Augustine speaking of the carnal Sacrifices of the Leuiticall
Law, and this Commemoratiue of the new: In them, he says, Christ was
foreshewed as to be killed; in this he is showed as killed. The reason hereof
is manifest, because the several substances of bread and wine (as I touched
above) are not directly changed, and transubstantiated into the whole person of
our Savior Christ, as here he lived upon earth, or as he now reigns in
heaven; but the bread into his body apart from the blood, and the wine into his
blood apart from the body. In so much that if nothing else ensued, but that
which the words precisely signify and effectuate, the body should be there
truly dead, deuoid of blood, and the blood truly shed, severed from the body.

28. Notwithstanding all this, we constantly beeleue, that ( per concomitantiam)
as the Deuines term it, or by sequel of all parts each to other, the body of
our Savior is in the Sacrament, as it is in it self: that is, glorious,
immortal, and fully replenished with his precious blood. His blood is likewise
under the other kind as it now existeth, contained in his veins; his veins in
his body, his body conjoined to his soul, his soul and body Hypostatically
united to the Son of God: so that Christ by this sequel or Concomitance, is
here wholly under both kinds, his whole body, his whole blood, his whole soul,
his whole Godhead, his whole manhood. Yea by essential connection of one with
the other, all the persons of the holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

29. O most rare and unspeakable mystery, which M. Bell, M. Reynolds, and
their unhappy Consorts, either blinded with ignorance, or transported with
malice, can Heb. 5. ver. 11.
not conceive! O great and inexplicable speech, which S. Paul thought unfit to
unfold to the Hebrews, feeble in faith, and weak in understanding! And
indeed, it is too deep a point to explain to the itching ears of our
captious Heretics, if the calamity of our times, and importunity of our
Adversaries, did not press us thereunto.

30. Besides these cauils, gathered out of Scripture, M. Bills. 4. p. page 692.
693. 752. Rey. p. 536.
Bilson, and M. Reynolds huddle up certain objections out of the Fathers
writings; as that S. Gregory Nazianzen calls our daily Sacrifice: An Image of
that on the Cross. S: Chrysostom: A sign, a remembrance of Christ's death.
Others say: That Christ is ossered in a Sacrament, in mystery, in memory. Some
term it: A spiritual Sacrifice: A Sacrifice of prayer. S. Augustine: A
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. But how do these sayings infringe our
doctrine? We allow it an Image: yet the truth it self. A sign: yet the thing
signed. An image, in respect of the outward forms: the truth in respect of the
inward substance. A sign in show: the thing it self indeed. We agree with the
Fathers: That Christ is offered in a Sacrament, in mystery etc. in regard of
the visible elements and outward representation, as I have already declared, we
call the Mass, A spiritual Sacrifice, A Sacrifice, A Sacrifice of Prayer: for
that it is made with blessing, and prayer mystical; for that the manner of
consecrating this victime is not gross, carnal, and sensibly bloody, as the
Jewish victimes were, but clean, spiritual, and unbloody. Unbloody in
Sacrification, in substance bloody, Aug. con. lit. Petil. l. 2. ca. 86 ^
Tertul. ad Mar. li. 4. Iren. l. 4: ca. 33. and 34.
the manner spiritual, the thing corporal. We subscribe to S. Augustine,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, and the rest: That it is a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving; because hereby God is highly praised, abundant thanks are
surrendered unto him. And whatsoever the old Law with many Hosts and burnt
offerings, nakedly resembled; by our sole and singular Sacrifice is wholly,
honorably, fully accomplished. In which respect we are the true worshippers of
God: Who neither in the Temple of Jerusalem, nor in the mount Garizim, but in
every Coast and Climate of the earth adore the Father of Heaven, according of
our Saviors prophecy, in spirit and truth. He says in spirit, by reason of
the life and spirit of God, which our Host contains: Joan. 4. 23.
In truth, because it is indeed the truth it self, the true body of Christ,
which the figures of the old Law shadowed and resembled. Or he adds in
spirit, not to debar us from all external Sacrifices, or outward ceremonies
(as Calvin misconstrueth the word) but to exclude the gross and corporal
victimes of the Jews, as S. Chrysostom Calvin in his Com. upon this place.
Chrysostom. and Euthy. upon this place. Amb. de Spi. l. 3. ca. 11. Cyr. in Io. l. 2.
ca. 93.
and Euthymius expound this place; In truth, to oppose it against the false and
unlawful worship of the Samaritans; which is the interpretation of S. Ambrose,
S. Cyril, and Theophilact.

31. And this is sufficient to clear the Fathers, sufficient, if not to stop
the mouth of clamous Adversaries, yet to quiet the minds of indifferent
Readers, sufficient to acquit our Sacrifice from calumny, our selves from
Idolatry, our Priests from injury, and incroachment upon Christ's
incommunicable right, in their immaculate and daily immolation of his body and
blood.

THE FIFTH CONTROVERSY. WHERE IN The Communion under one kind, is defended,
against D. Bilson, D. Fulke, and all other Protestants.
CHAP. I.
THe late Nouellists of our time, not contented to impugn our Sacrament,
control our Sacrifice; eagerly also inueigh against our manner of Communion.
Amongst whom, a chief Ensigne-bearer M. Thomas Bilson, condemns Bills. 4.
Par page 684. and 685. of Christian subjection. Fulk in bis answer to the
Rhem. Test. in ^. 6.10. sect. 12.
it, as mangled, broken, and imperfect. He presumes to say: That we chase the
people from the Cup of their salvation: from the Communion of Christ's blood,
and fellowship of his holy spirit. D. Fulke avouches: The Chapter of Trent (so
he scornefully terms that Venerable Council) vainly goes about to prove
that one half of the Sacrament is not necessary. But they purposly
misconstrue, or ignorantly mistake the truth of our doctrine. For if they knew
that under the forms of bread alone, or wine alone, and that in every part and
parcel of them the whole body of Christ, and all his precious blood is
contained Conc. Triden. se^. 13. cap. 13.
(as we with that sacred Council mantaine) they must needs believe, that he
who enjoys the least particle of either kind, receaueth not a mangled or
imperfect, but an absolute, complete, entire and perfect Sacrament, the true
Author and giver of life, the whole refection of Christ's body and blood. And
whereas more then the whole, more then all, none can expect, he that partaketh
the least portion is no way defrauded, but abundantly replenished with
whatsoever he can desire. Secondly we teach, that not only the entire
Sacrament, and total substance thereof, but the whole fruit, grace, and
virtue, Conc. Triden. sell. 21, cap 3. Joan. 6. 1. Cor. 10. Ira^. l. 4. cont.
haer. cap. 34. Hilar. l. 8. de Trinit. Greg. Niss. orat. cate. c. 36. 37. Cyr.
lib. 10. and 11. in Joan.
which proceeds from both kinds together, is fully also exhibited under one
alone. For which cause our Blessed Savior attributes the same effect and life
of our souls to one, as he does to both, speaking only of the bread, he says:
This is the Bread descending from heaven, that if any eat of it he may not
dye. Again: He that eats this Bread shall live for ever. And S. Paul: He
that eats the Host, is partaker of the Altar. Which S. Irenaus, S. Hilary, S.
Gregory Nissen, S. Cyril of Alexandria very notably confirm in sundry places.

2. Hence it follows that the Priest receaueth not any more benefit by both
kinds then the people by one. For albeit the Chalice by it self be both the
well and conduit of grace: yet taken at the same time with the body, it infuseth
no more then was enjoyed before: Every particle of a divided Host, every drop
of the Chalice is a maine Ocean of spiritual blessings: yet many of them by
the same moral action successively received, affoard no more grace then one
alone, because that one instilleth the whole fountain it self which cannot at
that time be further increased, or produced a new. In the mystery of the Holy
Trinity we believe the same; we believe the understanding of the Son to be
alike fruitful and powerful as the understanding of the Father: yet it
begets not any Image of it self, any word of the mind, because the true and
consubstantiall Image, the eternal and perfect word of the understanding is
already begotten. So in earthly things, where the burning lamp once casts
his clearest beams of light, although it shines still, it enlightneth no
more. Where the fire has inkindled all degrees of heat, although it works
still, it can heat no more. In the Holy Sacraments we find the like. When the
Character of Baptism is once imprinted, let the child be baptized again, it
cannot be imprinted anew. When the body of Christ is once consecrated under the
forms of Bread, let the words be repeated, it cannot be consecrated again.
After the same manner in our Communion, when the full and plenteous refection
of our soul with the whole Body and blood of Christ is by any parcel of
either element perfectly accomplished, let new Hosts be imparted, let another
element be applied, as long as the former heavenly repast morally nourishes
and remains, we cannot be fed anew, or be more daintily refreshed. Why then
(say you) do the Priests communicate under both kinds? I answer; Not to
partake more abundantly the virtue of the Sacrament, but more perfectly to
represent the Passion of Christ, the inregrity of his Sacrifice, the violent
separation of his body and blood, which is most lively signified (as I have
already declared) by the several consecration, and separate consumption of
distinct and diverse elements.

3. But Christ (says M. Fulke instituted both kinds: the Apostles ministered
the Sacrament in both indifferently to all. Our Savior (says M. Bilson)
commanded the Chalice to be M. Fulke in c. 6. 10. Bills. 4. par page 679.
drunk of the people, a^ well as of the Priests, when he said: Drink ye all
of this. What? Was this spoken to all universally? Was it spoken to Jews,
Turks, and Infidels? Was it spoken to Infants, to whom the Protestants
themselves do not minister the Cup? No. It was spoken only to them that sat
down at supper with Christ, to them to whom before he brake and distributed
the forms of bread, to them to whom he reached the Chalice; to them, who
after song the Hymn, and went into the mount O^iuet with him, to them to
whom he said: All you shall be sca^dalized in me this night. But these only were
the Marc. cap. 14.
Apostles of Christ, as the Evangelist witnesses. Therefore to them alone, and
in their persons to all Bishops and Priests their successors it way said:
Drink ye all of this. This history of the institution of the Sacrament, S.
Paul Math. ^6. v. ^8. 1. Cor. 11 V. 23.
delivers to the Corinthians: yet neither commands himself all to drink
of the Chalice, nor avouches any I. Cor. II v. 23.
such ordinance or decree to have been enacted by Christ.

4. M. Bilson presses further: To whom then were these words spoken: Take
ye, eat ye? Not to the self same parties to whom it was said: Drink ye?
If none may drink but Priests Bills. 4. par page ^79.
then by the same logic none should eat but Priests. I answer: that by the
force of that commandment: Take, eat, the Laity are not tied to taste of the
Holy Eucharist (for these words were spoken to the Apostls only) but they are
obliged by the institution of this holy Mystery as a Sacrament necessary to
salvation. They are obliged by those threatening words of Christ: Unless you
eat the flesh of the Joan. 6. (...) 53.
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall have no life in you.

5. He does not here command the manner of eating and drinking, but the
substance of the thing. He does Alexan. 4 par. sum. ^. 53. in I. iuxta edit.
antiquam. Alex. l. 1. Euchar. c. 41.
not say (as our Adversaries would wrest his meaning) unless you eat my flesh
under the shape of bread, and drink my blood under the form of wine: But
unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood, which may be truly performed
under one kind alone. For he that eats the bread is entyrely nourished not
only with the flesh, but with the whole substance of Christ his precious blood;
as certain monks of whom Alexander de Hales, and Cardinal Allan write, were
miraculously instructed by abundance of blood which issued from the signs of
bread, And he that drinks the Chalice is likewise fed with the whole quantity
of our Saviors flesh. And so he that participateth one kind which perfectly
contains the meat Claud in repe. vle. de Eucha. 1. Cor. 3. v. ^. and 9. v. 7
Cyp ser. de coen. Dom. Vvald. to 2 de Saca^. rap. 93. Pasch. l. de Cor. Christi
Aug. l. 3. q in Leuit. cap. 57. Chrysostom. ho. 18. m 2. ad Cor. Bills. 4. par. page
632. S. Igna. ep. ad Philad. Amb. l. de mit. mist. cap. 9. Hier. in c. 2. Mala.
Cyp. ser. de coen. Dom. Toles. in c. 6. Joan. Exodus 22. v. 15. Job. 31. Eze.
13. Psalm. 129. 1. Cor. 11. v. 27. and cap. 10. v. 17.
and drink of both, may truly be said to eat in regard of the one, and drink
in respect of the other. As Claudius Xainctes proves by the authority of many
Fathers, and excellently gathers out of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where the
same milk is termed drink and meat, which S. Cyprian verifyeth of the food
of the holy Eucharist. After the like manner Thomas Waldensis expounds
Paschasius, when by these words: Drink ye all of this, he wills all
faithful belieuers, To drink the Blood that is under the outward accidents
and show of bread. Which is also the meaning of S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom,
and others alleged by M. Bilson, where they say: We are all exhorted to
drink the Blood. And: That the cup is ministered to all. Or they speak of the
use and practice of the Church in their times, as S. Ignatius, S. Ambrose, and
S. Hierome do. Or lastly they speak of the necessity of receiving both kinds
at least by some in the Church, but not by all: As S. Cyprian does when he
says: The l^^ prohibiteth the eating of blood: the Gospel commands it to
be drunk.

6. Otherwise we may auerre with the renowned Cardinal Tolet in that passage
of S. John: Unless you eat etc. and drink his blood: that the Conjunction
(and) is according to the Hebrew phrase, disiunctiuely taken for (or.) As in
Exodus, where the Hebrew text has: He that strikes his Father, and his
Mother, Let him dye: the meaning is, as our vulgar translation interprets and
reads: He that strikes his Father (or) his Mother. The like we find in Job,
Ezechiel, and other places; the like in S. Paul in plain confirmation both of
this exposition and doctrine of the Sacrament. For where some read: Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice our of Lord unworthily, in the
Greek it is ( or drink.) And in the immediate chapter before, where the
ancient latin copies have: We are one bread and one body, all that partake of
one bread, and one Chalice, the Greek only reads, All that partake of one
bread. Because by one kind we receive the true nourishment and perfect
substance of both.

7. Thus we easily put off the force of that argument, but how our Adversaries
will avoid it I know not. For they interpreting S. John's words of the
spiritual eating of Christ's flesh and blood, by faith; I would understand of
them, what difference they make between eating, and drinking. For certes, in
the sole act of faith, there is no difference: no difference in believing his
flesh wounded, from believing his blood shed, in respect of belief: therefore
you neither obey the precept, nor fear the co^mination of Christ: Unless you
eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you shall have no life
in you. Here Christ Joan. 6. v. 53.
commands the real eating, which you renounce; mentions the drinking,
which you have not: the believing which in that place he neither commands
nor mentions, you embrace, and yet you would be the Ghospellers of Christ.
Nevertheless at your importunity, let us leave his words, leave his meaning,
and admit your false construction. Then I propose this question, whether he
that steadfastly belieueth in Christ, the Savior of the world with one firm
assent, without separatly thinking of the wounds of his Body, and effufion of
his blood; does truly fulfill according to you the former precept, and enjoy
the promised life, or not? Without doubt you must grant he does, as our
Savior often avouches, saying: He that belieueth in me has life everlasting,
Joan. 6. v. 47. Joan 3. v. 16. Joan. 11. v. 25.
and every one that belieueth in the Son of God shall not perish etc.
Besides, He that belieueth in me, although he be dead, shall live. Wherefore as
this satisfyeth in the spiritual eating, why should it not also satisfy in the
corporal, by one act and under one kind to receive the author himself, and
price of our redemption, without receiving him twice, by two several acts of
eating, and drinking? Because, you will say, in the corporal, Christ
commands both: and does he not so in the spiritual, supposing you
spiritually expound his words? Or will you say, that in the spiritual eating
of our Redeemer, his death and Passion, and by consequence his body broken, and
blood shed, are inuolued? So say I, that in the corporal teceauing of one kind,
both are not only consequently inuolued, but perfectly contained: and in the
sole act of eating, the other of drinking, is vertually employed. Which this
very passage Joan. 6. v. 57.
ensuing apparently conuinceth: He that eats me, the same also shall live by
me. For what does the word ( me) comprehend, but the whole person of Christ,
his flesh, his blood, his body, his soul, his deity, and whatsoever else
belongs unto him? Therefore he that eats only, eats him, eats and
drinks all.

8. But out of the former sayings of S. John, M. Bilson with his confederates
pick a new quarrel, that the wicked according to us eat Christ, yet dye the
death of sinners, therefore our Savior speaks not of the corporal, but only
of the spiritual eating by faith, by which we perish not, but live for ever. I
answer, that the former sentences and many such like are understood
conditionally, if he eat worthily, and still persevere in that happy state, he
shall live for ever; otherwise if he eat unworthily, he eats, as the Apostle
says, judgment to himself. Joan. 4. v. 13. Marc. 16. v. 16. Joel. 2. v. 32.
So it is said: He that shall drink of the water that I will give him, shall
not thirst for ever: He that belieueth, and is baptized shall be saved: Every
one that shall invoke the name of the Lord, shall be saved; to wit, if he
invoke and call upon him in faith, and charity as he ought; if he believe
aright, and does not finally loose his faith, nor the grace of Baptism, and
water of the holy Ghost once received, as I shall prove hereafter he may.
Therefore this argument of theirs makes no more against the corporal, then
spiritual feeding; for as everlasting life is promised to the faithful and
pious belieuer, so to the real and worthy Receauer: and as the one may fall
from his worthy dignity, so the other make shipwreck of his lively faith, and
eternally perish. Perchance you will object, that this answer suteth not with
the prerogative which our Savior gives to the holy Eucharist, above Manna:
That Joan. 6. v. 49. 50.
the Fathers did eat Manna in the desert, and they dyed, this is the bread
that descends from heaven, that if any man eat of it, he dye not. For
whosoever did worthily feed on that dainty Manna, and continued in the same
state, never tasted the bitterness of spiritual death: therefore according to
this construction, it is not inferior to the blessed Sacrament. I answer
first, that such as then lived for ever, enjoyed not the privileges of life,
by the virtue and force of Manna; but by their love of God and faith in Christ
their true Messiah; and yet they that worthily receive the Eucharist, truly
live by the virtue, power, and efficacy of Christ's real presence, the spring
of life, and fountain of grace therein contained.

9. Secondly I reply, that Christ does not only compare the Eucharist with
Manna, in respect of the life and death of the soul; but of the body also,
after this sort. Manna could not affoard to your Fathers life of body, much
less of soul, during their short passage through the desert. This bread
affoardeth life to the soul, much more to the body during the length of all
eternity. They that eat Manna dyed in body, a temporal death: they that eat
this bread shall not dye the eternal death, neither of the body nor soul. And
herein consists as Maldonate commenteth upon this text, the singular grace,
and elegancy of our Saviors comparison, in passing from Maldonat^ in hunc
loeum. Matt. 8. v. 22. Joan. 4. v. 13.
one kind of life and death to another: which pleasant digression he often
uses, as the same Author discourses in other places. In S. Matthew: Let the
dead bury the dead. The first he calls dead in soul, the next in body. In S.
John: Every one that drinks of this water, shall thirst again: but he that
shall drink of the water, that I will give him, shall not thirst for ever.
First he speaks of the corporal Matt. 26. v. 29.
water, and thirst of the body: then of the spiritual water and thirst of the
soul. Likewise: I will not drink from hence forth of this fruit of the vine
until that day, when I shall drink it with you new, in the kingdom of my
Father. Here he first mentions the natural wine of the grape: then the
metaphorical wine of celestial joys. So now he first speaks of the
corporal, then of the spiritual, and everlasting life, which our Blessed
Sacrament of his own nature yeildeth to all such as daily receive it (although
Manna yielded not as much as the corporal) if they do not after by sin
wilfully destroy the quickening grace and lively seed it imparteth unto them.
And thus the words are of more emphasy, the comparison more pithy, and the
pre-eminence of the Eucharist above Manna more remarkable, then if our Savior
had spoken in both places only of the spiritual. Lastly if our Sectaryes
expound S. John of the eating by faith, how vncongruously will they make S.
Paul to speak, writing of the same matter, and saying: He that eatech
unworthily, which 1. Cor. 11. v. 27.
cannot be properly attributed to the belieuer, because he that belieueth not
as he ought, does either falsely or fainedly believe; we cannot with any
congruity of speech say that he belieueth unworthily; therefore as S. Paul, so
likewise S. John ought to be understood, not of the spiritual, but of the
corporal eating of Christ's sacred flesh.

10. That which M. Bilson alleges out of Gelasius, and S. Leo condemning the
Communion under one kind, Bills* 4. par. page 684. and 685. Gelas. can*
Comperi^us did. 2. Leo. ser. 4. de quadra.
is of no force at all. For they condemn the dry Communion not of the
Catholics, but of the Manichees, who teaching that Christ brought into this
world, and walked upon earth with a mere empty and fantastical body, deuoyd
of true and natural blood; they in testimony of this error abstained from the
blood, and with great sacrilege, as Gel^sius writes, divided one and the
self same mystery: which all Catholics had just cause to reprehend in them,
no Protestant any cause to object against us, who neither divide the mystery,
nor abstain from the blood, but constantly teach, that by fequele and
concomitance, we receive it wholly and entirely; contained in the body, we enjoy
the full participation of Christ, Fulke loco ^itato. Bills. 4. par page 682.
as M. Fulke requires.

11. At last, both he, and D. Bilson jointly oppose the Practice of the
universal Church, which for many ages together* ministered the Sacrament under
both kinds, even to the Laity. I grant that the Church used it as a thing
lawful, not as a Aug. epist 23. ad Bonif. Tolet. Con. cap. 11. Tho. 3. p. q.
80. art. 9. ad 3. Cypr. sermon. de lapsis.
thing prescribed or decreed by God, or universally without exception, in all
times and places practiced. Which manner of receiving, the Church might after
change when her Communica^ts were so many, as wine sufficient could not be
fitly consecrated, nor without eminent peril of shedding, or danger of
abusing, be conveniently ministered. It was an usual custom both in the Greek
and Latin Church, for many ages to communicate with the Chalice young sucking
babes, of which S. Augustine, the x j. Toletan Council, and S. Thomas make
mention. And S. Cyprian writes of the consecrated Blood powered into the mouth
of an Infant. But as the Church upon just cause abrogated that custom, leaving
the children the benefit of neither kind, without any wrong unto them, and
Protestants allow hereof; why write they so bitterly against debarring the
people upon as many important reasons from the use of the Chalice? where
notwithstanding, the whole fruit and benefit thereof to their comfort remains.

12. Besides, in many things you your selves (who count it in us a crime so
damnable) stray from that which Christ practiced, in the institution of the
Sacramen^: for example, Christ communicated only men, you women also: he in a
private house, you in a public Temple: he at night, you in the morning: he
with For the Jews had no other then vnlea^ened bread at that time. Exodus 12.
There shall not be found leanened in your houses. Luc. 24. Aug. l. 3. de consen.
Euang. c. 25. Chry. hom. 17. oper* imperfect. in Matthew. Theoph. in eumlocum.
Beda in i^ loc. Luc. Act. 2. v. 42. and 20. v. 7.
unleavened, you with leauened bread; his Communicants received sitting, yours
kneeling: his after, yours before meat: may you in these points vary from
Christ? and may not we by the ineriable warrant of his Church, alter that which
he has left indifferent unto her? Especially seeing she follows herein the
president of Christ, who ministered the Sacrament under one kind only to the two
Disciples at Emaus, as S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Venerable Bede avouch: the example of the Apostles, who did often the like: the practice
of S. Paul, who at Troi^s, before he fell into danger of Ship-wracke, as S.
Chrysostom teaches, performed the same: the prescription of Chry. hom 17.
oper. imperf. Tertul. l. 2. ^^v^or. Cypr. sermon. de lapsis. Amb. or ^^ de obitu
Saty^i. Basil ep. ad Casar. Euse. lib. 6. bist. c. 36. Pauli^us in vita Ambros.
Amphilo. in vi. Basil. Fulke in c. 6. 10 sect. 11. Conc. Tol. 2. cap. 11.
August. sermon. 252. detemp. and Conc. An^ifiod. cap. 3^. and 38. Ambr. in orat.
de obitu Satyrifratris sui* Basil. ep. ad Caesar* am. Patric. Al^uinus l. de
Offi. Eccles. c. de Paras^eue. Inno. ^ ep. 1. cap. 4. Eusebius. loc. citato. Fulke
vbi supr^.
the ancient Church, which ministered to Children only the blood, reserved most
commonly the body alone, both in private houses, and in Wildernesses for the
Ermites, as Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and S. Basil testify; housled
the sick often under one kind, after which manner Serapion, S. Ambrose, S.
Basil, received their Viaticum lying on their death beds, witness Eusebius,
Paulinus, and Amphilochius.

13. M. Fulke labors to avoid the authorities of these Fathers by two
Sophistical shifts. First by the figure of Synecdoche which takes the part
for the whole: secondly by disgracing the practice S. Tertullian, S. Cyprian,
S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, Eusebius and others record, with the note of a
superstitious custom. Where, on the one side he overthrows himself, he
contradicts on the other those learned writers. He overthrows himself,
calling it a superstitious custom, which must consequently savor of some
point of Popery, conformable to our ancient prescription, and wholly disagreable
to his new invented doctrine. He contradicts those learned Fathers, who
expressly speak of the sole infusio^ of the blood into the mouths of young
sucking babes, or into the mouths of the sick who could not for dryness
receive the body, as it was decreed in the second Toletan Council. Of fine
Linen clothes, called Dominica^^a, provided by devout women to in wrap the
body, unfit to infold the blood. Of a sole particle of the body, which S.
Ambrose his brother enclosed in a Pix and hanged for safeguard about his neck.
Of keeping the body so long in Alexandri^ and Egypt those hot Countries,
where the wine without corruption could not be reserved, nor carried with
safty, nor kept with decency. Of the Custom of the Roman Church, whose Priest
upon Good Friday, many years ago, communicated only under one kind, as
Alcuinus and Innocentius the first ^elate. Of the moisture which was used for
the better swallowing down of the Host, mentioned by Eusebius, altogether
needless if the Cup had been exhibited. Where I desire the Reader to register
the folly of M. Fulke, who affirms the moistened Sacrament, whereof Eusebius
speaks, To be the Cup dropped into the mouth of ^erapion, whereas it was the
body dipped in some profane liquor the easier to swallow down that divine
food. But any Common liquor faithfully received is wholly as good as the wine of
their Table, and therefore he may well entitle it the Cup of his Communion.

14. Not the Fathers only, our Sectaries also: Vrbanus Vrbanus Regius in li. de
locis com. 69. Luther ep. ad Bohemo^ christus, inquit, hac in re nihil t^qua^
necessarium praecepit. Melanct. in Centu. ep. th^o. page 252. Bucer. in Colloq.
Ra^isbon* Jewel in his Reply. p. 110. and 106.
Regius, a Lutheran Doctor confesses, the Sacramont in one kind to have been
ordained in the first Council at Ephesus, about a thousand years before the
Synod of Basil or Constance, for extinguishing Nestorious heresy, who held
the Body without the Blood in the one, the Blood without the Body in the other
kind comprised. Yea M. Luther, the Protestants first Progenitour, and chiefest
Patriarch affirms: That Christ commanded nothing as necessary touching
Communion under one or both kinds. And Melancthon his scholar, and Bucer with
him, accounts it as a matter of indifferency, as many other Protestants do,
whom M. Jewel in his Reply neither reproves or gaine-sayth. And it is strange
the Sacramentaries should begin to plead for the necessity of both, who believe
their bread and wine to be nothing else but outward tokens to stir up their
faith, memory and devotion, which may be far better excited by the sight and
view of the several Hosts which our Priests do offer, then by the
participation of the signs their Ministers exhibit. Or if they will needs taste
of the Cup, we allow our faithful Communicants whatsoever they for their
Sect-mates provide, and the same for which they contend. We minister to our
Laity the wine of the Grape, the dayntiest Nectar of their Communion Table, and
we affoard them besides the precious food of Christ's Body and Blood, a
Celestial banquet infinitely surpassing their poor, profane, and hungry
feast.

15. Go then M. Bilson, go M. Fulke, go you Sectaries, revile and vpbraid us
as transgressors of Christ's commandment: go you their fauoruits, declaime in
your Oratories, and cry out in the Pulpits, that we defraud the people of the
Cup of their salvation, of the Communion of Christ's Blood; Whereas you are
they, who rob them indeed of the sacred Blood and Body also, bereave them of
their spiritual life, and of all the heavenly delights and treasures of their
soul: yielding bare signs and vain figures, in lieu of the divine verities
and real substances our Blessed Savior bequeathed unto them. And we fensed by
Christ, by his Apostles, by the Church, the neuer-erring Spouse of our Lord,
refreshing all with the maine fountain of life, perform it in that manner, as
is most behoofull for time, for place, for Priests, and People.

THE SIXTH CONTROVERSY, CONVINCES The Necessity of Confession, against D.
Sparks, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. 1.
I May fitly compare the Sectaries of our time as S. Gregory Nazianze^ does
that enemy of God, Julian the Apostata, Nazian. orat. 1. in Iulianum. Sparks
in his answer to M. John de Albins page 3. 6. 337. Eu. ke in cap. 20. 10. sect.
5. Kemnitius in Censu ad c. 5. Con^il^ Trident.
to the Camclion. For as he changes himself into all variety of colors but
only white the most true and native color: so our Reformers admit all manner
of Doctrine, and in this present all sorts of Confession, but that which is
most important and beneficial for their souls. 1. They allow the Confession
of sins to God in general. 2. The Confession of some sins in particular to
a learned Minister to receive comfort and direction from him. 3. The Confession
of certain enormo us crimes publicly made in the sight of the congregation,
for their satisfaction and terror of others. 4. The Confession of private
injuries to the party offended to be reconciled to him. But the Confession of
all particular faults to a lawful Priest to receive pardon, and absolution
they utterly disauow. Wherein (to proceed more perspicuously) they chiefly deny
three principal points. First the power in Priests to absolve from sins.
Secondly the necessity of sinners to confess. Thirdly the necessity of
numbering every particular offense. All which notwithstanding I will clearly
deduce out of that sovereign Commission Christ gave to his Apostles, when
breathing upon them he said.

2. Receive ye the holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive they John 20. v. 23.
are forgiven: and whose sins ye retain they are retained. For by this
passage it is evident, that authority is given to the Priests of Gods Church,
not only to preach the Gospel, and denounce retention to the impenitent,
remission to the Sparks P. 323. Fulke. in c. 20. Joan. sect. 4. and 5 Math 28
Mar. 16. Joan. 20.
penitent belieuer, as D. Sparks, D. Fulke with their adherents perfidiously
wrest the words: but absolute power is granted unto them, as the Vicars and
Vicegerents of Christ, truly to remit and pardon sins. 1. Because commission
to preach was given before in S. Matthew and S. Mark. 2. That was extended to
all, Teach all nations: this is restrained to some alone, who submit their
faults to the keys and censure of the Church, Whose sins ye remit etc. 3.
Forgiveness of sins in heaven is not always annexed to the Preachers
exhortation, it is to the absolution of the Priest, if no obstacle hinder it in
the party absolved. 4. The Preachers voice declares on earth what God has
already persormed in heaven: but here quite contrary God ratifieth in heaven
what the Priest by his mynisteriall power pronounces upon earth. The Judgment
Hila. Can 26. in. Mat. Chr^. hom. 5. de verbis Isa. Vidi Dominum.
or sentence on earth (says S. Hilary) goes before that which is given in
heaven. Heaven (says S. Chrysostom borrows principal authority of judging
from the Earth. So as it cannot be the mere vocation to preach, but some other
extraordinary and singular Jurisdiction which our Savior here bequeathed to
his Apostles.

3. A Jurisdiction signified before by the power of keys, which are chiefly
given to magistrates and rulers of Cittyes, not to betoken things already
locked or unlocked, but to open and shut as occasion requires. A Jurisdiction
for the due exercise whereof, the Sacrament (so Aug. l. 2. cont. Parm. c. 13.
Greg. l. 4. Com. in l. Regu^ c. 5. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 19.
) S. Augustine and others term it) of Ordination was instituted, ( Chrysostom.
hom. 85. in Joan. Greg. Niss. ora. de lap. Isa. 44. v. 12. Cyr. lib. 12. c. 56.
in 10. Atha ser. in illaverba Profecti in pagum. Hier ep. ad Hedibi. Bafil.
quaest breuib. inter 288. Leo ep. 91* ad Th^o^. Pacian ep. 1. ad Sym. pro.
Ambr. de poenic. l. x. c. 2. and 7. Chris l. 3. de Sacer.
) Spiritual grace infused, the Holy Ghost purposely imparted, and imparted
after a special manner of insufflation or breathing on them, to denote that
the breath of his Priests pronouncing the words of absolution should disperse
and dissolve the mists of sin, according to that of the Prophet Esaias: I have
disolued like a cloud thy sins. This ceremony then was used to declare the
effect of extinguishing sin: the Holy Ghost was given to manifest the cause
by whom it is abolished. For as S. Cyril says: It is neither absurd nor yet
inconvenient that they forgive sins, who have the Holy Ghost. For when they
pardon or retain sins, the Holy Ghost pardons or retayneth sins by them,
and that they do two ways, by Baptism first, afterward by Penance.

4. Lastly that this rare prerogative granted to Priests was not only by the
mystery of the word to declare, but by the authority of the keys to forgive
sins, many other of the Fathers directly teach; S. Athanasius tearming it:
Power given by our Savior to Paiests to loose sins. S. Hierome, S. Basil, S.
Leo, Pacianus have the like. S. Ambrose expressly proves this authority in
Priests of remitting sins against the Nouatians, cuen over them to whom they
denied the ministry of absolution, albeit they granted the benefit of
preaching. S. Chrysostom extolling the dignity of Priests above Kings, and
Angels, amplifyeth the same after his fashion with this goulden stream of
words: They that inhabit the earth and converse thereon, to them commission is
given to dispense those things that are in heaven. To them that power is
given, which Almighty God would not communicate either to Angel or Archangell.
For to them it is not said, whatsoever ye shall bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven etc. Earthly Princes indeed have also authority to bind, but the bodies
only: but that Sacerdotum vinculum ipsam: e^i im animam contingit, atque ad
caelos vsque peruadit etc.
binding of Priests which I treat of, touches the very soul it self, and
reaches even to the Heavens. In so much as whatsoever the Priests perform
beneath, the very same Almighty God does above: and the sentence Seruoru^
sententiam Dominus confirmat.
of the servant our Lord does confirm. And what is this truly elso, but that
the power of heavenly things is granted by God unto them. Whose sins soever
(says he) ye shall retain they are retained. What power I beseech you can be
greater then this? The Father gave all power to the Son: but I see the same
power, delivered altogether by the Son unto them. Wherefore as Christ had a
special power of pardoning sins distinct from his power of preaching: so had
the Apostles, to whom he gave al power committed unto him, as S. Chrysostom
avouches, and our Savior himself witnesses, when before he imparted this
authority, he mentions his own commission Joan. 20. v. 22.
saying: As my Father sent me, I also send you.

5. The power of Priests to remit sins being thus established: it remains I
declare, how Confession to a Priest, the second point which our Adversaries
deny, is herein employed. M. Fulke says: Neither does it follow of M. Fulke in
c. 20. Io. sect. 5.
any necessity, that men are bound to submit themselves to the Judgment of
Priests, if they have authority to forgive sins. But S. Augustine more
ancient, more holy, more learned then he, is of a contrary mind: Let no man
deceive himself, and say: I do penance secretly, I do it in the sight of God:
God who Aug. 50. bom. bom. 49.
pardons me, knows I do it in my heart. Then without cause was it said:
Those things which you loose on earth shallbe loosed in heaven. Then without
cause were the keys given to the Church of God. Do we frustrate the Gospel?
Do we euacuate the word of Matthew. 18. v. 18. etc. 26. v. 19.
Christ? As though all these things were in vain, if by God alone without the
help and ministry of the Priest our sins could be remitted. For as the
Commandment our Savior gave to his Apostles to baptize, saying: Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them etc. had been wholly in vain, if all men were not
bound to receive the Sacrament Matthew. 28. ^. 19.
of Baptism, if any entrance to Christianity, any badge or cognizance of a
Christian could be obtained without this lauer and regeneration of water, and
the holy Ghost. Again, as the authority he gave them to preach were to little
purpose, if men not sufficiently instructed Marc. 16. v. 15.
were not obliged thereby to give ear to his word: so idle and in vain were
the commission he granted to his Apostles, to retain and forgive sins, if
all who offended after Baptism be not tied to submit and make known their
offenses unto them, which for two several reasons they are bound to do.

6. The first is mentioned by Boethius, If thou desire the Boethius de Consola.
l. 1. prosa. 4.
help of thy Physician, it is requisite thou discover thy disease. But as many
as are swollen with the impostume of sin, ought to seek remedy for the
recovery of their souls. Therefore it is necessary they lay open their soars
to the spiritual Physicians appointed for their cure. The second reason is,
because Priests are made, by the virtue of this Commission not only Physicians,
but spiritual Judges also, to understand the quality and haynousnes of our
crimes, to know what medicinable pe^nance they should apply, to discern what
sins are to be remitted, and Arist. 8. Polit.
what retained. Now seeing Aristotle teaches, and natural reason approves it
to be true: That it is impossible for them to judge discreetly, who have no
knowledge of the case: all that are entangled with the snares of sin must give
notice of them to the Priests tribunal, whom God has placed in
iudgment-seat, to pronounce in his person sentence of absolution.

7. And least any should gainesay, with Calvin, this Nazi. ora. ad Ciues timore
perculsos. Hier. epad Helio. Aug. l. 20. de ciu. Dei cap. 9. Apoc. 20.
judicial power granted to Priests; besides the words of Christ, which
clearly convince it, the authority of the Fathers makes it undeniable. S.
Greg. Nazianze^ auerreth: That the law of Christ has subjected Princes to his
Throne and Empire. S. Hierome says: That Priests having the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, judge as it were before the day of judgment. S. Augustine
upon these words of the Apocalips: I saw seats, and those that sat upon
them, and judgment was given unto them, writes thus: This may not be thought
to be spoken of the last judgment: but by the seats are meant the Rulers
thrones of the Church, and the Persons themselves by whom they are governed.
And for the judgment given them it cannot be better explained then in these
words: Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye
loose on earth, shallbe loosed in Heaven.

8. Hence we infer the exact enumeration of all Sparks p. 329. 330. 331.
grievous crimes, the third point M. Sparks impugneth. For as they that have
many strifs in law to be determined by the examination and sentence of the
Judge, ought to unfold them al in particular to receive his judgment and
verdict of them: so they that are burdened with sundry faults, which be
offenses and iniuryes committed against God, if they will come to an atonement
with him, they must make them all known to such as are ordained to reconcile
them to his favor, to such as participate (to use S. Gregoryes words) the
principality of Divine judgment, Greg. ho. 26. in E^ang.
who in place of God may detain sins to some, release them to others. When a
soldier has received many wounds in war, it is not enough to tell his
Surgeon or Physician in general manner that he is wounded, but he must show
Aug. sermon. 66. de tem.
the several wounds and dangers of them, or else no wise Surgeon will venture
to apply his plasters, or undertake to cure them: even so it is not sufficient
for such as are wounded in Soul with diverse deadly sins, to complain in
general that they are grievous sinners, but they must particulerly specify the
number, quality and haynousnes of every mortal crime, that their spiritual
Physician may thereby discern what wholesome salve, whatsatisfactory penance,
what good counsel and advise he should minister unto them. And therefore S.
Gregory Nyssen says: That as in corporal infirmityes there are sundry kinds
of Nyss epist. ad Episco. Mytil. S. Tho. in Supplem. ad 3. p. q. ^. art. 2.
medicines according to the diversity of diseases: so whereas in the disease of
the soul, there is great variety of affections, sundry sorts of medicinable
cures ought to be adhibited. The reason hereof S. Thomas alleges, because
one disease is more dangerous by the contagion of another, and that medicine
which is wholesome to that, may be noyson to this kind of infirmity. So that by
the approved doctrine of both these learned writers every penitent ought to make
a particular rehearsal of all heinous faults, even of such as be secret and
hidden. To which the same S. Gregory vehemently Nyss. orat. in muliere^
peccatrie. Audacter inquit oste^de illi quaesunt recondita animi arcana,
ta^quam oeculta vulnera medico retege. Hier. super. Mat. cap. 16.
exhorts in another place, that thereby the Priest may be perfectly
acquainted with the whole state of their souls, and understand the manifold
varietyes of their spiritual diseases. For as S. Hierome says: Then the
Bishop or Priest knows who is to be bound, and who is to be loosed, when he
hears the variety of sins.

9. And this manner of confessing all particular offenses is that which Christ
commanded, which the figures of the old Testament betokned, which the Apostles
mentioned, and which in all succeeding ages has been devoutly observed in the
Church of God. Touching Christ's commandment I have already showed that it is
impossible for Priests to pronounce judicial sentence, impossible to apply
sovereign medicines, impossible to know what they should loose, what retain,
and consequently this Commission bootles, unless the Penitent were bound
distinctly to name his sins unto him. Concerning the figures, I let pass the
confession God exacted of Adam, of Eve, of Cain, by which Tertullian, S.
Ambrose and others confirm Genesis 3. and 4. Tertul. l. 2. ad Mar. Amb. l. de
para. c. 14 and l 2. de Cain and Abel c. 9. Chrysostom. l. 3. de sacer. Numb. 9. v.
5. Lenit. 5. v. 5.
our doctrine. I come to the Leuiticall Priests who being ordained by God to
judge of corporal Lepers, al such as were insected with this disease were tied
to present themselves unto them, to acquaint them with their infirmityes, and
according to their judgment to be admitted or expelled the Tents. Whereupon S.
Chrysostom uses these words: The Jewish Priests had leave to judge or try
such as were purged from corporal leprosy: but to our Priests it is granted
not to try the purged, but al ^ogeather to purge, not the leprosy of the body,
but the infection of the soul. The second figure is that confession which God
commanded in the 5. Chapter of Numbers, and 5. of Leuiticus, where the
circumstance of the text and Hebrew phrase most clearly demonstrate an
express and distinct manner of Confession, as Petrus Galatinus learnedly
proves by the refragable testimonies of many ancient Rabbis. But if the
Hithuaddu Gala. l. 10 cap. 3.
figure required a particular confession, how much more the thing figured by it.

10. Of which the Apostles likewise mention. S. Luke, Many of these that
believed came confessing and declaring their Act. 19. V. 18. (...).
Meschthahhin. Sachel cuthebin.
deeds. Or as the Greek, Hebrew, or Syriacke word imports, Numbering their
sins. And it follows, that S. Paul to whom this Confession was made,
caused them that had employed their time in the study of curious matters, to
burn their books, which he could not have done, unless they distinctly
specifyed their faults unto him. S. Paul himself says: God has given us the
ministry of reconciliation etc. Which is not only meant of the office of
reconcilement 2. Cor. 5. V. 18.
by public preaching the word: but by ministering also of the Sacrament, as
Calvin is pleased to allow, acknowledging these words to be spoken of the
Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. ^. 22. Iac. 5. Orig. hom. 2. in Leuit. Beds m hunc
loc. Conc. Laodic. Can. 2. Sexta Syn. Can. 102. Basil. in Regulis breuior.
inter 288. Leo ep. 91. ad Theod. and ep. 80. ad Episc. Campan. Pausimus in Vita
S. Ambros.
power and use of keys. S. James exhorts: Confess your sins one to
another: which Origin, and Venerable Bede directly expound of Sacramental
Confession to a lawful Priest. Bid says: The uncleanness of the greater
leprosy let us according to the law open to the Priests: and at his pleasure in
what manner, in what time he shall command, let us be careful to be purified.

11. The continual practice of the Catholic Church ever after approved the
same, long before the time of Innocentius the third. For of the custom of the
Greek Church, not only the Council of Laodicea, and the sixth Synod, but S.
Basil also testifyeth, who lived many hundred years before him: It is
necessary to confess sins unto them to whom the dispensation of the
mysteries of God is committed. The usage of the Latin Church S. Leo describes
in his Epistle to Theodorus, and in his Epistle to the Bishop of Campania where
he mentions secret confession to Priests, to be the institution of Christ.
And Paulinus writes of S. Ambrose: That he wept so bitterly hearing secret
confession, as he wrong tears from the Penitent. The practice of the Church of
France and Germany is witnessed by the Councels assembled at Turin, at Paris,
at Rhemes, at Worms, and at Mogun^ia, Council Tu. 10. 3. c. 22. Concilium ^^hem
can. 12. and 16. Council. Paris. c. 32. and 46. Worms. cap. 25. Mogun. cap. 16.
Aug. ep 180 Victor l. 2^ de ^ersecutione Vanda. Orig. ho^ ^ 17. in Luc. and
hom. 32 in Leuit. Cyp. ser. 5. de Laps. Atha. in illa Verba Profecti in pagum.
Chrysostom. bom. 33. in 10. and l. 2. and 3. de Sacerdo. Lactantius de vera
sapien. lib. 4. prope fine^. Hier. in c. Isa. and l. 2 ep. 18. ad Demetriadem.
Pacian. ep. ^ ad Symp. Tertul. de Paniten. cap. 7. Iero. ep. ad Marcel. 10.
Damas de haeres. c. 80. Guido de haeres. Mat. Paris in Henric. 3. Hayn^o in
Psalm. 31. Bern. in medita. c. 9. Damia. ep. 1. Sparks p. 322. and p. 329.
Hugode de S. Vict. l. 2. part. 14. cap. 1.
where the same manner of Confession is generally defined. The doctrine and
usage of the Church of Afric S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo shall declare
saying: It is a pitiful case when by the absence of Gods Priests men depart
this life, either not baptized, or not absolved from their sins. Which the
very people of that Country understood, when they lamented the banishment of
their Priests by the Arian Heretics, as Victor reports in this manner: Who
shall baptize these Infants? Who shall minister penance unto us, and loose us
from the bands of sins?

12. It would be too tedious to set down the words of Origin, S. Cyprian, S.
Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, Lactantius, and S. Hierome. For Lactantius
assigns Confession and penance a note of the true Church. S. Hierome terms
it: The second table after shipwreck. Pacianus and Tertullian do the like, who
lived notwithstanding many years before Innocentius the third. So did the
Montanists, whom S. Hierome: the Messalians, whom S. John Damascen: the
lacobites, whom Guido and Matthoeus Parisiensis record to have been condemned,
they in former ages, these in the year of our Lord 600. for affirming: That we
are to confess our sins to God only, and that Confession of sins to a Priest
is not needful. So did Haymo, so did S. Bernard, Petrus Damianus, Hugo de
Sancto Victore, who estsoones inculcate the necessity of Confession to the
Priests of Gods Church. In so much as D. Sparks showed small sparks of grace,
when he affirmed our Confession first imposed as necessary in the Lateran
Council by Innocentius 3. about the year of our Lord 1115. No sparks of
fidelity in citing Scotus and Antoninus as witnesses hereof, who witness it
not, but witness the contrary. For they both teach with us that the general
Council of Lateran determined the circumstance of time when Confession should
be made, and grant withal, that the substance it Sozom. l. 7. c. 16. Sparks
p. 330. and. 331. Chrysoft. ho^^ 4. de Lazar. and hom. 3^. in ca. 12. ad Haeb.
and in Psalm. ^0. Cassi^. Costa. 20. eap. 8. Aug. l. 10. Confess. c. 3.
self and manner of Canfession was ordained by God.

13. In lik sort he wrongfully abuses Necturius Patriarch of Constantinople,
auouching him to have abrogated secret Confession: whereas it appears out of
Socrates and Nicephorus, that Nactarim only disanulled public Confession to a
public and determinate Priest, by reason of great scandal that thereon ensued,
and left every one, iudicio conscientiasu^: To the Judgment of his own
conscienc^, as Sozomenus says, to make choice of a secret Confessor. Against
which public Confession S. Chrysostom also his successor wrote, when he
said, as Sparks alleges: Take heed thou tell not thy sins to man, least he
(...) thee with them: neither confess them to thy fellow-seruans, that he may
publish them etc. In which sense Cassianus is likewise to be interpreted. S.
Augustine, whom our Adversaries also object saying: What have I to do with men
that they hear my Confession etc. speaks only of the discovery of sins
committed before baptism, which he himself voluntarily made, not to give
notice of them to men, but to give praise and honor to God, who so mercifully
pardoned him.

14. Their last and chiefest objection is: That men Fulke in cap. 9. Mitth.
sect. 5. 6. 8. Cyril. l. 12. c. 50. in 10.
cannot forgive sins: and that it is a proper prerogative due to God, that
none can be remitted but only by him. I answer first with S. Cyrill: It is no
inconvenience for them to forgive sins, who have the holy Ghost. Men of
themselves cannot pardon sins, but by the power of the holy Ghost who is
given them to this end they may. Secondly I answer with S. Ambrose refuting
the same objection made by the Nouatia^s: Amb. lib. 1. de P^^i^^^. c. 7.
By the Sacrament of Baptism Priests forgive sins, why may they not do it
as well by the Sacrament of Penance? May God attribute to the dead element of
water, power and force to cleanse us from sins, and can he not impart the
same to a man endued with reason, to his Priest, substitute, and vicegerent
upon earth? Thirdly I answer with our Savior Christ, even as Almighty God
has given power to men to work miracles, to raise the dead, cure the blind,
lame etc. so he may also give authority to remit Math. 9. v. 2. Mar. 2. 5.
Fulke in c. 9. Math, sect 7. and 8. in cap. 2. Mar. sect. 2. and 3. Matthew. 9.
V6. Mar. 2. V. 10.
and pardon sins. Which argument he himself used. For when he said to the
sick man whom he cured of the palsy: Son thy sins are forgiven thee, the
Scribes murmured against him, as Fulke and other Protestants do now against us,
saying: who can forgive sins but only God? And our Savior argued and rebuked
them in this manner: That ye may know the Son of man has power upon earth
to forgive sins, I say unto thee, Arise, take up thy couch, and go into
thyhouse. Where by the gift of working miracles he demonstrateth unto the
Jews, that not only as God, but also as man he had power given him to pardon
sins. Which illation presses in like sort the Sectaries of our S. Cyrill.
12. c. ^6. in 10. Amb. Pacia. and Aug. locis citatis
age. For as it pleased God to communicate unto men, to S. Peter, and S. Paul,
and others that rare prerogative of working miracles proper to himself: so he
might also bequeath unto them this divine commission of forgiving sins, as I
have already declared he did, out of the words of Christ, and sundry other
texts of Scripture, out of S. Cyril, S. Ambrose, Pacianus, S. Augustine, and
the whole Senate of Fathers. Yea this doctrine was so generally received
Sorcrat. l. bist. tripar^ c. 23.
in the time of Constantine the great, that when Acesius the Nouatian delivered
in his presence how such as fell in time of persecution should be invited to
repentance, Sarcer. in loc com. de cons^s 289. Lobec. in disput. Theol page
295. sect. 4. Melanct. l. l. ep. p. 234 Harmony of Conf. p. 250, 357. and 358.
yet might not expect absolution from the Priest, but from God himself, who
only had power to loose the chains of such grievous Apostasy; the Emperor
deemed it so strange a Paradoxe, as he answered unto him: Then raise thou a
ladder (O Acesius) and climb if thou can alone into heaven.

15. In sine, sundry of our Adversaries mouded no doubt by some secret force of
truth, either join herein with us or adiudge the Fathers on our side.
Sarcerius a learned Protestant says: It is false that Confession made to God
abolisheth private Confession. The same private Confession is earnestly
defended by Lobecius, by Melancthon, by the Confessions of Saxony and Bohemia
in their Harmony of Confessions. Osiander and the Cencurists avouch that
Gregory grossly Osiand. in epit. histo. Eccles. Centur. 6. p. 183. Magdeb.
Centur 6. Simondes upon the Revelations p. 57. Fulke in c. 20. loan. sect. 3.
erred concerning Penance and Confession. Simondes affirms: Leo the first
brought in auricular Confession. M. Fulke says: That Ambrose heard secret
Confessions and kept them secret, we give credit to Paulinus. And it is a world
to read the variety of cousening sleights he there uses to avoid the pressure
of this and many other authorityes of Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Cyrill, S.
Basil, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, Victor, and S. Leo. For notwithstanding they
all write most plain in behalf of our Confession: yet he cauilleth with some:
That they speak not of the necessity thereof. With others: That they speak not
of the necessity of private, but of public Confession. Or, if of private, not
to obcame remission of sins. Or, not by the Sacrament of Reconciliation. Or,
not of Confession to be made to a Priest. Or if they name Priests (as he
grants Leo does, and secret Confession too) yet he says not (quoth he) that
Confession to the Priests of all sins is always necessary.

16. Behold the silly steights which falsehood inforceth her followers unto,
that they may find at length some holes to escape. For we grant, that neither
venial Luther l. de Captiu. Babylon. Melanctb. in Apolog. Conf. Augustanae c.
de number. and vsu Sacr. Calu l. 3. c. 46. 7. Calau. in his answer to the ep of
Card. P^ron. f. 16.
sins at any time, nor mortal at all hours and seasons, or in all places
are necessary to be confessed. As when without public notice, or notable
prejudice to our neighbor they cannot be uttered. But we contend that
Confession of grievous and deadly sins was instituted by Christ, in due time,
and place to be observed, which besides the Fathers and Scriptures, the chief
promoters of Protestancy seem to confirm. Luther allows Penance for a
Sacrament. And Melancthon calls Absolution the Sacrament of Penance in such
proper sense as he says: It was instituted by Gods commandment with the
promise of grace thereunto annexed: To say nothing of Calvin, who grants the
use hereof to have been very ancient; nothing of King James, of whom
Casaubon testifyeth, his Majesty grants that the Fathers who did first ordain
auricular Confession, had their reasons why they thought, that such manner of
Confession, would further easier attaining to salvation: Nothing of the
Centurists who write: It appears out of the works of Tertullian, and Centur.
3. col. 227. Confessionem magnoper^ vrget Tertul lianus lib. de poenit. and
vsitat^s fuisse priuatam confessionem, qua delicta and cogitata quoque prau^
confesst sunt, ex aliquot Cyp. locis apparet, vt exs^ron. 5. de lapsi. and l.
3. ep. 14. and 16. vbi diserte ait: in minoribus etiam peccatis etc. necesse
esse ad exomologesin venire. Deuter. 32. v. 31. Exodus 8. v. 19.
Cyprian, that private Confession was used of deeds, thoughts, and lesser
sins, that Satisfaction was enjoined etc. and the penitents were absolved,
with the ceremony of imposing hands.

17. Thus thou see (Gentle Reader) according to the prediction of the Prophet
Moses, in all Controuersyes our enemies are judges in our behalf. Thou see
how strange our Adversaries pretenses against Priests absolution have seemed to
antiquity: thou have heard both Fathers and Counsels maintain our Confession:
thou have heard all Christian people embrace and practice it. And can it sink
into the mind of any Judicious man, a thing so hard and difficult, so
cumbersome unto sinners and repugnant to nature, could be so universally
received by Greeks, Latins, Kings, Emperors, Princes and Subjects, unless it
had been instituted and ordained by God?

18. But if thou could pass a little further and discover the manifold
fruits and singular commodityes, which plentifully flow from the observation
thereof, thou should be forced to cry out with the Magicians of Pharao:
Digitus Deiest hic: The finger of God is here. Thou should behold a sinner
before he repair to his Ghostly Father sorrowful, pensive, vexed and grieved
with the cumbersome load of sin: and yet so soon as he has received the
benefit of absolution, depart so cheerful, so full of in ward comfort, as if
some heavenly joy dilated his heart. Thou should behold another, who reviled
and injured his Neighbor, come from the Sacrament of Confession, go reconcile
himself unto him, and crave pardon for the wrong he offered. Thou should
behold by this mea^es him that robbed, restore the goods he embezeled away:
him that cosened leave his cheating: thou should see the proud man humbled,
the dissolute reclaimed, the lascivious become chaste; a thousand such Psalm. 76.
v. 11.
alterations thou should be wray in the hearts of sinners, of which thou must
needs pronounce: This is the mutation of the right hand of God: whose instice,
goodness, and mercy, could no way be more manifestly showed then by this humble
Confession.

19. His instice chiefly ^^^^eth in making the guilty sinner both plaintiff,
witness, and accuser of himself, making him, who by sin rebelled against God
his Lord Bern tract de instabili cordis buma. c. 6.
and master, by sorrowful repentance humble his heart to his fellow-seruant,
which S. Bernard pithily denotes saying: It is convenient that be, who by
contumacy sinned against God, should by Penance become suppliant to the
Priests his Ministers: and that the man, who to preserve his grace needed no
Mediator, should for the recovery of it once lost, implore of necessity the
mediation of man. Gods mercy like wise and goodness are here apparent, in that
he wresteth not from us after the fashion of earthly Judges, this secret
accusation as a testimony to punish, but as an acquitance to pardon us; and
therefore S. Angustine most excellently writes: To this end he exacteth
Confesion to free and release the humble: to Aug in Psalm. 66.
this end he condemns the sinner not confessing, to chastise the proud.

20. What shall I say of infinite other benefits, which the discreet Confessor
and humble Penitent gleaneth from hence? The wife and prudent Confessor
sailing in this sea of Conscience, discovers the wonderful Psalm. 106. verse.
230
works of God, as the Prophet says; In aquis multis: In the Psalm. 106. verse.
23.
ebb and sloate of sundry waters. In the calmes of prosperity and storms of
adversity; in the admirable change and alterations of minds. And in respect of
his ghostly children, where could he have fitter means to know their diseases,
then when they open and disclose them unto him? Where could he more fruitfully
correct and rebuke their faults, then when they repent and plead guilty of
Greg. ho. 26. in Euang. quae est de Octa. Pascha.
them? From whence could the Penitent receive better advise and sweerer
comfort, then from them whom God electeth, the Church consecrateth, the holy
Ghost instructs to be the spiritual Surgeons, heavenly Physicians, and as S.
Gregory calls them: Judges of our souls.

21. I can not stand to dilate upon the general co^modityes which by this
wholesome discipline redoundeth to the whole Commonwealth. Many public abuses,
which neither by severity of Laws, nor vigilance of Magistrates can be
hindered, are often redressed by help of Confession. In this Court of Conscience
many unlawful bargains are dissolved, many wrongs satisfied, wicked
designements stopped, good purposes furthered, much virtue advanced, much vice
suppressed. Which the famous City of Norinberge in Germany after the
abolishing of this holy Sacrament, to her grief acknowledged, and Dominicus
Sotus l. 4. sent. did. 18. q. 1. art. 1.
sent an Embassage (as Dominicus Sotus records) to Charles the fifth, to have
auriculer Confossion by his Imperial decree restored again: Because they saw
by experience their Commonwealth swarm with sundry vices against justice and
other virtues, which were unknown unto them before. O England, England! Happy
were thou, if God would give thee like grace to discern what an inundatio^ of
sin ouerwhelmeth thy Land for want of this law! Happy, if not forced by Princes
Statutes, but moved by Gods Commandment, thou would return again to the
discipline of Confession, which is, as thou see, the Hedge of virtue, the
Bridle of iniquity, the Key of justice, and Lock of good life.

THE SEVENTH CONTROVERSY, Establishes Satisfaction, against D. Field and D.
Fulke.
CHAP. 1.
IT suffices not, we disburden our hearts by true Confession to a lawful
Priest, of which I spoke in the precedent Chapter: but to return into the
favor of God by the benefit of Absolution, Contrition also and Satisfaction
are necessary. Contrition, whereby we utterly detest the offense committed in
forsaking God our chief and sovereign good; Satisfaction whereby we seek to
recompense the wrong we offered in placing our last end and final delight in
the love of that we preferred before him. For first it is a general principle
amongst all the learned, that two things are included in the eno^mity of
mortal sin: a disloyal Scotus in 4 sent. did. 46. guaest, 4.
auersion from Gods unchangeable goodness, and an inordinate conversion to his
transitory creatures: to which a double punishment correspondently belongs;
to the auersion that which is called poena damni, the pain or penalty of
damage or losle of our chiefest good: to the conversion paena sensus: the
pain or punishment of sense. By the Tho. 1. 2. q. 76. and 87. Gab^^^l. Vasquez
ibidem disput. 139. and 140.
former every sinner incurreth disgrace of God, is banished for ever from the
sight of his countenance, and has his soul infected with the ugly spot of
sin, which the Schoolmen term Malum culpae, The evil or desormity of the
fault. By the second he is liable to punishment and made guilty of the
perpetual pains of Hell.

2. Secondly all Greg. de Valen. disput. 7. q. 14. puncto 1. de Satisfact. S.
Thomas 1. 1. q. 87. arti^ulo 6. and alij communiter in eum locum. Apoc. 18. ver
7. Field in ap. pen. 1. par. page 66. Field vbi supra and l. 3. of the Church
cap. 16. and in append. part. 1. page 42. 43. Field ibide^ page 43.
Catholic Deuines accord, that a deadly sin being pardoned after Baptism,
the whole guiltnesse of the fault is taken away, in regard of the contagion it
included and privation of Gods grace. But the guiltiness and desert of
punishment, albeit it be utterly released in respect of the eternal duration:
yet oftentimes some temporal chastisement remains to be suffered, greater or
lesser according to the measure of unlawful delights taken in sin, which the
Holy Ghost enacted in the Apocalypse: As much as she has glorified her self
in delicacies: so much torment and mourning heap upon her. These be the
immovable grounds of true Theology.

3. Our Sectaries herein dissent from us chiefly in this later point, affirming
no punishment to remain, where the fault is remitted. For says M. Field,
Where grace is so perfect that it expels sinfulness, there it must work
aperfect reconciliation to God, with which the guilt of punishment cannot
stand. Again: Charity (says he) in such perfection as is able to purge out
all impurity of sin, implies dislike of that which in sinning was ill
affected, and sorrow for the same, equtualent to the pleasure and delight taken
in sinning; and consequently does satisfy God in suchsort as that no
punishment shall come upon him that so sorroweth. Thirdly, Christ (quoth he)
suffered all that the justice of God requires, not only for the stain, but
also for the punishment due to sin either before or after Baptism to be
committed; therefore whenever we are wholly purged by the infusion of Christ's
sanctifying grace from the deformity of all faults, we are in like manner by
the imputation of Christ's satisfactory works fully discharged from all touch
of punishment. And the contrary he dubbeth, An heresy of the Papists. And M.
Fulke accounts it Horrible blasphemy against the effect of Christ's Passion.
Fulke in c. 8. ad Romans sect. 4. and in ca. 2. 2. ad Cor. sect. 2. Mat. 26.
Joan. ^0. Act. 24. v. 14.


4. But of such blasphemy the Son of God was appeached by the Scribes and
Pharisees. And of such heresy Tertullus the Orator of the Jews accused S.
Paul. Therefore we confess with him: that according to the way which you call
heresy, we do so serve the Father our God, believing all things that are
written in the law, and the Prophets. Where it is often recorded that the
Divine Majesty has justly inflicted upon some, the fine of punishment after
the whole debt of sin has been discharged. God pardoned at the intercession
of Moses the crime of Idolatry the Jews committed in adoring the golden
Calfe, notwithstanding he said: I will visit this their sin in the day of
revenge. God pardoned the sister of Moses, and received her into his favor;
Exodus 32. v. 34.
he punished her notwithstanding with seven days leprosy. God pardoned King
Dauict his murder and adultery, and pronounced absolution by the mouth of his
Prophet Nathan: Our Lord has forgiven thy sin; nevertheless Number. 12. v. 15.
he imposed this penance and satisfaction: But the Son which is borne of thee
shall dye. God pardoned Adam our first Progenitour, as appears in the book
of Wisdom: 2. Reg. ^2. v. 13. and 14.
albeit after reconciliation he was not exempted from that heavy curse: Because
thou have given ear to the voice of thy wife, accursed be the earth in thy
work. Moreover the Apostle reports Sap. 10. Verse. 2. Genesis 3. Verse. 27. 1.
Cor. 11. Verse. 30. Aug. tract 114. in Io. Droductior est poena quam culpa ne
parus putaretur culp^ etc.
of certain punished with death and grievous diseases for their unworthy
receiving, although some of them (as we may piously suppose) were reconciled to
God before their departure.

5. And not to be over long in particular examples, all mankind feels the
bitter scourge and calamity of sin, as hunger, cold, wants, sicknesses, and
death, the just imposed penalties of our forefathers transgression.
Notwithstanding many have had the guiltiness thereof cleansed before by the
Sacrament of Baptism. Therefore S. Augustine most notably says: The
punishment is more prolonged then the fault: least the fault might be little
accounted of, if the punishment ended with it. S. Irenaeus writing of the
pressures inflicted upon Adam, Eve, and their posterity affirms: Irand. 3*
cap. 35.
They were thus chastised, that neither accursed they might wholly perish, and
be abandoned of God; nor without correction might persevere contemning God.

6. With these might be numbered diverse others, who Aug tract 50. homil. ho. 50
Cyp. sermon. de opere and eleemosyn. and l. 1. ep. 3. Hier. ep. ad Eustochium de
obitu Paulae. Amb. l. ad virg. laps. cap. 8. Orig. hom. 15. in Leuit. Tertul.
l. de Poeniten. Lact. de verasapionca. 17. and li. 6. de vero cultis cap. 13.
Bafil. in Psa. 29. exponens verse. il^^^^. Conuertisti planctum meum etc. Greg
Naz. orat. de Pauperum amore. Pacianus in paraenesi ad Poenit.
teach that the punishment remaining after sin remitted by tears,
almesdeeds, and other works of Penance may be mitigated and released. Of which
mind S. Augustine is in his treatise of 50. Homilies. And S. Cyprian says:
Sins and stains contracted after baptism may by almesdeeds be washed away.
And in another place: Our offenses, by satisfaction may be redeemed. S.
Hierome: Long laughter ought to be recompensed with continual weeping. S.
Ambrose: A great crime needs great satisfaction. And therefore Origin calls
our good works: The price or ransom, by which sins are redeemed.
Tertullian, Lactantius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Pacianus, and all
the ancient Fathers preach nothing more then Penance and Satisfaction for
offenses past. The ancient Conc. Turonen. Can. 22. Council. Laodicen. ca. 2.
Council. Ancyr. can. 4. 5. 8. and 9. Conc. ^. Nicen. can 11. Theodor. l. 4.
haeret. fabularum. Dan. 4. Luc. 3. verse. 8. 1. Cor. 11. Chrysostom. hom. 42. in Mat.
Beda in cap. 11. 1 ad Cor. Matthew. 4.
Councels prescribe place of Penance, time of Satisfaction. The ancient Priests
after Confession enjoined Penance, imposed Satisfaction. The ancient Church
condemned certain Heretics called Audiani, because they gave remission to
such as confessed, without prescribing time of Penance. The Apostles, the
Prophets, and Christ himself often exhorts hereunto. Daniel counseled
Nabuchodonosor: Redeem thy sins with almedeeds. S. John in the desert with
habit, with meat, with voice, with deeds cried: Yield fruits worthy of
Penance. S. Paul says: If we did judge our selves, we should not be judged:
which S. Chrysostom and Venerable Bede expound of severe and judicial
affliction of our selves, that we may not be punished of God. Finally Christ
himself began his preaching with this precept: Do Penance, for the Kingdom
of heaven is at hand.

7. Diverse euasions M. Fulke and the rest of his faction here seek. They
answer that the penaltyes inflicted by Fulke in c. 2. ^. Cor. sect. 2. and in
c. 3. Matthew. sect. 4. etc. Calvin. l. 3. Inst. ca. 4.
the ancient Canons, by the Apostles, or by the hand of God were, 1. For the
public discipline of the Church. 2. For the exercise of virtue. 3. As the
fruits of true repentance. 4. As cautions to beware of future sins: Tet no
way to sa^isfy the Justice of God for precedent faults. But the Scripture
flatly declares the affliction I mentioned to have been imposed for offenses
past. The Prophet Nathan said to K. David: Because thou have made thy enemies
blaspheme the name of our Lord, for 2. Reg. 12. v. 14. Exodus 32. v. 34. Hier.
epist. 12. ad Gaud.
this word the Son that is borne to thee shall dye. And God himself said: I in
the day of revenge will visit this their sin. Therefore he meant to punish
their offense, which notwithstanding was pardoned, if we believe S. Hierome.

8. Likewise many innocent babes, after the spot of Original infection is
cleansed by Baptism, are daily afflicted with the panges of sickness, with the
agony of death, not for the exercise of virtue, nor for Penitential
correction, or future amendment, of which they are incapable, but for the
revenge and chastisement of our first Fathers sin. Neither can we say that
the death of King David's child was principally sent unto him as a fruitful
caution or token of sorrow, because he with tears, with fasting, with lying on
the ground sought to shun it as much as he could, which so virtuous a Prince
would never have done, if it had been any profitable caution or fruit of
repentance; much less could it be any Penitential correction, for the public
satisfaction and discipline of the Church, because he was so unwilling to have
it Psa* ^. v. 7. Psa. 34. v. 1^. Psalm. 101. ver. 10. 3. Reg. 21. ver. 27.
Ionae, 3. v. ^. 7. 8. Hiero. in his comm* upon the 3. of Jonas. Ionae 3. v. 9.
and 10. Vid. Fran Riberum in cap. 3. Ionae and in cap. 1. Na^um. Aug. hom. 5.
ex 50. homilij^^ 5 Non sufficit moresin melius etc. nisi etiam de his quae
facta sunt fatis^ias Deo etc. Aug. in En^hyr. ad Laurent. ^. 70. Cyp. ser. de
Lapfis. Cyp. tract. de oper. and Ele^mosyn. Ch^ys. hom 41. ad Popul. Antio
Lact. l. 5. di^. i^sti, ca. 13. Orig. ho. 3. in l. ludic. Amb. l. 2. de
Poenit^n cap. 5.
come to pass, using so many means to pacify God another way; neither is it
likely that the Church would have inflicted such a punishment upon him: the
tears likewise he shed in so great abundance, as he washed with them every
night his Couch, the humbling of his soul in fasting, the mingl^ng of his
bread with ashes; the wearing of sackcloth, and marvelous humility which King
Achab showed; the afflictions and voluntary fastings which the Ninevites, their
King, their children, their cattle endured, were neither used for example to
others, or for amendment of their lives hereafter, or for any other cause to
assuage the wrath of God, and recompense the wrong their sins had done,
already pardoned by the secret Contrition and sorrow of their hearts, as
together with the interpretation of S. Hierome upon this place, the very
words of the Ninevites, and Gods answer unto them do both make manifest. The
Niniui^es intention was to satisfy God, saying: Who knows whether God will
turue and pardon, and return from the fury of his indignation. The Prophet
replyeth in his person: And God saw their works (not the repentance only of
their inward hearts, but the Penance and Satisfaction of their outward works:)
and, Herepented him of the evil he spoke against them. Howbeit they after
slyding back into their former wickedness, the subversion of their City ensued,
which the Prophet foretold.

9. Besides, the authorityes of the Fathers are also pregnant, that the
punishments of which they speak, were not only inflicted for exercise of
present virtue, or preventing of future evils: but also to satisfy God, and
redeem offenses past, as nothing can be more evidently recorded. S. Augustine
pronounces: It is not enough to chang our manners to the better and decline
from evils, unless God be also satisfied for those things, which be past, by
the gri^^ of Penance, by the mourning of humility, by the sac^ifice of a
contrite heart, almesdees cooperating thereun^o. And in another place: By
almesdeeds for offenses past God is to be made propitious and favorable. S.
Cyprian: God is to be implored, our Lord is to be pacifyed with our
Satisfaction. Again: By good-workes God ought to be satisfied: by merits of
mercy sins should be purged. S. Chrysostom: Let us take reueng of our
selves, so we shall appease our Judge. Lactantius: It is lawful to satisfy
God. Origin: As much time as thou have spent in sinning, so long humble thy
self to God; and satisfy him in Confession of Penance. S. Ambrose: He that
does Penance, should not only wash away his offense with tears, but with
perfecter works ought to cover and hide former faults, that sin may not be
imputed unto him. ^asil interro. 12. in eg. breuioribus. Psalm. 100.


10. S. Basil shows the reason hereof saying: Albeit God in his only
begotten Son, as much as lies in him, has granted remission of sins to
all, yet because mercy and judgment are joined together by the holy Prophet,
and he witnesses God to be both merciful and just, it is necessary that those
things which are spoken of Penance by the Prophets and Apostles, be performed
by us; that the judgments of Gods justice may appear, and his mercy Greg. Na
zian. orat. insancta lu^ina.
be consumated to the condonation of sinners. For as S. Gregory Nazianzen
says: It is a like evil, remission without chastisment, and chastisement
without pardon, because the one lets go the raines too far, the other
restrains them too much. Wherefore that God may carry over us an even hand,
that his clemency may be mingled with some severity, his justice and mercy may
meet together; although he always of mercy pardons the iniquity of
repentant sinners: yet he often binds them over to some temporal
chastisement, to satisfy thereby the rigor of his justice, as in the partial
judgment of our professed enemies, all antiquity herein Calvin l. 3. Inst. c.
4.. 8. Calu. 4: c. 12.. 8. Kemnitius 2. par. exam. p. 181. Bulling. ser. 87.
super Apoc. fol. 270. Centu. 3. col. 127. Centu. 4. col. 254. Centu. 5. c. 4.
and 10. Cent. 6. 7. 8. etc.
witnesses with us.

11. Calvin says: I am little moved with the Sentences of the Fathers which
concerning Satisfaction do every where occur. I see truly some of them (I
will speak simply) in a manner all of them whose books are extant, were
either deceived in this point, or spoke tooto roughly and crabbedly. Again, In
this point the immoderate austerity of the Ancients can by no means be
excused, which disagreed from the prescribed order of our Lord, and was above
measure dangerous. Kemnitius noting the like speeches of the Fathers
reprehendeth them: As hyperbolically spoken, inconsideratly uttered, too much
ouerreaching the Truth. Bullinger affirms: Satisfaction and justification of
works incontinently after the Apostles time laid their first foundation. The
Centurists record: That in the times of Cyprian and Terullian, Penna^ce or
Satisfaction was enjoined according to the quality of the fault. And in the age
immediately following, which was four hundred years after Christ, they write:
A Priest was appointed, who absolved his Pe^^tents upon this condition: that
Vvbitian* his answer to M. Ed. Campians 5. reason page 1: 9.
they should exact punishment of themselves for their offenses past. The same
professed doctrine they report to have continued in the five hundred and six
hundred years after Christ, by the evident testimonies of S. Chrysostom, S.
Augustine, S. Leo, Cassianus, Hesychiuss, Prosper, S. Gregory, S. Isidore, and
Venerable Bede.

12. D. Whitaker, in his answer to M. Campians ibidem.
reasons, professes of S. Cyprian, he wrote something of repentance very
unseasonably and indiscreetly; and not he alone, but all the holy Fathers of
that time were tainted with that error immediately D. H^m^. ^esu. par. 2. rat.
5. page 540. Ibidem page 439. and 543.
after; They made the greatest part of repentance to consist in certain
outward disciplines etc. they thought the punishment of sin to be discharged,
Gods justice satisfied, freedom from sin, and certain forgiveness with
righteousness hereby to be procured; herein they diminished the power of
Christ's death, they attributed too much to their own inventions, and in a word
depraved the doctrine of repentance. D. Humfrey among many sentences of S.
Cyprian, which he like a bold Censor condemns, rejects also this as harsh
and crabbed: By our satisfactions and lamentations sins are redeemed, and
wounds by tears are washed Printed Anno Do. 1606. Bullinger vbi supra. The
Centurists, Calvin and D. Humf^^y locis citat. VVbitakerin his answer to ^.
Edmu^d Campian, transl^ted into ^nglish etc.
away. Then taking upon him the defense and Apology of his fornamed accomplices,
Whitaker and the Magdeburgians, he allows their severe censuring of the
Fathers, and only excuses them, That they do not condemn all of the third
hundred year, but the most part to have depraved the doctrine of Penance,
which they collect out of Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian. Thus he: Insinuating
that besides these or the most part of that age, there were some of his hidden
and invisible congregation who wrote the contrary. But because M. Whitaker knew
not who these were, not in what corners of the Sky they composed their books;
he in his English Treatise ( entitled, An Answer to the reasons of Edmund
Campian etc. Whereunto is added in brief Marginall notes, the sum of the
Defense of those reasons against Duraeus etc.) boldly protests, as I have
quoted him, all the holy Fathers of that time were tainted with that error.

13. Notwithstanding be it so, that Whitaker only reproves the most part of
the Fathers; let this be the Protestant Printers or Translatours fault, or be
it so that you have since corrected his Latin Copy; Is there yet any dealing
more audacious, any madness more blind then this, to confesle: That
satisfaction laid her foundation incontinently after the Apostles time? To
confess: that S. Cyprian, Origin, Tertullian, almost all the holy Fathers of
the first 300. or 400. years, in a manner all whose works are extant, do
command Penance, and exact Satisfaction? To confess: they thought by outward
disciplines of repentance to satisfy Gods Justice? And nevertheless presume to
say: They were deceived, they diminished the power of Christ's death, they
attributed too much to their own inuemious? Is there any dealing, I say, more
audacious? Any madness more blind then this? Doctor Field had once the grace to
write: The imagination that the Field in ap. 1. par so. 2.
Fathers generally from the beginning were in error, is so barbarous a
conceit, that it cannot enter into the heart of any reasonable man. Calvin then
by this censure was no man of reason; D. Whitaker void of reason; D. Humfrey
and all the former Protestants without sense and reason; all rude and
barbarous, whose hearts once harbored, and pens have uttered this barbarous
conceit. Grossly mistaken, partly by those ungrounded reasons M. Field, and
Fulke proposed at the beginning, partly by some other texts of Scripture I
shall presently refute.

14. To M. Fildes first argument I answer, and deny: Field in append ^. par
page 66.
That the guils of punishment cannot stand with perfect reconciliation to God.
For you must understand that he who sins against his divine Majesty, does
not only break with him the bands of friendship, but violateth also the laws
of justice, and that which repaireth the one, does not always requite the
other. Therefore a sinner may receive sufficient grace to be perfectly
reconciled unto God in respect of his love and friendship, and remain still
subject to some fatherly correction, or temporal punishment, to make up the
breach, and recompense the wrong of justice. M. Field urges again: That as
Charity renews the friendship of God: so sorrow equivalent to the pleasure
taken in sinning, satisfyeth him for the debt of punishment. I acknowledge
Field vbi supra.
that God may infuse such fervent Charity, such perfect sorrow or true
Contrition as the Deuines call it) as may both cancel the fault, and acquit
the sinner of all future punishment: but this is a peculiar favor not granted
to all; not to Adam, not to Eve, not to Moses and Aaron, Rein. in his cor fe
c. 8. diuis 4. fo. 517 etc ^ Phil. Mornay l. 3. de Euchar. c. 2 Calvin l. 3.
Inst. c. 12.. 4. Field in his 3. book of the Chur. c. 16. Push in ca 8. ep. ad
Romans sect. 4. and in c. 2. 2. ad Cor. sect. 2.
not to King David, A man according to the heart of God. Of these and such
others, who arrive not to this depth of sorrow, our former doctrine is verified.

15. And I wonder not a little, M. Field or any of his accomplices should auerre:
that such Charity or sorrow could proceed from man, as were able not only to
purge out the stain of vice, but free us also from the chastisment; when as
Reynolds, Philip Mornay, and generally all Protestars defend, our perfectest
actions to be nothing else (as Calvin says) but Inquinamenta and sordes: filth
and vncleaunesse. Whereon it follows, that the greatest Charity and deepest
sorrow man can have; drawing from inward concupiscence the stain of
corruption, as it rather increases then casts forth the mudde of iniquity;
so it redoubleth, and no way diminishes the answerable smart of punishment.
But M. Field (and M. Fulke insisteth with him) That the satisfaction of Christ
(supposing repentance) discharges us of whatsoever we have deserved to suffer
for sin. I grant that Christ has fully and superabundantly satisfied the
wrath of his Father for all the transgressions of man, and infinite more, Fiel,
in appen. r par. full. 43. R^^ th^se (...) objections in Greg. de Valenti^. tom.
2 disp. 6 q 17. puncto 5.
if they had been possible. Yet as it has pleased him by says, hope, and
charity etc. and by the Sacraments of the Church, to derive unto us the
inestimable benefits of his sanctifying grace: so he has ordained by our
penal works to apply unto us for sins voluntarily committed after Baptism,
the precious fruits of his bountiful and abundant Satisfaction.

16. Here M. Field and his mates make their last encounter and say: If our
penal afflictions be only required to apply the Satisfactions of Christ, they
do not satisfy the justice of God: or if they do, either they deroga e from
the sufficiency of Christ's passion, or God craves one debt to be twice paid,
which is more at our bands then is sufficient. I answer, there are two kinds of
Satisfaction, the one absolute and perfect, the other weak and imperfect, not
equally balanced with the grieuousnesse of the offense, but grounded on the
favorable acceptance of him that is offended. According to the first, Christ
has not only procured some little mitigation (as M. Field maliciously charge
the Romanists to teach) but he Field in his 3. book of the Church ^. 16. fo. 96
has offered a full, and more then equivalent ransom sufficient to release
all mankind both from the whole fault and punishment of sin. According to the
second, by the value of our works made worthy by Christ, we truly satisfy the
outrage committed against God; not because he exacteth a double payment of the
same, this being subordinate, dependant, and derived from our Redemers ransom;
nor because any supply is needful to the Why God exacteth satisfaction of us,
fully satisfied by Christ, see S. Thomas 1. 2.
sufficient price of his innocent blood: but for that God at the first so
decreed it for our greater benefit, his higher glory, for the dignity of his
servants, and conformity of the members with Christ their head.

17. It is certain our Blessed Savior by his prayers obtained of God all the
gifts and graces which are bestowed upon men, and yet he commands us to ask
and pray, and by prayer to obtain the self same things, which he before by
his prayers procured: so although he has perfectly satisfied for all our
offenses, he might likewise Field in his 5. book of the Church c. 17. Page 55.
require some satisfaction at our hands for our own behoof, and honor of his
Father, without any injury or extorsion at all. It is certain that Christ by
his humble obedience to his Father glorified him as much as all the dishonor
committed by sinners did ever disgrace him. Notwithstanding M. Field (...)
regis^^ed these words in ^ ^ ^ in sinning, must by sorrow of heart, disliking
and detesting, and by confession of mouth, condemning former euilis, restore
that glory to God he took from him, and seek and take alloccasions, the
weakness of his means will affoard, to glorify God, as much as he dishonored
him before. O unconquerable truth, which so often forces her enemies to speak
in her behalf!

18. Christ restored to his Father all the honor of which we deprived him by
sin, and yet it is no injury to Christ, no exaction in God, no iteration of
payment, the sinner himself restore that glory he took from him: it is no
offense, (according to M. Field) he gloriyyeth God, as much as he dishonored
him before. And there is no question quoth he) but these things are required
to pacify Gods wrath, fully pacifyed by the blood of Christ. Then there is no
question (I trow) of this which is now in question, that God may be satisfied
by our weak endeauours, perfectly satifyed already by Christ. For the
pacitying of Gods wrath by restitution of his honor, with sorrow, dislike, and
detestation of former evils, is the true satisfaction of his divine justice,
of which we speak, consisting in the compensation of precedent wrongs, by
actions of submission and penal contrition, according to our mean and Pu^ke
in c. 2 2. ad Cor. sect. 2 and 4. Calu. lib. 3. inst. c. 4 5. 26. 27. etc.
seeble ability. M. Field thus discomfited, M. Fulke and Calvin renew the
battle with a fresh Host of sundry testimonies gathered some out of the
Fathers, most out of holy Writ, which I marshall into three several ranks or
squadrons.

19. In the first, they assault us with such places of Scriptures as declare
our Savior Christ to have offe^ed 1. 10. 2 V. 20
for us a full and perfect redemption: He is the propitiation for our sins.
Behold the Lamb of God: Behold he that takes away 10. 1. V. 29. Hoeb 1 v. 3.
the sins of the world. Having by himself purged our sins, sits on the
right hand of the Majesty on high. Who was ^init en for our sins, and wounded
for our Transgressions. By whose Esaias 53. 15. 1 Petr 2. v. 24.
stripes we are healed. I answer as above, that Christ has offered indeed a
most copious and perfect Satisfaction for all our trespasses, but it must be
often applied unto us by our satisfactory works, unless it be otherwise
supplied by the Indulgences, and treasure of the Church, of which hereafter.

20. But Calvin opposes against this, the frank and Calu. lib. 3. inst. c. 4.
25. and seq.
free remission of sins made by Christ, without hope of recompense, without
any pain or travel of ours. I answer, Christ's remission is free, because he
freely enlightneth us with faith and repentance, freely receaueth us into his
favor, and reconcileth us to God, freely pardons the whole guilt of sin,
freely offered a sufficient satisfaction for all the punishment due to sin;
and freely Marc. 16. Haebr. 5. Matthew. 10. and 16.
also inspireth grace into us, by which our mean, and (of themselves without
it) un profitable satisfactions, are acceptable unto God, which no way
impayreth, but much ennobleth the dignity and freedom of his merciful
redemption. For as he freely dyed for all men, gave Proverb. cap. 16. v. 6.
himself a sufficient ransom for the salvation of all, which effectually only
profits them who believe in him, who obey him, who take up their cross and
follow him: so he freely and sufficiently satisfied for all, but effectually for
such as by penal afflictions, by mercy and truth redeem their iniquity Fulke
against pur. p. 45. 49. etc. Calu. vbi supra. Ezeth 18. v. 21. 22. Esaias. 38. v.
18. and 44. v. 22. Micb. 7. v. 19. Psalm. 3^. v. ^. and. 2.
after regeneration wilfully incurred. In the second rank are mustered the
sentences of holy Writ, which mention no memory but a clean abolishment of
sin thorough true repentance, as by Ezechiel: If the wicked do penance etc.
I will not remember his iniquityes. By Isay, Micheas, King David, where God is
said, to cast our sins behind his back; To disperse them like a cloud: To
sink them into the bottom of the Sea: To hide them: To cover them: Not to
impute them. I answer, these places are spoken, 1. Of most true and perfect
contrition, which freeth both from the fault and punishment. 2. Of imperfect,
with penance and Satisfaction, which Ezechiel seemed to insinuate saying: If
the wicked do penance etc. 3. They are understood of the utter abolishment of
the fault, and freedom from eternal pain, in respect of which, God is truly
said, To blot our Ezech. 18. v. 21.
sins out of his mind: to disperse them like a cloud: to cast them into the
sea: to hide them, to cover them, and not to impute them, as S. Augustine
elegantly interprets the words of King August. in Psalm. 3^.
David: If God cover our sins, he will not see them; if he will not see them,
he will not punish them, to wit, with everlasting punishment, nor with
temporal, if we redeem them with condign satisfaction.

21. Therefore he that pronounced by the mouth of Ezech. 18. v. 22. Number. 14.
verse 34. Esaias. 38. v. 17. Eccles. c. 5. verse. 5. Haeb. ^. v. 3 1. Joan. c. ^.
verse. 2. Proverb. c. 1^. v. 6.
Ezechiel: he would not remember our iniquityes, threatened revenge in his own
person to some he had forgiven, saying: Scietis vltionem meam: Ye shall feel
the rod of my reuengement. He who promised by the Prophet Isay: To cast our
faults behind his back, commanded us by the mouth of Solomon: Of pardoned
sin be not without fear. He who by himself purged our offenses, he who
said, he was the propitiation for sin, avouched also, By mercy and truth
iniquity is red^emed. So that both cooperate to satisfy for our trespasses, the
Passion of Christ, and our works of Penn^nce; his Passion freely, plentifully,
independantly of our merit, or Satisfaction cancelleth the fault and eternity
of punishment: our works sanctified in his blood, partly concur by his
ordinance to expiate the remains of temporal chastisement. Matthew. 2^. Luc. 7.
v. 48. and 50. Luc. 18. v. 15. Luc. ^^. Joan 8 v. 11. M. Fulke against purg. p.
43 85.


22. In the last place are sorted the examples of Scripture, of Peter, Mary
Magdalen, the Publican, the thief upon the Cross, and the Adulterous woman,
whose sins were forgiven without Satisfaction. To which they adioyne the
authorityes of S. Ambrose, and S. John Chrysostom confirming the same. I
answer, 1. To the instances out of Gods word, private examples are no
presidents for public rules. 2. What the master sometime does by prerogative
of his person, the servant may not usurp as the privilege of his law. 3. I
say, the tears of Peter, the contrition of Magdalen, the humility of the
Publican, the admirable confession of the these, the shame and confusion the
adulterous woman endured, with the inward sorrow of her heart, might be
sufficient satisfactions for their enormous crimes, albeit the Scripture does
not in plain terms express it. As S. Ambrose affirmed of S. Peter, when he
said: His tears I read, his Satisfaction I read Amb. l. 10. in cap. 12. Lucae.
L^chrimae veniam non postulant sed merentur.
not, howbeit his tears were both a confession and singular satisfaction,
which crave not, according to him, but deserve and merit pardon. Or S. Ambrose
takes Satisfaction in that place for the excuse and defense of his fault,
which S. Peter used not, but would rather (as he affirms) condemn his sin,
that he might be justified by confessing, then aggrauate it by denying. S.
Chrysostom accordingly uses that word in his Homilyes upon Genesis. Where he
likewise grants no Amb. ibid. Chrysostom. ho. 10. in Genesis and hom. de Beato
Philogonio.
satisfaction necessary for the recovery of Gods friendship, although he after
require it for recompense of the wrong committed against him, in the course of
his Justice.

32. Two other dark sentences M. Fulke scrapeth out of him, the one out of his
homilyes upon the Epistle to the Romans, Vbi venia, ibi nulla est poena: where
there is forgiveness, there is no punishment. In which place S. Chrysostom
speaks of the forgiveness given to a Jew in Baptism, M. Fulke* against purg.
p. 43. S. Chrysostom. Hom 8. in Epist ad. Romans
who passing from the wrath of the law, to the grace of Christ, had full
remission of all both fault and punishment. Another out of the book he wrote
of sorrow and compunction: God requires not the burden of shirts of hair, nor
to be shut up in the straites of a little cell, neither does he command us to
sit in obscure and dark caves; this only it is which he exacteth that we
always remember and recount our sins. Where S. Chrysostom only reproves
the negligence of such dainty S. Chrysostom. de compunct. cordis l. 1.
sinners as omit the behoofull bewayling and lamenting of their sins, Quasi
quidam intoler abilis labor sit, As though it were a thing intolerable: And
thereupon discourses, that God commands not as necessary any such rigorous
or insupportable satisfaction as they imagined. Not to betake themselves to the
strait mourning of Monks, not to the enclosures of Anchorets, not to be shut up
in caves and dungeons; which severe pennances, although many voluntarily and
laudably undergo, yet God exacteth them not as necessary, but he only requires
sorrowful bewayling, and some moderate satisfaction or due chastisement of our
sins, as that Golden Mouth often teaches other where, with whom S.
Augustine so punctually agrees, Chrysostom. hom 2. de lapsu primi hom. in orat. de
beato Philogo. and hom. 10. in Matthew. Aug. in Psalm. 50.
as I will only recite his words for a final conclusion of this matter. If he
be just, whom thou inuokest, he reuengeth sins. If he be just, thou can
not deprive thy Lord God of his Justice. Implore his mercy, but consider his
Justice; His mercy inclines to pardon the sinner, his justice to punish the
sin. What then? When thou seek mercy, shall sin remain unpunished? Let
David answer; let the lapsed answer; let them answer with David, that they
may deserve mercy, as David did, and say: Not so (O Lord) my sin shall not be
unpunished etc. Therefore I will not that thou punish me, because I punish my
sin. Aug. ibidem.
And a little after: Thou pardonest him that confesse^h; Thou pardonest him,
but punishing himself: So mercy and truth accord. Mercy because man is
delivered: truth because sin is punished.

THE EIGHT CONTROVERSY, APPROVES The doctrine and practice of Indulgences,
against D. Fulke, and other Sectaryes.
CHAP. I.
IF the use, or rather abuse, of Pardons were such as the Hussits heertofore,
the Waldenses, the Thaborits, and the Protestants now of late have buzzed Joan.
Cocaeus l. de hist. Hussitarum. Synodus Constant. ^es 2. Greg. de Valentia tom.
4. disp. 7. q. 20. puncto ^.
into the ears of their wretched followers; accursed were the Pen* unhappy the
Man, who would undertake their defense. But since all their reports are
pernicious calumnyes, which issue from minds corrupted with malice: I will
briefly propose what Pardons or Indulgences are: then, what grounds to
authorize them we have out of Scripture.

2. Indulgence therefore is a merciful relaxation, or absolutio^ of temporal
punishment due to sin, by applying out of the Sacrament the superabundant
satisfactions of Christ and his Saints by him that has lawful authority. To
manifest the truth of this definition two principal points generally denied by
Fulke and his Consorts, I am now to demonstrate. First that there What
Indulgences are?
is a certain surplussage or common treasure of public Satisfaction in the
Church. Secondly that this treasure may be communicated to such as need,
proportionably to the punishment their sins require. Concerning the former.

In one, and the same action achieued in the favor of God, a double value may
be considered, the one of merit, the other of satisfaction. The merit is drawn
from the worthiness of the work, as it flows from the fountain of
supernatural grace: the satisfaction arises from the painfulnesse,
difficulty, or annoyance, which is taken in performing the same. And because
every good and pious act of necessity bears this heavenly stamp of grace,
and is commonly attended with some pain and difficulty: every such action is
both meritorious of heaven, and satisfactory for the delight taken in sinning,
both which it has pleased God to set down by the Scribes and Secretaries of
his holy will.

3. S. Mark, speaking of a charitable Almes-deed, affirms it meritorious:
Whosoever shall give you to drink a Mar. 9. verse. 40. Matthew. 25. verse. 35.
cup of water in my name etc. he shall not loose his reward. And S. Matthew
testifies, that heaven is given as merited herby; For I was hungry, and you
gave me to eat etc. And that the same work is also satisfactory, Toby
anoucheth: Almesdeeds deliver us from sin and death. Solomon confirms: As
water quenches fire, so Alsmesdeeds extinguish sin. Which To^. 4. v. 11.
Eccles* v. 35.
cannot be meant of blotting out the guilt of any mortal crime, wholly remitted
by repentance, therefore it is understood of satisfiyng for the punishment, to
which a sinner is liable. Neither is there any reason why the same work of
prayer, for example, may be meritorious to him that prays, and propitiatory
in the sight of God to obtain some benefit unto others, if it may not be also
satisfactory for their sins, because the excellency of the work, from which
merit proceeds, is nothing lessened, but rather augme^ted by reason of the
painfulnes, and the painfulnes from which Satisfaction is made more precious,
in regard of the dignity. So that merit may well comply in the same action with
Satisfaction, and Satisfaction agree with merit. Yet there is a great
difference between them; for no man can merit for others, but satisfy he may:
Christ only has merited both grace and glory for us all and thoroughly
satisfied for our sins. The virtue of his merits communicated unto us by our
meritorious deeds, we can derive to none but our selves; the fruit of his
satisfaction we may apply by our satisfactory works, both to our selves, and
to our fellow members.

4. Besides, no man can merit so much, but he may daily increase and merit
more; and it is impossible to arrive to such height of perfection in the way of
merit, but the crown of reward shall infinitely surpass the worthiness of our
deserts: For the sufferances of this time are not condign Romans 8. 18. Bernar.
de conuers. ad Clericos sermon. 30.
to the glory to come. They are not answerable (says S. Bernard) to the
precedent fault which is remitted, nor to the present grace which is infused,
nor to the future glory which is promised unto us. But they may be
notwithstanding in the way of Satisfaction, more the^ enough to discharge the
debt of punishment; for that being rated according to the proportion of the
fault^, As the measure of sin, such shall be the number Deuteronomy. 25.
of stripes. Many zealous Penitents, and perfect followers of Christ, have
endured more penal afflictions, then the satisfaction of their sin required.
Now the surplussage or supererogation of these spiritual satisfactions, which
auance Nazian. orat. 4^. quae est orat. 2. in Pascha. In extra^. Vnigeni^. de
poenis. and remis. 1. Pet. 1. Psalm. ^^^. Basil exponens verb^ Psalm. 48. Chrysostom.
hom 10. in ep. ad Rona^o^.
to some, are not vain or superfluous, but make up one complete mass of
passions, which abound in the Church, chiefly through the sufferings of Christ
and our B. Lady. For first, if every drop of Christ's precious blood (as S.
Gregory Nazianzen does insinuate, and Clement the sixth define) if every prayer
he made, and work he achieued might have been sufficient to have satisfied
for the sins of all mankind; what a great price, what a cop^ous redemption,
what an inestimable ransom did he offer for us? A price (says S. Basil)
surpassing all value. A ransom, which as much exceeds (says S. Chrysostom)
the sum of our iniquities, as the maine Ocean surmounteth a little spark of
fire cast into it.

5. Likewise our Blessed Lady, who never spotted with the stain of sin, who
replenished with the fountain of grace, went daily forward increasing in many
charitable and painful works, had a rich heap of satisfactions to augment
the sum before mentioned. Fulke in c. 1. ad Colos. sect 4. Matthew. 1.
Which because M. Fulke is ashamed to confess, he villanously denies, by the
instigation no doubt of some infernal spirit, this immaculate purity of the
Virgin Mary, and belcheth forth out of his impure breast: If she He speaks
absolutely and accuses our B. Lady as well of actual as of original sin, as
appears out of his a^not. in c. 3. Mar. sect. Scotus in 3. sent. did 3.
quaest. 1. Zuarez. Tomo 2. in 3. part. distinct. 3. sect. 5. Bonau^n. 3. did.
3. q. 2. Aug. Ep. 57.
never sinned, how can she rejoice in God her Savior? How can she be one of
Christ's people, who was called Jesus, because he should save his people from
their sins? Blasphemous Catiffe! who would not understand that Christ might
redeem his Mother, as Scotus and Zuarez teach, as well by preserving her from
sin, by his preventing grace before she were touched with any infection, as
by cleansing her after she was once defiled. As a man may be saved out of a
dangerous pit, either by warning given before, or succor yielded after his
fall.

6. Our Blessed Lady rejoiced in God her Savior she was the Queen of his
chosen flock, redeemed by him by special prevention that she might not sin,
not by subuention after her ruin. Some peradventure more curious in reading
then judicious or cunning in expounding the Fathers, will urge out of S.
Augustine: Nullus redimitur nisi is qui vere per peccatum fuerit antea
captiuus. No man is redeemed but he that has served under the yoke of sin.
Which because the good Angels never did, our Savior Christ who merited grace
and glory to them, is not properly said to have redeemed them. No more can he
be said to e^sranchise our Blessed Lady, if she were never subject to the
bondage of sin. I answer it is true, that he who is redeemed must have been
first captiued either in himself or in the root and origin from whence he
springs: The good Angels were neither of these ways ever inwrapped ad Romans
3. v. 23.
in the bands of iniquity; but the Virgin Mary howbeit she never sinned
neither actually or originally in her self, yet she truly proceeded from that
root or Hest. c. 15. verse. 13. In Lege princeps. de legibus. Genesis 34. v. 16.
and v. 19. Aug. l. de natura and gratia cap. 36. Cyp. ser. de natiuitat.
Christi. Amb. ser. 22. in Psalm 118. virgo per gratia^ ab onmi integra labe
peccati. Nissen* ho. 13. in Ca^tic. Ansel. l. de concep. virg. and l. de
ex^ellen. virg. c. 3. Bonauent. in 3. sent. d. 3. Richard. Victor. ^an. 39.
Cant. 4. Job. c. 6. v. 2.
of spring in her parents, from whence she should have drawn by natural
propagation the corruption of sin, had she not been miraculously preserved,
and after this manner most perfectly redeemed, had she not been by a singular
prerogative exempted from that general sentence of S. Paul: All have sinned
and need the glory of God. Had she not been privileged by God as Hester was
by Assuerus, when he spoke unto her: Non pro te, sed pro omnibus haec Lex
constituta est. Not for thee, but for all this Law was enacted. To which
purpose Vlpianus says: The Prince is not subject to his own Laws, and the
Empress although she be subject, yet the Prince grants her the same
privileges himself enjoys. The Mother of God was the Queen, the Lady, the
Empress of the world, to whom as her Son imparted that unmatchable favor
to be free from the common malediction imposed upon women: In dolo reparies: In
dolor and grief shall thou bring forth thy children, to be free from the
universal decree inflicted upon all both men and women: In puluerem
reuerteris: Thou shall return into dust: so likewise from the general and
absolute sentence of the Apostle, All have sinned etc.

7. Therefore S. Augustine reckoning up all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and just
persons to have been stained with the blemish of some venial fault, excepteth
always our Blessed Lady: Of whom (says he) for the honor of our Lord, when
we talk of sins, I will have no question. With whom S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose,
Gregory Nissen, S. Anselme, S. Bonauenture, and Richardus Victorinus agree, who
attribute unto her that saying of the Canticles: Thou art wholly beautifyed my
beloved, and there is no spot, or blemish in thee. No spot, no blemish of
sin, suffering notwithstanding many dolorous griefs, she abounded with great
satisfaction treasured up in the storehouse of the Church.

8. Job abounded with the like, affirming of himself: I would to God my sins
by which I have provoked the wrath of God, and the calamity which I suffer,
were waighed in a balance* like the sand of the sea this would seem more
heavy. S. Mary Magdalen, Colos. 1. v. 24.
the Apostles, sundry Martyrs, and other holy persons have abounded with the
like. Especially S. Paul, who writes thus: I accomplish those things that
want of the Passions of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the Church.
Fulke in c. ^ ad Colos* sect. 4.
And what was this, which was wanting to the sufferings of Christ? Was there
any defect in his Passion? No. Was this suffering then of the Apostle only (as
M. Fulke answers) for the glory of God, and confirmation of the Church in
faith of the Gospel? No. It was also as th words enforce, to fulfill the
plenitude of Christ's and his members passions, for the benefit of the Church,
and behoof of others, to Aug. in Psalm. 6^.
whom they be communicated. For as Christ our head withal his elect make one,
mystical, common, and public body: so his sufferings with the afflictions of
his members concur to make up (as S. Augustine says) one common and public
weal, one general and public treasure. To which when we add, we accomplish
with S. Paul, Aug. ibid. Orig hom. 10. and 24. in Number.
that which is wanting to the Passions of Christ: and for the debt of sin
according to our mean ability, (to speak with the same S. Augustine) we pay
that we owe. Which Origin also taught long before him, and strengthened with
some testimonies of holy Writ.

9. Touching the second point, that this common treasure of penal afflictions
is dispensable unto others by them, to whom God has committed the government
Matthew. 18.
of his Church, is likewise plain by those words of Christ: Whatsoever ye
shall loose upon earth, shallbe loosed in heaven. And principally by those he
used to S. Peter: Matthew. 16.
Whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be loosed also in the heavens: which
being generally spoken without restriction are not only to be expounded of all
spiritual power to forgive sins in the holy Sacraments, by application of
Christ's merits, but also to release punishment out of the Sacrament, by
dispensing his own and his Saints satisfactions. 1. Cor. 2. Theodoret upon
this place. Cyp. ep. 13. 14. 15. Tertul. l. ad Martyr. Council. 1. Nicaen. can.
^1.
Thus S. Paul granted Indulgence to the incestuous Corinthian of his deserved
punishment, whom at the intercession (as Theodoret writes) of Timothy and
Titus he pardoned in the person of Christ. Thus the Bishops of the Primitive
Church gave many pardons and Iudulgences to sundry Penitents, by the mediation
of Confessors or designed Mattyrs, of which S. Cyprian and Tertullian make
mention. Thus the first Council of Nice appointed mercy and Indulgence to be
used to such as perfectly repented; whereas others should perform and expect
their whole time of penance. All these pardons, and many more which S. Gregory
the Tho. in 4. sent. dis. 20. q. 1 art. 3.
Great, Abbas Vrspergen in chron. Fulke in c. 8. 2. ad Cor sect. 3. 2. Cor. 1.
v. 6. Collos. 1. v. 24. Romans 9. v. 3. Orig. hom. 10. and 24. in Number. 2. Cor. 8.
v. 14.
Leo the third, Anton 2. p. hist. tit. 16. cap. ^.. 23.
Urban the second, Ludger^^ ep. de S. Swiberto apud Surium tom. 2.
Innocentius the third, and others granted, were always dispensed out of the
public treasure of the Church.

10. Moreover it is conformable to Gods justice, auswerable to the Communion of
Saints, which we profess in our Creed, agreeable to the mutual intercourse
between members of the same body, that the wants of one be supplied by the
store of others, and that there be (as I say) a communication of benefits, not
only from the head to the members, but also from one member to the rest of his
fellow members. After which manner not only the chief Magistrates and Stewards
of Gods house, to whom he has given commission to dispense his misteryes and
all his goods, but every particular man may by special intention apply, not
his spiritual merits (as M. Fulke contentiously cauilleth) but his
satisfactory works with which he abounds, to such as need them. So S. Paul
offered his afflictions one while for the Corinthians: another while for the
Colossians: now he desired to dye for the Romans, then to be Anathema, that is,
A Sacrifice, as Origin expounds it, for the Jews. For this cause he
exhorts the Corinthians to contribute largely to the poor of Jerusalem,
saying: Let in this present time your abundance supply their want, that their
abundance may supply your want. As if he should say, communicate you now unto
them the superfluity Chrysostom. Theod. Thom. Haymo, Primas. Ambros. Oecum.
Theophil. in hunc locum. Fulke ibid. sect. 3.
of your worldly wealth, that you may interchangeably receive from them the
supererogatio^ of their spiritual good deeds: Of their integrity of life, and
trust in God, says S. Chrysostom: Of their commendable patience, Theodoret:
Of their prayers, S. Thomas: Of their fastings, Haymo: And of many other such
spiritual blessings which Primasius, S. Ambrose, Oecumenius, and Theophilact
insinuate. So as M. Fulkes saucines is detestable in forcing most of them to
his private sense against their words and meaning, against the text of S. Paul,
and this profitable exchange of spiritual favors for temporal gifts.

11. In fine, King David plainly acknowledges the mutual communication of
which now I treat, saying: Psalm. 118. Psalm. 12^. v. 3.
I am made partaker of all that fear our Lord. And speaking of the Church,
which he calls Jerusalem, he says: It is built as a City, whose
participation is in it self; that is, as in a politic Commonwealth, or
public City there is a general traffic for the common good of all and
every particular man's necessity: so in the Church or City of God, there is a
participation or communion of spiritual works of all, to one end, to one
public benefit, and for the behoof of every private person. In our natural
body one member (says S. Augustine) speaks in behalf of the Aug. in Psalm.
30. con. 1. August. tract. 33. in Joan.
other. The foot is trodden on, and the tongue cries, Why do thou hurt me?
And in another place: The eye only sees in the body. But what? Does the eye
see to it self alone? It sees to the hand, it sees to the foot, it sees to
the rest of the members etc. The hand only works. But what? Does it work to
it self? It works to the eye. So the foot walks and labors for the rest
of the members etc. The same we see in a body Politic. One Citizen takes
pain and discharges the debt of his fellowcittyzen. Why then in this
mystical body of the Church, 1. Cor. 12. Matthew. 5^ Luc. ^.
which S. Paul compares to a natural, our Savior to a Politic body: why, I
say, may not one member suffer affliction, and by satisfying the justice of God
according to his weakness, redeem the fine of punishment, which is laid upon
another? Because, says M. Fulke, it is written: Fulke in c. 1. ad Colos. sect.
4. Ezech. 18. v. 20. ad Gala. 6. v. 5. Psalm. 48. v. 8.
The soul which sins, even that shall dye. Every one shall bear his own
burden. And: No man can redeem his brother, or give a price to God for him. A
weak battery to shake the Fort of my former reasons. For there is no question,
but the soul which sins mortally (of which Ezechiel speaks) incurreth,
without sorrow and repentance, eternal death. No question but every one shall
bear his own burden in way of merit or demerit, albeit he may be helped by
others in way of satisfaction. It is likewise out of doubt Basil. in comment.
in hunc locum.
that no man can give a ransom to deliver his brother from the guilt of sin
and danger of damnation, as S. Basil expounds that passage. Nevertheless he
may give a price dedicated in the blood of Christ to redeem him from the
punishment, the fault being pardoned.

12. But M. Fulke obiecteth: Our Bulls or Plenaryes are given, a culpa and
poena: Both from the fault and pain. They M. Fulke in ca. ^. 2. Cor. sect. 4.
and 6.
grant a full remission of all sins, as may be seen in the grand Iubiley of
Pope Boniface the eight, and in that which Leo the tenth granted to the
Hospital of S. Spiritus in Saxia Almae Vrbis. I confess such words may be
sometime inserted, not that by the force of Pardons the guilt of sin is
released, but because they always require as a necessary disposition in
sinners, either the benefit of absolution, or perfect Contrition, when
absolution cannot be obtained. Therefore they are said to give a Plenary, or
full remission of sins, to pardon the fault and punishment; the fault by
contrition, or by the Sacrament of Confession; the punishment which remains
by the Charter of Indulgence.

13. Then M. Fulke excepteth against the number of M. Fulke in ca. 2. 2. ad
Cor. sect. 7.
years some Pardons contain, as thousands of years and Lents, besides full
remission of all sins. I answer, when any pardon expresses many thousand
years Indulgence, they are understood of the years, or Lents of Penance
(which by the ancient Canons of the Church were inflicted upon sinners. For
whereas they assigned sometimes 7. sometimes 10. now 12. now 15. now 30. years
punishment, sometime the mourning of the whole remnant of our Vide Burchar.
Epis. VVorma. de poenit. Decret. l. 19. and de. fornicat. Decret. l 17 Vbi haec
probat ex Conc. Ancyran. c. 15. ex poenitentiali. Theod. ex Decr^t Eutychi
Papae and ex poen. Romano. Job. c. 15. 1^
life, for certain enormous crimes, and often 40. days, or a Lent of Penance
for lesser sins: How many thousand years, and how many Lents of such due
correction are they behind on the score, who have a common custom of sinning,
drink as holy Job complains, iniquity like water, and multiply their
offenses above the sands of the sea. These I say, be the years, these be the
Lents cut off by Indulgences: whereby you may see how impertinent that objection
of our Adversaries is, that Purgatory shall not continue so many years as our
Pardons specify, for they are not meant of the years or days of penal
affliction which there are imposed, but of such only as should by the
Canonical decrees be here inflicted. Now God may sometime by the bitter
sharpnes of Purgatory-paines in an hour, or in a short momentary time expiate
that which the slow and cold satisfaction of this life could scant redeem in
the mountenance of diverse years.

14. Against other abuses, which either by negligence of Pastors, or
covetousness of inferior Officers, have been practiced in promulgating
Pardons, the general Council of Lateran, the Council of Vienna, and of late
Conc. Lat. in Decreto Inno. 3. Vienn^n. in Decreto Clementis 5. Trident. s^ss
^5 ecreto de Indulgentijs.
the Council of Trent, has made such severe and wholesome laws, as they
cannot be free from egregious treachery, who attach us of allowing those
crimes, which we utterly labor to suppress.

15. In which kind because our English Protestants peruersly ween, and
obstinatly auow our supreme Pastors guilty of an abominable sacrilege, which
never entered their Holiness hearts, to wit, of granting Pardons to ratify
murders, or to perpetrate sins: because I say, they are so wilfully settled
in this vile conceit, as nothing whatsoever we say, or do, no words, no
writings, no Breues of Popes, no oaths, no protestations, no means at all
that man can use, can ever extirpate that pe^uish and deep rooted, wicked, and
damnable persuasion.

16. It pleased God in the secret disposition of his hidden judgment to reveal
the contrary unto them by this wonderful and unexpected manner. About the
year of our Lord 1608. in the 6. of his Maiestyes reign over the kingdom of
great Britain, as the Sexton (or other officer appointed for that purpose) was
digging a grave in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, he chanced to
light upon the Coffin of one Sir Gerard Braybrook Knight, who had been buried
there two hundred years before, where finding the cords whole, the flowers
fresh, he espied also a Charter of Pardon or Indulgence, not consumed, not
eaten, not defaced in so long a time, which thus began.

BONIFACIVS Episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei. Dilecto filio Nobili viro, Gerardo
Braybrooke Iuniori, Militi, and dilectae in Christo filiae Nobili mulieri,
Elizabethae eius vxori, Lincolniae Diocaesis, salutem and Apostolicam
benedictionem. Prouenit ex vestrae deuotionis affectu, quo Nos and Romanam
Ecclesiam reueremini etc.

I omit the rest in Latin, because the whole I set down verbatim in English, as
follows.

BONIFACE Bishop, servant of the servants of God. To his beloved son the noble
Gentleman, The copy of a Bull ^ound in the tomb of Sir Gerard Braybrooke
Knight, in S. Paul's Church in London.
Gerard Braybrooke the younger, Knight; and to his beloved daughter in Christ
the noble Lady his wife Elizabeth, of the Diocese of Lincoln, salutation and
Apostolical benediction. It proceeds from your affectionate devotion, with
which you reverence Us, and the Church of Rome, that We admit your petitions to
a favorable hearing, especially those which concern the salvation of your
souls. For this cause, We being moved to yield to your supplications, by the
tenor of these Presents, do grant this Indulgence to your Devotion, that such
a Ghostly Father, as either of you shall choose, shall have power by
Apostolical authority to grant to you (persisting in the sincerity of faith,
in the unity of the holy Church of Rome, and in obedience and devotion toward
Us, or Our Successors Popes of Rome, Canonically entering into that Sea) full
remission, only once, at the point of death, of all your sins whereof you
shall be contrite and confessed: in such manner nevertheless, that in those
cases where satisfaction is to be made to any other, the same Confessor shall
enjoin you to do it by your selves, if you survive, or by your heirs if you
shall then die, which you, or they ought to perform as aforesaid. And least
(which God forbid) you should by this favor become more prone to commit
unlawful things hereafter: We declare, that if upon confidence of this
Remission or Indulgence, you shall commit any such sins, that this present
Pardon shall not be any help to you concerning them. Furthermore let it be
lawful for no man to infringe this Writing, or Grant of Ours, or with
whatsoever boldness to contradict it. And if any shall presume to attempt any
such thing, let him know, that he shall incur the indignation of Almighty
God, and of his blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Given at Rome at S.
Peter's, under the Fishers-Ring, the fifth of June, in the second year of our
Papacy.

17. Let our Sectaries peruse this Breue, and tell me whether their consciences
will ever serve them again to vpbraid our Pastors with the former sacrilege
so rise 4. Conditions necessary to gain an Indulgence.
heretofore in all their mouths. Let them read the conditions here required to
gain an Indulgence, and tell me whether they any way encourage or authorize us
to sin. For first it is necessary thereunto to persist in the sincerity of
faith. Secondly, to be sorrowful, contrite, and confess our sins. Thirdly,
to make satisfaction, or restitution, if any be needful. Fourthly, not to
presume hereby to attempt unlawful things. But who can be sorrowful, much
less fruitfully confess, or duly satisfy for that which he purposes to
commit? who can be embolned to fall into sin in hope to obtain a Plenary
Indulgence, when this very hope and presumption is a maine bar not to gain
the Indulgence? And strange, no doubt, strange and admirable was the providence
of God in manifesting these things in so fit a time.

18. For as in the days of Theodosius the Emperor, Gregor: Turon. de glo.
Mart. l. 1. c. 95. Baron in annal. an. Christ. 357. This happened in the year
of our Lord 1582. under Pope Gregory the 13.
he, awaked and revealed the happy Martyrs S. Maximian, Malchus, Martinian and
the rest, after they had slept 372. years, when the article of our
resurrection was most eagerly impugned by the Sadducean heresy: and as he
revealed the body of S. Felix Pope and Martyr, by means of some who to find a
treasure dug at Rome in the Church of S. Cosmas and Damianus the very day
before his feast is celebrated, when so many doubts were made about his
Martyrdom, as his name might have been otherwise in danger to be blotted out of
the Calendar: So the Divine wisdom who with admirable sweetness disposes all
things, even then in the Royal City, in the chiefest Temple, in the greatest
recourse of English Sectaries disclosed this pardon in testimony of the
innocence of his Vicegerents, when they were most hoatly pursued, and most
wrongfully condemned of the deepest crimes in abusing of them; that none
hereafter may presume to stand against a witness produced from heaven, or
return them as faulty, who are so evidently acquitted by the sentence of God.

19. To conclude therefore, and briefly recapitulate what has been said in these
two former Chapters. 1. I have proved out of Scripture, that the fault of sin
being pardoned, some punishment may after remain. 2. I have proved out of
Scripture, that we our selves, or some other in our behalf may satisfy God for
that dept of punishment. 3. I have proved out of Scripture, that diverse perfect
men have more Satifactory works, then the punishment of their sins require.
4. I have proved out of Scripture, that this surplufsage of Satisfactio^s is
appliable unto others. Therefore seeing the whole ground of Indulgences
consists in this communication of superabundant Satisfactions, the whole
ground of Indulgences is strongly fortifyed by the infallible authority of holy
Scripture.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE NINTH CONTROVERSY, MANIFESTS How Christ our Savior performed not the
office of Mediation, according to both his natures: against D. Fulke, and D.
Field.
CHAP. I.
I HANDLE this Controversy chiefly to declare a doubt of no small importance,
in which my Gracious Sovereign King James desired once to be resolved, as I my
self heard a Noble man coming from Courr, deliver A deep and learned
question proposed by King James.
in the presence of many great personages. The doubt was this: How our Savior
sussered, and in what manner he satisfied for the multitude of our sins?
Whether as God, or as man, or partly as God, and partly as man. If as God, his
Godhead was passible, his Godhead corruptible, which is impossible. If as man,
his manhood being finite, and all the actions of his humanity finite, they
could not be of infinite value to ransom the iniquityes of men. If partly as
God, and partly as man, the Godhead is divided into parts, and some part made
passible; both which destroy the Nature of God. A learned question, and worthy
so Noble a Prince, if it may please him as willingly to give ear to the
answer, as he has wisely propounded the difficulty. The resolution whereof
wholly depends on this matter which I now discuss, according to what Nature
Christ did mediate in our behalf. For according to that he prayed, according
to that he sacrificed,, dyed and purchased the price of our redemption.

2. Two contrary opinions, or rather impious heresies, Cyr. ep. ad Eulog. and
patet ex quater. Nest. tomo 2. open. Cyr. Euag. l. 1. c. 2. Theo. l. 4. haer.
fabu. Gelas. l. de duab. ^at. cont. Eutych. Theod. vt supra c. vlt. Greg. de
Valent. in 3. p. disp. 1. q. 2. punct. 10. Luth. in confess. de coen. Dom.
Luth. l. de council. par. 2. p. 276. Zuing. in resp. ad Conf. Luth
I find touching this point. First Nestorius mantaining our Savior Christ, who
was borne of the Virgin, to be a mere man both in nature and person, did
obstinately teach, that he only prayed as man, suffered as man, and exercised
his function of mediation as a mere man; witness S. Cyril, Euagrius and
Theodoret* Eutyches on the other side vnconsta^tly affirming, that either the
deity of Christ was changed into his humanity (as Gelasius reports) or his
humanity into his Divinity (as Theodoret mentions) and that after this
conversion the Divine nature only remained, did consequently defend, says
Gregorius de Valentia, that he suffered in his Godhead, and died also according
to his Godhead, albeit in the outward show and semblance of man. Both these
wicked and diabolical opinions brewed by Satan, have been broached of late by
our new reformers Luther and Calvin.

3. Luther vented the Eutychian blasphemy, in the Confession he made of the
supper of our Lord saying: If I believe the humane nature only suffered for me,
Christ is a simple or infirm Savior, and then he himself needs another
Savior. Therefore he supposed with Eutyches, that his divinity suffered, as
appears by his inuectiue speeches against the Zuinglians, calling them
Nestorians for denying it, and by Zuinglius Apology, or defense of his brethren
in refuting Luther, who says: If Christ according to his Deity be passible,
certes, he is no God.

4. John Calvin in his book of Institutions wholly seems to favor Nestorius,
distinguishing with him, Two persons Calu. insti. c. ^3.. 9. 23. and 24
in Christ, the person of the Son of God, and the person of the Mediator.
Who howsoever he may strive to gloze that manner of speech: yet neither he, nor
Melancthon, nor M. Fulke, nor M. Field, nor any Protestant, who imbraceth their
doctrine, can from the blot of Arianisme or Eutychianisme Calu. ep. ^^ Polonos.
in^er tracta. p. 682. 683 printed Geneuae anno. 16 11. Melanct. ^^ locis edit.
1545. Fulke in c. 5. ad Haeb. sect. 4. Field in his 5. book of the Church ^^
16. Dan. cap. 2. Haeb. 7. v* ^6. Leo ser. ^ de natali Domini. Basi^. in illud
Psalm. 48. Frater no^ redimit. Nazian. orat. 2. d^ ^aschate.
be any way excused: for (explicating how Christ paid the forfait of our
sins, or made mediation to his Father) Calvin avouches, that he was our
mediator, According to his divine nature, in respect of which his Father was
greater then he. And that he was mediator; Before his Incarnation, before
Adams fall, even from the beginning. Melancthon: The divine nature was obedient
to the Father; It yielded to the divine anger. M. Fulke: Christ as God offered
Sacrifice. He was a Priest according to his Deity. He was our Mediator (says
M. Field) according to both his natures. Thus the Southsayers delude his
Majesty's wise demand, who might find many Daniels in the Church of God able
to unfold the mystery, and resolve him in the truth.

5. We therefore reply to the question propounded: that our innocent, and
impolluted Priest, our Mediator and Redeemer Christ Jesus, satisfied the wrath
of his Father for our manyfold transgressions according to his manhood and not
according to his Godhead. For albeit he were both God and man, yea perfect God
and perfect man, answerable to that of S. Leo: unless he were true God, he
could not affoard us remedy; unless he were true man, he could not show an
example; which S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and many others in like manner
affirm: Yet if you demand how and by what means he discharged the office of
mediation, the function of Priesthood? then we answer; He performed them by
the means of his humanity, and not by any work of his deity, which I
illustrate by this familiar example. Take one and the same man, who is an
excellent Physician, and a singular Lawyer: When he ministers wholesome physic
to his patient, it is true, to say, he who mynistreth physic, is both a
Lawyer and ^. Tim. 2. v. 5. Aug. l. 2. de pecca. orig. c. 28. Aug. praefat. in
E^ar. 2. Psa. 29. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei ^ 10. c. 20. Cyr. in Apol. pro 12.
Capitibus. Chrysostom. in c. 6. ad Haeb. Fulgent. l. de incarna. and gratia Christi.
Amb. l. 3. de fide c. 5. Idem ( inquit) Sacerdos idem and hostia:
Sacerdotiu^tamen and sacrifi^um humanae conditionis officium est. etc. Nemo
ergo vbi ordine^ cernit huma^^ conditionis, ibi ius diuinitatis as^ribat.
a Physician; yet you cannot say he ministers physike by his skill in law, but
by the art of physike: so our high Bishop, our merciful Redeemer, who
sacrificed himself upon the Altar of the Cross,, was (as I say) both God and
man. If you inquire according to what nature he offered this Sacrifice, or used
mediation in our behalf? then we reply: he accomplished them in his humane
nature, and not in his divine, which S. Paul by the instinct of the holy Ghost,
and the Fathers with him manifestly declare.

6. S. Paul auerreth: There is one God, one also Mediator of God and men, man
Christ Jesus. He did not say (as S. Augustine here observes) Christ Jesus, but
Man Christ Jesus, to denote the nature by which he was mediator; expressly
inferring, By this therefore a Mediator, by which he was man: and a little
before: Not by that by which he was equal to his Father. In his explications
upon the Psalms: What is it to be a Mediator between God and men? Not
between the Father and men, but between God and men. What is God? The Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost. What are men? sinners, wicked, mortal.
Between that Trinity and men's infirmity and iniquity a man is made Mediator,
not wicked, but yet infirm. In his book of the City of God: Christ is a true
mediator in as much as he assumed the form of a servant, whereas in the form
of God he receives the Sacrifice with his Father, with whom he is one God. S.
Cyril, S. Chrysostom, Fulgentius I let pass. S. Ambrose only I join with S.
Augustine, the Father with the Son, the ornament of Italy with the glory of
Afrike, who affirms: The same is the Priest, and the same the Host.
Nevertheless the Priestood and the Sacrifice is the office of humane condition:
And a little after: Let no man therefore where he sees the course of humane
property, there ascribe the right of divinity.

7. But you will say; the knot of his Majesty's difficulty is not yet unloosed.
For suppose he prayed, sacrificed and satisfied for our sins according to his
manhood, how could his prayer, his sacrifice, his satisfaction amount to such
infinite value, the nature of man being finit, and all his actions finit? I
answer, that this proceeded from the dignity of our Saviors person, which
being not the person of man (as Nestorius wickedly held) but the sole, sacred
and divine person of the Son of God, it dignified and ennobled the actions of
his humane nature, which it sustained, and made every one of such Rom 5. 20
inestimable price, as they far surpassed the sum of our trespasses, that,
where sin abounded, grace might more abound. For as the baseness of the
person, who iniureth another, increases the nature of the wrong: so the
worthiness of him that satisfyeth enhaunceth the valor of satisfaction. Hence
it comes, that the recompense made by a Prince is more esteemed, then that
which is exhibited by a private person, and the outrage attempted by a base
companion against a Prince, more heinous then the injury which a Prince
commits against one of mean condition. Therefore Aristotle in his Ethics
says: Arist. 5. Ethic. c. 8. Arist. 1. Metaph. c. 1.
If a Magistrate strike another, he is not to be stricken again: but if any man
strike him, he is not only to be stricken again, but seuerly also to be
punished. Where by the baseness of the offender, and worthiness of him that is
offended, he exaggerateth the grieuousnes of the crime, and greater desert of
punishment: So on the other side, in the way of recompense and satisfaction,
the excellency of him, that satisfyeth and submits in our behalf, makes
the submission far more acceptable, because Aristotle says: The Clem. 6. in
extra. vnigenitus de paeniten. and remis. Proclus hom. de Chri. natiuitate in
Council. Ephe. c. 7. ^om. 6. Amb. praf. in Ps 35. Leo epist. 83. Vniuersitatem
captiuoru^. Cyp. ser. de rat. cir cu^cisionis. 1. Tim. 2. v. 6. Ephesians. 5 v. 2.
Philip. 2. v. 8. Chrysostom. ho. 7. in eum loc. Cyr. cate. che^i. 13. Haeb. 5. v. 7.
actions are to be attributed to the persons that work. Wherefore seeing it
was the divine person of the Son of God, which by the operations of his
humanity prayed, sacrificed and humbled himself to his Father, he advanced his
prayers, his sacrifice, his humble submission, and every action he achieved in
his manhood to be in moral estimation truly accounted of infinite and
unspeakable worth.

8. He purchased for us by his merits and satisfaction (as Clement defines) an
infinite treasure. He paid (says Proclus) such a price, as did equal the
debt of sin, even in the axact nor me or rule of justice. He disbursed (as S.
Ambrose auerreth) gold so precious, a ransom so rich, as it was able to wash
away al sin: able to redeem (says S. Leo) the whole multitude of cap. iues.
Not through the benignity only of Gods favorable acceptance: but by the
worthynes (as S. Cyprian writes) of our Redeemers oblation, who with so great
authority entered the holy places etc. Where he deriueth the excellency of his
oblation from the great pre-eminence of his person, who offering and submitting
in our behalf not only the actions of his humanity, but himself also, his
own divine and sacred person, morally derived as much worthiness to his
works, as there was true reverence and dignity in himself. Which makes S.
Paul so often repeat, He gave himself a redemption for us: He delivered
himself for us an oblatio^ and host to God: He humbled himself being made
obedient. Where S. Chrysostom says: As much highness and dignity as he had, so
much humility likewise did he undergo. And S. Cyrill. Jesus offering himself
the price, shall he not app^ase the wrath of God conceived against men? Yes,
yes. The Apostle again auerreth it: He was Our Protestants perniciously
corrupt those words, say ing: He was heard in that which he feared, to prove
that he feared the payns of hell. O horrible blasphemy! S. Chrysostom. and the rest
in eum lolum. ^uar, in 3. par. disp. 4. sect. ^.
heard for his reverence, That is, for the reverence which was due unto him
being the Son of God, as S. Chrysostom, S. Anselme, Hugo de Sancto Victore
and Theophilact interpret it. And S. Paul seems to insinuate immediately
adding: And truly whereas he was the Son of God for that great dignity of his
person he was heard, and reverenced of his Father.

9. Here some learned Protestant may object. That the person of the Son of
God was the party offended; therefore it could not satisfy, but must be
satisfied by the submission of another. I answer with Suarez: the person of
the Son of God may be considered two ways; either as it is all one by
Identity with the nature of God, or as it supporteth the nature of man. In the
former sense he is the party offended and must be pacifyed: in the latter he is
our Priest, Mediator, and he that pacifyeth; because the operations he works
by his humanity are only capable of merit, and apt to satisfy, and not these he
produces by his Divinity. Which makes M. Fields, M. Fulkes, and their
followers assertion the more detestable, who faygne Christ to mediate by both
his natures. As though he could either merit or satisfy in respect of his
Deity, or without merit and satisfaction discharge his office of Mediation, the
mystery of our redemption. Many other such invincible reasons may be brought
against them.

10. For he that mediateth to another, uses some submission and entreaty unto
him to obtain that he cannot himself perform, which argues want and
impotency in the mediator, and power or authority in him, to whom mediation
is made. So that if Christ as God sueth and supplicateth to his Father, he is,
as the Arians said, more impotent then his Father, according to his Godhead,
he is a Creature, and not God. Again he that makes mediation, must be
distinguished from him to whom mediation is made: but the divine nature of
Christ is the party offended, he that ought to be pacifyed, he to whom
mediation is made; Therefore it cannot be he that makes mediation. For this
cause Cardinal Bellarmin infers, that Christ could not be our Mediator
neither Bellar. l. 5. cap. 5. de Chri. Mediatore.
according to both his natures severally, nor jointly. Not severally for the
reasons alleged: not jointly, because though in that sort he differ from the
Father and the Holy Ghost, neither of which is both God and man, and from the
Sons of men who are merely men: yet he differs not from the Son of God
(who was to be pacifyed) neither in nature, nor in person.

11. D. Field taxes this: as a silly kind of reasoning; And he like a silly
nouice impertinently or impiously replyeth: Field in his 5. book c. 16 fol. 53.
That the Son of God incarnate differs not only from the Father, and the
holy Ghost, but from himself as God, in that he is man; and from men and
himself as man, in that he is God. And therefore may mediate not only between
the Father and us men, but also between himself as God, and us miserable and
sinful men. How idle, how impertinent is this? Do not we grant? Does not
Bellarmine in the same place confess this difference? Bellar. l. 5. c. 3.
Do not we acknowledge that Christ does mediate between his Father and us; yea
between himself as God, and us wretched sinners? But the question is
according to what nature he performs it? And you, who affirm him to execute
it according to both natures, should show how the Divine nature of Christ,
which makes mediation, differs from it self, to whom mediation is made.
Assign no difference, and you confound the party satisfying with the party
offended, you make no satisfaction, no mediation at all. Assign a difference,
and you divide the unity of Godhead, you impiously deny the Blessed Trinity.
The Son, say you, assumed the nature of man, which the Father did not. True:
But what? Did the Incarnation or assumption of man make any distinction, any
mutation in the essence of God? Is not the divine nature of the Son,
notwithstanding his Hypostaticall union, the same with the Fathers, the same
with the Holy Ghosts? Is it not as far distant from* us in the Son, Aug. li. 2.
de pec. orig. c. 28. Fulke vbi supra. Aug. in Psalm. 109. Theod. in eumdem Psalm.
Iero. in Psalm. 109.
as it is in the Father? As far distant since, as before the incarnation?
Therefore I conclude with S. Augustine: Quomodo erit medietas, vbi eadem
distantia est? How can there be a mean, where the same distance still
remains?

12. The like forces we bring against M. Fulke, who makes Christ a Priest in
respect of his Godhead. For besides the Fathers, who directly affirm the
contrary, besides S. Augustine who says: As he was man, he was Priest; as God
he was not Priest. Theodoret: As man he did offer Sacrifice; but as God he did
receive Sacrifice. S. Hierome: Our Lord swore etc. Thou art a Priest for ever.
He swore not to him, who before Lucifer was begotten, but to him, who after
Lucifer was borne of the Virgin. Besides these authorityes, if Christ be a
Priest and offer Sacrifice (as M. Fulke holds) according to his Divinity, he
is both distinct from his Father and inferior to him according to his
divinity. He does homage to him as his Lord and supreme sovereign; and sits
not (as the Scripture teaches) on his right hand, equal with him in dignity,
equal in glory, power, majesty, as the Atha. ser 1. con. Arian. B^sil. l. de
Spir. sanct. cap. 6. Ambr. l. 1. defide c. 4. etc.
Doctors commonly interpret that place. Nay, he is (as the August. ^om. 6.
propos. 33. Fulk. in c. 5. ad Haeb. sect. 4. Field. 5. ca. 16.
Arians affirmed) the Priest and Minister of his Father, and not his true and
consubstantiall Son. M. Fulke, and M. Field with him seek to avoid these
blasphemies by distinguishing the works of mediation and Priesthood into two
sorts: into works of ministry, and works of authority. Of ministry; as to
pray, to pay the price of our Redemption, and by dying to satisfy for sin. Of
authority; as to enter into the helyest place, to reconcile us unto God, which
two, D. Fulke expresses: Or to quicken, give life, impart the spirit of
sanctification, to pass all good unto us from the Father in the holy Ghost,
which M. Field specifyeth: And then they will have the works of ministry to
be performed by Christ in his manhood: the works of authority in his Godhead.
Such maskes they prepare to hide the face of their monstruos assertion:
notwithstanding the ugly shape appears.

13. For here they first intermingle the ministerial function of man with the
powerful actions of God: To enter into the holiest place, to penetrate the
heavens, which M. Fulke vbi supra.
Fulke recounteth as a work of authority, was (if we speak of the action and
not of the power by which it was done) a local motion, and work of ministry
proceeding from man, and not from God, who is unchangeable, immovable, not
entering any place, but filling all places with his infinite immensity. In like
manner the reconciliation, which Christ as Mediator made, was the action of
his humanity, in which sense S. Paul said: God was in Christ 2. Cor. ^. v. 19.
reconcyling the World to himself, because he reconciled it to himself by
Christ by the obedience, and labors of his manhood. Or if he take this
reconciliation as made by God, without the interposing of a third person, as
one may by himself reconcile his enemy unto him, then (I say) this was no act
of mediation, but an act of Gods mercy, as much belonging to the Father, as to
the Son. So I acknowledge the works of authority, which M. Field loco citato.
Field mentions, to be the works of Christ's Divinity, but not the works of
mediation, not proper to the Son of God, but common to all the persons of Holy
Trinity, agreeable to that principle ratifyed by all Deuines: Indiuisa sunt
opera Trinitatis ad extra: The works of the Trinity outwardly Field in his 5.
book of the Church c. 16. f. 52. M. Fields reply sauoureth too much of
Arianisme.
produced, indiuisibly proceed from every person.

14. D. Field replyeth: Though their action be the same, and workedone by them:
yet they differ (...), in the manner of doing. For the Father does all things,
auctoritatiue, and the Son subauctoritatiue, as the Schoolmen speak. Thus
he writes, and still dippeth his pen in Arian poison. For yield that the
divine nature of the Son of God works in a different manner from the nature
of the Father, there must needs ensue some difference in nature, some
diversity of wills, otherwise it cannot be conceived, how the Tho. 1. p. ^. 19.
art. 4.
same indivisible essence, how the same unchangeable will, which is the cause of
all things, should change, and alter in manner of working.

15. Secondly, if the Father and the Son differ in manner of doing these
outward actions toward us their Creatures, then they are not both (as the
Deuines term The three persons of holy Trinity are but one beginning or
author of things.
them) Vnum principium: One sole origin or beginning of things; but the Father
causes and wills them one way, the Son another: the one creates,
quickneth, and gives life in this sort, the other in that. Which is nothing
else, but to rake up the ashes of old, dead and buried heresies, to give way to
the Manichees and other followers, to ma^^ diverse Creatours and Beginners of
things. Yet because you affirm the Schoolmen bolster this error, name (I
beseech you) what Schoolmen they are. Who, unless he were an Arian, presumed to
write, that the essential and external actions (for of them we now speak)
which the Father and the Son essentially produce, are different in manner of
doing? Who, in respect of these works, ever uttered those words, which I
quake again to repeat; the one did them auctoritatiue, the other
subauctoritatiue? What? Is the Son according to his Godhead an inferior
instrument or underling to his Father? The Oracle of S. Paul records: Christ
Jesus, when he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal unto
God: and shall this Phil. 2. 6.
Sectmates blasphemy take place, that he has power and authority to work
under God? He answers, his meaning is not the son should be an instrument
or underling Field ibi.
to his Father, but that he receives the essence he has and power of working
from the Father, though the very same that is in the Father, only differing (as
he notes before) in subsistence.

16. Is this M. Field, the part of a Christian, to sprinkle your writings with
words of blasphemy, and powder them over with a wholesome meaning? Has not our
learned Sovereign King James, worthily condemned Conradus Vorstius that
egregious Heretic, for the like abuse? K. James in his declaration concerning
his proceedings in the cause of D. Contradus Vorstius. page 36. Genesis 19. 24
does not he teach it unlawful to use in these great mysteries any other
phrase or manner of speech then such as the Church has always used? How dare
you then in his kingdom, under the shield of his protection; how dare you
diuulge in Print such venomous speeches, such pestiferous words? howbeit you
seek, as Vorstius did, to strew and cover them with a sugared sense. For I
confess the son of God receives his essence as begotten of his Father, and
so may sometime by denomination or appropriation of speech be said to work by
power received from his Father, as in Genesis it is written: Our Lord reigned
from our Lord. But for one person to mediate to another, is not only required a
different denomination, but a real and substantial difference: a distinction,
an inferiority in the very essence it self, in such manner as I have often
inculcated. Also I confess the persons of holy Trinity differ in Subsistence,
differ (to use the terms of Art) in Personal Notions, or Notionall Relations.
Yet hereof to infer an vnder-power or different manner of producing outward and
essential works, this (I say) is either to make some diversity of natures,
with the accursed Arians, or give scope to the Manichees to establish not a
double only, but a triple God, or threefold cause of things created. Now if you
tremble to support such wickedness as your words enforce, to what purpose was
that sacrilege breathed forth? How answer you the objection of the unity of
the works of the Divine Persons? how make you the same action a work of
mediation in one, and not in the other?

17. For you ought to know (good Sir) if you dare usurp the title, or challeng
the dignity of a Divine, that albeit the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost jointly
cooperate and accomplish the works of authority you mentioned, as they are
perfectly subsisting in three Persons really distinct: yet they perform them
not primarily or formally by their personal properties, by which they differ,
but by their will and understanding in which H^^r. de Gandauo quodl. 6. q 2.
they agree, and not by them (if we speak precisely) as they are Notionally,
but as they are essentially taken; that is, as they are one, absolute, and the
same in every person. It was I confess the error of Henry de Gandauo, that
the National knowledge and love of God did practically Molina in 2. par. q.
36. ^. 4. disp. 2. 5. and 6. Altifiod. l. 1. sum. c, 30. Greg. Arimin. 1. did
22. q. vnica. Valen^. in 1. par. disp. 2. q. 10. punct. 5. de person. Spiritus
Sancti. S^oc. l. 2. ^st. 1. q. 1.
produce all outward creatures: yet far was he from your impiety; far from
imagining so maine a difference, as to attribute thereby a work of submission,
subjection, mediation to one person, which is not in the other.

18. The holy Ghost as the Deuines teach, proceeds from the Father, and from
the Son, as they inco^municably subsist by their different relations: yet not
according to their difference, but according to one single or common virtue of
spiration, which is the same in both. In so much as the Council of Florence
had not only defyned that the Father and the Son are one origin or beginning
of the Holy Ghost, but also (as Al^isiodorensis, Gregory of Arimini, and
Valentia affirm) that they are not aliter atque aliter principium: After a
distinct and several sort a beginning: not breathing the holy Ghost in a
different manner one from the other. But Scotus excellently proves out of S.
Augustine, that as the Father and the Son are one beginning, in respect of the
Holy Ghost: so all Aug. l. 5. de Trin. c. 14.
three are one in respect of creatures. The reason is, because the Molina in 1.
par. q. 45 art. 6. Bannes ibidem. Molina in 1. part q. 36. art. 2. Disput. 3.
Deuines tell you, that the Relations of themselves are of no actiuity, their
only function is in wardly to distinguish the persons among themselves, and not
outwardly to work, but only as they are identifyed with the Almighty working
nature of God.

19. Moreover it is an approved principle amongst the learned, that in the
Trinity all things are one, Vbi non obuiat relationum oppositio: Where no
opposition of relations is interposed. But in manner of producing outward
actions there is no opposition of relations, no diversity of notions; therefore
all unity, conformity, and no difference at al. Which the Prophet Moses
denoted in the beginning Genesis ^.
of Genesis by these two Hebrew words, Elohim bara, Creauit Dij: where to show
the unity of the divine essence and Identity of action, together with the
Plurality of the Persons, he coupleth the singular number Bara, Creauit, with
the plural Elohim. And yet if they had created in a distinct manner, it had
been as needful to have used the plural number Creauerunt, to express their
variety of working, as the plural number Elohim to betoken the diversity of
persons: nevertheless if contrary to the Holy Prophet, I should yield unto M.
Field what he requires, it serves not his turn. For suppose the persons did
work in a different manner: yet the Son has no different manner of working
from himself; and therefore it still implies that he as God should mediate,
and be also he to whom mediation is made, which are the only things
controuerted between us, and the only points which always remain unanswered.

20. These are I grant, profound and deep mysteryes, these of the Trinity, too
deep M. Field for you to treat of; they are able to dazell the wits of
Angels, it is not strange that they have wholly darkened, and eclipsed yours.
Yet strange it is, you never heard what the Fathers write against you. Strange,
me thinks, you never read these words of S. Gregory Nissen: Not deuidedly for
the number Nis^^^. ad Ablabium Aug. l. 1. de Trin. c. 4. and 5. Later. Con. c.
Firmiter Tol^. 6. c. 1. and vndecimum in conf. fid. 10. 5. v. ^9. Damascen l.
3. de fide ortho. c. 14. 15. Maldonat. in c. 5. Io. Nazian. orat. 2. de Filio.
Tho. 3. p q. ^9. art. 2. Dam^s. l. 3. cap. 14.
of persons does the holy Trinity work every action. Nor those of S.
Augustine: The three divine persons inseparably work. Not the like in the
Lateran, the like in the 6. and 11. Tole^an Council. But most strange of all,
so great a Preacher and expounder of the word could never call to mind that
saying of S. John: What things soever the Father does, those the Son also
does in like manner, and not in a different manner, as S. John Damascen upon
this sentence excellently discourses, and confirms with the testimony of S.
Gregory Nissen. And Maldonate solidly observes out of Leontius, that the
Evangelist adds, Similiter, In like manner, to signify that the Son does
work all things, in the same sort with the Father, with the same power, with
the same auctority, says the same Leontius, and S. Gregory Nazianzen. The
reason is, as S. Thomas, and S. Damascen declare, because: Operatio sequitur
naturam, The operation follows the nature: And where that is one and the same
without any distinction, no distinction can there be in manner of action.

21. Nevertheless M. Field goes forward: In this sort to quicken, give life
etc. to whom he pleases especially with a kind of concurring of the humane
nature, meriting, desiring and instrumentally assisting, is proper to the Son
of God, manifested Field in his ^. book c. 16. fol. 52.
in our flesh etc. Therefore notwithstanding the objection taken from the unity
of the works of the Divine persons, may be a work of mediation. See what
errors spring out of heretical pride: first he would have the diverse manner of
working in the Son from the Father, wholly to arise out of their several
manner of subsisting: now that not sufficient, he seems partly to draw it
from the isntrumental concurrence of Christ's humane nature. As though either
the union of his manhood with the person of the Son, or the works it
produces should cause some alteration or diversity in the works of his
Godhead. And he who is in himself unchangeable, should be altered and changed
by the cooperation of his humanity. But what change can that cause in the
actions of God the Son, as they proceed from his divine Nature, which it
causes not in the actions of the Father, in the actions of the Holy Ghost?
Chiefly seeing S. Leo speaking in the person of S. Leo homilia de
Transfiguratione.
God the Father to our Savior Christ, says: This is my beloved Son etc. who
all things that I do does in like manner, and whatsoever I work, he without
any separation or difference works with me: If all things? If whatsoever?
Then those things which he works with the concurrence of his manhood, those
he accomplisheth without separation, without difference from the works of his
Father, and so cannot possibly by them mediate unto him.

22. To explicate my self more clearly. Touching the action of quickening, or
giving life, which M. Field terms a work of mediation, we speak not here
precisely of it, as it meritoriously issues from the humanity of Christ, but
as it is efficiently produced by the Godhead of the Son, with a kind of
concurring (for so he speaks) of the humane nature. In which respect either
M. Field distinguishes two agentes: God on whom the action of quickening
principally depends, and Man who instrumentally concurreth thereunto: or he
distinguishes them not. Say he distinguish them; then that work of authority,
as it proceeds from God, equally flows from all the persons of Holy
Trinity, in regard whereof they are all mediators, as well as the Son,
because the nature, which principally causes it, is common to all. Say he
distinguish them not, but make one sole agent of both, on which the work of
mediation indifferently and inseparably depends, then he confounds with
Eutyches the two natures of Christ; and with Macharius, Tho. 3. p q. 18. art.
1. In 6. Syn. genesis act. 4. 9. and ^6.
with Sergius, with the Monothelites their wills and operations; who for this
cause are enrolled in the rank of heretics, and above 1000. years ago
condemned by Pope Agatho in the sixth general Council.

23. Wherefore to draw to an end, I entreat you all who peruse this Treatise,
if the filth sucked out these miry puddles have not dammed up the passage of
truth if these dregs of heresies have not quenched in you all sparks of
grace, renounce the Patrons of such iniquity, beware the infection of their
folly, the fury of them, who proclaim Christ a Priest, Christ a Mediator
according to his Deity, and acknowledge with us how he discharges these duties
only as man: notwithstanding how his actions, his Sacrifice, his prayers and
tears were all of infinite and incomparable merit, through the excellency of
his divine person. Which I would to God his Royal Majesty would also
understand, for whose worthy satisfaction I have diligently labored to decide
this question.

THE TENTH CONTROVERSY DEMONSTRATETH The Primacy of S. Peter: against D.
Bilson, and D. Reynoldes.
CHAP. I.
ARISTOTLE the chief and Prince Arist. ^. 3. polit. ^. 5. 6. and. 7
of Philosophers assigns three several manners of governing a Commonwealth.
For either many of the meaner sort bear sway, or some few of the Nobility, or
only one as absolute Sovereign. If many, it is called Democracy: if few,
Aristocracy: if one, a Monarchy. The first, is often ruined with the tumults
and garboyles of the unconstant and diuersly-headed multitude. The second,
commonly divided with the strifes and factions of the ambitious Peers. The
third, as it is less subject S. Thom. de regim. principum l. 1. cap. 1. 23.
and. ^.
to division, so most convenient, as S. Thomas learnedly notes, to order,
guide and keep many in peace and unity; the final scope to which all
governments should be directed, and all rulers aim.

2. Whereupon Plato, Aristotle, Isocrates, and diverse other affirm, in peace,
in war, in managing al affairs, Plato in polit. Arist. l. 3. polit c. 11.
12. and l. 4. cap. 2. Isocrates oratione 3.
this to be the most divine form of a Commonwealth, where one most singular
man has the supreme power and administration of things, which both God and
Nature confirms. For in the mystery of the most holy Trinity, there is the
Father from whom the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who from the Father and the
Son, as from one only origin or beginning proceeds. They every way equal,
in properties distinct, in Persons three, are only one in ouer-ruling and
disposing all things. Amongst the immortal spirits and quires of Angels there
is one illuminated by God who gives light to the rest. In the Heavens there is
one first moveable, by which the inferior orbs and planets are moved. One
Sun from whence the light of the Stars is borrowed, and influence of the
signs in the Zodiac determined. In earthly things, in this little world of
man, there is one heart from which the arteryes and vital spirits, one brain
from whence the sinews, one liver from which the veins and channels of blood
have their head or offspring: in every element there is one predominate
quality. Amongst the birds the Eagle, among the beasts the Lion, among the
fishes the Whale does also dominier. In Trees, Cyprian tract. do Idolorum
^anitate.
Herbs, and Plants, in Towns, Villages, Families, and private Houses the
like head-ship or Monarchy might be showed if it were not too long for my
professed breuity; in so much as S. Cyprian writes: The very Bees have their
guide and captain whom they follow. Apo. 2^. 2. Cant. 6. 3. Mat. 13. v. 38.
41. Joan. 10. 16. Luc. 10. 34. 1. Tim. 3. ^^.


3. Now since the Church of Christ militant upon earth, is a perfect, yet
spiritual Commonwealth: since it is, An holy City, A camp well ordered, and
established by the wisest Captain, Governor, and Lawmakers that ever was: Who
doubts, but that he placed in it, the most worthy Regiment of all others,
that Monarchical pre-eminence which in all his other creatures so perfectly
reigns; especially for that he resembles it to A kingdom to A sheepefold,
to An Inn, to An House, in which one King, one Pastor, one Host, one Master
bears sway. For that it ought to be correspondent to the ancient Mat. 16. 18.
19.
Synagogue, in which one High Priest answerable to the celestial hierarchies
and orders of Angels, among whom one Seraphim is chief. And who was this
visible Monarch, this Ministerial head of the Church under Christ, but S.
Peter? To whom our Savior said: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I
will give to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth, it shall be bound also in the Heavens: and whatsoever
thou shall loose in Earth, it shall be loosed also in the Heavens. In which
sentence four rare prerogatives are promised unto Peter, and by every one of
them, his supereminent dignity above the rest of the Apostles manifestly
declared.

4. For first he calls him Rock, by which Metaphore he does insinuate, that
he, as a Rock or Stone immovable, Amb. ser. 47. Orig. hom. 5. in Exodus
says S. Ambrose, vpholdeth the whole weight and fabrike of Christian work.
That he, says Origin, is the great foundation, or most solid stone, upon
which Christ builded his Church. Secondly, he adds: To thee I will give the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, by which words is signified all power to enact
or repeal Laws, sommon or confirm Councels, appoint or displace offices,
consecrate or degrade Bishops, all power and authority, which is requisite for
the rule, government, or instruction of the Church. For even as when the keys
of a City are given up to the Magistrate, the administration and rule of the
State is surrendered into Greg. l. 4. epi. 32. Luc. 11. 52. Apoc. 1. v. 18.
his hands: so now when the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven are imparted to
Peter: The whole charge and principality of the Church, as S. Gregory writes,
is committed unto him. And whereas there be two sorts of Keys: the Key of
knowledge to teach and instruct, of which S. Luke: You have taken away the Key
of knowledge; and the Key of authority and jurisdiction to guide and govern,
whereof S. John speaks: I have the Keys of death and of Hell; and Esaias: I
will give the Key of the house of David upon his shoulder. Both these Keys
were here delegated unto Peter: by Isa. 21. v. 22. It was usual amongst the
Hebrews to give power and authority by the Keys vid. Azor. Insti. mor. p. 2.
c. 9.
the one he had the Chair of infallible doctrine to decide all controversies,
and define all matters of faith: by the other the scepter of Ecclesiastical
government to rule, order, correct, and chastise all the members of Christ's
mystical body. Thirdly, he subioyneth. Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth,
it shall be bound also in the heavens. Fourthly, whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens: that is, whatsoever punishment
thou shall inflict, either of excommunication, suspension, interdiction or
degradation, or whatsoever other spiritual Censure (for he speaks without
restriction) the same shall be ratified by Almighty God: and whatsoever of
these thou shall release, the same shall be released in the heavens above. Upon
which words, Origin observes no small Orig. tract. 6. in Math.
difference between Peter and the rest of the Apostles, because to them the
Keys of one heaven were given, to Peter of many. Whereupon he infers they
had not authority, in such perfection as Peter, to bind and loose in all the
heavens.

5. Our Adversaries not doubting of the highest sovereignty, M. Reyn-in his
Conference with M. Heart c. 2. diuis. 1. M. Bills. in his book of Christian
subjection, par. 1. fol. 62. and 63. Reyn. ibi. diuis. 2.
which by these singular privileges are betokened, apply some to Christ, some
to all the Apostles, but none peculiar to Peter alone. For the first
prerogative both M. Reynoldes, and M. Bilson attribute unto Christ, affirming
either him to be the Rock, upon which the Church is built, or the faith which
Peter pronounced of him, and not Peter pronouncing the same. The second, the
third, and fourth Reynolds extends to all the Apostles, because to them all
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given, the power of binding and
loosing, and not only to Peter. Silly men, who see not how they cross
themselves in their own answers. For our Savior speaking of one matter to
one person in one and the same sentence, to whomesoeuer he made the first
promise, to him he made the rest. Therefore if he promised the Keys to all the
Apostles, upon them all he promised to build his Church, and not upon Christ.
Or if he promised to build his Church upon himself, to himself he promised
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, to himself he promised all power of
binding and loosing, which had been as impertinent to our Saviors discourse,
as dissonant from truth. For Christ had all that power before, even from the
first hour he began to plant his Church, he already enjoyed those
privileges, not given by himself, as the jurisdiction here mentioned, but
imparted by his Father, from whom he was sent.

6. Again, as those answers encounter one another: The words of Christ import
some extraordinary favor to S Peter alone.
so they offer violence to the Text, each of them depriving Peter of that
sovereign dignity, which the whole passage of the place conueyeth unto him.
For the words of Christ are purposly addressed to the person of Peter; his
name is only changed at this time, and not any of the other Apostles; he is
called Rock, and none of the rest: he only speaks, and professes Christ to
be the Son of the living God; our Savior only names him, and continually
uses the singular number; yea he adds the name of his Father, to distinguish
him not only from the Apostles in general, but also from the other Simon. And
shall not all these particiculer descriptions denote something in Peter, more
then in the rest? If we appeal to the Greek, to the Hebrew, especially to the
Syriacke text, in which Fabri. in diction. Syro-caldaicolero. in c. 2. ad Gala ^
language our Savior uttered this whole discourse, it so evidently shows the
very first promise to have been made to Peter, and not to Christ, as nothing
can be more clear. For he speaking in Syriacke said unto Peter: Thou art
Cephas, and upon this Cephas will I build my Church; where the same word Cephas
signifying, as Guido Fabritius, and S. Hierome testify, a Rock, or Stone, is
used in both places. And the Greek words (...), and (...), though different
in termination, signify the same. Wherefore as if Christ speaking in English,
had imposed unto Simon the name of a Rock, and thereupon had said: Thou art a
Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my church, there would have been no
doubt, but that he had builded his Church upon Simon the Rock; so neither in
this present, speaking the same in Syrtacke.

7. M. Reynolds not able to resist, confesses at length Rain. c. 2. diuis. 1.
page 24.
that Fabritius translateth Cephas, a Rock. But Fabritius (says he) shows
further, that Cephas signifies a Stone also. And in the page immediately
following he adds Cephas in Greek is expounded (...), and (...) in English
signifies a Stone. Whereupon he counts this a fit translation of the former
Syriacke words: Thou art a Stone, and upon this Stone will I build my Church.
And what is this but to grant the substance of the thing, and wrangle about
words? For whether Peter were termed Rock or Stone, as long as he was that
stone, that singular stone, which after Christ vpholdeth the frame of the
militant Church of which the Apostles were part, he was the fundamental Cyr.
l. 2. in Joan c. 2. Cy^. ep. ad Quintum. Tertul. l. de praescript. Epipha. in
Ancorato. Amb ser. 47. Nazianz. orat. de mother. ser. Basil. l. 2. in Eunomium.
Aug. in Psalm. con^. partem Donati. Bills. part. 1. page 62.
Stone, upon which both they, and all others were built. And seeing the
foundation is the same to a house which a head to a body, he was the head of
the whole body of the Church.

8. The Fathers generally fortify the same. S. Cyril writes that Christ called
Peter by the name of Rock, because on him as on a steadfast rock or stone
immovable he was to build his Church. S. Cyprian says: Christ chose Peter,
upon whom he builded his Church. Tertullian terms him: Ecclesiae Petram,
The Rock or foundation of the Church. Read the like in Epiphanius, S.
Ambrose, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, and S. Augustine, of whom M. Bilson
most wrongfully and slanderously writes: That Peter is the Rock on which the
Church is built, S. Augustine and others do plainly deny. But what if S.
Augustine deny it not plainly? What if he deny it not at all? What if he
plainly avouch it, and that in diverse places? Will you ever give credit again
to M. Bilsons writings? Therefore he upon the Psalms says: O Church, that is,
O Peter: because upon this Rock w^ll I build my Church. Read the like upon the
69. Psalm, in his Sermons: Our Lord named Peter the foundation of his Church,
therefore the Church rightly honored this foundation, upon which the height of
the Ecclesiastical edifice is raised. Again: Only Peter August. conc. 2. in
Psalm. 30. and in Psalm. 69. Et ser. 15. de Sanct. and ser. 29. qui est 5. de S.
Petro and Paulo. Aug. l. 1. Retract. cap. 21. Bills. ^. par. page 63. Reyn. in
his conf. c. 2. diuis. 1. 1. Cor. 3.
among the Apostles deserved to hear: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will
I build my Church; worthy truly, who to the people, which were to be builded in
the house of God, might be a stone for their foundation, a pillar for their
stay, a keye to open the gates of the kingdom of heaven. M. Bilson may say, as
some Protestants are wont, that S. Augustine reuersed these things in his book
of Retractations; how beit he is so far from retracting that exposition, as he
there confirms it rather by the authority of S. Ambrose, and at the length
leaves it to the Readers choice, whether he will have Peter, or Christ the
Rock, on which he builded his Church.

9. But D. Bilson and D. Reynoldes with him allege out of S. Paul: Another
foundation can no man lay, then that which is already laid, which is Christ
Jesus. I answer another chief, principal, and independent foundation besides
Christ, no man can lay: but an inferior, secondary or subordinate may be laid
without danger of disgrace Basil. in concione de paeniten.
to his unmatchable privilege. Because as S. Basil excellently teaches: God
imparteth his dignityes, not depriving himself of them; but enjoying, he
bestows them. He is the light, and yet he says, you are the light of the
world: he is a Priest, Basil. ibid.
and he annoynteth Priests: he is the Lamb, and he says, Behold I send you
like lambs amongst the midst of woules* he is a Rock, and he makes a Rock;
and immediately before resuting this Ephesians. 2. Apoc. 21.
former objection he says: Though Peter be a Rock: yet he is not a Rock as
Christ is. For Christ is the Rock, immovable of himself, Peter immovable by
Christ the Rock.

10. If you infer that all the Apostles were thus termed Rocks and
foundations of the Church: I answer they were indeed in a certain manner
foundations all, because they were all chosen to preach the Gospel, and plant
the faith in every part of the world: they were all immediately instructed by
Christ; they had all most ample and universal jurisdiction throughout the whole
empire of the Church. In which respects Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Hilary, S.
Hierome and rest, whom M. Bilson and Bills. par. 1. page 63. Reyn. c. 2. diuis.
2. p. 37. John. 20. v. 23. Matthew. 16. v. 19. John. 17. v. 9. Luc. 22. v. 3^.
John. 16. v. ^3. Luc. 22. v. 32. Ephesians* 2. v. 20. Matt. 16. v. 18. Mar. vle. v.
15. Joan. 11. v. 17. Bern l. 2. de Consider. Pascere apud Haebreos idem
nonnumquam est quod regere. Psalm. 22. Dominus regit me. in Hebraeo est Dominus
pascit me.
M. Reynolds object, confess the keys to be given to all the Apostles, they
acknowledge them al Rocks and Foundations of the Church: yet as their
authority was delegate, S. Peter^ ordinary, as they had absolute power over
others, S. Peter over them; so they had all the keys, but with dependency of
Peter: they were all foundations, but Peter the first after Christ, and maine
foundation both to them, and to the whole Church with them. Whereby he excelled
the rest of his fellow Apostles in prehemine^ce of power, in pre-eminence of
Faith, in pre-eminence of dignity. And therefore whatsoever privilege in any of
these kinds is attributed in holy Write to all the Apostles together with
Peter, the same is imparted again to Peter alone in a more peculiar and
special manner. To them all power was granted to remit sins: Whose sins ye
forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose ye retain, they are retained. To
Peter alone in more ample sort: Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be loosed
also in the heavens. For them all Christ prayed that they might be constant in
faith, Not for the world do I pray, but for them, whom thou have given me* for
Peter alone, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. To them all our
Savior said, When the spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth:
to Peter alone, Confirm and strengthen thy brethren, in the truth the holy
Ghost shall teach. Of them all it is written, That we are planted upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: of Peter alone, Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church. To them all it was said, Going into the
whole world, preach the Gospel to every Creature: To Peter alone, Feed my
sheep. What sheep (says S. Bernard) the people of this or that City? Of this
or that Kingdom? My sheep (quoth he.) To whom is it not manifest that he
designed not some, but assigned all? Nothing is excepted, where nothing is
distinguished.

11. Feed my sheep: that is, feed all that are within the compass of my fold,
all that may be entitled mine, whether they be Apostles, Bishops, people or
Princes, unless Matt. 16. v. 18. and ^^. Psalm. 2. Mich. ^. Matthew. 2. Apoc. 2.
perchance their Apostolical, Episcopal, or Imperial sovereignty any way
exclude them from the number of my sheep. By these words that great reward,
which was promised to S. Peter in the 16. of S. Matthew, is here exhibited to
him and his successors: by these he is installed in his Pastoral dignity: by
these he is created head of the Apostles, and chief Governor of the militant
church as the Greek word (...) does declare, which imports not only feed,
but feed by governing and ruling, as may be seen in diverse other places of
Scripture. Likewise Eusebius. Emiss. sermon. in Na^iuit. S. Joan. Euang.
our Blessed Redeemer gave here unto S. Peter commission both to feed his
Lambs, and to feed his sheep, whereupon Eusebius Emissenus above a thousand
years ago, proposes this conuincing argument. He committed (says he) to S.
Peter his Lambs, and then his sheep, because he made him not only a Pastor,
but the Pastor of Pastors. Peter therefore feeds the lambs and also the
sheep. He feeds children and their Mothers, he rules the people and their
Prelates. He is therefore Joan. ^1. v. 15.
the pastor of all, because besides lambs and sheep there is nothing in the
Church. Hitherto Eusebius. Also before this power was given to Peter, Christ
demanded of him: Simon of John ^ouest thou me more then these? What caused the
Son of God to exact more love of Peter then of his fellow-Disciples? Had not
equal love been sufficient to equal care? Why then does he exact more? But
only because Chrysostom. l. 2. de Sacerd. Ecclesiae praefectura
he bequeathed unto him a far higher Dignity, a more perfect charge over his
floke, the headship or primacy of the Church, as S. John Chrysostom, by the
force of this argument inuincibly proves.

12. Moreover when our Savior repressed the in ordinate Luc. 22. v. 26.
lust and desire of reigning in his Disciples (a place with which our
Adversaries urge us, and we easily retorte upon them, turning the points of
their weapons, against their own breasts) two things he observed: he
reprehended the imperious and haughty manner of ruling ordinarily practiced by
worldly Princes: and he instructed them in another course of governing which he
purposed to plant among them. In the former he uses general Qui mayor est
invobis. Reyn. in his Confer. c. 2. diuis. 2. page 105. Reyn. ibid. Vos autem
non sic. or non ita erit inter vos, as S. Matthew reads. Matthew. ^0. v. 26.
Luc. 22. v. 26.
terms and speaks to them in common, Vos au. em etc. but you etc; in the
latter, particular words, directing his speech to one, he that is greater. In
the former he teaches them all to humble themselves, and not to thirst after
earthly preferments; in the latter he does not only teach humility to all (as
Reynolds would likewise slip away) but he also delivers an instruction to one
how to behave himself in government. In the former I accord with him, that he
debarreth them all from being such Lords, from such proud dominion as he there
rebukes, and therefore purposely says: But you not so; in the latter he
approves a distinct manner, but directly establishes a superiority amongst
them, saying, He that is the greater among you, let him become as the younger.
He does not say, he that would be, as in S. Mathews Gospel, but he that is,
nor he that is the greaterouer others, but he that is the greater among you.
Among you my Apostles, among you, in the midst of whom, I the Leader, have bin
like him that wayteth: so he whom I shall leave as chief among you, let him
follow my example, and be as the waiter.

13. Shall I here pose M. Bilson, shall I pose M. Reynolds, what this
instruction meant? was it addressed to some one amongst the Apostles designed
to be head or not? if they answer it was, as maugre all violent constructions,
or colored glosses, the Text it self does speak: Then there was one to be a
Greater, a Leader, a Captain, or Prince amongst them, as the Greek (...)
word, and Dirosh, that is, Princeps, a Prince in Syriack, in which language
our Savior spak. Luc. 22. 31. and 32.
Syriacke opens; if not, if it appertayned to none; how will they free the
wisdom of God, from letting fall those superflouous words? from teaching a
lesson, proposing an example, giving an instruction, which no way belonged to
any of his audience? how follows that sudden digression immediately hereupon?
Simon, behold Satan has required, to have you for to sift as Wheat, but I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, and thou once converted confirm
thy brethren. How is this saying connected with the former discourse? this
conversion of our Saviors speech at the same time to Peter? this redoubling of
his name? this mention of the prayer he made for him, of the authority of
strengthening his brethren given to him, unless he, he were the man appointed,
to be head and Amb. lib. 10. in c. 22. Luc. posteaquam, inquit, fleuisti,
erectus es, vt alios regeres qui te ipse non rexeras. Arnobius in Psalm. 138.
Rein. c. 5. diuis. 3. Mat. 10. 2. Beza in. Annot. Noui Test. An^o Domini 1556.
Mat. 16. Act. 2. Act. 10. Act. 3. Act. 4. Act. 21 Act. 1.
chief of them all? Which S. Ambrose flatly avouches, speaking thus unto
Peter: After thou have wept thou art raised up, that thou may rule and
govern others, who did not govern thy self. And Arnobius: Help it
affoarded to the Apostle penitent who is the Bishop of Bishops; and a greater
degree is restored to him weeping, then was taken from him denying etc. that he
might not only be assured to have recovered that which he had lost, but also to
have gotten more by repe^ting, then ever he lost by denying.

14. Further, whenever the Evangelists rehearse the Catalogue of the
Apostles, S. Peter is named first; which M. Reynolds basely conceiting
surmiseth to be, for that he was like the foreman of the quest in Iuries. But
S. Matthew expresses it to be, because he was indeed in the number of the
Apostles, (...), Primus; that is, The first; a word so significant in Latin and
Greek, as Beza suspecteth it to have been foisted into the text by some
favorer of Peter's Primacie. Not only in naming, in sundry others extraordinary
graces he is privileged as the first or chief of the Apostles. He was the
first who acknowledged and openly confessed the Divinity of Christ: the first,
who preached unto the Jews: the first, who converted the Gentiles: the first,
who confirmed his doctrine with a famous miracle: the first, who resisted the
Synagogue: the first, who increased the Church with three thousand at one time:
the first, who rises: the first, who propounds: the first, who concludes in
the midst of his brethren.

15. Finally the Scripture teaches that only Peter Mat. 17. Mat. 14. Luc. 5.
was matched with Christ in the payment of tribute. Only Peter walks, with
him upon the waters. Only Peter recei ueth Christ into his barge. Only out of
Peter's boat does our Savior teach and instruct the people. Only Ioa. 21. Act.
12. Luc. 22. Leo sermon. 3. de assump. sua ad Pontif. Luc. 5. v. 4. Amb. l. 5. in
c. 5. Luc. Gal. 1. 18. Oecum in eum loc. Chrysostom. hom. 87. in Ioa^. Amb. in
hu^c loc.
Peter's death and Passion was foretold by Christ. For Peter alone prayer is
made by the Church, without intermission. To Peter alone infallible assurance
was given to strengthen others in faith. To Peter alone our Savior said: Duc
in altum: Launch forth into the deep: that is, as S. Ambrose interprets: In
profundum disputationum: Into the maine depth of all disputations, of all
hidden mysteries of our belief. To see Peter alone, S. Paul came to
Jerusalem. He came as to his greater, says Oecumenius. As to the mouth and
chief of the Apostles, S. John Chrysostom. As to the first amongst the
Apostles, to whom our Savior committed the charge of the Church, S. Ambrose.
Few Iuries I ween will perform the like office, or yield such dignity to the
Foreman of their Quest.

16. But if you will see the Primacy of Peter more lively expressed, consider
the actions he accomplished after the ascension of Christ, and you shall every
where behold him practicing his sovereign authority. To publish the deposition
of one Bishop, and election of another in the College of the Apostles, is
proper to the chief Act. 2.
and highest Apostle: S. Peter pronounced Judas to have lost his Bishopric,
and proposed another to be chosen in his room. To condemn unto death without
check or controlment belongs to the chief and highest Judge; S. Peter
condemned Ananias and Saphira for their sacrilege Act. 5. Act. 8. Aug. l. de
haeres ^ares. 1. Act. 15. Ier. c. 3. epi. ad Aug. quae est 11. inter epist.
August.
in detaining that they had vowed unto God. To vanquish the first Peer and
Patron of falsehood appertained to the first Peer and pillar of truth; S. Peter
conquered and killed Simon Magus, the first Progenitour of Heretics, as S.
Augustine auerreth. To call and assemble Councels, is the office and function
of the supreme Pastor; S. Peter assembled the Council of the Apostles. And
notwithstanding this Council was held in Jerusalem, in the presence of S.
James Bishop of that Citry, even in his own Cathedral seat: yet S. Peter (as
S. Hierome notes) first delivered his mind, and S. James with the rest
ratified his sentence. So although S. Paul were the Apostle of the Dionys. l de
Diui nomi. c. 3. Epiph. haer. ^^. Bern. l. 2. de consider. Cyr. Hieros
Cateches. ^. Cyr. Alex. l. 12. in Ioa^. cap. 64. Aug ser. 124. de temp. and
quaest. nou. and vet. test. q. 75. Opta. l. 2. cont. Par. Ier. l. 1. in Iouin.
Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Mat. Eusebius. in Chronic. Aug. l. 2. ca. 1. de Baptis. Reyn.
c. 5. diuis. 3.
Gentiles, and Preacher unto nations: yet S. Peter was the first, by whose
mouth the Gentiles were called; the first, to whom notice was given of their
admission unto the Church. Two evident tokens of his supremacy.

17. For this cause S. Peter is termed: The stay, pillar, and chief of
Deuines, by S. Dionyse: The Captain of the Disciples, by Ephiphanius: The only
Vicar of Christ, by S. Bernard: The most excellent Prince of the Apostles, by
S. Cyril of Jerusalem: The Prince and head of therest, by S. Cyril of
Alexandria. Which title of head of the Apostles is given him also by S.
Augustine, Optatus, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom and others. Eusebius also makes
a great difference between Peter and other Bishops; speaking of S. James, he
calls him: The first Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem; Writing of Enodius
he terms him: the first Bishop of the Church of Antioch; Speaking of S.
Peter, he intituleth not him by any particular Church, but calls him,
Christianorum Pontifex Primus, The first Bishop of Christians. Which S.
Augustine confirms, attributing to him: The principality of Apostle-ship; and
a little before: The Primacy of the Apostles is conspicuous and preeminent with
excellent grace in Peter. Both which passages M. Reynolds sticks not to
expound of Primacy in calling, or preeminence in grace: whereas S. Augustine
directly writes of his principality of power, by reason of the dignity of his
Sea above all others, and above S. Cyprians the Primate of Affricke, whom
notwithstanding he equalleth with him in the Crown of Martyrdom, saying of
Peter: Who knows not his principality of Apostle-ship to be preferred before
every Bishopric? But although the grace or preeminence of Chaires be
different; yet one and the same is their Aug. vbi. supra. Reyn. loco citato.
glory of Martyrdom. These words M. Reynolds (who makes M. Heart never speak
more, then he was provided in some show to refute, and sometime such things, as
he never dreamed) cunningly cut off, and wresteth that to a prerogative of
grace, to a Primacy of calling, which S. Augustine avouches to be a privilege
of S. Peter's Sea, a preeminence of his Chair, and Pontifical dignity, above
all other Bishops and Primates too. Aug. in Psalm. 130.


18. Secondly, S. Augustine affirms S. Paul the chief, and to have excelled
Peter in prerogatives of grace, he witnesses him to have received more
abundant grace in every Apostolical work, then the rest of the Apostles,
because he labored more then they, and therefore is called: The Aug. cont. dua^
ep. Pela. l. 3
Apostles, by an De Bap. cont. Don. l. 2. c. 1.
excellency. In so much as where he gives to S. Peter the preeminence of (b)
excellent grace, he gives to S. Paul the preeminence of In Psa. 130. Ieron. l.
1. aduersus Iouinian. Reyn. c. 5. diuis. 3. fol. 179. Sap. 4. 8. Tract. 1.
sect. 3. subd. 1.
most excellent grace. And S. Hierome reports that S. John excelled Peter in
many gifts of grace. M. Reynolds foresaw these objections, and will you hear
what answer he makes: But Peter (says he) on the other side, excelled Paul
in Primacy, for that he was chosen first: and John in age, because he was
elder. Surely an excellent grace, an extraordinary pre-eminence, a principality
worthy of such high and honorable titles, to be before in calling, and behind
in working, elder in years, and younger in merits. Judge you, and your fellows
of this privilege as ye list, they who are endued with the spirit of God,
will give judgment with the Holy Ghost: Old age is venerable, not prolonged,
not lengthened with the number of years: for the understanding of man are the
gray hairs; the ripeness of years is life undefiled.

19. Other Protestants more sincere, although as saucy as Reynoldes, rather
reprehend the Fathers for their unfitting speeches, then make of their words
such impertinent constructions. For as we read in the Protestants Apology: The
Centurists reprove Cent. 4. col. 554. and col. 1074
Arnobius for calling S. Peter, the Bishop of Bishops: Cent. 4. Col. 556
Optatus for intituling him: The head of the Apostles. They write of Centu. 3.
col. 84.
Tertullian, he did erroneously think the keys to be committed to Peter
alone, and the Church to be builded on him. The like error they reprehend in
S. Col 84.
Cyprian, Centur. 3. Col. 85.
Origin, Cent. 4. Col. 1215.
Hierome, Cent. 4. Col. 555.
Hilary, Cent. 4. Col. 558. Fulke in his Retentiue page 248.
Nazianzen. Fulke charge Optatus with absurdity for saying of Peter, He
deserved to be preferred before all the Apostles; and he alone received the
keys of the kingdom of heaven to be communicated to the rest. And speaking in
the same place of Leo and Gregory Bishops of Rome he says: Gregory lived about
the year of our Lord 590. Leo 440. Tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiu. 10. Calu. and
Mus^ulns alleged by Whitgift in his Defense p. 173. and. 66. Whitgift ibid.
page Couel in his Exa. against the Plea of the Innocent. ^ero^. ^. 1. in Iouin.
Bills 1. par. p. 62. and 63. Reyn. cap. 2. diuis. 1. page 27. Rem. c. 3. diuis.
1. fol. 95. Bills. part. 1 page 63. 66. and 67.
The mystery of iniquity having wrought in that seat near five or six hundred
years before them, and then greatly increased; they were so deceived with long
continuance of error, that they thought the dignity of Peter was much more
over the rest of his fellow Apostles, then the holy Scriptures of God do
allow. But if this error of the Roman Papacy and Peter's Supremacy began near
five or six hundred years before Leo and Gregory, it began (according to M.
Fulke) in the Primitive Church, it began in the Apostles time, who flourished
not six hundred whole years before Gregory; not five hundred before Leo.
Whereupon the worthy Author of the fornamed Apology cites Calvin, Musculus,
D. Whitguift, D. Couell, affirming amongst the Apostles themselves there was
one chief, who had chief authority over the rest. And D. Couell approves
that saying of Hierom: Among the twelve one was chosen, that a chief or head
being appointed, occasion of dissension might be prevented.

20. Now let us examine what M. Reynoldes and M. Bilson oppose against us, and
these their Sect-mates. They produce S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and
others interpreting the Rock whereupon the Church is built, to be the faith,
which Peter confessed of Christ. I grant they apply the Rock to Peter's faith,
but therein they imply the person of Peter. For they mean not it should be
built on that faith separate from Peter, but upon Peter confessing it: or upon
his faith and confession as proceeding from him which is all one in effect, and
makes nothing against us. Then they object: That Peter and Paul gave the right
hands of fellowship each to other: That the rest of the Apostles (as S. Cyprian
writes) were the self same that Peter was, endued with like fellowship of
honor and power. I answer: Four things are to be considered in the Apostles.
1. Their Apostolical dignity. 2. Their power of preaching. 3. Their order of
Priesthood. 4. Their power of regiment or jurisdiction* I confess then the
Apostles were all fellows, equal in Apostleship, equal in authority of
preaching, equal in Priesthood; for they could all equally consecrate the Body
and blood of Christ: but they were not equal in regiment, not equal in
jurisdiction, because the Jurisdiction of the rest was subject to Peter's:
theirs universal and absolute over others, Peter's over others and Leo Epict.
84. ad Anastas. Episc. c. 11.
them themselves. Which S. Leo insinuated saying: Among the BB. Apostles in the
likeness and equality of honor, there was a certain difference of power. And
whereas the election of all was equal, yet to one it was given to be
prehe^^inent above the rest.

21. But M. Reynoldes urges: The Apostles which were Reyn. c. 4. diuis. 3.
fol. 1^7^ Act. 8. v. 14. Act. 11. v. 3.
at Jerusalem sent Peter and John to the people of Samaria. The Apostles and
Brethren that were in Jury, called Peter to an account, when he had preached to
Cornelius. Therefore he was not head of the rest. I answer: there be four
sorts of missions or sendings. The one by natural propagation, as the tree
sends forth her branches, the branches their leaves: or by inward procession,
as the Father and the Son sent the holy Ghost the third person in Trinity.
The second is by authority or command, as the Lord sends his vassal, the
master his servant, which supposes inferiority or subjection. The third is by
lot, suffrage or election, as many fellows of a house, or parteners of an
incorporation send one of their companions Iosue 22. v. 13.
which argues equality. The fourth is by advise and humble entreaty, as the
people of the Jews sent Phinees the high Priest to the sons of Ruben and
Gad. And as the Counsel may advise the King to undertake some heroical
enterprise for the good of the Commonwealth, which imports superiority in
him that is sent.

22. And thus S. Peter by entreaty was sent to the Sea Lorin in Act. 11. verse.
2.
people of Samaria, and he of curtesy, or charity rather did give an account
afterward why he preached to the Gentiles, by telling the vision he received of
Gods divine pleasure therein, to instruct such of the Apostles as doubted
whether the time were yet expedient, to admit the Gentiles, or free them that
were addmitted from the burden of the law, if at least they were the Apostles,
as S. Chrysostom and Hugo teaches, who reasoned hereof. Or he gave Chrysostom. and
Hugo in hunc loc. Epiphan. haeres. 28.
that account to free himself from the calumniation of his enemies, and
scandal of the Jews, if it were (as Epiphauius thinks) Cerinthus the
Arch-heretike, who stirred up the people, to expostulate that matter with him;
both ways he might of great humility and singular charity deliver what he did,
and be sent as he was, without any abasement to the Primacy of his Apostleship.

23. To the other objections, that Peter was reprehended Bills. *par page 69.
Calu. l. 4^ Inst. c. 6.. 7. Tertul. in praescript. cap. 23.
by Paul, that Paul was appointed the Apostle of the Gentiles, Peter of the
Jews; therefore not superior to Paul, or in dignity above him. I answer the
thing for which Peter was reprehended and resisted by S. Paul was an error of
fact, not of faith: It was as Tertullian says: Conuersationis vitium, non
praedicationis, a fault of conversation, not of preaching. And it is lawful
for the inferior upon just cause with modesty and reverence to correct his
Superior, as S. Augustine declares by this reprehension S. Paul the later
Apostle, used to S. Peter. Secondly I reply to the second branch of this
objection: The division which was made between S. Peter and S. Paul of
assigning the Jews to one, and Gentiles to the other, was no division or
limitation of Jurisdiction, but a distribution only of Provinces for the more
commodious preaching of the Gospel. And therefore as S. Paul was not
restrained hereby from intermedling with the Jews whom the acts of the
Apostles report (as the worthy Bellar. l. 1. de Romans Pont. c. 16.
Carninall Bellarmine diligently quoteth) every where to have entered their
Synagogues and to have preached unto them: So S. Peter by his particular regard
and care of the Jews, was no way abridged from his general charge and care of
Gentiles: neither did he hereupon preach only in Jury, or in the Provinces
adjoining, not Baron. in annal. an. Christ. 44. and 45.
in Syria, Bithynia, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, but as universal Pastor he
planted the faith, sent preachers, ordained Priests, consecrated Bishopes in
the universal Church. So he placed S. Mark at Alexandria, Euodius at Antioch,
Jason at Thessalonia, at Rauenna Apollinaris, at Capua Rufus, Euprepius at
Verona, at Naples Aspernates, Prochorus at Nicomedia. So as many
Ecclesiastical histories Metaphrastes apud Suriu^. die 29. ^umj.
record he appointed Sixtus in France, Martial and Eucherius in Germany,
Torquatns in Spain, Marcianus, Berillus, and Philippus in Sicily, diverse in
Italy, where he raised his seat, which be (as all Cosmagraphers describe) the
Cou^tryes of Gentiles.

24. And Innocentius concludes that S. Peter sent ministers Inno. primus in
ep. 1. ad Decennium.
of the word and Sacraments throughout all the west, the north, throughout all
Asia, and the Islands that lie between. He to whom Christ committed the charge
of all his sheep, took care to provide food for all; his pastoral solicitude
reached even to the uttermost parts of the world. Enjoy therefore, O Peter,
enjoy thy primacy, and rare pre-eminence, glory in thy dignity granted thee by
Christ, and be always vigilant over his flock. Reign, O supreme Pastor,
reign thou still as head under him, as leader of his camp, as Prince of his
people, and that which now thou can not perform by thy self discharge at
least by thy successor the Pope of Rome, in whose care and vigilance the
exercise of thy function still continues, as the subsequent Treatise shall
declare.

THE ELEVENTH CONTROVERSY VPHOLDETH The Popes Supremay* against D. Bilson, and
D. Reynoldes.
CHAP. I.
MASTER BILSON, treading the sleps of his fore-father Calvin, requires Bills.
par. 1. p. 10 4.
of us to prove three things, before we install the Pope in his Pontifical
Sea. First, You must show (says he) That Peter was Supreme Governor of all
the Church. Next that this dignity was not proper to Peter's Person, but common
to Peter's Successor etc. Lastly, you must show, which of Peter's Chaires must
have Bilson ibi.
Peter's Privilege, that is, why Rome, rather then Antioch; or as Calvin
urges, rather then Jerusalem, where Christ died, Calvin l. 4. ^nst. c. 6.: 21.
and yielded up as it were, the visible head-ship of his Church. I am content
to observe this method, and satisfy him in these three points. The first I
have already demonstrated in the precedent Treatise: the second, and third, I
am now to declare.

2. Touching the second, the words which Christ spoke, the reasons which moved
him to impart a Supremacy to Peter, do consequently convince, it be deuolued to
his Successor. The words of Christ are these: Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church etc. My Church, Mat. 16.
says he, not a patt or portion of his Church, not that part only, which
flourished in Peter's days, but all his whole Church, which ever was since
Christ his time, or ever shall be until the end of the world. But this could
not be Chrysostom Demonstr. quod Christus fit Deus. Joan, 21.
built upon Peter in his own person, he being deceased so many years ago:
therefore it must be builded upon some other instead of Peter, and so, as John
Chrysostom eloquently discourses, still continue. In like manner, when our
Savior said to Peter: Pasce oues meas: Feed my Sheep, did he not command him
to feed all his Sheep? did he not lay a charge upon him, which he should never
forgo? Chiefly seeing the office of a Pastor is an ordinary and perpetual
office, and as long as there are any Sheep to be fed, so long there ought to
be some Pastor to feed them, which because Peter performed not in his own
person these many hundred years, there must needs be some other to execute it
in his room, in respect of whom S. Peter may be still said to accomplish his
duty, and feed the Sheep entrusted to his charge. Whereupon Ieo s^r. 2. de sua
assumpt.
S. Leo writes of Peter: In whom the care of all Pastors, with the custody of
the Sheep committed unto him still perseuereth: and whose worthy dignity in
his unworthy Successor fails not. In the Council of Calcedon when an
Epistle of Leo the Pope Council. Calcedon. act. 2. act. 3.
was read, all the Fathers cried out, that, Peter spoke by the mouth of Leo.
And when sentence was pronounced against Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria,
the whole Council delivered, that Leo endued with the authority of Peter the
Apostle deposed Dioscorus.

3. Whereby it is evident, that the Pastoral privilege, granted to Peter was
not restrained to him, but extended to others, not given him as a private, but
as a public person, and therefore still to continue to them that succeed. I
presume you are not ignorant, that a King, being a public person still
continues, that he is said in the Law never to die, and the dignities granted
to him, are common to all the heirs and inheritours of Stow in his Chronicle
in the year of our Lord 1521. page 865.
his crown. As the thrice worthy Title of Defender of the Faith, given to King
Henry the eight, by Leo the tenth Pope of that name, for writing against
Luther, descended to king Edward, passed to Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth,
and now perseuereth in our most potent, and dreadful Sovereign King James.
The honor likewise M. Bilson enjoys, of being Prelate of the Garter, is
annexed to his Sea, and derived to him from his Predecessors. The same is seen
not only in Titles and Prerogatives of honor, but in privileges also of
power, imparted to Cities, Dukedoms, Commonwealths or public Magistrates,
both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, who as they never fail, so neither the
honors, dignities and prerogatives, they once enjoy. Such was the Primacy
communicated unto Peter, not personal, but public, Chrysolog. in epist. a^
Euty^h. Read S. Aug. in Psalm. 44. upon those words. For thy Fathers* Sons.
are born to thee: that is: For Apostls, Bishops succeding in their room.
not proper to him, but common to his Successors, in whom he even now
suruiueth, speaks, and feeds the Sheep of Christ, with the food of
heavenly doctrine; as S. Peter Chrysologus Bishop of Rauenna declares, writing
thus in his days; Blessed Peter who lives and governs, in his own proper
seat, delivers the verity of faith to them that seek it.

4. The reasons, which caused our blessed Redeemer to advance Peter to this
sovereign dignity, were all for the behoof and benefit of the Church: First,
to prevent schisms: Secondly, to appease dissensions: Thirdly, to settle it in
peace: Fourthly, to endow it with a most perfect form of a Commonwealth. All
which enforce, that it was not a private grace annexed to Peter's person, but a
public privilege conveyed to his Successors. For if these things be now as
behoofull and necessary to the Church as then, why should she not still enjoy
them? Is Christ become less careful of his Church then heretofore? Or has
this faultlesse Virgin, the pure Spouse of our Lord, committed any fault, by
which she should be deprived of the benefit he bestowed upon her? If she be the
same well ordered Camp, how is she disappointed of her guide and Captain? If
the same Ship, how sayleth she without a Pilot? If the same body, how is she
separated from her Head? How is she become so prodigious a monster, as to have
a visible body with an invisible head, because if none succeeded Peter, the
visible body of the Church has had this long time no other then Christ Titus
Liuius. The Protestants will have the church first governed by Christ alone:
next by the Apostles, then by all Bishops after by Kings and Free stats: when
they were converted to the faith, by Queen Elizabeth a woman, by King Edward a
Child. Dan. 2. Luc. 1.
her invisible head.

5. If none succeeded Peter, the whole state of the Church is altered and
changed; changed from a Monarchy to Aristocracy, from the administration of
one, to the rule of many. It was a Monarchy, when Christ alone planted and
founded it; a Monarchy, when Peter ruled it; and is it now fallen to a more
imperfect form of government? The Commonwealth of the Romans, which
flourished above all others, was at last utterly ruined by her manifold
alterations, by altering the stern of regiment from Kings to ten Governors,
from them to Consuls, from Consuls to Tribunes of soldiers, from Tribunes to
Dictatours, from Dictatours to Trium-viri; and could not our heavenly Lawmakers
prevent in his spiritual Commonwealth these great inconveniences? Would he
subject his Church to such chops and changes, to be governed first by one, then
by many, after by more, now by the Clergy, then by the Laity, one while by
Bishops, then by Kings and Princes, here by Women, there by Children, whom
you make heads and Governors of your Church? Daniel prophesied that the God of
Heaven would raise a kingdom, which should never be dissolved; and the Angel
Gabriel foretold it should never have end: But neither the words of the
Prophet, nor voice of the Angel do you regard, who rent and divide the
kingdom of Christ's Church into as many several Commonwealths, as there be
several Kings, several Courts of Parliament, several estates and manners of
government, absolute and independent in the whole Christian World.

6. The Synagogue of the jews long triumphed in the lineall succession of her
High Priests. First in Aaron next in Eleazarus, then in Phinees, and in others
after him, until the end and abrogation of the Law; and is it not meet the
Church of Christ should glory in the like, Being Heb. 8. v. 6
established in better promises, and having greater necessity the^ ever the
Synagogue had? For we find by experience many strifes and contentions daily
happen among the people of God, who shall appease and quiet the^? The Bishops?
But how often do they arise among the Bishops themselves? The Primates and
Patriarchs? And what if they be also at variance, as Flauianus and Dioscorus,
Cyrillus and Nestorius, Euphemius and Petrus Mogus were? The temporal Prince
or Civil Magistrate? But they ought not to intermedle with Ecclesiastical
affairs, their factions may be more dangerous then any of the former. To whom
shall we then repair? To a General Council? But who shall sommon, who shall
order, who shall direct and guide this Assembly? What if they decline from the
truth as the Council of Ariminum, the Council of Milan, the second Council
of Ephesus did, who shall judge their cause? Who shall compose their
dissentions, unless some one be appointed by the providence of God, whose decree
is i^nuiolable, and whose infallible censure all ought to obey. Couell in his
exam. against the Plea of Innocents page 107. Cartwright in his second Reply
part. 1. page 582.


7. Otherwise, as D. Couell our English Protestant affirms: The Church of
Christ should be in a far worse case, then the meanest Commonwealth; nay
almost then a den of thieves, if it were left destitute of means either to
convince heresies or suppress them. A little before he says: Authority (which
cannot be, where all are equal) must procure unity and obedience. And
Cartwright: This point of keeping peace in the Church is one of those, which
requires as well a Pope over all Archbishops, as one Archbishop over all
Bishops in a Realm. Melancthon pursues the same reason: The Bishop (says
Melanct. in Centu. Ep. Theol. Ep. 74. iuxta edit. Bipont. an. Domini 1597.
Lu^h. in lo. com. Clas. 1. cap. 37. p. 107.
he) of Rome is president over all Bishops, and this Canonical policy no wise
man (as I think) does or ought to disallow etc. For the Monarchy of the Bishop
of Rome is, in my opinion, profitable to this end, that consens of Doctrine may
be retained. Which Luther his master taught before him: Whereas God would have
one Catholic Church throughout the whole world, it is necessary to have one
people: Yea and of this one people, one Father ought to be chosen.

8. Thus these Protestants depose against their own confederates, and no
marvel though some in so clear light of Scripture, in such a general consent
of Councels, 1. Cor. c. 12. verse. 21. Io. 10. v. 16.
Fathers and all antiquity, should voluntarily approve a truth so manifest,
marvel no more approve it, great marvel, they remember not all the
comparisons of S. Paul, resembling the Church to a body, in which the head
Council. Nicen. can. 6. Council. Brach. can. 28. and 23. Council. Constant. apud
Theod. l. 5. Hist. c. 9, Council. Lateran. c. 5. Florent. in Declarat. fidei.
Conc. Chal. Act. 3. and in relatione Sanctae Synodi ad B. Papa^ Leonem. 6.
Synodus general.
cannot say to the feet (as Christ might) you are not necessary for me. The
prophesy recorded by S. John: There shall be one fold, and one pastor. Which as
it was not verifyed in Christ his time, so it cannot be now understood only of
him our invisible Pastor: but the flock and fold being visible, the Pastor,
whose office is ordinary, and charge perpetual, must likewise be visible.

9. What shall I add the approbation of general Counsels? Of the first
Council of Nice in Bithynia: of the Council of Brachara in Spain: of the
Council of Constantinople in Thracia: of the Counsels of Lateran and Florence
in Italy: especially of the Council of Chalcedon in Asia, one of the four,
which our English Protestants allow; where Pope Leo is called: The universal
Archbishop: The universal Patriarch: The Bishop of the universal Church: The
Pope of the universal Church. Where the whole Council terms Leo: The
Interpreter of S. Peter's voice to all the world. Where they acknowledge him
their head, and themselves his members. Where they all confess: That the
custody or keeping of the vineyard (that is of the whole Church) is committed
by our Savior to Leo. Likewise the sixth General Synod confesses, that S.
Peter was with them by his Successor Agatho; and that, S. Peter spoke by
Agatho his mouth.

10. From the Councels I pass to the Fathers; to S. Chrysostom. l. 2. de Sacer.
Hiero. Ep. ad Dam Hiero. ibid. Aug. in Psalm. cont. part. Donati. de Vtilitate
Cred. c. 17. Aug. in Epist. 162. Aug. lib. 1. con. 2. Ep. Pela. c. 1. ad
Bonifa. Prosper. li. de ingrat. Victor. l. 2. de persecu. Vandal. Vincen in suo
Co^mo. ^ustinian. Ep. ad Io. quae habetur in Codice. Iraen. l. 3. cap. 3.
Chrysostom: Why did our Lord shed his blood? Truly to redeem those sheep,
the care of which he committed both to Peter, and also to his Successors. To
S. Hierome, writing to Damasus the Pope of Rome: With the Successor of the
Fisherman, and with the Disciple of the Cross I speak; I following none
chief but Christ, hold the fellow-ship of Communion with your Holiness, that
is, with Peter's Chair. Upon that Rock I know the Church to be built:
Whosoever shall eat the Paschall Lamb out of that house is a profane person.
And a little after: He that gathers not with you, scatters: that is, he
that is not Christ's, is Antichrists. To S. Augustine: Number the Priests, even
from Peter's seat, and see who succeeded one another in that row of Fathers:
that is the Rock which the proud gates of Hell do not overcome. And in another
place: That is it which has obtained the top of authority: Then he says: The
principality of the Apostolical Chair always flourished in the Roman Church.
Lastly: The Bishop of that Sea has the pre-eminence of higher room in the
pastoral watchtower, which is common to all Bishops. For this cause the
Church of Rome is termed, The head of the world: the head of all Churches, by
Prosper, by Victor, by Vincentius, by the Emperor Justinian, and others. To
which Church, as Irenaeus testifyeth, for her more powerful principality,
every Church ought to repair. For this the Pope of Rome is worthily entitled:
The Hiero. epist. 123.
chief and highest Priest: The Ambr. com. in 1. Tim. 3.
ruler of the house of God: The Council. Chal. in epist. ad Leonem act. 1.
head of the Church: The Synod. Later. sub Mar^ino Papa secret. 2.
Prince and Doctor of the orthodoxall and immaculate faith: The Stephanus
Archiepis. Carthag. ep. ad Dam.
Father of Fathers: The Bern. l. 2. de consid.
Vicar of Christ: The Bern. ibid.
Pastor of all Pastors: The Council. Constant. 5. act. 1. page 74.
giver of Light, and pillar of the Church: The Valent. epist. ad Theodosium
quae habetur inter praeambula. Conc. Chaleed. Justinian. Novel. constit. 123.
in edit. Haloand. and lib. 1. Cod. de summa Trinitate, Liberatus in Breuiario
cap. 12. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 7.
most Blessed Bishop of the City of Rome, to whom amiquity has given the
principality of Priesthood above all other. These last be the words of
Valentinian the Emperor, whom Justinian Chrysostom. Ep. ad Innocent. Theod. in Ep.
ad Leonem. Sulpitius Sever. l. 2. sacr. hist. Epiph* haer. 42. Cyp. l. 1. Ep.
4* Epiph. haeres. 68. ^este Paulo Diaco. and Anact. in Symmacho. Sigeber. in
chronic. Extainter Epi. Agapeti To^. 1. ep. Romans Pontif. habetur. ep. Euti.
tom. 2. Conc. edit. Colon. ann. 1606. page 510. Apud Leonem epist. 68.
following makes also a solemn decree: That according to the Definition of
the four Holy Counsels, of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of
Chalcedon, the Pope of Rome is the chief of all Priests. And he adds: No man
doubts, but that the top or principality of the highest Bishopric rests
in Rome.

11. Besides these authorityes, which are all impregnable, the continual
practice and consent of all Nations approve the supremacy of the Pope of Rome;
and therefore to him, as to the supreme and highest Judge upon earth appeals
have been made from all parts of the world. To give you a taste of some few
examples; To whose high tribunal did Flauianus the Partriarch of
Constantinople appeal from the second Council of Ephesus, but to the
tribunal of Leo Pope of Rome? Whose aid and succor did Athanasius the Bishop
of Alexandria implore, oppressed by the Arrians, but the aid of Julius the Pope
of Rome? Under whose wings did S. John Chrysostom fly deposed in a Council
of many Bishops of the East, but under the wings of Innocentius the Pope of
Rome? To him Theodoret, to him Saluianus, and Priscillian rebels unto God, and
enemies of that Sea, condemned in a Synod at Caesar-Augustum; to him Marcion,
to him Basilides deposed from his Bishopric was feign to appeal. To him
Valens and Vrsacius came to give an account, and crave pardon for their
treachery against Athanasius. To Symmachus Pope of Rome 220. or 225. Bishops as
others report, banished their seats by King Thrasimond, fled for relief, who
honorably maintained them at his own charges.

82. To the Pope of Rome as to the anchor of faith and oracle of truth, the
faithful were wont to direct the Sum of their belief, the greatest Clerks
their books and writings, most famous Counsels their Canons and decrees. So
Justinian the Emperor sent the profession of his faith to Agapetus the Pope.
Eutychius the Patriarch of Constantinople to Vigilius the Pope. Proterius the
Patriarch Aug. co^t. 2. ep. ^ela. lib. 1. cap. 1. Inter Ep. Hormis. Tom. 1. Ep.
Romans Pontif. Hiero. in exp li. Sym. ad Dama. Council. Chal. in relat. sanct.
Synod. ad Leo. Con. Mileu. 10. 2. p. ^01. and inter ep. Aug. 92. etc. Cyp.
test. Hier. dialo. adu. ^ucif. Bils^ pa. 1. p. 44. 45. 48. 49. Chrysostom. Ep. 1.
ad Inno. Tom. 5. Socrat. l. 2. cap. 15. Hier. in symb. exp. ad Damas. Aug. con.
2. Epis. Pelag. l. 1. c. 1. Theod Ep. ad Leone^. Commen. eius in Paul. praefix.
of Alexandria to Leo the Pope. So S. Augustine sent his works to Pope
Boniface to be examined and amended. Possessor a Bishop of Africa his
commentaries upon S. Paul to Hormisda. S. Hierome his explication upon the
Creed to Damasus. So the Council of Chalcedon sent their Canons to Leo the
Pope. The Mileuitan Council held in Numidia, the cause of Pelagius to Pope
Innocentius. And S. Cyprian the Primate of Africa sent the decrees of the
Council of Carthage to Stephen the Pope. Neither were these things done (as
M. Bilson to obscure the truth, and beguile his Reader, craftily suggesteth)
for the common consent, mutual agreement, and public liking of the Bishops in
every Province, because then the like resorts should have been made to other
Primates, as well as to the Pope; but they were made to him, as to the Vicar
General of Christ, and ruler of his whole Church, who had power and authority
to examine the causes, punnish the faults, reform the abuses, approve the
faith, condemn the heresies, establish the decrees, reuerse the sentences of
all other Bishops, as the Letters, the Complaints, the Suites, the Embassages,
the Petitions, the whole History of the former Appellants, and other resorters
unto Rome bear witness.

13. S. John Chrysostomes letters were to request Innocentius: To pronounce the
proceedings of the Bishops of the East void and of no force: to punish with
Ecclesiastical Censures the Authors of that disorder. S. Athanasius his
complaint was of the wrong offered him by the Emperor and a great assembly of
Eastern Bishops, who wrongfully thrust him from his Bishopric. And Julius
the Pope of Rome, as Socrates relates: by the prerogative of the Roman Sea
wrote threatening letters in his behalf, and restored him to his place,
rebuking them who rashely deposed him. S. Hieromes suite to Damasus was: If any
thing be here unadvisedly set forth, we entreat it may be amended by thee, who
hold the faith and seat of Peter. The like suite S. Augustine made to
Bonifacus* Theodorets supplication to Leo was this: I humbly request and
beseech your Holiness in this case to aid me, appealing to your just and
upright judgment, and command me to come before you. And in his Epistle to
Renatius the Priest: Idem. in Epist. ad Renatu^ praesbit. In rela. S. Synod.
Chal^ed. ad B. Papam Leonem.
I beseech thee (says he) to persuade the most holy Archbishop Leo, that he
use his Apostolical authority, and command our appearance before his Council.
For that holy Seat holds the stern of government over all Churches of the
world.

14. The Embassage of the Fathers of the Chalcedon Council was: To have their
decrees confirmed by Leo, Saying: we are suppliants unto you, and do you
honor our judgment with your decrees: and as we have joined to our head
conformity in things that be good, so let your Highness perform that (which
beseems) to your children. To the same purpose, Marcianus the Emperor
Osiand. in Epist. Ce^t. ^. p. 182.
prayed him to confirm the faith which there was defined. The petition of the
first Council held at Arles to Pope Siluester in the time of Constantine the
Great was this: That for the Rog^^nus igitur, and tuis decretis nostru^ bonora
iudicium, and sicut nos capiti in bonis adiccimus consonantia^, sic and
summitas tua filiis (quod decet) adimpleat. ex Epist. 59. Leo. and 60. eiusde^.
Habetur inter Ep. Hormisdae Tom. 1. Epist. Romans Pont. Extat in decret. Agapeti
to. 2. Council. 553. or 45^ according to the later Edition. Sozon. l. 8. c. 3.
Socrates lib. 5. c. 15. Theod. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 23. Theod. ibid.
uniform observation of Easter day throughout the world, he according to the
custom, should direct his letters to all. Justinius the Emperor referred the
questions of faith presented him by the Bishop, to Hormisda the Pope,
requesting his resolution. And the Emperor Justinian after he had humbled
himself to Pope Agapetus, and adored his Holiness, he beseeched him to
adnance Me^^as a Catholic to the Catholic to the Patriarchall seat of
Constantinople instead of Anthimus the Heretic. S. John Chrysostom the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and Theophilus the Bishop of Alexandria entreated
Damasus the Pope of Rome, that Flauianus long usurping the seat of Antioch
might at length after the death of Paulinus be installed in his Bishoprike, and
pardoned his former fault. And although he were much favored by all the East
who cleaued unto him, and by Theodosius the Emperor who allowed him as far
as he could, yet he twice commanded him to repair to Rome, and never could he
be canonically or peaceably enthroned until he sent Acatius the famous Bishop
of Beroea with other illustrious Prelates to the sea Apostolic, by whom he
obtained the consent and approbation of the Pope.

15. Not the suites of Emperous only, not the supplication or entreaty of
foreign Bishops, but the jurisdiction also and authority, which the Pope has
always practiced, witness his sovereignty over the whole flock of Christ.
For he made laws which did bind the whole Church, he called Counsels,
censured Princes, excommunicated Bishops, deposed Patriarchs and restored them
to their seats, who were unjustly deprived of their dignityes. For example Leo.
Epist. 1. ad Episcop. Camp. etc.
Leo writes to the Bishops of Campania, of Picenum, and of Tuscia, how he and
his Predecessors constitutions obliged them all. The same Leo ep. 87. and Ep.
93. ad Turb.
Leo summoned to a general Council the Bishops of Tarracone, Lusitania,
France and Carthage. Nicep. l. 13. c. 34.
Innocentius the first thundered the sentence of Excommunication against
Arcadius the Emperor, and Eudoxia the Empress: Against The Centurist^ Cent.
5. Col. ^^^.
Theophilus also Bishop of Alexandria. Liberatus c. 18.
Felix excommunicated Acatius the Patriarch of Constantinople. Eusebius. l. 5. ca.
24.
Victor the 15. Pope after S. Peter (not somewhat Popelike, as Sparks in his
answer to M. John Albins preface.
M. Sparks scoffeth at him, exceeding his bounds, but by the privilege of his
supreme and transcendent authority) censured in like manner all the Bishops of
Asiae for dissenting from the Roman Church in celebrating the feast of Easter.
Zona. in vita Justin.
Agapetus the Pope deposed Anthimus, Galas. Ep. ad epis. Darda.
Leo Dioscorus, Theod. l. 5 histo. c. 23.
Damasus Flauianus, three Patriarchs, one of Constantinople, another of
Alexandria, the third of Antioch. And on the other side Conc. Chal. act. 1.
Leo restored Theodoret the famous Bishop of Cyrus to his sea, deposed by the
2. Council of Ephesus. Cyp. l. 3. ep. 13.
S. Cyprian wrote to Pope Stephen to depose Marcian the Bishop of Orleance and
install another in his room. ^elas. ep. ad Epis. Dardaniae. Socrat. l. 2. c.
15. Cent. 4. col. 550.
Julius the first of that name restored to their Bishoprikes Athanasius of
Alexandria, Paulus of Constantinople, and other Catholic Bishops of the East,
expelled by the Arians. And this he did, as the Centurists confess out of
Socrates, fraetus Romanae Ecclesiae prerogatiua: By the prerogative of the
Roman Church. And Sozomenus says of the same Julius: When for the dignity of
his Sea, the care of all appertayned unto him, he restored every one to his
Church. Zozom. l. 3. c. 7. Euag. l. 1. c. 4. Phot. l. de 7. Syn. Leo ep. 47.
Leo ep. 84. idem ep. 87. Gela. ep. ad Epi. Dard. Galf. l. 9. cap. 11. Leo ep.
84. Greg. l. 4 ep. 52. Innocent. 1. ep. 26. ad Con. Mile. extat inter epi. Aug.
Conc. Cbal. act. 1. Patet ex Leo. ep. 55. ad Pulch. Basil. epist. 52. ad
Athanasiu^. Conc. Nicenum 1. c. 6. ex Nicolao 1. ep. ad Mich. Imp. vide S. Greg
in Regist. epi passim. Idem S. Greg. in Regis. l. 12. c. 15. vsum tibi pallij
ad sola missarum solemnia agenda concedimus. Bedel. ^. hist. c. 19. and 2. hist
c. 8. God win in the Catal of Bishops. Beda l. 2. c. 17. Fox. act. p. 185.


16. In fine the Pope of Rome has always had his legates, presidents and
chief in all Oecumenicall Counsels; as Hosius, Vitus, and Vincentius in the
first Council of Nice: S. Cyril in the Council of Ephesus: Paschasius and
Lucentius in the Council of Chalcedon. He has had his Vicars general in all
forrayne and remote Countries, Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica in Greece,
Potentius in Afrike, Acatius Patriarch of Constantinople in Egypt, Dubritius
Archbishop of Wales and primate of Britany in England. To him as to the
highest Judge, the weightyest causes, from all parts of the world have been
still directed. Without him no general Council can be kept or assembled. By
him tumultuous Synods have been ever disanulled. From him most ample
privileges, dignityes and prerogatives have been granted to Bishops,
Pathiarches, Kings and Princes. To mention some particulars. From him the
Patriarch of Constantinople had the preeminence of the highest Sea after Rome,
and jurisdiction over Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis. From him the Bishops of
France, of Spain, of Greece, have received their Archiepiscopall robes or
ornaments. From him S. Augustine our Apostle of England, and first Archbishop
of Canterbury amongst the Saxons: from him all other Archbishops, even to the
Conquest, received their pals, which in sign of their subjection to the Pope,
and honor derived from S. Peter's Sea, is first laid upon his holy Tomb, and
from thence sent to the Archbishop. Thus our King Edwin for S. Paulin, and
Honorius; King Rufus for S. Anselme, obtained their Episcopal Palls.

17. To be brief, from him Kings and Emperors have received, some their
Scepters, Crowns and Regalityes, some singular favors and tytles of honor,
others their very manner and form of coronation. So Alber. Krant. l. 2.
Pipin was created King of Italy by Leo the Third. Blond. dec. 2.
Stephen King of Hangary by Sergius the Pope. li. 7. hist. Scoto.
Edgar King of Scotland by Urban the Second. Paul. Diacon. l. 23. rerum Romana.
Charles the Emperor of the Romans by Leo the Third. The S. Thomas l. 3. de
regi. princ. co. 19. Stow ann. 1521. and Onuphri. chro. 1520. King Iams in his
Declar. conco^cerning his proceeding in the cause of D. Conradus V or-^ stius p.
36. Thomas Bozius de fignis Eccles. Tomo 2. l. 17. Signo 77. Papyrius Masso. l.
3. Annal. in vita Henr. primi. Bills. 1. p. page 83. 84. 93. 94. 97. 98. and
part. 2. p. 137. 138. 139, etc. Sabellicus Aene. 9. l. 1. Atha. ad soli. vitam
agentes.
seven Electours of the Empire were all chosen and ordaynad by Gregory the
Fifth. Our King Henry the second was first entitled to the Lordship of Ireland
by the gift of Adrian the Fourth Pope of that name. And as the honorable style
of Catholic in Spain, most Christian in France, so the no less memorable and
renowned title (I mentioned before) of defender of the Faith (in which our
Soueraygne King James gloryeth more as himself protests, then in the title
of King of great Britany) was first granted to King Henry the eight by the
Pope of Rome. But whom also the solemn manner of Crowning both our and sundry
other Kings has been instituted, prescribed, and is to this day observed. For
example the King of France is consecrated and anonynted by the Archlishop of
Rhemes, according to the ordinance of Hormisda the Pope. The King of England by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, according to the grant of Adrian the Third. The
King of Scotland by the Archbishop of S. Andrew according to the prescription
of Urban the Second. The King of Germany by the Archbishop of Mentz. The King
of Bohemia, by the Archbishop of Prage; and diverse others by such as the Pope
appointed. By these, and a thousand other presidents the supremacy of all
spiritual power is more then manifest in the Sea of Rome.

18. But D. Bilson opposes some Kings and Princes of Greece, of Germany, of
France, and England, who resisted the Pope: Some who deposed him: Some
Emperors who commanded in matters Ecclesiastical. To what purpose is this?
Might not inferiors resist and persecute their Superiors, as Nero persecuted
and killed S. Peter? Might they not wrongfully depose, or rather force them (as
Sabellicus writes of Henry the third) to forgo the Papacy? Might not
Emperors usurp the function and authority of Priests, as Oza in the old law,
and Constantius the Emperor did in the new, whom Athanasius, Hosius, Leontius,
and S. Hilary sharply rebuke for his Hosius in litteris ad Constant. ibi
recitatis Leontius pud Suid. in Leontio. Hilar. l. co^t. Constable. Aug. epist.
162. Justin. in Nouella constit. 3. and Nouella 123. and 133. in edit. Haloand.
Leg. Franciae l. 2. and 2. Codice Theod. L. 26. tit. 4. de relig.. Ea quae,
Ruff. l. 1. cap. 1. hist. Eccl. ^^ ep. praeam. Conc. Chal. In 6. Syn. act. 1.
See Cusan. l. 3. de Concord. Catho. cap. 2. 10. 13. etc. Bills. par. 2. page
155. 156. etc. Leo Epist, 24. and 26. Bills, 2. par. p. 154. Ambros. com. 5. Ep.
praefix.
tyranny therein? The factes of Constantine, of Justinian, of Theodosius and
others, with which M. Bilson furnishes his large treatise, are for the most
part examples drawn from the like abuse. In which kind even Constantine the
Great waded so far beyond the bounds of his vocation: That (as S. Augustine
writes of him) he minded to ask pardon of the holy Bishops. Or I answer,
that the precepts Kings and Emperors used, the laws they enacted in matters
Ecclesiastical, were to corroborate, strengthen and renew the laws of the
Church. Such were many laws and commandments of Justinian, in which, He
followed (as he says) the holy Canons, and holy Fathers. Such the laws of
Charles, of Lodowike, of Ricaredus King of Spain. Such the decrees of
Theodosius and Valentinian, as by their own Constitutions appears.

19. After this manner I grant Emperors might call general Councels, as the
especial Advocates of the Church. As Constantine the Great summoned the
Council of Nice in Bithynia: Ex Sacerdotum sententia: According to the will
and desire of the Priests, as Ruffinus witnesses. Valentinian and Marcian the
Council of Calcedon, by the consent of Leo. Constantine the fourth, the sixth
General Council by the consent of Agatho. Thus Emperors have been present in
Councels as Protectours of the Bishops, and Procurers of peace; thus they have
subscribed as witnesses, not as Judges, by privilege, not by right. Thus they
have commanded the decrees to be observed as executours, not Superiors ( M.
Bilson) in Ecclesiastical affairs.

20. For these causes Popes and Bishops might of Christian charity humbly sue
to Emperors, to interpose their Temporal power in manner aforesaid, as Leo
did to Theodosius and his sister Pulcheria: S. Ambrose with the Synod of
Aquileia, to Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius joint Emperors; requesting
their protection for the better defense and peaceable execution of what they
had decreed, because the Heretics Valens and Attalus sought to disturb them.
For the same peace and quietness S. Gregory writes Greg. Ep. l. 2. c. 100.
most submissiue letters to Mauritius the Emperor. And what he and others of
singular curtesy and charity perform, will you say they do of duty? when he
imitating his Master, humbles himself to the feet of his Infeririours,
Bills. part. 2. fol. 157. 158. Fulke in c. 2. 2. ad. These. sect. 7. Whit.
Calvin and commonly all Protestants. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 32.
shall an act ( M. Bilson) of such virtue blemish in your conceit, or debase
his dignity?

21. But M. Fulke, M. Whitaker, and other M. Bilsons confederats, often upbraid
us with that of S. Gregory, where he calls the name of Universal Bishop: A
profane, proud, sacrilegious, and Antichristian title. I answer, S. Gregory
inueygheth not against the good use and meaning of the word ( universal) but
against the proud and presumptuous manner, after which John the Patriarch of
Constantinople usurped it to himself, to wit: to be such an absolute and
universal Patriarch, as to derogate from all others their Patriarchall
dignity, as diverse Catholic writers have often demonstrated out of S.
Gregoryes own Epistles. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 34. 36. Andreas Frisius de Eccles. l.
2. 6. 10. p. 170.
Yet if it may carry more credit with Protestants, delivered by Protestants
themselves, let them read what Andreas Frisius, a famous Zuinglian, Secretary
to the King of Polonia writes: Some there be, who against this office of
universal Superintendent, object the authority of Gregory, who says, that
such a title belongs to the Precursour of Antichrist. But the reason of
Gregory is to be known, and it may be gathered out of the words he repeateth
in many Epistles: That the title of universal Bishop is contrary, and does
withstand the grace which is commonly powered upon all Bishops. He therefore that
should surname himself universal Bishop, names himself the only Bishop, and
takes Bishoplike power from the rest. Therefore this title he would have to be
rejected, which is usurped with the injury of other Bishops. And immediately
after: Notwithstanding by other places it is evident that Gregory thought the
charge and principality of the whole Church was committed to Peter by the voice
of our Lord. And thus much he wrote plainly, and almost word for word to the
Emperor Maurice, and strenghtned it by testimony of Scripture. Thus he.
Plainly declaring that although S. Greg. l. 4. Ep. ^2.
Gregory disliked the arrogant usurpation of that name with injury to the other
Bishops: yet he allowed the universal dignity of one supreme Governor of the
Church without wrong or derogation to any.

22. To that which M. Bilson urges of Counsels Bills. part. ^. p. 84. 85 86.
87. 88. etc.
deposing Popes, I answer: First they were unlawful assemblyes, as the
Council of Brixia, the Council of Pisa, according to Antoninus; And the
Council of Basil, although lawfully begun, was then unlawful, when it deposed
Eugenius. Secondly I answer: that lawful Counsels may in time of Schism
judge and declare who is true Pope, and depose the usurpers, or persuade also
the true Pope for quietness sake to resign his right, which was all that the
Council of Constance defined and practiced in deposing John the 23. Gregory
the 12. and Benedict the 13. And therefore M. Bilson might have well spared his
pains from tyring the learned, and amazing the simple Reader with the vain
recital of so many wild, and vagrant hystories. To proceed.

23. This second point being proved; that Peter's Successor enjoys his
dignity: it rests I discuss why the Pope of Rome should rather inherit it
then the Bishop of Antioch where Peter first sat, or the Bishop of Jerusalem
where Christ our Savior dyed. For declaration whereof you must understand that
Christ never fixed his seat either at Jerusalem, or at any other determinate
place. Again he has none to succeed him, he still continues Haeb. 7. v. 24*
his Everlasting Priesthood. And that the Primacy should not remain at
Jerusalem, the testimonies of Scripture are most perspicuous. S. Paul gives a
reason hereof: The Priesthood being translated, it is necessary that a
translation of the law Haeb. 7. v. 12. Matt. 21. v. 41. Act. 13. v. 46.
also be made. Christ forto^d it to the Jews: The Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you: and given to a Nation yielding the fruits thereof. S. Paul and
Barnabas testify the performance: To you it behooued us first to speak the
word of God: but because you repel it, and judge your selves unworthy of
eternal life: behold we turn to the Gentiles.

24. If Calvin had weighed these places well, they might have instructed him,
why the seat of Christ's Lieutenant was not placed at Jerusalem, the chief
City of the Jews, but in the chief and principal City of the Gentiles. It
might have also informed M. Bilson why at Rome, rather then at Antioch; because
it was meet, as Saint Leo does often insinuate: That the City of
Superstition, Leo 1. de na^a. Apost. Pet. and Paul. Marcel. Ep. ad presbyt
Antioch. Anaclet. ad omnes Presbyt. Hieron. de viris illust. in vit. Pet.
Damas. in vit. eiusdo^ Eusebius. in Chron. an. 44. Hieron. de viris Illusta in
Petro.
might be made the Chief Seat of Religion. For this cause, albeit he first
sat at Antioch for the space of seven years: yet after, as Saint Marcellus,
Anacletus, Saint Hierome and Damasus avouch, he translated his throne to the
City of Rome, and there continued Bishop as Eusebus, Saint Hierome, and other
Hystoriographers testify 25. years. There he ended his life with a glorious
Martyrdom. There he resigned, or rather surceased his Pastoral charge.
Wherefore seeing he only is invested in the state of his Predecessor, who
succeeds him, yielding up either by natural death or voluntary resignation
his whole former dignity, and not he, who succeeds only in his place, or
partaketh some part of his charge, the reason is clear, why Linus the Pope of
Rome, and not Euodius Bishop of Antioch is Peter's Successor, because in Rome
he sat last, in Rome he sat longest, in Rome he resigned his Episcopal
dignity.

25. We see when the King changes and remoueth his Court from one City to
another, the Magistrate he places in his former residence, he appoints no
heir or Successor to the right of his Kingdom. When the throne of the Empire
was translated from Milan, from Treuers, from Antioch and other places, the
Governors of those Cittyes did not thereby usurp the Imperial crown; no
more can the Bishop of Antioch challenge the scepter of Peter's supremacy, after
that Peter translated his seat from thence, after that he advanced it to the
City of Rome, and there continued it until the hour of his death.
Nevertheless he often departed thence during this time into diverse other
countries about the affairs of the Church.

26. And it has pleased God so to confirm the continual succession of his
chief Vicars in the Blessed Sea, that notwithstanding many cruel and mighty
Tyrants have bent their whole endeauours to disturb them from thence,
notwithstanding they have been often banished into remote and barbarous
Countries, as Clemens by Traian in Chersonesum the North part of Asia,
Cornelius Thomas Bozius de signis Eccl. Tomo 2. l. 17. signo 78. Baronius in
Auna. anno chri. 200. 255.
by Decius to Centumcellas, Liberius by Constantius into Thrace, Martin by the
same into Pontus, and forty such like; notwithstanding 33. one after another
have been put to the sword; notwithstanding their remove for a time to
Viterbo, Auenion, Rauenna: Yet the Pope* have still returned, and the Sea
continued at Rome. All other Patriarchall seats have been shaken in pieces,
but that of Rome no deaths, no banishments, no Tyrannies of men, or malice of
Satan could ever overthrow. That has perseuered for the space of 1620.
years: and Aug. de vtil. crede^. cap. 17. them. Test. in ca. ^. ^. ad Thessal.
flourishes still: The Heretics (to use Saint Augustynes words) in vain
barking round about it. Not the heathen Emperors (as the Author of the Rhemes
Testament excellently notes) not the Goths and Vandals: not the Turk: not
any sackes or m^ssakers by Alaricus, Attila, Burbon and others: not the
emulation of secular Princes, were they Kings or Emperors: not the Popes own
divisions amongst themselves, and manifold difficultyes and dangers in their
elections: not the great vices, which have been noted in some of their
persons: not all these, nor any other endeavor or scandal could yet prevail
against the Sea of Rome. Which is a clear demonstration of Gods divine
providence in preserving the Apostolic seat of his Vicar general Saint Peter's
Successor in that holy place, and not at Antioch, nor at Jerusalem; where the
succession of the Apostles have been interrupted by Schisms, infected with
Heresies, and utterly ruined by barbarous enemies.

27. Finally, it is a tradition uncontrollable, that the Pope succedeth Peter,
and whosoever denies it gaynsayeth Hystories, Chronicles, and Records of
Prelates, from the Apostles time, in which the Bishops of Rome are ever
enrolled in the Catalogue of Peter's successors; and not by them alone,
Tertullian, Optatus, Saint Augustine, with diverse others derive the lineall
succession of Popes by name from Peter. And in the days Tertull. l. de
praescri. Optatus l. co^t. Parm. Aug. Ep. 165. ad Generosum. Reynold. in
conference 1. diuis. 2. fol. 10. and 11.
Leo the Great, about 440. years after Christ, it was so far from being called
in question, that in the common phrase, both of Him, his Successors, and their
Secrecretaryes, all things appertayning to the Bishops of that Sea, bare the
memory, stamp, and title of Peter. They, as Master Reynolds my Antagonist
trauelleth to declare, grew to be Saint Peter's. Their prerogative Leo Epist. 45.
Saint Peter's right: Their dignity, Ibidem.
Saint Peter's honor: their greatness, Ep. 87. and sermon. 1. in Anniu. assum
suae.
Saint Peter's reverence: Subjection to them, Ep. 87.
subjection to Saint Peter: A message from them, Ep. 24.
an Embassage from Saint Peter. Things done in their presence, Ep. 4.
things done in Saint Peter's presence: Lands and Possessions given them,
Platin. de vit. Pon. in Joan. 7.
given to Saint Peter: Their Territoryes and Lord-ships, Pope Innocent the
third extra. c. per Venerabilem qui filij fint legitimi.
Saint Peter's patrimony: Their Revenues, Abbas Vrsperg. in Chron. Hen. 5.
Onuphr. de 7. vrb. Eccles. in pal. Latera.
Saint Peter's Royalities: Their goodwill, Greg. Regist. lib. 4. epist. 34.
his savor: Their communion, Lib. 7. epist 69.
his peace: Their indignation, ^ latin. de vit. Pon. in Greg. 7.
his curse: Their signer, Popes in their letters sub annulo Piscatoris etc.
his ring: Their Chair, Pope Innocent the 4. extra. cap Maioris de bap. and
eius effect.
his Sea etc. These and the like speeches which M. Reynolds in an ill cause
sets down to deface; I in a good (changing some of his spiteful terms)
do here repeat to countenance the truth of the Roman Bishops chief
pre-eminence and true descent from Peter. Wherein the common style of the Court
and consent of all men jointly agree: which I the further urge to satisfy
Master Bilson in this and every one of the three things he required, to
introne the Pope in his Supreme dignity, if the grace of God may prevail with
him, to take satisfaction from one, who although he impugn his errors, yet
loves his person, and earnestly wishes all his good parts may be once
converted to the advancement of his honor, from whose rich treasury they are
derived.

28. And with this my wel-wishing unto him, I would here make an end, if
Master Reynolds petulancy Reyn. c. 6. diuis. 3. f. 216. Cassio. in Chro.
Rhegi. in Chron. l. 2. Ado breu. Chri. ^^tat. 6*
in controlling the report of all ancient writers, could be passed over in
silence. For albeit he acknowledges Saint Peter's abode at Rome: yet he denies
that there he was Bishop, or that he held there his seat 25. years, affirming
(to recite his words, is sufficient to bewray his pride and temerity)
Cassiodorus, Rhegino, Ado, and all the Ecclesiastical Hystories have erred, in
saying that Peter did abide at Rome five and twenty years. Which error they
were carried into by Eusebius, or whosoever first reported it. A malepert
assertion. But as saucy is that which follows, where to wash the fault from
Eusebius, he layth it on Saint Hierome, and then to disburden Saint Hierome, he
loadeth Damasus the Pope of Rome. For first his conjecture Reyn. c. 6. diuis.
5. fol. 218.
is, that these words of Eusebius Chronicle: Peter continued Bishop of Rome
preaching there the Gospel five and twenty years, were not written by
Eusebius, but interlaced by Hierome etc. Now Hierome ( says he) might receive
it from In Ponti^icali.
Damasus Bishop of Rome: on Hieron. ^p. 11. ad Age. and l. 2. cont. Ruffin. as
Reyn. quo^eth them.
whom he attended as a Secretary. And Damasus was not so void of all
affection, but he would be content to advance the credit of his own Sea, by
helping it to be reputed the Bishoply Sea of Peter. Lo how he rejects
Eusebius, discrediteth S. Hierome, disgraceth Damasus, and reproves all
Hystories.

29. Are these all whose credit he impayreth? Not so. The Epistles and writings
are quoted of above two and thirty Bishops of Rome, who lived within the first
300. years after Christ, maintayning the Popes Supremacy, he answers: They
are Counterfeits all. Then Innocentius, Leo, Gelasius, Vigilius, Pelagius, and
Gregory, Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 3. Ibid. Reyn. c. 8. diuis. 6. fol. 550.
are recorded for the same. He replyeth. The praise which they give the Sea of
Rome, does so exceed the truth, that it bears evident makes of their
affection. Is his sauciness yet at an end? No, Saint Cyprian, Saint Leo, Saint
Hierome, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Maximus, Isidore, Theodoret, Saint Gregory,
and Saint Bernard are alleged some for Peter's, some for the Popes
prerogatives, or of the Roman Sea. Will you read his several answers, and note
the print of Heretical pride?

20. Saint Cyprians authority he rejects with Reyn. in the Preface to his 6.
conclus. fol. 607. Reyn. c. 1. diuis. 2. fol. 17.
a courteous Congy, saying: Pardon me, O Cyprian, I would believe thee gladly,
but that believing thee, I should not believe the word of God. But Saint Leo,
whom God with miracles, and the General Council of Calcedon, three times
honored with the title of Holiness; him, I say he more roughly handles, and
discardeth in this manner: I do freely without curtesy of tytles, and
accepting of Persons, profess, that I mislike these hauty speeches in Leo: and
I think that the Mystery of iniquity so wrought through his ambitious
adaduancing Peter, that of the Eggs which he cherished, two of the most
venomous Cockatrices were bred, that ever poisoned the Church of Christ; The
one, the Popes Supremacy etc. The other, the worshipping of Saints.

31. What says he of Saint Hierome? Hierome to Reyn. c. 4. diuis. 3. fol. 134.
Hieron. ad Aug. ep. 11. inter ep. Aug. Reyn. c. 4. diuis. 1. fol. 133. Rein. c.
4. diuis. 1. fol. 116. 117.
mayntaine his quarrel against Augustine, wrote of affection more what he
fancied, then of discretion what be thought. And when we Catholics allege
that sentence of his: Paul not had security of preaching the Gospel, unless
it had been approved by the sentence of Peter etc. Master Reynolds answers:
That we discover the nakedness of the Fathers etc. And praise the beauty of
their blemishes: and think them best clad, when they are naked most. Thus of
Saint Hierome. What of Saint Chrysostom? That which Peter might have done, as
Chrysostom supposes, would infer a greater Primacy then Peter had, if it were
true; but the Scripture says it not. The Fathers write some things (...), by
way of praise and commendation etc. Wherein if their words should be rigorously
sifted, Reyn. c. 4. diuis. 3. fol. 132. and cap. 4. diuis. 2. fol. 123. Ibid.
c. 7. diuis. 9. fo. 285. Bern. l. 2. de Conside.
the truth is somtymes ouerlashed. Of Maximus, of Isidore, of Theodoret what?
Father Maximus did dote; Isidore ouershot himself by slip of memory; Theodoret
served his own cause.

32. Is Saint Gregory then? Is Saint Bernard of more credit with him? Gregory
(quoth he) was somewhat troubled. Gregory had a loving affection to Rome. Will
you give me leave to think of him as Christ of Peter: That he knew not what he
said? That worthy passage is cited out of Saint Bernard, vvriting of Eugenius:
Thou art the Prince of Bishops, thou the Heir of the Apostles: Thou art for
Primacy Reyn. c. 6. Diuis. 4. fol. 226.
Abel, for government Noe, for Patriarch-ship Abraham, for order Melchisedech,
for dignity Aaron, for authority Moses, for Judgment Samuel, for power Peter,
for unction Christ. Master Reynoldes answers: Your men esteem this place of
Bernard very highly, and make a feast of it. I marvel they are not ashamed to
allege it. For to call the Pope heir of Saint Peter, it were a great excess
of speech: much greater to call him heir of the Apostles: But to call him
Christ, that is so great, that any modest man, who were Bernardes friend, would
rather lay his cloak upon it, then discover it, much less make boast of it.
Was ever heard a more audacious fellow, who durst open his mouth against heaven
it it self, and disgrace the writings of so many Saints?

33. And who art thou (O Reynoldes) that I should believe thee before those
Cyprians, those Chrysostomes, those Gregoryes, those Bernardes, whom thou
reprouest? Who art thou, that I should rather judge the greatest faults in them,
then the least spot or blemish in thee? Shall I deem Leo ambitious, Hierome
naked, Gregory troubled, Cyprian to have varyed from the word of God; and only
Reynoldes to have understood it aright? Can any man be persuaded that
Chrysostom ouerlashed, Maximus doted, Isidore ouershot himself, Theodoret
served his own cause, and John Reynoldes spoke sincerly; that Bernards shame
deserved a cloak, and Reynoldes beauty was worthy to be displayed? Can a man
think so many godly Popes miscaryed with affection, all Ecclesiastical
Hystories wide, and only Reynoldes to hit the mark? Truly he were either
sottishly perverse, or frowardly blind, whosoever would seem so partial on
his side, whosoever (I say) upon the slanderous deposition of such a faythlesse
witness should deprive the Pope of his soueraygne dignity over the whole
Church, which God and his Saints have imparted unto him.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
THE TWELVTH CONTROVERSY FREETH The true worship of Saints, of their Shrines,
and Relics, from Idolatry: Against D. Bilson, D. Reynoldes, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. 1.
THE Prince of darkness our professed enemy, as he always enuyed the glory of
God, and repined at the felicity and happiness of man, so he ever sought to
impair the honor of the one, and deface the dignity and pre-eminence of the
other. To this end he levied See Irae. l. 1. c. 22. ler. in Catal. Epip. baer.
68.
his infernal forces, first against the Divine Majesty it self, against the
first person in Trinity, stying up Simon Magus, Basilides, and others, to deny
the first article of our Creed: That God the Father created beauen and earth.
Then against the second person he banded, Ebion, Chrinthus, Arius who robbed
our Savior Christ of his Divinity, and Equality with his Father. Against the
third he armed Council. 2. Constant. cont. Mac. Ambr. l. 1. de fide c. 1. and 2.
etc.
Macedonius, who impiously impugned the Divinity of the holy Ghost. Against
them all jointly Sebellius, who wickedly gainsayed the distinction of the
Persons. But when this diabolical battery could no way prevail, he mounted
his Ordinance against the blessed Angels and Saints of God. He suggested
Eustachius in the year of Basil. in orat. con. Sabellium.
our Lord 300. Eunomius and Vigilantius, about the same time to fight against
the honor the universal Church exibited unto the happy souls which raygne in
heaven: whose poison Wicklisse after swallowed up, and is now disgorged by M.
Calvin, M. Bilson, M. Reynoldes, M. Fulke, Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 11.. 11. Bills.
4. p. page 157. 561. 571. Rey. de ldol. Romans Eccl. 1. l. c. 8. Fulke in c. 14.
Act. sect. 2. and in c. 19. Apoc. sect. 4. Rey. ibid. c. 6. and 8.
and all modern Protestants, chiefly upon this fond persuasion: That there be
only two sorts of honors, Civil, and Dixine; the one proper to God, the other
peculiar to mortal men. And seeing the servants of God already departed cannot
be reverenced with Civil honor, because they are absent, nor with Divine, for
fear of Idolatry; no true worship, but only (as M. Reynoldes yields) an
honest commemoration, or december burialt can belong unto them. This is the maine
ground of M. Calvin, of M. Fulke, of whosoever, which being once, razed, the
Rampire of their defense, and Fortress of their folly is wholly overthrown.

2. First then, I will deduce out of the cause it self and offspring from
whence honor arises, out of Scriptures and reasons undeniable, another kind
of worship besides Civil and Godly, which without danger of Idolatry may be
allotted to Saints. Albeit Aristotle says: Adoration and honor is in him
that honors: yet it has for Etb 9. c. 2.
his mark and object the excellency of the person worshipped, in testimony
whereof this sign of reverence is submissiuely exhibited. And therefore as
there be three sorts of excellencyes, so we distinguish three kinds of
adorations, Godly, Civil, and Religious.

3. There is first in God a supreme, infinite, and illimited Excellency, to
which a Godly worship or adoration is due commonly called Latria. There is
secondly in Men, in Kings, Magystrats, Masters, Fathers etc. a humayn and
natural excellency, to which our will by the apprehension of their worthiness
inclines to exhibit an honor termed by Aristotle, conformable to the nature
of their dignity, Civil or Humane. Thirdly there is a mean or middle
pre-eminence between these two, an higher then the last, yet inferior to the
first, seated not in the natural, but in the supernatural gifts and graces
of God; to which supernatural pre-eminence a supernatural worship more then
Civil, less then Divine Aug. ser. 58. de verb. Dom. and sup. Ps. 98.
ought to be attributed, commonly called Religious, or Dulia. For Hyperdulia is
only a more eminent and remarkable degree, yet contained under the same kind of
reverence, properly belonging to our Blessed Lady, as she is mother of God, and
to the humanity of Christ as considered apart from the divinity; albeit as it
is inseparably conjoined, and Hypostatically united with the Word, it ought to
be worshipped with the adoration of Latria; as the fifth general Council of
Constantinople defined Rey. l. 1. de ldo. To. Ec. c. 3. and 8. Fulke in c. 4
Matthew. sect 3 and in Act. 14. sect. 2. Aug. de ve. re^g. c, 55. Hiero. ep. ad
Ripa. con. Vigil. Augustquaest. 61 supr. Genesis Huro aduer. Vigil. cap. 20.
against Theodore the Heretic. And S. Augustine answering the Gentiles, who
objected against the Christians (as now the Protestants do against us) the
crime of adoring Christ's flesh in the Eucharist. I adore (says he) the flesh
of Jesus Christ, because it is united to the Deity: even as one adoreth the
King and his Royal robe with the same adoration.

4. Notwithstanding these three sorts of honor be each of them most different
in nature the one from the other: yet the names are most of them promiscuously
used and according to the ten our of the discourse, sometime restrained to one
kind of adoration, sometime to another. Which if M. Reynolds and M. Fulke had
diligently weighed, they would never have cited S. Augustine against us:
Affirming the worship of Religion neither to be due to Angels or men departed,
but only to God. Nor S. Hierome: That neither Angels, nor Martyrs Relics, nor
any created thing, can be worshipped and adored. Nor Ep phanius saying: God
will not have Angels adored, how much less Mary. Nor S. Cyril, nor S. Gregory,
nor any of the rest, who in those places take Quis (o insanum caput) aliquando
Martyrs ador auis? quis hominem putauit Deum? Aug. l. 3. de trin. c. 10.
the name Religion, Adoration, and Worship, for the supreme and soueraygne
worship which is only proper unto God (as S. Augustine explayneth himself in
his questions upon Genesis, S. Hierome in the same place, and against
Vigalantius) not for that inferior kind of adoration, which is often ascribed
unto creatures, and which Abraham exhibited unto the people of Heth: whereupon
S. Augustine gathers, That it is not said: Thou shall only adore thy Lord thy
God; as it is said, Him only thou shall serve. Which in Greek i^ (...). And in
his ^. book of the blessed Trinity writing of the brazen Serpent, and other
holy signs, he says: They may have honor as Religious things, not
admiration Fulke in 4. Matt. sect. 3. Aug. l. 10. de Ciui. c. 1.
as strange things. So that the Fathers only deny the Religious worship of
Latria to Angels and other creatures, the Religious worship of Dulia they
assign unto them. Which M. Fulke forced to confess says: S. Augustine a
mean Grecian imagined a distinction between Latria and Dulia etc. and that by
them which have interpreted Scripture, Latria is taken for that service which
pertayneth to the Religion of God. But Lodouicus Viues in his notes upon that
Chapter tells you otherwise. But Lodouicus Viues? O base comparison! Was it
not enough to disgrace S. Augustine with his mean knowledge in Greek, but
must a late Gramarian be compared, opposed, preferred before him, whom D.
Couell esteems the chiefest Doctor, that ever was, or shall be, excepting the
Apostles? Let his skill in Greek be what it was, shall his D. Couell. in his
book against M. Burges
doctrine, his distinction, the diversity of Religious worships, which he and
other Interpreters from these Greek words derive, be utterly exploded and
rejected by you? Shall Viues be accepted, and S. Augustine outcou^tenanced?

5. Consider M. Fulke how far herein you iniure your cause, wrong your
conscience, dishonor that grave; ancient and incomparable Divine. Again we
ought to observe, that as the names, so likewise the outward actions of
kneeling, prostrating, lifting up hands, and the like, are generally used in
every particular kind of worship: yet by the inward acts of the mind they are
wholly different the one from the other. For he that kneeleth to God reverently,
acknowledges by the light of his understanding a certain supreme,
incomprehensible, and increated excellency, author and cause of all rare and
excellent things; he loves with his will a bounty unmatchable, and with
profound submission humbly adoreth an infinite and unsearchable Majesty. He who
kneeleth to his King or Prince dutifully, agnizeth, and aflectionatly
reuerenceth his natural or Civil dignity. He who kneeleth to a Saint, to
their Tombs, Relics, or Pictures, devoutly apprehends, and piously
worshipeth some supernatural pre-eminence, Three things necessary to the
nature of honor.
quality, or relation. Whereby it follows that three things concur to the
nature of honor. 1. The apprehension of the understanding which acknowledges
an excellency worthy of adoration. 2. The propension and inclination of the
will, which unfeignedly prosecuteth the same with honor. 3. The external
obeisance of capping, kneeling, or bowing the body which is an outward obsequie
of inward reverence. And although the understanding be the root, origin, or
rather motive which exciteth the will; yet the act of the will is the life,
soul, and proper essence of adoration, without which the sole notice and
apprehension of dignity is no worship at all, and the outward and external
action may be as well a sin of mockery as any mark of honor. As it was in
the soldiers who adored Christ Matt. 27. and Ioa. 19.
and said: All hayle, O King of the Jews.

6. By which you may easily discern the blindness of Protestants, who
distinguish not the outward worship by the inward mind, but seem to make all
external Bills. 4. par. page 576. and 577.
honor belong to God, whether it proceed from the acknowledgment of natural,
supernatural, or entreated excellency. Submission (says M. Bilson) of knees,
hands, and eyes, parts of Gods honor. Again: The outward honor of eyes,
hands, and knees God requires of us as his due. Then: God allows to Parents
and Magistrates etc. some part of his corporal, but in no wise of his
spiritual honor. O mighty ruler and moderator of all hearts, who
ouer-reachest the wicked in their wiliest and deepest plots! how have thou
either caught our enemies in the enormity of that heinous sacrilege they have
long vainly labored to fasten on us; or suffered them to be enwrapped in such
snares of absurdity, as they cannot possible find means of escape. Esaias
prophesies God is so jealous of his honor Esaias. 42.
that he will not resign any jot thereof to other: My glory to other I will
not give. Not any jot of his spiritual, no nor of his corporal or external
homage (as M. Bilson a little before contrary to himself agrees with me.)
Both Bil. 4. par. page 553.
which he strictly prohibited in the first precept of the decalogue to be
surrendered to any but himself alone. The internal, when he proclaimed: Thou
shall have no other Exodus 20. v. 3. 5.
Gods but me; the Exterior, where it follows: Thou shall not bow down and
adore. Whosoever then affoardeth to man the outward obeisance of knees, hands,
or eyes which is proper to God, which God (says M. Bilson) requires of us as
his due, he disrobeth him of some part of his Bills. 4. par. page 577. Genesis 33.
Genesis 23. ^. Reg. 20.
right, and commiteth with his Creatures most foul Idolatry. Whereby it must
needs ensue that Jacob was an Idolater (to use his own examples) when he
bowed himself to Esau. Abraham an Idolater, when he adored the people of Heth.
David and Idolater, when he fell down before Ionathas. Yea it follows that
all Children are Idolaters, who bow to their Parents; all subjects Idolaters,
who bend their knees to their Soueraygnes; and the Protestants themselves
Idolaters, when they use such submission to the Magistrates, Counselors, or
Officers of his Maiestyes Court.

7. Which supposing, M. Bilsons ground I euince in this manner: The submission
and outward reverence which Children do to their Parents, subjects to their
Prince, is either the external and divine worship of Latria, which is proper
and peculiar to God, or some other Civil far inferior obeisance: if inferior,
God exacteth it not as his due, it is not the corporal and outward homage
which is proper to him: If it be the divine worship of Latria, Latria is
outwardly given and addressed to M. Bilson by his doctrine maintayneth Idolatry.
creatures, a sacrilegious and idolatrous honor is given unto them. Moreover,
give me leave to ask you M. Bilson, whether this external reverence of
bowing or kneeling to Princes, which you term Gods outvvard honor, be
conformable to the inward reverence and submission of the mind or not? Yield
it is, and the inward or spiritual honor due to God, which you so often
deny, is as well exhibited unto creatures, as his corporal and external. Say
it is not conformable, but either inferior, or none at all. If inferior, you
flatter or dissemble with your Prince, making outwardly show of far greater
homage then you inwardly perform or acknovvledge in your heart: if none at
all, your adoration is a mere derision or plain mockery; as Gabriell Gabriel
Vas. tom. 1. in 3. par. Diui Tho. disp. 108. cap. 9.
Vasques, and all Deuiues generally teach. Better had it been for him to have
embraced our Catholic doctrine, and to have taught with us, that the outvvard
action of bowing, kneeling etc. is common to every kind of worship, and only
limited to this or that, by the inward affection and submission of the mind.
It is accounted Civil honor, when it is done to Civil and humane:
Religious, when to holy and supernatural: Divine, when it is exhibited to
infinite and increated excellency. To which purpose if any shall dravv M.
Bilsons meaning, how contrary soever his words do seem, I will pass him
over with this mild censure of S. Augustine: Sententiam Aug, l. 3, de ciuit.
Dei cap. 1.
teneat, linguam corrigat: Let him hold his opinion, and correct his language,
or change his phrase of vvriting. But because, he so often, and so seriously
inculcateth the bowing of the knee, which is done to Parents and Magistrates,
to be parts of Gods honor, to be his bodily, his corporal honor, to be that
honor which God requires of us as his due: And hereupon infers, because
Pictures have not this Divine honor, therefore they have none at all: I should
betray the truth I have hitherto supported, if I charged him with less, then
the crime of I dolatry, whosoever shall yield such homage to men.

8. Neither can M. Bilson free himself from that fault, by the grant of Gods
allowance. For God cannot (as he fancyeth) allow those that present his
goodness and glory in Bilso^ ibid. page 577.
blessing and judging, as Parents and Magistrates, some part of his corporal
honor. He cannot allow to any civil dignity or humane excellency, how great
soever the external and peculiar worship which is due to himself, without
he allow the transgression of his Law, usurpation of his right, debasement of
his worships impiety in them that impart, and sacrilege in those that admit
such homage. And therefore, as M. Bilson follovving the former sense, runs
into the Labyrinth out of which by cleaving to his words he can never vvind
himself: So embracing the latter may well deserve that saying of the Prophet:
Incidit in foueam quam fecit: He has fallen into the pit Psalm. 7.
(of Idolatry) he dug for others. To proceed.

9. The word of God does likewise authorize this ^. Reg. 18. Dan. 2.
middle kind of adoration of which I speak. Abias, as the Scripture
mentions, adored Elias, Nabuchodonosor Daniel. But what honor was this?
Not Divine. For Abdias Dan. ^.
a virtuous and holy Prince would never have given that to Elias. Neither did
Nabuchodonosor (as his own words bear witness) think Daniel, a God, or
consequently worship him with godly honor. Not Civil: Because it is most
ridiculous to say, that such great Personages should ciuilly adore these
private men so far inferior to them in Civil dignity. Most fond, that
Nabuchodonosor for Civil curtesy should prostrate himself at the feet of his
Captive. It was therefore an holy and Religious worship, which for the
holiness and sanctity of their lives, for the excellency of their
supernatural gifts was worthily exhibited unto them. Such was the worship
which Saul did to the soul of Samuel: the children 1. Reg. 28. 4. Reg. 2.
Iosu. 5.
of the Prophets to Elizaeus: Iosue to the Angel: and which the Angel
commanded him also to perform to the earth; where you cannot say, that either
he worshipped the Angel with Godly, or the earth with Civil honor. For he did
not adore the Angel until he knew him by his own report to be the minister
of God. And what ciuility was it to put off his shoes in honor of the earth?
Or what rare or civil excellency had that profane earth, the field of
Jericho, above Iosue the servant of God, for which it should deserve any Civil
worship? Truly none. But it was then only holy in regard of the Angels
presence, for which it might challenge a most lawful and holy reverence.

10. Furthermore, the Arc of the Testament Psalm. 98. 2. Reg. 6. 1. Reg. 6. 2.
Reg. 6.
was in such estimation amongst the Jews, as King David commanded them to
adore it, before which he for devotion danced: which the Bethsamites curiously
beholding were slain by God to the number of 50000. men: Which Oza rashsly
touched, and was severely punished with the loss of his life. Now, who can
imagine that all this was done for moral ciuility or vrbanityes sake? Was it a
Civil and comely thing for the majesty of a King clad in a surpresse to dance
before the Arc? Was God so severe as to chastise the Bethsamites in so great a
number for a mere act of discurtesy? Or punish Oza with death for some
uncivil demeanor? Nay, if you only look into points of Ciuility without
regard to Religion, you shall find that Oza discharged the part of courteous and
Civil duty, in staying and upholding the Arc when it was like to fall: yet
because he touched with profane hands (which was an act of Religious
irreuerence) that which ought only to have been managed with the hands of
Priests, he was justly punished by Almighty God. On the contrary side, that the
dance of King David was an uncivil deportment so ill befitting his Princely
gravity, as Michol his wife rarely nurtured in all Civil obseruances, much
disdayned and misprized 2. Reg. 6.
him for it: and King David in his answer to her, does plainly insinuate that
he used this humility, not as courteous, but as a Religious reverence, as an
obsequy of Religion. For so S. Ambrose terms it, and says of the same Amb.
ep. l. 6. ep. 3^. and re Paenit. lib. 1.
in another place: All that becomes, which is exhibited to Religion.

11. Besides, our Savior commands, I say to you, not to swear at all:
neither by heaven because it is the throne of God: neither by the earth,
because it is the footstole of his seat. From whence we manifestly gather, that
to inferior creatures as they have a reference to the highest majesty, a Math.
5. v. 35.
certain Religious worship and honor is due. For as to swear by heaven or
earth rashly and without just cause (such oaths only are there forbidden and
not all manner of oaths, as the Pelagians in S. Augustines time, and the
Anabaptists now adays following the bare letter, obstinatly contend) is not
an unmannerly part, disagreable to Aug. ep. 89. q. 5. Maldonat. upon that place.
civil nature, and common vrbanity: but an ireligious abuse, offered unto God;
because that is his throne, this his footstool. So to swear by them when
necessity, truth, and other circumstances require, is a Godly, pious, and
religious act. Whereupon we are charged in Deutronomy not to swear by false
Gods, because we ought not to acknowledge in them any thing worthy such honor
Deu. 6. v. 13.
and reverence: Yet it is said. Thou shall fear thy Lord thy God, and by his
name thou shall swear. Like wise: all shall be praised that swear by him,
because they exercise an homage of Psalm. 62. v. 1^.
Latria, an act of divine worship, by which they testify that God has the
supreme care and providence of humane affairs; the perfect dominion, power,
government, and infallible knowledge of all things. So the nearer any thing is
lincked in relation with his Deity, or the more eminent respect it has unto
it; the greater offense it is to swear unlawful y by it, by reason of the
greater religious awe, and holy reverence we owe thereunto.

12. And if the word of God contained not such irrefragable testimonies hereof:
yet the approved rules both of equity and reason dictate and declare, that to
every dignity such honor ought to be ascribed, which is proper and
correspondent to the nature thereof. As to humane dignity, Civil and humane
worship: to sanctity or Religious excellency, holy and Religious honor: to
Divine sovereignty, Divine adoration. And he that attributes wittingly to one
the peculiar worship belonging To every dignity a worship corespondent.
to the other, does no less transgress the laws of Justice, then if he
performed to the subject the obeisance due to his Prince, or honored his
Prince with his servants title; no less then if he should inuest his
Soueraygne with an Herauldes Coat, or Burghesses gown in lieu of his Princely
robe; or scornfully reach him a Sergeants mace instead of his Royal scepter.
So foolish and ridiculous is the whole rabble of Sectaryes, who to profane and
earthly men most Idololatrously exhibit the corporal and external reverence
which in their opinion belongs to God, and to supernatural and holy things,
the Civil and humane, which appertains to men. For I desire to know how, and
in what manner they adore their Sacrament of the Lords supper? Protesta^t^
cannot reverence their Communion, (...) distinguish ^ ^ortes of reverence.
Not with Divine honor I presume, for that were tooto notorious and detestable
impiety. With Civil then no doubt; and this nevertheless is as great an
absurdity; because you either direct it to the natural dignity of bread and
wine, and so prostrate your selves most vilely to dead and senseless
Creatures, which in that respect have no pre-eminence above the excellency of
man capable of honor: o^ you address it to some supernatural quality, to
some Divine virtue (as M. Bilson calls it) annexed unto them. And so you
allow it an imperfect and Bills. 4 par. p 712. 78^. etc.
injurious kind of worship, you rob it of all Divine and supernatural, and
give it a Ciui^l, base, and humane reverence, no better then you yield to a
mortal man. Nay you worship your holy Communion with the same degree of
reverence, as you honor a profane and sometime wicked Magistrate. What is
confusion? What is sacrilege? What is iniquity, if this be order, is this be
religion, if this be equity, to confound high things with low, sacred with
profane, terrene with heavenly?

13. Having sufficiently proved three sorts of adoration, Civil, Godly, and
Religious: it rests that the blessed Angels and Saints of God, their
Relics, Tombs, and Monuments may be lawfully worshipped with Religious
reverence without any derogatio^ to the Divine honor of God, as the general
practice of the whole Catholic Church recorded by the ancient Fathers does
amply demonstrate. S. Justin the Martyr writes of his time: We worship and
adore the Army of good Angels Just. 2. apo. page 2. Euse. l. 4. hist. c. 14.
Basil. hom. de Mart. Ma^ante.
Eusebius, of the Clergy of Samaria in the time of Saint Pelicarpe: We
celebrate the memory of Martyrs with holy days, and great joy. S. Basil, of
the Custom in his days: The Church by honoring them that are departed,
encourages such as are present. S. Gregory Nissen: To what King is such honor
exhibited? What Emperor has ever been so famous and renowned, as this poor
Champion (speaking of S. Theodore the Martyr?) S. Augustine: Christian people
celebrate the memoryes of Martyrs with Religious solemnity. To these I might
add S. Athanasius, S. Aug. l. 20 con. ^aust. cap. 21. Atha. l. de virg.
Nazian. orat. in Machab. Epipha. haer. 79. Chry. hom. de SS. Iuuent. and
Maximo. Abros. ser. ^.
Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, with many more, if the very
calumniation and obloquy of the professed enemies of God did not ratify the
truth hereof. For Julian the Apostata, the Manichees, the Jews, Heathens, and
other Heretics, observing the custom of former Christians in honoring
Saints above all earthly Creatures, always slaundered them with the crime of
Idolatry, as Saint Ciril, Saint Augustine, and Euscbius testify; to whom these
Fathers answered, as we do now the like imposition laid upon us by our
Adversaries.

14. Saint Augustine excusing the Christians of his time said to the Manichees:
We worship the Martyrs etc. yet ^ot with that honor proper to God, which is
called in Greek Latria. S. Cyril replied to Julian: We do not say our Martyrs
are made Gods, but we use to yield all honor unto them. All honor Cyr. l. 6.
and 10. con. Iulianum. Aug. l. 10. c. 21. con. Faust. Eusebius. l. 8. hist. c. 6.
and l. 4. c. 14. Cyril. loco citato. Arist. 1. Eth. cap. 5. Romans 2. 10.
he says, because they are replenished with all the supernatural gifts and
graces to which any honor can possibly belong. To virtue says Aristotle: To
well doing, says S. Paul, honor is due: glory and honor to every one that
does well. The Saints have accomplished such virtuous and heroicke acts as have
purchased a crown of eternal bliss. To sanctity and holiness honor is due:
they are so perfectly holy as they are admitted into the Society of the Holy of
all Holyes. To wisdom honor is due: they are so wise, as beholding the
treasures of the Divine wisdom it self, they see in it whatsoever they can
either wish or desire. To nobility honor is due; they are ennobled to be the
children of God, the son of the highest, the undoubted inheritours of the
Kingdom of heaven. To soueraygne dignity honor is due; they are advanced to
so great preferment, as they Apoc. 3. 21. Apoc. 2. 27. Cyril. vbi supra.
sit with God in his throne, they have power over Nations, they rule and
govern them. So that all honor, as S. Cyril says, may be justly bestowed
upon them, who have all these worthy respects of honor and reverence, howbeit
not in that highest degree which is proper and agrees only to God. Reyn. l. ^.
de Idol. Romans Ecc. c. 8. p. 287. etc. Greg. Nis. orat. in S. Theod. Reyn. ibid.
p. 288. etc. Chrysostom. ser. de SS. Iuuent. and Maximo Basi^. in Psalm. 115.


15. M. Reynolds overcome with these and many other reasons, grants
sometimes (although otherwhere again he utterly denies it) That the Angels
and Saints are to be worshipped; yet with a Civil kind of worship: But S
Augustine terms the honor done unto them not Civil, but Religious
solemnity, no such as is surrendered to mortal men, but far greater; such
according to Saint Gregory Nissen, as has been yielded to no earthly King or
Emperor. Yea M. Reynoldes own Pew-fellowes condemn his rashness herein
affirming: that no Civil honor can be exhibited to souls departed. And he
himself speaks so staggeringly in this behalf, as his Pen had no sooner
uttered that unadvised phrase: That Civil honor is due to Saints, but he
presently recalled the word ( Civil) as a voice unbeseeming the nature of
their worship, and adds, That Calvin himself accounted it somewhat too
rough; and therefore he sought to sleeke and smooth it with the limitation of
Civil honor (as I may say.) It is well you limit and correct, smooth and
soften your rude and harsh conceit. It is well neither Niss. orat. in Theod.
Hiero. l. 2. ep. f^n. ep. 8. Ergone ^rlt illadies quando nobis liceat speluneam
Saluatoris intrare* and Crucis la^bere lignu^, and Ioha^nis Baptistae, Helisaei
quoque and Abdiae pariter ci^^resadorare? Amb. ser. 93. de SS. Naza. and C^lso.
you, nor your master knows how to call, which you disdain to call by the
right approved name. To return therefore to my purpose.

16. As the Saints of God: so their Relics, Tombs, and ashes are highly to
be honored. S. Chrysostom writing of S. Iuuentius and Maximus says: Let us
often visit them, let us adorn their Tombs, let us touch their Relics with
a strong faith, that we may receive some blessing from thence. S. Basil: He who
handles the bones of a Martyr, draws a certain touch of Sanctification from
the grace resident in the body. S. Gregory Nissen affirms the same. S.
Hierome speaking of visiting the holy Land of Palestine, and other devout
Relics, says: Will that day once come when it shall be lawful for us to
enter our Saviors den? and to lick the wood of the Cross? and to adore the
ashes of S. John Baptist, of Elizaeus together and Abdias? S. Ambrose
proposing this objection to himself: what do thou honor in resolved and
decayed flesh? I honor (says he) in the flesh of the Martyr the wounds or
marks received for Christ; I honor the memory of the living by perpetuity of
virtue; I honor ashes sacred by the Confession of our Lord; honor in the
ashes seeds of eternity; I honor the body which instructs me to love our
Lord, which has taught Aug. l. 22. de Ciuit. c. 8. and epist. 103. ad Quin.
Chrysostom. l. cont. Genesis Beda l. 2. c. 13. l. 3. c. 11. 12. 13. and l. 4. c. 19.
me for his sake not to be daunted with the horror of death. And why should
not the faithful worship that body, which the very devils do reverence? S.
Augustine testifyeth of the many miracles and great honor yielded to the
Relics of S. Stephen. S. Chry sostome the like of the shrine of S. Babilas.
Venerable Bede of the Relics S German wore about his neck, with which he
restored sight to the blind. Of the Relics of S. Oswald and S Edildride, the
one a Pious and Godly King, the other a vvedded wife, and Virgin Queen of our
country. Socrates reports of Theodosius the younger a virtuous Socrat. l. 7.
cap. 22.
and noble Prince; that he was wont to wear the sackecloth of a certain holy
Bishop, that dyed at Constantinople: quamuis sorditatus, although it were not
very clean: Persuasus se aliquid ex mortui sanctimonia inde percepturum,
persuading himself, that he should receive some benefit from thence, by the
holiness of him that was dead. S. Gregory the great, sent to King Edilbert of
England Greg. l. 8. ep. 60. l. 7. ep. 126. indict. 2. l. 11. ep. 49. indict. 6.
l. 2. ep. 71. 8^. l. 3. ep. 30. l. 5. ep. 6.
small tokens, not of small value; as he accounted them, having the blessing of
S. Peter. The like he sent to Ricaredus King of Spain. To Eulogius the
Patriarch of Alexandria. To the Empress. To other Princes, Bishops, and
Patriarchs: and to make the gifts more precious, he put into them a little of
the holy Cross, a little dust filed from S. Peter's or S. Paul's Chains, some
of S. John Baptist hayres, S. Laurence gridyron; which the aforesaid parties
reverently wore about their necks. And many miracles as the same Saint Gregory
relates were wrought by those Ambros. ser. 91. and l. 10. ep. 85. Nazian.
orat. 3. i. 1 in Iulia. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. ser. de vire. and vitijs. Ambros. l. 10.
ep. ep. 85. Hier. cont. Vigilan. cap. 3. where he also says that if we herein
be guilty of Sacrilege, Sacrilegus fuit Constantinus Imperator, qui sanctas
reliquias Audreae, Lucae, and
Relics, many at the Invention and Translation of Saint Geruasius and
Protasius bodies; many by the bones, dust, and shadow cast from the corpse of
other Martyrs. And S. Hierome auoweth the estimation and honoring of Relics
to have been in his time; the received doctrine: Non vnius vrbis, sed totius
orbis. Not of one City, but of the whole world. He controlled and suppressed
Vigilantius for teaching the contrary: Which stirred up the hearts of sundry
Protestants in defense of their Patron to rate and revile S. Hierome in most
opprobrious manner.

17. M. Reynoldes says: He yielded to much too his own passions; He more
eagerly then truly, not soundly, viciously and with vehement rage argues
against Vigilantius. M. Fulke: He confuteth not Vigilantius with arguments so
much as with railing. Osiander: Hierome did folishly contend that the Relics
of Saints were to be worshipped. Bullinger: It is Hierom^ ouerlashing when he
avouches that the devils roar at the Relics of S. Andrew. But was S.
Hierome only taxed for Timoth^i transtulit Constantinopolim, apud quas Daemones
rugiu^t etc. Sacrilegus di^endus est and nunc Augustus Arcadius qui ossa beati
Samuelis etc. Omnes Episcopi non sacrilegi sed etiam fatui iudica^di* qui etc.
this fault? No, M. Sutcliffe writes: Gregory esteemed much the Relics of
Saints. M. Fulke: Gregory was superstitious in Relics. Bale: Gregory admitted
the adoration of the Cross. What then, was Gregory, and he singular herein?
No, Danaeus a prime Puritan asseuereth: That Cyrill, and diverse other Fathers
were plainly superstitious, and blinded with this enchantment of the Crosses
adoration. The Centurists affirm of Constantine the Great: With like
superstition he translated to Constantinople in conservation of that City,
certain Relics of the Cross found by Helen. Whom they (howbeit Camden our
English Antiquary reports her to have been often registered in antique
Inscriptions, A most Pious and venerable Empress) for this cause, and for
going in Pilgrimage to adore the holy Land, and other monuments of Christ,
injuriously term A Superstitious woman.

18. And what if God himself allow the like Superstition? What if many grave
and ancient writers defend the like? God allows it in his own written word
by the reverence which Moses used to the bones of Joseph Reyn. l. 1. de Ido.
To. Eccl. c. 6. Fulke in c. 6. Apoc. sect. 1. Ofian. in epit. Centu. 4. p. 506.
Bulling. de Orig. erro. f. 67. Sutcl. Subuers. c. 4. Fulke in c. 6. Apoc. Bale
Con. 1. c. 68. Danaeus in 2* 1* ad Bell. 5. Cont. resp^p. 1415. Cent. cen. 4.
Col. 1529. and cen. 4. Col. 458. Cambden in his English description of Britan.
page 74. Exo. 13. 4. Reg. 23. Act. 1. Act. 19. Lact. him. de Passio. Ruff. l.
10. Hist. c. 8. Socra l. 1. c. 13. Paulin. in nata. 10. S. Felic. Procop. l. 2.
de bell. Pers. Chrysostom. ser. de Cruce. Aug. orat. de obitu Theod. Sozom. li. 1.
cap. 8. King James his conference at Hamp. Court. page 69.
the Patriarch: and Josias to the bones of another holy Prophet: by the
miracles wrought by the dead bones of Elizaeus: by the shadow of S. Peter: by
the Napkins of S. Paul. The Fathers defend it by the meruaylous wonders
achieued by the Holy Cross of Christ Queen Helen found out, and by the
exceeding reverence Christians exhibited unto it in former time. Of which
Lactantius, Ruffinus, Socrates, Paulinus, Precopius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose
witness, and Sozomenus chronicleth of the forenamed Constantine (whom our
noble Soueraygne King James vouchsafes to acquit from all Superstition:) He
worshipped the holy Cross, because he had received much help thereby in battles
against his enemies, as by reason also of the heavenly vision he saw of it,
when that victorious sign, as Eusebius writes, appeared Fulke in ^* 19. ^o
sect. 1. Prudent* in Apoth* Lactan* in poem. de Passio. Redempt.
unto him in a clear and fair day, with this inscription: IN HOC VINCE:
OVERCOME IN THIS. Prude^tius accordingly affirms, Vexillumque Cru^^ summus
Imperator adorat, The chief Emperor adoreth the ensign of the Cross.
Lactantius: Bow thy knee, and adore the venerable wood of the Cross. Paulinus
agrees with them cited thus by M. Fulke: The Bishop of Jerusalem yearly at
Easter brings forth the Cross to be adored, himself being the principal of
the worshippers. How does he avoid this evident testimony? Marry he opposes S.
Ambrose against him saying, that to Amb. de obitu Theod.
worship it, Is an Heathenish error, and vanity of the ungodly: where S.
Ambrose is nothing contrary to Paulinus. He says speaking of Queen Helen: she
adored the King, not the wood: verily for that is an Heathenish error. To wit:
not the Wood as Wood; not in regard of it self, but with reference to Christ,
as the Cross on which he dyed. So she adored, and so Paulinus, so S. Ambrose
teaches it deserves great veneration, as I will incontinently set down. First
let us see what our Opponents urge besides. Rein. de I* do. To. Ec. p. 84. 85.
Act. 14. Hester* 13. Zuares in. 3. p. disput. 52. sect. 1. Act. 10. Apoc. 19.
Hiero. lib. con Vigil* August. q. 61. in Genesis Talis appar^er ^t vt pro Deo
pos^^t adora^i.


19. They object: That S. Paul and Barnabas prohibited the Lycaonians to adore
them: and Mardochaeus refused to worship Ammon. They did so for just respects.
Ammon challe^ged the submission of both knees, which the Jews were wo^t to
surrender to God alone, as Zuares one of the deepest Deuines of our age notably
observes. The Lycaonia^s would have yielded to S. Paul the honor of Sacrifice
which is only due to God. For which cause the one piously feared to yield, the
other to accept any Godly worship. But say they: Cornelius did not adore S.
Peter, nor S. John the Angel with any Godly honor: and yet they were both
reproved for the reverence they used. I answer, either with Saint Hierome:
That Cornelius apprehended a certain divinity in Peter, and was therefore
worthily reprehended by him; Or with S. Chrysostom: That Cornelius devoutly
worshipped Peter, and Peter of modesty forbear to accept thereof. In like
manner I say of S. John: That he might well mistake the Angel, by reason of
the majesty he presented, and take him for God, as S. Augustine answers
hereunto: and so was corrected for his error concerning the person, not blamed
for his abuse of adoration. Secondly I may say with S. Gregory, and Venerable
Greg. l. 27* mora. c. 11. Beda in 19. Apocal. Anselm. in idem cap. Ruper. lib.
10. in Apo. Fu^^e in c. 19. Apoc. sect. 4. Bullinger in c. 19. and 22. Apoc.
Marlor. in suis Rapsodijs.
Bid, S. Anselme, and Rupertus, seeing S. John reiterated this worship the
second time, that neither of them was an error or absolute prohibition, but
that S. John adored the Angel with the Religious worship of Dulia, due unto him
and the Angel of mere reverence to the humanity of Christ, and to the dignity
of his dearly beloved Disciple refused that honor. For although M. Fulke
vnshamfastly charge S. John herein, with an offense of humane frailty and
forgetfulness: although Bullinger and Marlorate two Caluinists, accuse him of
Idolatry: yet no modest man can ever think so great an Apostle, who instructed
others in all Christian duties, could himself in a matter of such importance
either be so ignorant, as not to know, or so obliuious as not to remember, or
so impious as to exhibit to a Creature the honor of God, forbidden before by
the mouth of an Angel.

20. Nevertheless M. Reynolds, M. Fulke. M. Bilson Reyn. l. 2. de Ido. To.
Eccl. cap. 2. Fulke in c. 19. Joan. sect. 2. Bills 4. par. p. 172. 561
and the whole rabb^e of Protestants with open mouth exclayme against us, that
if not to men, if not to Angels, yet to far more vile and abject creatures:
To a dead and senseles stock (such M. Bilson miscalleth the Rood or Crucifix)
we give equal degree of glory with the mighty Creator and quickner of all: we
salute it saying: All hayle our hope etc. We call upon it to save us, pardon us
etc. I answer: In these and such like speeches we conceive Christ as crucified
on his Cross, and so apply these words to him, Our true Hope, Life, Salvation
etc. For not only the Cross, but every Image of Christ may be saluted and
worshipped in two several manners. First I may salute or reverence Christ by
his Image, as by spectacles I see the thing I desire; that is: I may reverence
Christ directly as the principal object that shines in his Image, and his
Image merely per acccidens, as conueying my thoughts to Christ, which is the
homage indeed of Lairia, and may in no way be properly said to be deferred to
the Cross, but it is wholly carried by the Cross to Christ, as the whole sight
is leuelled through the spectacles to the object I behold, by the self same
vision with which the thing is seen. For as we use the internal act of our
mind to adore him who^ we internally appre^hed thereby: so we may use this
external sign to worship him who^ it externally represe^teth. Thus we salute,
thus we reverence the Cross (as our adversary mentioned above) or rather
Christ by his Cross, who under it is comprised.

21. And that the Cross does thus comprehend Christ, and may be consequently
adored in lieu of him, Gal. 6. v. 14. Col. 1. v. 10. Philip. 3. 18. 1. Cor. v.
17. ibidem verse. 18. Gal. 6. v. 12.
we learn of S. Paul, who when he gloryed, and boasted in Christ he said: God
forbid I should glory, saving in his Cross. He calls the blood of our
Redemption: The blood of the Cross. The enemies of Christ: The enemies of his
Cross. The frustrating of his Passion: The making void of his Cross. The
preaching of his Gospel: The preaching the Cross. The persecution thereupon
inflicted: The persecution of the Cross. Where M. Reynolds was so
sharp-witted, how dull soever he be in conceyuing the prayers of the Church, as
to understand and set down in Print; That S. Reyn. c. 8. di^is. 2. p. 412. 413.
Paul after a figurative manner of speech by the Cross meant Christ crucified.
Neither was this in him a private fancy, or taint of Puritanisme: the
Protestants in their public Canons have solemnly enacted and diuulged the
same. The Canon. 30.
Holy Ghost say they) by the mouths of the Apostles did honor the name of the
Cross so far, that under it they comprehended not only Christ Crucified; but
the force, effects, and merits of his death and Passion, with the comforts,
fruits, and promises, which we receive or expect thereby. Secondly the honor
and dignity of the name of the Cross begat a reverent estimation even in the
Apostles times of the sign of the Cross etc.

22. Suppress for shame this Constitution of yours, or cease to upbraid us as
Idolaters for reuerencing the Cross, as comprehending Christ crucified: The
very name whereof the Holy Ghost so honored by the mouths of the Apostles:
The sign whereof was so esteemed by them, so held in the Primitive Church, so
applauded with one consent by the Greeks and Latins, as it is evident (you
your selves depose) by the testymonies of ancient Fathers: In so much, As if
any opposed themselves Canon. 30
against it, they would certainly have been censured (I use your own words)
as enemies of the name of the Cross, and consequently of Christ's merits, the
Sign whereof they could no better endure. If you had been feed to write in
our behalf, could you have written more, either to acquit us herein of blame,
or condemn your selves of malice? For that which is after interlaced by you,
as cautions (so you term Ibidem. Canon. 30.
them) against our Popish superstitions: That the sign of the Cross used in
Baptism is no part of the sustance of that Sacrament; and that the addition,
or omission of it does neither add or detract from the substance, virtue, and
perfection of Baptism, are indeed no cautions, no exceptions against us, who
never Bills. 4. par. page 561.
taught any such doctrine; but hateful calumniations forged by you, who sell
your souls to slander truth. Again to the matter from which I have digressed.

23. The second manner of adoring the Image of Christ is: when directly I
worship the Image, and Christ consequently as represented therein, which is not
the divine worship of Latria, but a far inferior reverence, redounding
notwithstanding from the Image Christ etc. Here M. Bilson interrupteth my
discourse with the clamorous imputation of a new disgrace offered to the Son
of God: For if this honor (says he) be baser then the highest and diuinest
kind of adoration, it cannot pass from the Image to Christ. Less then honor
Christ will not have: he that otherwise honors him, defaceth him. I confess
M. Bilson, that he who affoardeth our Savior in his own person less worship
then Latria, does much dishonor and disgrace his dignity: But he who exhibiteth
less homage unto him as he adoreth him indirectly represented in his Image;
does no more deface his preheminent excellency, then he who reuerenceth the
servant of his Soueraygne for his Soueraygnes sake, with a meaner regard of
duty then belongs to his Prince: although by the same out ward submission and
affection of his heart, he truly honors the King in his subjects person.

24. Secondly I answer to your former outcry, that the Church uses those
Rhetorical phrases to the sanctified wood of the Cross by the figure of
Prosopopaeia. Which if our Adversaries blame in us, they may blame the^ in
Moses, when he said: Hearkeno ye heavens the things which Deutro. 3^. Matthew.
23.
I speak etc. They may blame them in Christ saying: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I etc. They may blame them in S. Ambrose who dignifyeth the Cross
with far more excellent tytles then these mentioned by the Church, as
Walden. tom. 3. tit. 20. c. 159. Amb. orat. in faner. Theod.
Waldensis our learned Countryman pithily notes: We sing in our Office
(says he) All hayle O Holy Cross, our true Salvation. S. Ambrose terms it:
The ensign or Trophey of Salvation. Wesing: O Lively wood bearing the life of
all. S. Ambrose names it: vitam ipsam: Life it self. We sing: O Blessed
Cross, because on thee the King of Angels has triumphed: S. Ambrose calls
it: I psum triumphum: The very triumph it self. We entytle it: Our vital or
lively Cross. S. Ambrose: Our Palm Tree, or victory of eternal life. We
sing: O sign of Salvation, safty in dangers. S. Ambrose terms it: I psam
Salutem: Salvation it self. We sing, and say to the Cross: By thee we are
redeemed O beautiful ornament of the world. S. Ambrose calls it: Sacram
Redemptionem: our holy Redemption: using these words: Helen did wisely
inhaunce the Cross on the heads of Kings, that the Cross in Kings might be
adored. This is not insolency, but piety, which is performed to sacred
Redemption.

25. Not an Heathenish error then M. Fulke, not an insolent, but a Amb. ibidem.
pious work it is in S. Ambroses conceit to reverence the Cross: A Aug. l.
20. cont* Faust. cap. 20.
Religious homage to worship Saints: A Amb. ep. ad soro.
devout obsequy to adore their Tombs: A Chrysostom. ser. in adorat. vener. Catena.
virtuous and holy service to touch their Relics, called hereupon: R^ffi. l.
11. hist. c. 28.
Venerable Relics: Basil. in Psalm. 115.
Precious Relics: Amb. vbi supra.
Most holy Relics: Aug. l. 22. de ciuit. Dei cap. 8.
Sacred Pledges: Amb. ser. 93.
Consecrated ashes: Auth. de Eccles. dog. cap. 73.
Members of Christ: Chrysostom. vbi supra.
Heavenly treasures: Eusebius hist. lib. 4. cap. 14^
more dear then gold and precious stones: Chrysostom. ser. in ador at. vene,
Catenarum.
Monuments full of Divine grace, full of all veneration and sanctity; Whereby
such as touch them with faith are sanctified, and the spots of their souls
after a mystical manner cleansed. Which cannot import any profane, but a
certain, divine, holy, and Religious reverence, less then Godly, more then
Civil.

THE THIRTEENTH CONTROVERSY PROVES Invocation of Saints to be lawful:
Against Doctor Reynoldes, D. Field, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. I.
THEY who above with great impiety robbed the Saints of their deserved honor,
here with no less injury, with no less iniquity bereave both us of their
special patronage, and them of the prayers and supplications we make Rein. l.
1. de ido. Romans Eccl. c. ^. 6. etc. Field lib. 3. cap. 20. Fulke in c^ 15. Luc.
sect. 2.
unto them. Because they are ignorant and unacquainted (as amongst others M.
Reynoldes, M. Field, and D. Fulke chiefly think) with our affairs, they
cannot here our suites, or relieve our wants. Because it derogateth from the
mediation of one sole Redeemer, to fly to any other mediator then he. But I
will briefly show by his divine assistance, whose cause I mayntaine; that the
Angels and Saints departed make intercession for us; that we may lawfully
implore their 1. Tim. 2. sect. 4. 1. Io. 2. sect. 5.
aid; that there is no want of knowledge or ability in them; no injury to God,
or prejudice to Christ to frustrate and condemn our duties heerin.

2. To unfold first the state of the question: we pray not to Saints (albeit
M. Reynolds, M. Fulke, with others of Reyn. l. 1. c. 6. etc. Fulke in 1. Timo.
2. sect. 4. Iaco. 5. sect. 12. Act. 7. sect. 2.
their crew would attaint us of it) either as Gods to help us, Redeemers to
save us, or as the author of any gift and grace bestowed upon us. Almighty God
alone is the sovereign fountain of life, the author of all natural and
supernatural favors. Of him al grace and glory ought to be demanded: in him
all our hope and affiance is always reposed. Secondly we pray not to Saints as
Mediators of our Redemption, but of Intercession only, neither as immediate
Intercessours between God and man. For Christ is our sole Mediator and
imediate Intercessour also, by whose incomparable merits all living creatures
either in heaven or in earth, have access unto God: by him all their prayers
are offered and suits obtained from the bountiful hand of his Father. And
therefore (howsoever Calvin impudently belyeth us in this behalf, protesting
Calu. lib. 3. Inst. c. 20.. 21.
that in all our Hymns and Litanies we make no mention of Christ) we end al
our petitions addressed unto Saints and Angels, with this conclusion, Per
Christum Dominum nostrum etc. By Christ our Lord, beseeching them by their
intercession to the highest, through the benignity and favor of our merciful
Redeemer to help and succor our distress. In this manner we inuoke and call
upon them; in this manner they supplicate and pray for us.

3. As we read of the Angels, in Zachary one of them prayed: O Lord of hosts,
when will thou have mercy of Jerusalem, Zacha. 1. verse. 12. Tob. 12 v. 12.
Apoc. 8. v. 3.
and of the City of Judah etc. This is now the seauenty year. In Toby, Raphael
said unto him: When thou with tears did pray and bury the dead, I offered
up thy prayers unto our Lord: In the Apocalypse, An Angel offered much incense
of the prayers of Saints upon the golden Altar. And (least Caluins cavil
should here take place, that the Angels pray for us, because they are ordinary
Meslenges sent into the world for the guardianship Calu. l. 3. Just. c. 20.
Luc. 20. Orig. l. 8. cont. Cells. Greg. Nys. in vita. S. Ephrem.
of Gods elect, Saints are not;) our Savior himself equalleth Saints with
Angels not only in bliss, but in other prerogatives. In knowing (quoth Origin)
what favor we enjoy in the sight of God, and praying with us for increase
thereof. In assisting with them (quoth S. Gregory) at the Divine Altar etc. In
remembering our necessityes, and craving pardon for our sins. In custody and
safeguard of us (says Saint Hilary.) In patronage and Prelacy over us: In
conversation with He alludeth to the 8. of the Apocal. Hilar. in Psalm. 124.
Amb. in l. de vid. and l. 8. in Luc. Bern. ser. 2. de S. Victore. Hierem. 15.
Apoc. 5. Primasius in cum locum. 2. Macha. 15. Reyn. l. 1. c. 3. Field. l. 3.
c. 20. fol. 111. Tob. 12. Dan. 10. Zacha. 10 Psalm. 90. Matthew. 18. Theod. l. 8.
ad Greg. Greg. ora. in Cypria.
us (says S. Ambrose.) Whereupon S. Bernard: The Angels run and succor men:
and they, who were of us, have they forgotten us? Have they not learned to take
compassion in which they once suffered Passion? Certes they have, as the Divine
Oracles in sundry places insinuate.

4. God spoke unto Jeremy: If Moses and Samuel stood before me, my affection
should not be to this people. Therefore they were wont to stand and pray for
them, or else the speech were very incongruous. S. John in the Apocalypse saw the
24. Seniours falling down before the lamb, having every one harps and vials
full of odours, which are the prayers of Saints. Where Primasius and others
note, what prayers, and for whom they were. Jeremy the Prophet after his
departure: Prayed much for the people, and all the holy City, as Onias the
high Pryest testified to Judas Machabaeus. M. Reynoldes with his pew-fellow
Field both instructed in the school of Calvin answer with their Master: That
the Saints pray for us in general, as these places prove, not in particular as
we would enforce. But it is evident out of Toby, Daniel, Zachary, King David,
and S. Matthew, that the Angels pray for us in particular, are our particular
Guardians, Pedagogues, and Overseers. Which Theodoret, S. Gregory Nazianzen,
and diverse ancient Fathers consequently infer of the Saints, calling them in
like manner: Amb. lib. de viduis.
Presidents of our Salvation. Basil. in 40. Martyrs.
Protectours of mankind; comparteners of our cares. Basil. ibidem.
Intercessours, or Ambassadors to God for us. Prude^. l. de Coronis.
Patrons of the world. Theod. l. 8. Graec. affect. 2. Petri 1.
Captains, guides and defenders of men, by whom we are rescued out of sundry
misfortunes, and fensed from the evils our Ghostly enemies would inflict.
Evident it is that S. Peter spoke of particular matters when he said: And I
will do my endeavor, you to have often after my decease also, that you may
keep a memory of these things. The souls of the Martyrs craved in particular,
revenge for their Persecutours, how much more pardon and mercy for their
Friends? The rich Glutton moved with natural compassion prayed in particular
for his brethren; and shall we not think that the Saints in heaven, installed
in bliss, enflamed with Charity, have a more particular care of their
brethren, Apoe. 6. Luc. 1^. Ambros. in natali sanctorum Mart. Nazarij and
Celsi. Leo ser. 1. in natali Apostol. Aug. l. de cura pro mort. c. 16. Eusebius.
l. 6. hist. cap. 5. Pruden, in Him. de S. Fructu^so. Nys. in in vita Greg.
Neocaesar. Genesis 48. Job. 5. The Heb. word Kara signifies to Inuoke, Exodus 23.
Theod. q. 67. in Exodus, Dan. 3.
friends and kinsfolks? S. Ambrose, S. Leo, S. Augustine think they have. S.
Ambrose writes, that S. Nazarius was a peculiar Patron of the people of Millan
by the privilege of his Sepulcher, which there was honored. S. Leo affirms
S. Peter to have a general love of all, but a special protection of the City
of Rome. S. Augustine testifyeth of the particular care S. Felix had of the
City of Nola, and of his strange apparition in defense thereof confirmed by
undoubted witnesses. Eusebius, Prudentius, S. Gregory Nissen report in
particular cases many such particular apparitions. To proceed.

5. It is lawful for us to pray to them in particular; therefore they know,
and may redress our private necessityes. Jacob said: The Angel which has
delivered me from all evils, bless these children. Job was counseled to pray
to the Saints: Call if there be any who will answer thee: and turn to some of
the Saints. Which the 70. Interpreters translate: Inuoke if any may answer
thee: or if thou do behold any of the holy Angels. Moses entreated the
patronage, as Theodoret witnesses, of the Patriarchs in these words:
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants. The like did Daniel: Take not
away the mercy from us, for Abraham thy beloved, and Isaac thy servant, and
Israel thy holy one. And King Solomon: Remember O Lord, David and all his
mildness. Which God himself approved in the 4. of Kings: I will guard this
City for Psalm. 13^. 4. Reg. 19. Chry. hom. ^. in psa. 10. Victor. l. 3. de
pers. VVanda. Greg. Nazian. orat. in Basil. Iero. in Epita. Paulae. Nissen.
orat. in Theod. Aug. de Bap. l. 7. c. 1. Cries. ho. 5. and 8. in Mat. hom. 43.
in Genesis Bern. ser. 2. super. missus est. Reyn. l. 1. de Ido. Romans Ec. c. 2.
misliketh the name of Queen of Heaven, Star of the Sea. Athan. ser. de
Deipara. Aug. sermon. 18. de Sancti^. Ephrem. ^rat. in laudem B. Virg. Conc.
Chal. act. 11. ^lauianus post mortem viuit, Martyr pronobis oret. Field. l. 3.
c. 10. Iero. in ep. Paulae, Nazian. orat. in S. Basil*
my own sake, and David my servants sake. Where S. Chrysostom says: David
was dead, and his merits flourish, and are of strength or power. O wonderful
thing: a dead man patronizeth the living. Thus Victor V^icensis prayed to the
Angels, Patriarchs, Apostles, and to S. Peter and S. Paul by name. Thus S.
Gregory Nazianzen implored the help of S. Basil, S. Hierome, of S. Paula, S.
Gregory Nissen, of S. Theodore, S. Augustine, of S. Cyprian. Thus S.
Chrysostom often exhorts us to supplicate unto Saints. S. Bernard exciteth
us to pray to our B. Lady, gracing her with sundry illustrious tytles, which M.
Reynolds utterly distasteth. S. Athanasius says, Incline thy ear to our
prayers and forget not thy people. O Lady, Mystres, Queen and Mother of God
pray for us. S. Augustine: O Blessed Mary receive our prayers, obtain our
suits, for thou art the special hope of Sinners. S. Ephreem inuocateth her by
the name of Hope, Refuge, Advocate, Safty, and Mediatrix of the world. All the
venerable Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon allowed the prayer made to
Flauianus, where it is said, Flauianus lives after his death, he a Martyr let
him pray for us.

6. Were these things all spoken by way of Apostrophe, as you M. Field would
deceive the ignorant? Were they (as you miscall them) doubtful Compellations,
and not rather effectual prayers, devout inuocations, by which they hoped,
demanded, and often obtained the fruits of their requests? Listen to S.
Hierome, listen to S. Gregory Nazianzen, both which you produce to bewray their
doubtfulnes; S. Hieromes words are these: Farewell O Paula, and support with
the help of thy prayers the feeble old age of thy worshiper: These S. Gregory
Nazianzens, calling upon S. Basil: O Divine and sacred head, behold us from
above, and the instigation of my flesh given me as an instruction from God,
either aswage with thy prayers, or move me to bear coragiously. Did these men
doubt? Or S. Bernard, who often assures us of Bern. sermon. 3. in vigil Not. and
ser. de B. Virg. quae incipit Signum magnum Bafil. in 40. Mart. Cyp. lib. de
habit. Virg. Ruffin. l. ^. hist. c. 33.
the help of our B. Lady? Or S. Basil, exhorting us to inuok the 40. Martyrs:
Whosoever is oppressed with any misery let him repair to these: and who soever
rejoices, let him pray tothese: the one that he may be freed from evil, the
other that he may persevere in his prosperous courses? Or S. Cyprian, who
requested the Virgins or Nuns of his time, in whose commendation he wrote to
remember him after their departure, when their Virginity should begin to be
honored? Or Theodosius the Emperor who, as Ruffinus witnesses, clad in
sacke-cloath, lay prostrate at the Tombs of the holy Apostles and Martyrs, and
craved help by the assured intercession of Saints? Or any of those, whom I
recited before, whose speeches cannot be eluded by any doubtful flourish or
figure of Rethorike, much less the suites they make unto the Saints in heaven:
Prude^. in him. 4. 8. and 10. Casar-August. August. quaest. 108. and ser. 18.
de Sanct.
to obtain pardon for their sins. Noz. or at. in Ath^n.
To be directed in the warfare and combat of this life. Bern. in vigil. Petr.
and Paul.
To incline the heart of our Judge in their behalf. Prud. him. 2. in D. Lauren.
To be sooner released the bonds of our mortality. Amb. or at. ^. in morte
fratris. Nazi. ora. in Basil.
To be received by them into the Tabernacles of bliss. August. lib. medit.
cap. 24. Nazian. in S. Cypri. Ambros. exhor. ad virg. Paul. Nola. in Car, ad
Cytherium. August. lib. 22. de Ciuit. Dei cap. ^.
To bewafted by their prayers and merits to the haven of perpetual peace. Such
and many such like requests they made, which were no. wholly frustrate, as the
miracles wrought in accomplishing their desires give testimony unto us.

7. S. Gregory Nazianzen writes of a Virgin bewitched with devilish charms to
be deflowred by her Lover, who prayed to our Blessed Lady, and was delivered
from his wicked inchantements. S. Ambrose of S. Julian, who obtained a son by
the intercession of S. Laurence. Paulinus of Martinian, who escaped imminent
danger of death by the help of Saint Felix. Saint Augustine of Palladia, who
praying to S. Stephen was healed of a grievous disease. Of a blind woman, who
received her sight. Of the daughter of one Bassus a Syrian restord to life: And
sundry other miracles wrought by the Relics, memory, and invocation of
selfsame happy and glorious Protomartyr.

8. Which argues M. Field of more then vnshamfastnes, Field. l. 3. c. 20. fol.
109. and 110. Kemnitius exam. p. 3. p. 211.
of insolent malepartnes in slandering S. Augustine: That he dares not
pronounce, but inclines to that opinion: that the Saints do not particulerly
see, know, and intermeddle with humane things. If Saint Augustines own words
here quoted cannot free him from so vile a reproach, let Kemnitius, M. Fields
fellow Protestant be heard, he alleges S. Field loco citato.
Augustine inuocating S. Cyprian, and blusheth not to add: These things
Augustine without the warrant of Scripture yielding to times and custom. Yet
D. Field once down the bank Whitgift in his defense against the reply of
Cartwright.
of modesty slideth to the bottom of audacious impudency, and immediately
writes: The Church of God never desined otherwise, how soever Hierome in his
passion against Vigilantius seem to say the contrary. Not Hierome M. Field, in
his passion, but your own Sect-mates in their sober writings shall convince
you of falsehood, and testify the same with him. D. Couel in his exam. page
120. Fulk in his Reioynder p. 5. and 6. and against the Rhem. Test. in 2. Petr.
c. 1. sect. 3. Kemn. in exam. p. 3. page 200. Sparks p. 33. Cent. Cen. 3. Col.
83. etc.


9. M. Whitgift late Archbishop of Canterbury: Almost all the Bishops (says
he) and writers of the Greek Church and Latin also, for the most part, were
spotted with Doctrines of Freewill, of merit, of invocation of Saints, and such
like. The same is avouched by D. Couell. M. Fulke says: I confess that
Ambrose, Augustine, and Hierome held Invocation of Saints to be lawful. And
in another place: In Nazianzen, Basil and Chrysostom is mention of Invocation
of Saints. Kemnitius the Lutheran before named: Invocation of Saints (quoth
he) at length about the year of our Lord 370. by Basil, Nissen, and Nazianzen
began to be brought into the public asse^blyes of the Church. D. Sparks
charge Origin, or some other under his name, With a gross Popish prayer to
Job. The Centurists do the like, acknowledging moreover this uniform doctrine
in many other, who lived about the 300. years after Christ saying: There are
manifest steps of Invocation of Saints in the Doctors of that ancient age.
And in the Centuries following they accuse Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen,
Ambrose, Prudentius, Cent. Cen. 4. c. 4. Col. 296. 297. Whitaker in his ans.
to the 4. reason of Comp. Ibid. in his ans. to the 5. reason.
Epiphanius and Ephrem of the same error. Finally when blessed Campian urged
this approved custom of the ancient Fathers, Whitaker answered: The old and
inueterate practice of inuocating Saints in prayers we little regard: although
this were an ancient custom, yet it flowed from humane superstition, not from
Divine authority. And a little after speaking of Prudentius who flourished
within the 400. year after Christ, he says: Prudentius I grant as a poet
sometimes called upon the Martyrs whose Acts he describes in verse; and the
superstitious custom of praying to Saints, had now taken deep root in the
Church which as a Tyrant haled sometimes the holy Fathers into the same error.

10. What think you now M. Field, was S. Augustine, was S. Ambrose, were all
these learned Fathers here cited, and the whole Church which they guided, of
this belief or no, that the Saints in heaven see and intermeddle with humane
affairs? Or were all these mirrours of wit, learning and sanctity, not only
superstitiously (as your Ghospellers tax them) but foolishly sottish also, as
you would make them, to call upon such as they thought had no sense or feeling
of their necessities? Dare you avouch: That Invocation of Saints prevailed not
in the Church of Field lib. 3. cap. 20.
God, when these Pastors and Prelates vpheld it as lawful? When it had taken
deep root, and haled the holy Fathers into that error. Dare you profess
that the members agreed not with their head, the Sheep with their Shepherds,
the people with their Priests? Dare you think that any presumed to contradict
that which Augustine in Affricke, Ambrose in Italy, Hierome in Palestine,
Epiphanius at Cyprus, Chrysostom at Constantinople, Basil, Nazianzen, Nisien,
Athanasius in other parts of Greece countenanced and supported? Or if any
disallowed this general and universal practice, tell us who they were; show
us but one in the first 600 years besides Vigilantius, whose name for that
cause is billited in the house of Heretics, and fameblotted with everlasting
ignominy.

11. Morouer both reason and equity persuades that as the faithful upon earth
make one Church, one This is proved by S. August. l. 20. de Ciuit. Dei c. 9.
People, one Commonwealth, with the Saints in heaven: as we are all members of
the same body, sheep of the same fould: as we all live in the family and
household of one Master, all are governed and guided by one headpastour and
shepherd: so it is expedient we should have mutual fellowship and society
together, mutual Communion and participation of benefits, mutual and
interchangeable offices of love, charity, duty, reverence, honor, and
submission. We of duty, should sue to them: they of charity pray for us; we
honor and praise their felicity: they help and relieve our misery; we lay
open our poverty and wants: they supply with the abundance of their merits. For
if this reciprocal love and communication of benefits be practiced between
the Cittyzens of every City, subjects of every Kingdom, servants of every
house; if the Corinthians exhibited it to their brethren upon earth^ how much
more may we expect from the 2. Cor. 8. verse. 14.
blessed souls in heaven, we that are called to the inheritance of their
Kingdom, we that are not pilgrims and strangers but Cittyzens of Saints, and
houshould-seruants of God.

12. Lastly, we read in holy Writ; that the living do fruitfully invoke the
living upon earth. The children of Israel entreated the prayers of Samuel: S.
Paul of 1. Reg. 7. v. 8. Romans 15. 1. These. 5. Colos. 4. Ephe. 6. lob. vl^.
the Romans, Thessalonians, Colossians, Ephefians. And God commanded some to
repair to holy Job saying: Go to my servant Job, and he shall pray for you.
Yea, was it pleasing to God, was it auaylable to others to pray to him yet
living in misery, and shall it not profit us to invoke him now raygning in
glory? Was it no fault in S. Paul to pray unto the faithful exiled from the
face of their Spouse, and can it be no less then high treason in us, and
treason against his Divine majesty to call upon them now blessed with the
fruition and sight of his countenance? To call upon the Apostles and Martyrs of
Christ, to call upon the immaculate Virgin and mother of God? Are they dead to
us, because they live to him, and live a more perfect, pure and happy life?
Agreeable to that of S. Matthew cited Matt. 22. Cyr. l. 6. cap. 10. Call. lib. 3.
Inst. c. 20. Rey. l. 1. de Ido. Romans Hec. c. 3.
to this purpose by S. Cyril of Alexandria: I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, the God of the living, and not of the dead; albeit Calvin scornfully
taunteth often at the^ by the name of deadmen.

13. M. Reynolds seeks to show a reason why we pray to the living, and not
to the departed: Because (says he) the living may understand our griefs
either by word or message; the Saints can have no notice of them. Therefore
they cannot make particular intercession for us, or we use any supplication to
them. But if I prove they may have perfect intelligence of our affairs, if by
the same means, and by far more assured then the living with us, what will
he then say? What shield will he find to save himself? What shift to eschew
the force of my argument? Two vvayes he and others assign of knowledge to
the living: By word or sight in presence: by message or report in absence. Both
these are ascribed to the Saints in heaven. They understand our afflictions by
word and sight, when being (as Ambrose, and S. Hierome teach they may be) by
incredible svviftnesse and celerity of motion every where present and
conversant Amb. l. de viduis. Hierom. l. con. Vigil.
amongst us: being, as S. Ambrose adds: Beholders of our life and actions,
they see our distress, and hear the complaints we make. They know our
estate by message also and report of others: By the report, says S. Augustine,
of the souls, who depart from hence, and by the report Aug. l. de cura pro
mortuis.
of the Angels Gods trusty messengers, and our Faithful Guardians, who have
daily intercourse betvveene them and us.

14. Or if these means will not suffice (the ordinary vvayes by which
mortal men take notice of our occurrents) there are yet two others more sure
then these, by which the Saints still resident in heaven have certain
knowledge of our outward actions and inward thoughts as far forth as it may
be needful for us and expedient to them. The one insinated by Saint Hierome
and Saint Hier. ep. 2. con. Vigil. Greg. l. 12. moral. c. 13. 16.
Gregory the Great, is, that the Saints behold them in the brightness of God,
as in a fair replendent glass, in which the beams of all creatures, their
nature and perfections more clearly shine then in themselves, according to that
of S. Gregory: What can they be there ignorant of, where Naz. orat. fun. in
sor. Gorg. Aug. l. de cura pro mortuis. cap. 15. Luc. 15. 7. Mat. 18. 10. Mat.
22. 30. Luc. 20. 36. Apocal. 1. 26. 27. Mat. 19. 28.
they know him who knows all things. Another mentioned by S. Gregory
Nazianzen and S. Augustine, is by the special favor and revelation of God,
who opens to them as to his entire friends whatsoever is behoofull for them
to know. And that by one or both these means the blessed souls understand our
affairs, we evidently prove. First, because the Angels in heaven know them,
they rejoice at the secret conversion and repentance of a sinner, therefore
they know it. They have such care of their Wards, as it is written: See you
despise not one of these little ones: for I say to you their Angels in heaven
always do see the face of my Father. Therefore they know the estate of their
pupils, they know the wrong we offer unto them, or else in vain are we
threatened to fear it. The same I conclude of the Saints, who by Christ
himself are likened unto Angels, who rule, govern and raygne over us: who
must (the chiefest of them) give doom and judgment of our actions; therefore
they know them. Secondly, the nature of bliss and happynes requires it,
which is a main Ocean of joys, a full and plentiful repast of whatsoever
the heart can vvish or desire. For Psalm. ^6.
King David said: I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear. Now every
Saint (nature being not abolished but perfected by grace) has a natural
inward appetite to know the estate of their friends, to understand the suits
they make unto the^, therefore to fulfill the measure of their felicity they
must have notice of them.

15. Thirdly, the excellency of their beatificall and happy vision of God
challenges no less. For if many holy-men even in this life either by the gift
of Prophesy or by the extraordinary favor of God have disclosed the hidden
thoughts of heart, things to come, and things done far distant from them; as
Elizaeus knevv the bribe which Geizi took: S. Peter the sacriledges of 4. Reg.
5. Act. 5.
Ananias and Saphira: Daniel, Ezechiel many secrets to come, depending on the
free choice and will of man: Why should not the Saints, whom the highest
Soueraygne has admitted into his heavenly consistory, with whom he
communicates his hidden counsayles, why should not they by the pre-eminence of
glory, which far surpasses the gifts of prophesy, the prerogatives of
grace, more truly decipher, and perspicuously see what is often revealed by
inferior means? Which reason Aug. l. 2^. de Ciu. Dei. cap. 29. Basil. l. de
vera Virg Athanas. quaest. 32. Esa. 63. Hier. upon that place.
S. Augustine profoundly prosecuteth, saying: If the Prophet Elizaeus absent in
body did see the bribe his servant Geizi received of Naaman Syrus etc. how much
more in that Spiritual body shall Saints see all things etc. When God shall
be all in all unto us? I might adioyne hereunto the suffrage of Saint Basil and
S. Athanasius, unless our Adversaries thought to wipe them all away with one
misconstrued place of the Prophet Esaias.

16. Abraham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us. I answer with Saint
Hierome: That they knew not the Jews with the knowledge of approbation or
liking; because they had abandoned before the Law of Aug. l. de cura pro.
mort. c. 13. Job. 14. Eccles. 9. Orig. l. 2. in Ep. ad To. Aug. l. de vera
relig. cap. 55. Naz. orat. in Athan. Field l. 3. c. ^^. fol. 109.
God. Or they knew them not by their own power and virtue, by humane
conversation with them, as Saint Augustine seems to interpret it: and of
which Job, King Solomon, Origin, Saint Augustine mean when they doubt or deny
the Saints to know our actions. S. Gregory Nazianzen is so far from
staggering in this point as he says of Athanasius: Recte noui etc. I truly
know he vieweth our doings. And therefore M. Field might easily have perceived,
had he not been wilful, that in the sentence of S. Gregory at which he
carpeth, If the Blessed souls have that privilege from God to know these
things etc. If the dead have sense etc. the particle ( if) is not taken
conditionally, but causually by way of asseueration, as learned Maldonate
literally expounds it in his notable commentaryes Maldonat in Io. c. 15. etc.
13. Joan. 15. Joan. 13.
upon the New Testament in S. John: If they have persecuted me etc. Again: If
God be glorified in him etc. The like I affirm of S. Hierome, and the rest,
when they use any such conditional speeches. For although some Fathers doubted
of the manner of knowledge the Saints have of inferior things: yet none ever
made question, but that they understand by revelation from God, not generally,
All our inward actions and secret thoughts (which Field loco citato. fol. 114.
M. Field, whether of ignorance or malice I divine not, injuriously terms,
An impious counceit of Papists) but such as we of devotion, or they of piety
desire to know. Howbeit it could inuolue no impiety if they did see all, not of
themselves, but by the Divine illumination and favor of God.

17. So as our Protestants can devise no semblance or show of reason why
mortal men may be prayed unto, and not immortal Saints: Unless they imagine
that being united to Christ, they be more estranged from us: that their charity
is more cold, or ability Bern. in vigil. Petri and Pauli. and ser. de S.
Victore. Aug. ser. ^9. infest. SS. Petri and Pauli.
less able to comfort us. Of their charity S. Bernard writes: That Blessed
Country does not change, but augment it. The latitude or breadth of heaven
restrayneth not, but dilateth hearts. Of their power and ability, Saint
Augustine speaking of the miracle S. Peter wrought with his shadow says: If
then the shadow of his body could affoard help, how much more now the fulness of
his power? And if then a certain little wind of him passing by did perfect
them that humbly asked, how much more the grace of him now permanent and
remaining? And S. Hierome: Hier. aduers. Vigi.
If the Apostles and Martyrs dwelling in corruptible flesh could pray for
others, when they ought to be careful for themselves; how much more after
their crowns, victory and triumphs? When, Secure, as S. Cyprian notes, of
their own felicity, they remain sollicitous only of our safety?

18. Lastly, the wicked fiendes and devils of Cyp. de mortal ^
hell, hear the Southsayers, Witches, and Magitians when they either conjure
or call upon them, they contriue and accomplish many mischiefs at their
appointment by Gods permission, as you may read in the fourth Martinu^ del Rio
Magica. disquisitionum l. 4.
book of Matinus Del Rio his magical Disquisitions. And shall we think the
triumphant Saints and Angels of heaven deaf? Shall we think their hands
fettered or power restrained, when we devoutly pray and suplicate unto them? O
ye heavens be astonished, and stand amazed ye immortal spirits, at this
cursed generation, which grants to the devilish and damned spirits what it
impiously gainsayeth and denies to you. For ^. Reg. 28. Basil ep. 80. ad
Eustac. Amb. l. 1. in Luc. 1. Ieron. Isa. 7. Aug. de. cura pro mort. ger. cap.
15. which S. Augustine wrote after that to Simplicia^ where he seems to doubt
whether it was Samuels soul or no. Eccles 46. Tertul. l. de anima. Procop.
and. Euche. in (...) locu^.
what can any Protestant say to that apparition of Samuel mentioned in the
first of Kings? Will he grant with S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S.
Augustine, which is also most agreeable to the words there recorded, and
confirmed by Ecclesiasticus, that the soul of Samuel truly appeared unto Saul
and foretold him of his death of King David his successor, of the slaughter of
his sons, and other Israelites, which was to ensue the very next day after.
Then he must perforce acknowledge, that souls departed do know our affairs,
and what good or evil does here betide us: as S. Augustine by this example
inuincibly proves. Or will he answer with Tertullian, Procopius, and
Eucherius, that some hellish spirit taking the shape of Samuel, was raised by
the enchauntment of the Pythonicall woman. Oh how does he debafe Gods blessed
Saints, making them less able to hear our prayers, less powerful to relieve
our necessityes, then Devils are to hear and obey the magical charms and
coniuration of witches? Or will he reply at last with some of the former
authors, that God preventing the woman's witch-crafts, called up Samuel, not in
such ugly shape, and disorderly manner, with his heels upward, as evil
spirits according to the Rabbis were wont to appear: but in due order, and
comely fashion, sooner also then she expected. Oh how ungracious is he, and
blasphemous against God, to think him more ready to prevent the desires of the
Sorceresse, then the earnest suits and supplications of the Just: more ready to
summon up the devil from hell to satisfy her demands; then reveal and lay
open to his Saints in heaven the humble requests of their suppliants on
earth. Incline therefore to which part you will, follow what opinion, invent
what shifts, frame what answers you list; either you blaspheme the boundless
piety, and goodness of God: or you must needs confess, that he acquainteth the
inheritors of his Kingdom with the prayers we address, and dutiful services
we perform unto them.

19. But let us hear the cloakes they use, the pretenses they make to cover
such wickedness. Christ (say they) inuiteth us all to him: Come to me al you
that Labor and Mat. 1^. v. 28.
are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Who doubts that we must all
repair to Christ as to the head and offspring from whom all goodness flows?
we must have recourse to him, as to the Doctor of truth, to the Physician of
our souls, the comforter of our griefs, and only author of our salvation, as
the ancient Fathers interpret that place? Origin teaches, that Christ by these
Orig. l. 2. cont. Cells. Ier. l. 2. in c. 11. Mat. Hilar. in hunc locu^ Matthew.
Chry. hom. 39. in c. 11. Mat. Aug. ser* 11. de verb. Dom. Luc. 7. Mat. 8.
words, come ye all to me, inuiteth all from the darkness of error to the
new light of his doctrine: he inuiteth us, according to S. Hierome, from the
yoke of the law to the grace of his Gospel. To the observation of his
Commandments, according to S. Hilary. He inuiteth us, says S. Augustine, from
the disasters, and combersome travel, of this world to refresh us with his
spiritual rest, with the abundance of his godly delights which sweetneth all
bitter and distasteful things. He inuiteth all (says Saint Chrysostom, and
the same S. Augustine) that are surcharged with the burden of sins, to fly to
him to be eased, unloaded and assoyled of them. Not one of these expositions
hinder or inhibite our repair to Saints, neither can we be said any whit
the less to come to Christ our selves, when we of humility and reverence
interpose them as means with us to obtain these graces of him: for whereas
the humble Centurion came not immediately himself, but sent his friends and
Seniours of the Jews to Christ: yet as Saint Augustine wisely observes, Aug.
l. 2. de consen. Euang. c. 20.
the Scripture says, Accessit ad eum Centurio, the Centurion came to him, and
was far more inward in his favor then the proud Pharisy, who went himself
and drew so near unto the Altar of God. Whose presumption let Miscreants
follow: we rather imitate the humility of the former.

20. But M. Fulke presses out of the Epistle to Fulke sect. 4. in ^^. ad Roman.
the Romans: How shall they invoke in whom they have not believed? now it is
unlawful to believe in any but God. Therefore unlawful to invoke any but
God. I answer, the Apostle there speaks of Pagans and Infidels, who could
not truly call upon Christ as they ought, unless they acknowledged and
believed him to be their Lord and Savior. No more can we dutifully implore
the succor of Saints, except we believe them to be endued with such grace
and favor in the sight of God as they are able to help us. Which manifestly
rejects M. Fields fiction of the Fathers doubtfulnesse. For how could they
doubt to whom they so devoutly prayed? How could they invoke, whom they
believed not? I do not say to be Gods, but to be able to obtain, or further
their suites, as I have already demonstrated out of the word of God.

21. It is urged further: Letno man seduce you willingly in the humility and
Religion of Angels. Where, as Saint Chrysostom, S. Hierome, Theophilact
interpret, S. Paul Colos. 2. 18. Epip. haer. 6. Aug. haer. 39. Theod. in eum
locum Conc. L^o. cap. 35. ^ield lib. 3. c. 20. f. 109. 1^0.
speaks against Simon Magus and his followers, who taught (as certain other
Heretics called Angelici, of whom Epiphanius and S. Augustine vvriteth
imitating the Platonickes, since have done) that the Angels ought to be
honored as Demy-gods with the divine worship of Latria: that by them, and
not Christ, access is to be made to God the Father. Which horrible heresy
Theodoret and the Council of Laodicea reprehend in the place by M. Field cited
against us. After which sort we may reconcile Saint Ambrose with Saint
Bernard, whom M. Fulke, Fulke in c. 2. ad Tim. sect. 4. Amb. in c. 1. ad Romans
Bern. ser. de Bea. Virg. quaeincipit Signum magnum.
after his fashion of answering the Fathers, uncharitably bandeth one against
the other. For true it is which Saint Ambrose auerreth, vvriting against the
Heathens, who worshipped the Stars as they the Angels: To merit God we
need no suffragatour: as though he were unable of himself to aid us. In
another sort true it is which S. Bernard teaches: We need a Mediator to our
Mediator, and who more profitable, then the Blessed Virgin? True, that we
need no Mediator, no Intercessour in respect of Gods ability, power, promise,
benignity, and forvvardnesse to relieve: true that we need in regard of our
own imbecility, negligence, indignity, and base unworthiness.

22. Our Adversaries having gained no ground by these former attempts, think
at least to drive us 1. Tim. 2. verse. 5.
out of the field with their last assault out of S. Paul: One God and one
Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus. Therefore they contradict this
holy Apostle: And do injury Fulke in eum loc.
(says M. Fulke) to Christ, who make any more Mediators then he. I answer,
that as S. Paul himself did nothing prejudice the honor of Christ in using
the mediation of the living upon earth: so we nothing at all in admitting the
intercession of the Saints in heaven, as long as we call upon these after the
same fashion, and in no other sort then he upon them, with a main difference
and distinction from Christ. To Christ we say: Lord S. Aug. l. 8. de Ciuit.
Dei c. 27. Never did any man hear the Priest standing at the Altar upon the
holy Body of the Martyr, say. Offero tibi sacrificium Petre vel Paul.
have mercy upon us: to them: O Holy Saint N. pray for us. Christ we inuoke as
God himself to bestovv his gifts and graces upon us: Saints only as the
friends of God to purchase by their prayers his favor and mercy. To Christ
we offer our daily Sacrifice: to Saints we never say: I offer to thee Peter,
to thee Cyprian. Christ we make our only Mediator, who by himself in his
own name and person confidently deals in our behalf: Saints we use as
mediators to Christ, who by his gracious favor may affoard us help. For
two sundry vvayes a man may be a mean to deliver his friend out of prison:
either by entreaty to his Creditour, or supplication to the King to obtain his
enlargement: another is by an absolute discharge and full payment of the whole
debt, for which he is imprisoned. The Saints are Mediators after the first,
Christ after the second (a more excellent) manner. The Saints are such
mediators as God required, when he sought a man to interpose himself betwixt
him and his people. Such as Moses is termed by Saint Paul to the Galathians,
by himself in Deuteronomy: I was a Mediator between our Lord and you: Ezech.
22. Galat. 3. Deuteronomy. 5. 1. Tim. 2. Greg. de Valen. l. de Christ. Red. and Med.
p. 2. cap. 3. Chrysostom. in hunc loc. Hill. l. 9. de Trinit. Cyril. l. 12. Thesaur.
Aug. l. 9. de ciuitate Dei c. 17.
Christ, such a one as the same Apostle describes: One God, and one Mediator
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Redemption for all.

23. Out of which words one of the chiefest Deuines of our age has gathered
four extraordinary propertyes of mediation belonging to Christ alone. First
that he is an Advocate or Mediator, not only in regard of his office, but in
respect of his nature also, which was a mean, as it were betvveene God and
man perfectly partaking the nature of both, and so termed: The man Christ
Jesus: to wit, Christ our Savior both God and Man. After which manner S.
Chrysostom, S. Hilary, S. Cyril, S. Augustine acknovvledge him our only
Mediator. Secondly, who gave himself: that is, who by the dignity of his
own person, without the assistance of any other, makes intercession for us.
Thirdly, A Redemption: to wit, who offered a full and general discharge,
ransom and satisfaction for our sins, such as his Father in the extreme
rigor of justice ought to accept. Fourthly, For all: that is for all sorts of
men both present, past, and to come. Accorcording to any of these conditions,
if either Saint, or Apostle, or Angel should be equalled to Christ, as
Parmenian Aug. cont. Parm. l. 2. ^. 8.
the Donatist equalled the Bishop; we conclude with S. Augustine in no other
words then those, with which Master Fulke sounded his retrayte, and
vauntingly ended the triumph of his section: What good and faithful Christian
could abide him? Who would behold him Fulke loc. citato
as an Apostle of Christ, and not as Antichrist, that should thus be placed a
supreme Mediator in the room of Christ?

24. Nevertheless in a far inferior degree Many Saints, as Saint Cyrill
teaches, have used the ministry of mediation. As Saint Paul himself: Crying
upon Cyr. in Io* l. 3. c. 9.
men to be reconciled to God. And Moses was a Mediator etc. And Jeremy a
Mediator: and all the Prophets, and Apostles were Mediators, without any
inpeachment to the peculiar mediation and aduocation of Christ. For so sundry
rare privileges and special tytles, which in most excellent manner appertain
to him in a different and meaner acception of the words, are attributed unto
men, Christ is our only Savior, our only Redeemer, the only Rock and
foundation of his Church, the sole and only Judge of the quick Iud. 3^ Verse.
9. Act. 7. Verse. 35. Matthew. ^ Verse. 13. M^tt^h ^9. Verse. 28.
and dead: Yet Othoniel is graced in holy Write by the title of Savior:
Moses, by the name of Redeemer: S. S. Peter is termed the Rock, and
foundation of the Church: the Apostles and others shall sit as Judges with
Christ, judging the 12. Tribes of Israel. Well then, as it is no disparagement
to our supreme Judge the Saints ascend his Tribunal seat, and exercise this
chief and Royal action in giving the last doom and sentence with him: so it
can be no derogation or wrong to our sole Mediator, the Saints should use
mediation to him, Reyn. l. de ido. To. Ec. c. 3. and 6. In his confer. with M.
Heart. c. 8. diuis. 2. p. 411. Fulke loc. citatis.
by him to his Father in a far lower degree then he. They, he mediation of
prayerand entreaty, he, of pardon and absolute Redemption.

25. But we make the Saints likewise, says Master Reynoldes, and Master
Fulke, Mediators of Redemption, when we desire them to have mercy on us, save
us, reconcile us to God: when we call them, Our hope, life, refuge etc. To
which I reply, that albeit we often use that phrase of speech, yet the truth of
our meaning is apparently known, that we beseech them only to save us etc. by
their prayers unto Christ. We call them our hope, life etc. because they may
procure by intercession, our hope and salvation: or if we speak to our Blessed
Lady, because she also brought forth our hope, life, our true Redeemer. And it
is, M. Reynoldes, in you and your Accomplices an abuse intolerable, reproved by
Saint Augustine, condemned in the Law, to wrangle about the Aug. ep. 274. ^.
Contra. ff. de leg. Sen. tusq. Consult. Job. 19. v. 21 Aug. in his annot. upon
Job. ^. Tim. 4. Verse. 16. 1. These. 2. v. 18.
words, where the sense is clear, or to seek by pleading the one, to
undermine the other. Chiefly for that we follow heerin the phrase of Scripture:
Of Job, who praying to Angels, according to Saint Augustine, said: Have mercy
on me, have mercy on me etc. Of Saint Paul, speaking to Timothy: This doing,
thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee. Of the same Saint Paul,
calling the Thessalonians: His hope, his joy, his crown of glory.

26. And since our Sectaryes are so nice and scrupulons in this behalf, so
jealous of the tytles, names, and prerogatives of Christ, as they will have no
mediators with him, least they prejudice his right of mediation, no
ministerial Rock or foundation of his Church, least they displace him forth
of his fundamental seat: no true Bishops or Priests upon earth, for fear
they degrade him of the dignity of his Priesthood: I would feign have them tell
me, how they look to be coheyres of Christ hereafter, (...) inheritours with
him, Romans 8. verse. 17.
and compartners of his Kingdom, without danger of disturbing him from his
throne of bliss? Surely, by the evidence themselves do give, they shall then
be discarded the fellowship of his glory, who admit not God is honored, Christ
renowned by prayer to Saints.
here the participation of his graces. They cannot but think it a more
dangerous incroachement to possess with him the inheritance of his crown,
then to execute under him the office of mediation. But we, who hope for the
greater, may well profess and acknowledge the meaner, especially whereas
Almighty God is no less but much more honored thereby, for that his friends
are honored whom he chiefly esteems: Christ more renowned, because many
noble Personages sue unto him in our behalf: we benefited the more in that
such innumerable Patrons solicit our cause. Neither can our affiance in God
herein be diminished, but our humility nourished, in so much as reputing our
selves unworthy Luc. 7. 3. and ^. 2. Corinthians. 1. 11.
to approach, we send with the Centurion, our friends to Christ; Our
gratefulness redoubled in that, which Saint Paul requested of the Corinthians:
By many men's persons thanks for the gift which is in us may be given by many.
Our confidence and trust more assured, for that we come accompanied with sundry
suitors so charitable as they are willing, so mighty as they are able, so
beloved of the highest, as they cannot be denied whatsoever is behoofull for us
to be obtained.

27. Wherefore seeing no injury to God, no prejudice to Christ, no want of
knowledge, will or ability in Saints can hinder them from making intercession
for us: seeing there be reasons invincible, places of Scripture irreprouable,
testimonies of Fathers indefeatable to convince it, and Fathers of the first
500. years by the deposition it self of our Adversaries: I appeal to thee (my
dread and dearest Sovereign) I appeal to thy judicious and Princely censure,
who with thy Royal Pen approuest King Iams in his premonition to al Christian
Monarchs.
the learned writers of these prime and purest ages, whether we, who hold with
them, uphold not the right of the Catholic faith: Whether we may not
fruitfully follow, what they devoutly practiced, what they by Scripture
strengthened, what they so mightily authorized, counseled and recommended unto
us.

THE FOVRTEENTH CONTROVERSY ESTABLISHES The lawful worship of Images: Against
D. Bilson, and D. Reynolds.
CHAP. I.
THE chief seeming reasons, which quayle our Sectaryes, and terrify them from
the worship of Images, set down Calu. lib. 1. Inst. c. 11. Reyn. de Idol. Romans
Eccles. l. 2. Bil. 4. p. page 557. Esa. 40. Act. 17. Exodus 20. 1. Io. 5* Bil. 4.
p. page 553. and 554.
by Calvin, ouerflorished by M. Reynolds, largly dilated by M. Bilson are
these. 1. Esaias derideth their presumption, who labor to express the likeness
of God, saying: To whom have you resembled God, or what image can you frame of
him? S. Paul does no less speaking to the Athenians. 2. God commanded in
Exodus, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image (so you teacherously
translate it) thou shall not fall down and worship it. 3. S. John in his
Epistle forewarneth us of the like. 4. The Jews and Gentiles were rebuked as
Idolaters for that which we desend. 5. Many ancient Fathers uniformly condemn
it. 6. The word Image all one with Idol gives evidence against us. 7. The
carved wood and works of men which we adore, proclaymeth us guilty of no
lessethen Idolatry.

2. This is the strong band and terrible proofs which affright all
Protestants, and lead them captives to the thraldom of error. But have
patience (Gentle Reader) and thou shall find them a dumb-shew of objections, a
vain terror of words without strength of reason, without substance of truth.
First Esaias and Saint Paul speak nothing against all sorts of Pictures, they
only tax their insolency, who make them to represent the Divine essence it
self. For seeing God is invisible, incomprehensible, without members great,
without colors fair, without parts immeasurable, no lineaments of body, no
luster of Art, no proportion of shape can Aug. de fide and Symbolo c. 7. C^l.
l. 1. c. 11. Rei. l. 2. ^^. Ido. Romans Ec. c. 2. pa. 351. 352. Daniel. 3. Apoc.
5. Tert. l. 9^ Pudici.
fashion or describe him. To this end, as S. Augustine explayneth, we never
make or allow any Picture of God or Angel. Against this the many learned
writers speak, whom Calvin, and M. Reynolds heap together. The resemblances
therefore of God the Father in form of an Oldma^, of the Holy Ghost in form
of a Dove, are but explications of the Hystories recorded in Scripture, in
Daniel, in the Gospel, in the Apocalypse: or remembrances of the shaps in
which they appeared. The Images of Christ in likeness of a Lamb, or of a
Shepherd carrying a Sheep on his shoulders, which engraven in Chalices were
very frequent (as Tertullian witnesses) in the primitive Church; The Pictures
of Angels with wings in the flower of youth are made to the same purpose. Or
these with the former are other whiles shadowed to denote some mystical
signification, or divine property, with which they are endued: as swiftness of
motion in the Angels by their wings: spiritual vigor and beauty by their
youth: mildness by the Lamb in Christ; fortitude by the Lion, and so of the
rest.

3. Secondly, God forbids not in Exodus absolutely making and worshipping of
Images, but the worshipping of them as Gods, and making of them to that purpose,
as is evident by the reasons he annexeth of this prohibition: For I am thy Lord
thy God: by the exposition he makes of the same in Leuiticus: Thou shall not
make any graven Idols; not set any sumptuous stone to adore it: by the rule of
his Exodus 20. Leuit. 26.
own decree commanding the Images of the Cherubims and Brazen Serpent to be
made, which he could not have done, if it had been of his own nature evil,
as whatsoever the Decalogue inhibiteth, is, excepting only the violation of the
Sabbath. The Idol then as the 70. Interpreters expound this place, the
likeness of any thing to be adored with Godly honor, is that which our Lord
reproves, that which S. John forbids, that which the whole stream of
Fathers condemn, that which Jews and Gentills practiced, and for which they
are justly branded with Idolatrous infamy, an abuse intolerable, far
different in name, far different in matter from our holy use of Images.

4. An Image, says Origin, is a true Similitude: an unfeigned likeness
resembling a thing which is indeed, a as Man, a Orig. ho. 8. in Exodus
Lion, a Lamb etc. An Idol, as S. Hierome, and Eustachius accords with him,
is a false counterfeit shadowing that which is not at all; as the Statua of
Venus, Jupiter, Mars etc. representing Hiero. in Ose. 7. Eustach. in lib. 11.
Hom. odis. 1. Cor. 8. Haba. 2. Hom. 11. odyss. Plato in Theot. Reyn. de ido.
To. Ec. l. 2. c. 2. and 3.
men Gods, and women Godesses, such as never were nor ever can be. And therefore
S. Paul calls an Idol: Nothing. Habacuc: A false Image. Homer: An empty
shadow. Plato: Alye. And M. Reynolds our Ghospellers Proctour, who straineth
his wits to confound Image with Idol, may make thereby the Image of his Prince
the Idol of him: The Son of God the Idol of his Father. So to discountenance
our earthly Images he impiously defaceth the Divine Image it self: and
despises the decree of 350. Bishops in the seventh general Council, where
they are all accursed who presume to traduce the Images of Christ, and of his
Saints with the name of Idols.

5. Moreover we distinguish in Images two things, the matter and the form.
The matter is not only the wood, gold, silver, brass, or other metal, but
the draught of colors, the proportion, form and figure also, which M. Bilson
the easier to enwrappe us in his supposed crime of Idolatry, wrongfully
teaches to Bills. 4. par. page 557.
be the form. The form (say we) is the representation the picture carries of
the original it self, which is not the immediate work or effect of art, but
a relation arising out of that artificall figure which man has drawn. Now the
reprehension of the Idolaters, the testimonies of ancient writers M. Bilson
and M. Reynolds quote; the reason they and their followers allege, aim all
at Bills. 4. par. p. 550. etc. Reyn. de ido. To. Ec. lib. 2.
this: that Images ought not to be honored materially, not the wood, not the
figure, not the form, or proportion fashioned by man, not any portraicture of
Saint in regard of it self, which we willingly agnize. Yet we avouch that
picturs as they are holy things by the deputation consecrated to an holy use,
as they represent the Originals unto us, for these two respects are to be
honored, not with Divine, but with a Religious and respective kind of worship,
as I shall demonstrate at large after that I have declared the lawful making
and keeping of them.

6. And who can wisely doubt hereof when he hears the Divine precept of God
for ornament of the tabernacles, charging them to be made: When he reads Exo.
25. 3. Reg. 6.
the art of painting, the faculty of caruing in Beseleel and Oliab allowed by
God to no other end, as Calvin grants? When Solomon garnished the Temple of
our Lord with Number. 21. Number. 25. Exo. 31. 35. Calu. lib. 1. Inst. c. 11. 12. 3.
Reg. 6. 7.
the resemblances of bulls, lions, palme-trees etc. When he observes the
practice of all Nations, of all the elect and chosen of God, who have the
pictures of their Friends, the Images of Kings, Queens, and Emperors stamped
in coin, portrayted in tables, in tapestry, in cloth of Arras, in many rich
and sumptuous monuments, when he looks into the custom of the primitive
Church, which adorned their Chapels, Oratoryes, and holy places with the
picture of Christ, of his Apostles, and of sundry Saints, as I shall imediatly
show. Lastly when Christ and his Disciples made diverse pictures themselves. For
S. John Damascene, Euagrius, Nicephorus, and Theophanes record: That a paynter
endeavoring Damas. de Fid. ortho. lib. 4. c. 17. Euag. hist. l. 2. c. 7.
Theophan. apud hist. miscel. lib. 17. Theopha. loc. citato.
to take the resemblance of Christ, when he could not behold the splendor of
his countenance, our Savior himself took the white linen cloth, and laying
it on his face imprinted therein the feature of his visage, sent it to King
Abagarus, who longed much to see our Savior, yet was hindered by infirmity. And
Theophanes recounteth how Philippus General of an army under Mauritius the
Emperor caused this Image of singular piety to be carried into the field, and
gained thereby a renowned victory over innumerable troops of Persians.

7. The second Image was the Veronica which Christ our heavenly Painter after
the same manner without Methodius Ep. apud. Marian. Scotum in Chro. an. Dom. 39.
Pen or Pensill miraculously shadowed in a Handkercher or Towell, offered unto
him by a devout woman of that name, as he fainted under the burden of his
Cross, ascending the Mount Caluary: which in the raygne of Tiberius the
Emperor was brought to Rome, and there honorably reserved, and with great
devotion showed the people every Maundy Thursday at night.

8. Many other Images of Christ were made even by those that lived in his time:
One by the woman healed of her bloody flux, set up at Peneades a city in
Palestine, and graced with many miracles. The first Eusebius relates Eusebius. l.
7. hist. c. 14.
of an unknown herb budding up at the foot of the Brazen Statua, which when
it grew so high as to touch the hemme of our Saviors Image, it received virtue
Sozom. l. ^. cap. 20.
to heal all kind of diseases. The second is mentioned by Sozomenus, to wit:
how Julian the Apostata threw down that Image of Christ, and set up his own
instead thereof, which was immediately destroyed with fire from heaven: but the
Image of Christ broken in pieces by the Pagans, the Christians afterward
gathering the pieces together placed in the Church, where it continued, as he
writes, until his time.

9. Another was taken by Nicodemus, which 43. years after a Christian carried
from Hierusalom to Berith a village in Syria, where in derision of our Saviors
Passion the Jews crowned, whipped, boared it with nails, and used A^^. orat.
de Pas. Imag. Rhegi in Chro. ann Dom. 806. Greg. Turon. de glor. Mart. c. 21.
7. Synod. act. 4.
all the outrages they committed against Christ: yet not without divine miracle
and much spiritual profit. For as they pierced the side of the picture there
issued out great abundance of water and blood, by which sundry maladyes were
cured, and many Jews miraculously converted. This history is written by S.
Athanasius, Rhegino, S. Gregory of Turin, and recited as ancient in the
seventh general Synod.

10. What shall I speak of the Niceph. l. 14 hist. cap. 2.
Pictures of our Blessed Lady drawn by S. Luke? Of the Damas. in vita Siluest.
golden Statua of S. John Baptist, Constantin erected in the Chapel where he
was Christened by S. Siluester? Of Epist. Adrian. ^. cap. 2. Niceph. l. 7. cap.
33.
the tables of S. Peter and S. Paul, S. Siluester showed him, by which he knew
who they were that appeared unto him the night before? Of (b)
the golden Image of our Savior Christ garnished with precious stones which
Valentinian raised upon S. Peter's Altar in a Church dedicated to his name? Of
Anast in vit. Sixti. Platina.
the pictures of the 12. Apostles all of pure massy gold, which the same
Emperor advanced in the self same Church? Of Nicep. lib 14. c. 2. Tertuli. l.
depudi. Naz Ep. 49. ad Olym. Chrysostom. or^^ in S. Mele 4. cons. Euang. c. 10. l.
22. con ^aust. c. 73. Basil. in S. Barla. Sozom. l. 5. cap ^o Niceph. l. 10. c.
30. Eusebius. l. 7. hist. cap. 14. Calu. lib. 1. Inst. c. 11.
the picture of the glorious Virgin Mary sent by Eudoxia from Jerusalem, to
Pulcheria the Empress and placed by her in the Temple she built at
Constantinople? Of thousands mentioned by Tertullian, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Basil, Sozomenus, Nicephorus, Eusebius, who for
many profitable causes have ever allowed the Images of Saints to be painted in
Churches, hanged on Altars, carved in Chalices, or embrodered in vestments, to
the open shame and rebuke of Calvin, who resolutly writes: That in the first
500. years after Christ, there were never any Images in Christian Churches.

11. The first vtility and profit, is an easy and compendious manner of
instruction. For that which is slowly Greg. l. 7. Ep. ep. 9. and l. 9. ep. 9.
Niss. orat. in Theod.
instilled by other senses, that which by many discourses is delivered in
words, and with laborious study gathered out of books, is all in an instant
with curious delight presented to the eye, by the message of the eye conveyed
to the soul, where through the quickness and viuacity Chrysostom. orat quod vet.
and non. Test. vnus fit mediator. 7. Syn. act. 2. and 4. Greg. l. 7. Ep. 53.
of that noble messenger, whatsoever is brought the soul more lively
apprehends, and more surely entrusteth to the storehouse of the mind. Which
S. Gregory the great knew right well when he termed pictures, The books of
the unlearned. And S. Gregory Nissen, when he said, The silent picture speaks
in the wall, and profits very muth.

12. The second is to increase the love of God, and his Saints, to enkindle in
our hearts the coals of devotion, which S. Chrysostom felt when thus he wrote:
I loved a picture of melted waxfull of piety. S. Gregory Nissen felt the like;
who, as it is rehearsed in the 7. Synod: Was often wont to Basi. orat. in S.
Barlaam. Paulinus Ep. ad Seu. Salust. orat. quae incipit, Falso quaeritur. de
natu. l^utarch Arnol. Ferro. in ^ita Caroli 8.
weep looking on the Image of Abraham sacrificing his Son Isaac. And S.
Gregory our Apostle sought to stir up the same in Secundine the Abbot, to whom
he sent the picture of Christ and said: I know thou longest for our Saviors
Image, that gazing on it, thou may burn the more with the love of thy Lord
God.

13. Thirdly, they execute, move, and with secret eloquence vehemently persuade
to the imitation of their virtues, whose noble acts we see depainted. Which
commodity not only S. Basil, S. Paulinus etc. but Plutarch, Salust, and other
Heathens observed. Admirable is the history of Charles the eight King of
France, who ouercomming a town in Italy, was overcome himself with the beauty
of a young betrothed bride: And when he determined to let go the reins to the
slavish appetite of his untamed lust, in a chamber where the Image of the
Blessed and euer-vnspoted Virgin hanged, the modest Damsel earnestly entreated
him for the chastity of that pure and immaculate Mother of God, which the Table
represented, she might reserve to her spouse her honor unstained and bed
undefiled: the King casting his eyes in an happy hour, upon that chaste
picture, and upon this humble suppliant, was presently inspired with the
heavenly gift of such unexpected continency, as leaving her untouched, yet
enriched with a Princely dowry, restored her, her husband, her parents and
allies to their former liberty.

14. Great was the force of this sacred Image, which so luckily enfranchised so
many captives in such diverse manner captiued: one in the thraldom of his own
unbridled passion: others in the bondage of a warlike co^querour. For a
conqueror indeed he was rather then a captive, far more renowned for the
victory over himself, then for the conquest of others. But as chaste picturs
Teren. in Eunucho.
breed chaste desires: so immodest and uncivil monuments cause many unchaste and
wanton motions. Contrary aspects have contrary influences, which moved
Aristotle and Arist. l. 7. Pol. 17. Xenop. in Cyr^. Damas. l. 4. Orth. fi c. 17.
Zenophon two memorable Philosophers to prohibit unto children al obscene
tables and naked Images of their Gods.

15. Fourthly, they renew the daily memory of Christ and his Saints. It often
chances (says S. John Damascen) when we think not at all of our Saviors
death, by the sight of his crucified Image, the memory of his wholesome Passion
is revived in us. Whereof we have a very profitable example fresh in memory, In
the book written of her life c. 9. p. 57.
and fit for my purpose in the life of the virtuous and holy Woman Saint Teresa
of Jesus, which she relates in this manner. One day going to my Oratory, I saw
a picture which was brought thither to be kept, having been borrowed against
the solemnizing of a certain feast: it was of our Savior full of wounds, and
so devout, that so soon as I looked upon it, I Mark what mod^ns the ^ight of
a Picture stirred up.
was exceedingly troubled to see him in that case, for it represented very
well, what he suffered for us: I was so much grieved to think how unthankful
I had been for those wounds, that me thought my heart was pierced through, and
I cast my self down by it with great abundance of tears, beseeching him
that he would once give me strength, never to offend him any more. Thus she
prayed and recommended her self eftsoons with great devotion to S. Mary
Magdalen, one while entreating her to obtain pardon for her, otherwhile crying
out to Christ, and saying in her heart: That she would never rise from thence
until he granted her request. O what effects did this prayer work! What
darkness did it expel! What light did it infuse! How clean did it wash and
purify her soul: and all by the outward means and help of a picture.
Whereupon she testifyeth, I verily believe it did me good, for I profited much
Page 57. Page 59. Cyr. Alex l. 6. con. Iulianum. Salutare lignu^ etc. ad
recordationem omnis virtutis inducis.
from that day forward etc. and for this cause was I such a friend of pictures.
Miserable are they who through their own faul, deprive themselves of this
benefit: it appears very well that they love not our Lord; for if they did
love him, they would be glad to behold his Image. Glad to behold the wholesome
wood, which as S. Cyrill of Alexandria says, puts us in mind of all virtue.

16. The fifth and last profit I will now recite, is to honor them whose
Images we keep: For the reverence given to Pictures redounds to the Original,
as S. Basil affirms, and the devotion of our virtuous and religious King
^anatus confirms: who took the Diadem he used to were on his head, and
crowned therewith an Image of Christ crucified, which in his days was devoutly
reserved Henry Hun. hist. Angl. l. 6.
in the Church of S. Peter, and S. Paul, at Winchester. Neither would he ever
after wear any Crown during his life. A rare heroical act, and worthy such a
King.

17. As rare was that of Commenus the Emperor, who having slain and put to
flight an huge army of the Scythians with a small company of his own men, by
the intercession and prayer of our Blessed Lady, after the Conquest, a day of
triumph being ordained, when he should Nicetat in vita Io. Comnem.
have ascended his triumphant Chariot gorgeously furnished for so great a
solemnity, he placed therein a beautiful Image of the Queen of heaven, and
carrying himself a Cross in his hand marched before royally accompanied with
all h^s Nobles. Thus causing the picture to be drawn with four choice and
milke-white horses, he gave her in her Image the whole honor of the triumph
Our Blessed Ladies picture carried in Triumph.
by whose happy favor he gained the victory. Which that gracious Empress so
benignely accepted, as she made him after owner of sundry victoryes, and worthy
of many triumphs. For these vtilityes therefore picturs are made, for these
they are kept, for these they are hanged on Altars, depainted in Churches, or
publicly carried in some Processions.

18. But the honor we do unto Images may scandalize perchance the hearts of the
simple, prone thereunto by their own weakness, and pricked forward by the
instigation of our Adversaries, not weighing the nature of Joseph. l. 1^. c. 8.
antiq. Dan. 2. 4. Reg. 4.
the worship, or evidence we produce for the maintenance thereof. To begin
therefore with an argument unanswerable: All holy things deserve to be
honored. Pictures are holy things. Therefore Pictures deserve to be honored.
The Psalm. 98. Exo. 3. v. 5.
Maiorproposition, that all holy things ought to be honored, is apparent,
because holiness is a certain excellency ^o which honor is due. We see in all
Common-vvealthes both Heathen and Christian holy Persons for their Exo. 12: v.
16.
sanctity always reverenced. For which Alexander the Great adored Iaddus the
high Priest; Nabuchodonozor, Daniel: the Sunamite, Elizaeus. Yea not only men
endued with reason, but inanimate and senseles Creatures, for this prerogative
of holiness, are deservedly worshipped, as King David exhorts saying: Adore
ye his footstool, because it is holy. Our Lord said to Moses: Put off thy
shoes from thy feet, because the place where thou stand is holy earth.
Again he said unto him: The first day shall be holy and solemn, and the seventh
with the like festiuity venerable. For this the Tabernacle, the Altar, the
Propitiatory, the Breads of Proposition, and all Holyes are honored by the law
of God. The difficulty then remains to show some holiness in Pictures for
which they may challenge the dignity of honor.

12. Albeit this word (Holy) is commonly taken in Scripture for that which is
pure, sacred and immaculate of it self, in which sense Almighty God alone is
essentially holy: He is the supreme holiness, or Holy of all Holyes, as Daniel
styles him: The Angels and Saints are pure and Dan 9. 14.
unspotted, but by grace only and participation of his holiness: it is often
notwithstanding more largely extended for that which is consecrated unto God,
or has any special reference, or relation unto him. In respect whereof the
Temple is termed in Scripture Holy, the vestment Psalm. 78. Exodus 28. Isa. 62.
Exodus 3.
of Aaron, the people, the earth Holy etc. And in this acception of the word,
the Pictures of Christ, and of his Saints be truly counted and esteemed holy,
both in that they are dedicated to the worship of a most holy God, as all
things are entitled Royal, which nearly appertain to the Royal Majesty of a
King: and also for that they carry a remarkable respect or relation to him, or
some of his chiefest friends much honored by him. And whereas this divine
reference or dedication ennobleth them above the degree of profane and common
things, it gives them that excellency and pre-eminence to which an holy and
regardfull reverence belongs, as the examples already specifyed convince. For
to the earth where God appeared, what other cause of adoration can Bills. 4.
par. Trident. sess. 25. Nicenum. ^. art. 2. 8. Syn. act. 3. Leo^t. de ador.
cru. l. 5. Apol. co^t. Iud. refertur. in 7. Syn. ^ct. 4.
you ascribe? Any native quality? Any inherent holiness, of which it was
incapable? No, No other (which M. Bilson is forced to confess) then the awful
respect of God, or his Angels presence. If then the earth, if the Temple, if
solemn days, if the name Iehoua amongst the Jews, the name Jesus amongst
Christians, if the sacred Bible without danger of I do latry may be religiously
reverenced for this holy representation or signification only: why may not
Images for the same respect accordingly deserve the same honor and reverence,
conformable to the decree not only of the Tridentine and second Nicen, but of
the eight general Council of Constantinople, where it is so defined: and of
Leontius the Bishop of Cyprus, urging the Jews above a thousand years ago,
as I may now the Protestants, saying: Thou adorest the volume. of the Law,
worshipping not the nature of ink or parchme^t, but the words of God contained
therein: so I adoring the Image of Ath. ser 4. cont. Arri. and q. 16. ad Antio.
Dama. l. 4: ort. fid. 17. Euthy. p. 2. c. 20. Basi in Iul. cited in Nic. Con. 2
Chry. in Liturgia. Iero. in vit. Paulae. Amb. orat. de obi. Theodos. and l. de
incar. Domini Sacram. c. 7. Aug. l. 3. de Tricap. 10. Lact. in Car. pass. Domi.
Sedul. lib. 5. carm. Pass. Bills. 4. par. page 547. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. cap. 10.
col. 1080. line 50. item Cent. 8. c. 10. col. 850. Bale in his Pageant of
Popes. fol. 33. Item Bale page 24. and 27. Simondes on the Re^^ela. p. 17.
fine. Bills. 4. par. p. 561 and 577. 578.
Christ, neither the wood or colors do I honor (God forbid:) but the
inanimate character, which when I embrace, I seem to take hold, and adore even
Christ himself. S. Athanasius, S. John Damascen, and Euthymius establish the
same with almost the same words. S. Basil says: The historyes of the Images
of Martyrs, I honor and publicly adore. S. Chrysostom: The Priest boweth his
head to the Image of Christ. S. Hierome speaking of S. Paula: She adored
prostrate before the Cross, as though she beheld our Lord hanging before her
eyes. S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Lactant: us, Sedulius I let pass: I will not
use in a matter not doubtful, testimonies not necessary.

20. The greater is M. Bilsons fault, the fault of M. Reynoldes the greater,
who desame the worshipping of Images, as a nouelty first decreed in the 2.
Council of Nice 780. years after Christ. Too young (says M. Bilson) to be
Catholic. Whereas all these ancient Fathers, S. John Damascen, and Euthymius
only excepted, lived long before that general Council, and sundry more, who
accord with them, as their own fellow Protestants contest with us. The
Magdeburgians write, That Lactantius affirms many superstitious things
concerning the efficacy of Christ's Image. That Bid erred in the worshipping of
Images. M. Bale says, That Gregory by his Indulgences established Pilgrimage
to Images: And that Leo allowed the worshipping of Images. With whom Simondes
another Protestant accords saying: Leo decreed that reverence should be done
to Images. What agreement is here? These say the adoration of Images was first
decrred by Leo: Bilson about 200. years after by the Council of Nice. Where
is truth? Where is sincerity?

21. Yet M. Bilson will reply: That the fornamed Fathers speak not of any
Religious worship, but only of a loving aspect, civil salutation, or mannerly
submission. But this unmannerly answer is already refuted in my former
discourse, because there can be no natural or Civil dignity assigned Bills. 4.
par. page 554. Reyn. de To Ecc. I do. l. 2. page 145. and de Iero, page 421. and
de Aug. page 476. Exodus 32. Bills. 4. par. vbi supra. Reyn. l. 2. c. 3. and 9.
Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 105. 1. Reg. 8. Esa. 46. Abac. 2. Hier. 2. Psalm. 113. and 114.
Sap. 13. 14. etc. Aug. l. 3. de doct. Christ. c. 7. in Psalm. 113. Cypr. de Ido
vanitate. Tertul. Apol. cap. 11. and 12. Arno. l. 1. cont. gent. Lactan. l. 1
cap. 14. 15. etc. C^^m. Alex orat. exhor. ad Gent.
to pictures, for which they should deserve any civil reverence. It is also
countermaunded sufficiently by his own sect-mates, who accuse the Fathers not
of Civil worship, which they allow, but of Religious honor reproved by them.
Then he, and others outface us, That the Jews and Gentiles thought not the
Idols they worshipped to be Gods, but Images of their Gods; and in that respect
honored not so much them as God by them, as we by our pictures do. The
children of Israel (says M. Bilson) did not think their golden calfe a God,
but minding to have some monument of him to stir them up to devotion, they made
choice of a Calfe. The same he avouches of the Heathens; and not he alone. M.
Reynoldes defends it too, and argues S. Hierom of inconsideratio^, S.
Augustine of falsehood for affirming the contrary, albeit the Scripture it self
affirms it with them. Moses writes, that the people said of the golden
calfe: These be thy Gods, O Israel, who have delivered thee o^^ of the land of
Egypt. Behold they termed it their Gods, not by the figure of Metonymia,
because it was a sign or monument of the true God (as you misconstrue them)
but for that it was an Idol of the false God, a resemblance of the black Calfe
of the Egyptians called Apis, to whom they attributed the honor of their
deliverance. And it was so far off from putting them in mind of the true God,
which M. Bilson with M. Reynoldes stiffly contend, as it made them wholly
relinquish and abandone him, which he complains saying: The God which made
thee thou have forsaken, and thou have forgotten our Lord thy Creator. Again:
They made a Calfe in Horeb, they adored an Idol, and they forgot the God that
saved them. They have abandoned me and served strange Gods.

22. Semblably the Prophets, the Psalms, the whole Scripture is so frequent in
deriding the phrensy of the Heathnish people, who imagined their silver, brazen
and golden Idols to be Gods: the Fathers so uniformly consent herein, S.
Augustine, S. Cyprian, Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
as our Adversaries could hardly devise wherein they might either gainesay more
plainly the express voice of God, or more impudently ouerbeare the authority
of their ancestors, who distinguish diverse sorts of Pagans. Some, yea the most,
prayed, vowed, sacrificed to their Idols as to breathing and living Gods.
Witness S. Paul, Arnobius, and S. Augustine. Others 1. Cor. 10. Arnob l. 1.
con. Ge^tes. Aug. in. Psalm 113. Aug. l. 8. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 23. 26. Lactan. l.
1. c. 14. 15. and l. 2. c. 16. Orig. l. 6. con. Celsu^. Eusebius. l. 3. praep.
Euang. ca. 2. 3 etc. Council. Trident. sess. 25
reverenced a certain Divine virtue, a certain, Divinity inhabiting in them.
Some worshipped dead men, some Devils in them. Some the Sun, Moon, Sea, Air,
or the souls of these creatures, as S. Augustine, Lactantius, Origin, and
Eusebius testify. Not these, not any of these, nor any such thing we inuoke,
adore, or ascribe to our Images. We are commanded by the most sacred and
Oecumenicall Council of Trent to exhibit due honor and reverence to them,
not because we believe any divinity or virtue in them, for which they are
worshipped, nor that any thing is to be demanded of them, or any hope or
affiance to be placed in them, as the Infidels did in their Idols: but for that
the honor done to them, is addressed to the Saints whom they represent. No
otherwise then all devout Christians, when they adore our Savior or any Saint
in their hearts, they frame in their minds, as the Philosophers teach, an inward
As it is no Idolatry to adore by the inward image of the mind either Christ or
his Saints* so neither by the outward.
Image and liknesse of him, whom without touch of Idolatry they worship by it:
so by the outward Image before which we kneel, we pray to him whose picture it
is, by lifting our hands to it, we lift our hands and hearts both to the
Original it self; by bowing, kissing, or using any obeisance, we manifest our
loving affection and dutiful homage to the true person whom it resembles.

23. But to grant that which can never be proved, let it be, the Gentills
neither confided in their Idols, nor accounted them worthy of any reverence,
but only in regard of the things represented: yet infinite is the disparity
between their worship and ours. They by their Idols adored false Gods, wicked
men; they worshipped Jupiter a Tyrant, Venus an Harlot, Mars a Murderer: We by
our Images reverence the true God, even Christ himself, our B. Lady, the holy
Apostles, who deserve to be honored. Could any Protestant then be ever so
malicious as to match them with us, but such a one as protests defiance
against God and his Saints?

24. Calvin, D. Bilson, and D. Reynolds will not yet Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 11.
Bills. 4. par. p. 565. and 569. etc. Reyn. de Idol. Romans Ecc. l. 2. 4. Reg. 4.
verse. 37. 3. Reg. 19. v. 7. Ruth. 2. verse. 10. Gen* 4. v. 4. Genesis 28. verse. 18.
Judith. 6. 1. Macha. ^^ 4. v. 59. John. 10. Number. 6. and Iud. ^8. Exodus 26. and
29. Leuit. c. 27.
be silent, but demand what evidence we show out of the written word for this:
The arc (say they) the tabernacle, the Temple, the Cherubims were by Gods
appointment made: our Images are devised by men, made by men, erected by men.
What if they be? Are you witched with so foul an error that you ca^ see
nothing to challenge, either the right of honor, or excellency of holiness, but
what God expressly commands? Then no Churches may be consecrated, no holy
days observed, no Priests, no Prophets, no Temples reverenced, but such as he
prescribes. And where did God license the Sunamite to adore Elizaeus, Abdias
Elias, Ruth Booz.

25. Also the Sacrifices which Abel and others offered in the law of Nature God
commanded not: and yet they were Religiously ordained by them, and gratfully
accepted in the sight of our Lord. Jacob erected an Altar, he dedicated a stone
which God commanded not, and who doubts, but that Altar was holy, and worthy
veneration by that Religious Ceremony? The Jews instituted the feast of
Judith, and devoutly observed it. The Machabees ordained a festival day, which
our Savior after allowed and vouchsafed to keep holy. The Nazarites, who of
their own accord devoted themselves to God. The gifts which the Jews of
liberality presented to the Temple, and whatsoever else proceeding from men, was
holy, venerable, and to be reverenced being once consecrated to the most holy
and venerable Majesty of God. And dare our Protestants detract so much from his
mighty sovereignty as not to attribute the like to Pictures, as they are both
dedicated to his Highness, and as they represe^t himself or his Friends unto us?

26. Further the precept which God makes of reuerencing holy days, of not
swearing by heaven, by earth etc. and consequently of honoring them, of
adoring In Pan. ff. vet. de legibus and in glossa de regulis ^uris Euthym. par.
2 c ^0. Arist l. de me. and reminis. Niceph. in dial. in^er. Orthodoxus. Cyril.
l. 5* dial. de Trin. Atha. orat. 4. con. Aria. Chrysostom citatur in Nice. Council.
2. act. 2. Amb. in Psalm. 19 Sueto de Domitia. Eusebius l. 2. hist. c. 10. Chrysostom.
orat 2. and 3. ad Popul. Anti.
his footstool etc. are warrants for us to worship our Images: because the
laws both Civil and Canon prescribe, in like cases, like Judgment, like
manner of proceeding. And Euthymius notably confirms it, interpreting the
footstool of which King David spoke, To be the Cross of Christ, on which his
feet were nailed. But whatsoever the Prophet meant thereby, if the footstool
of our Lord ought to be adored, and such other things as had small alliance or
conjunction with him: how much more his picture, his Image, which is so closly
lincked in resemblance to him; that Aristotle says: The same motion of our
mind tends to the Image and to the Person whose Image it is. In so much as
Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople answering this objection to other
Heretics many hundred years ago constantly auerred: That seeing the Image in
relation is inseparable from the Original, wheresoever we find it written that
Christ and his Saints are to be honored, there it is inuolued also of their
Images. Which S. Cyril, and S. Athanasius seem to strengthen saying: The Image
representing the King is allone with the King: and he that adoreth the Image
adoreth the King in it. S. Chrysostom: Know thou not that he which hurts
the Emperors Image dishonors the Imperial dignity etc. S. Ambrose: He that
crowns the Emperors Image, honors surely him whose Image he crowns: and
he that despises the Emperors Picture, does injury to him whose picture he
contemns. As the abuse offered to the mounments of Domitian, of Maximinus, of
Theodosius wife, and the revenge taken hereof abundanly witness.

27. Hereupon the civil law set forth in the reign of Arcadius and others,
grants this privilege: That whosoever flies for refuge to the Emperors
Image shall be protected L. vnica cod. de hi^ qui ad statuas.
as much from foreign violence, as if he had repaired to the Sanctuary of the
Church, or fell into the lap of ^he Imperial clemency. And he that defaceth
the Picture of his Prince shall be guilty of high treason committed against him.
For which cause they were wisely adjudged by Michael the Emperor: To have
their tongues cut off, as heinous blasphemers, who should utter Castal. de
Imper. q. 96. Paul. de Castro.. Nam Antoninus. Item text. not. in l. 4. in
sine. cum L. seq. L. Cornel. de sicar. Baron. in Annal. an. Christ. 843.
any reproach against our sacred Images. And he justly censured by Theodora the
Empress: To have his eyes plucked out, who had razed the eyes of a Picture.
Nevertheless he lives in England, and lives in a high estate of pretended
dignity, who burned at Carefox, the public Marketplace of Oxford, the picture
of Christ.

28. Furthermore when our Adversaries honor the Chair of Estate, the Seal,
Arms and Images of their Sovereign, what pretense have they, but the divine
precept, which commands us to reverence our Princes? Whereupon I conclude; if
Civil obeisance be lawfully imparted to these Royal monuments, because civil
homage is due to their Royal Persons; then in all equity and reason Religious
honor should respectively appertain to the Images of Saints, when Religious
honor absolutely belongs to the Saints themselves. Neither can M. Bilson with
the Century-writers shuffle us off, by Bills. 4. par. page 5^1. Centur. ^ent. ^.
and seq. c. 13.
answering as they do: That the reverence done to Princes Images etc. is
accepted as rendered to their own Persons, when they cannot be otherwise
present then by a sign or substitute: Now God (say the Centurists) is every
where present. But Christ (say I) according to his humanity, his Angels, and
Saints are not every where present. Therefore honor done to their Pictures
ought to be accepted by your own illation.

29. Again the Royal Arms, the Chair of Estate etc. even in the Kings
presence ought to be honored, When Charles the Great was proclaimed Emperor,
did not all the people then present (as Auentinus reports) Auen l. 4. Anual.
adore his Image before his eyes? Do you think Theodosius the Emperor who so
cruelly revenged in the City of Antioch the treachery committed against the
pourtraite of his wife, would have tolerated it at Constantinople before the
gates of his Palace? Or the King who delights in absence his Throne should
be worshipped, would disdain to see it reverenced in his presence? And who
dares abuse his Princes picture in the sight of his Prince? But if it be
subject to injury, then capable of honor in the Royal presence. A weak cause
I perceive has weak means to support it.

30. Many other petty objections are by our Sectaryes devised; some against
making, some against adoring Images, which may be as soon answered as
propounded. They cite the decree of Valentinian, Theodosius, and Justinian
prohibiting the sign of the Cross to be made; fraudulently suppressing these
words, On the ground, earth, or pauement; In which they forbid it for
reverence, to be carved or painted, to the end the triumphant sign of our
Conc. Constant. Trul. c. 73. Bills. 4. par. page 575. Council. Eliber. can. 36.
victory, as another Council expounds it, should not be ^roden on and
defiled by men's feet. With the like cosenage they quote a Canon of the
Elibertine Council, as though it discharged all Churches of the use of Images:
whereas the Council allowing all Tables and portable Pictures, commanded only,
by reason of the incursions of the Goths, which often happened at that time,
no Image should be painted and engraven on the walls and windows of the Church,
least that which is adored by Christians, should be dishonored and abused by
savage enemies in their common ransackes and rifling of the Temples.

31. Then they produce certain words out of a Conc. Nic. 2 act. 6. Bills. 4.
par. page 601.
proscript of S. Epiphanius Epistle: Dissuading images to be brought into
Churches, or erected in Church-yardes, or tolerated in private houses,
convinced in the 7. Synod, to be inserted by heretics: where the fable of the
painted veil is proved also to be fabulous, which the fornamed Epiphanius
Baron. an. Christ. 392.
caused (as they pretend) to be cast out of the Church. Or he commanded that
veil to be removed, and torn in pieces, because it was the Picture of a
profane man, seeming to be the Image of Christ, or some Saint, as the words
themselves import, and Baronius in his Ecclesiastical History diligently
unfolds.

32. Notorious is the Centurists and Caluins fraud in alleging to this
purpose two unlawful Counsels tumultuously assembled at Constantinople, the
one under Leo Isaurus, the other under Constantine Copronimus two pernicious
Cent. 8. c. 9 Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 11. Abbas Vrs p^^g. in Chron. Bills. 4. par.
page 547.
Heretics, and as a grave Historiographer chronicleth them, Forerunners of
Antichrist. Less notable yet, no less dangerous is M. Bilsons legier-de-main
in crazing the 2. Nicen, and extolling the credit of the Council of
Franckeford: where the Churches (says he) of England, France, Italy, Germany
etc. condemned the former Nicen in behalf of Images. A mighty condemnation, if
iuridically pronounced, as crafty a Collusion if wickedly procured, if
guilfully extorted. The guile lurked in the Author of the bastardly books
ascribed to Charles, who persuaded the Council of Franckeford, first, that the
Bishops assembled in the 7. Synod at Nice, decreed Images to be worshipped
Epist. Adri. act. 2. subscrip. in omnibus actionib. Confess. act. 7. Recant.
act. 1. and 3. Centu. 8. cap. 9. Paul. Dia. l. 23. Reru^ Romans Cedr. in comp.
hist. Iuo 4. p. c. 147. Bills. 4. p. page 551. and 565. Rein. de dol. Romans Ec.
l. 1. c. 2.
with the Divine honor of Latria; secondly that this Council was celebrated
without the authority of the Pope of Rome. Both false depositions, as the
Epistle of Adrian the Pope, the subscription of his Legates, the confession of
the Council it self, the recantation of Basil the Bishop of Ancyra, of
Constantine the Bishop of Cyprus can testify, who abiuring their Heresies
allowed the Religious, yet not the godly worship of Images. The Deuines
notwithstanding of Franckeford, mistaken in this matter of fact by that
faythlesse deponent, disanulled the second Council of Nice, accursed them who
assigned to Pictures the worship of Latria, and those withal who should seek
to abolish them. Which point M. Bilson concealed as little favoring his cause.
Or if this Counsel had favored, it could not have steeded him against the
former. A private Council cannot impeach a public, a latter a more ancient, a
Council from which (if the Centurists deceive us not) the Pope and his Legates
dissented, a Council approved by the supreme authority of Pope and Prelate, as
the 2. Nicen was first by Adria^, then by Leo the third of that name, as Paulus
Diaconus, Cedrenus, and Iuo accord.

33. Lastly, for the vpshoot and conclusion of their perfidious dealing, M.
Bilson and M. Reynoldes oppose certain passages of the Fathers: The fact of
Ezechias, the Idolatry Epiph. haeres. 27. Aug. haer. 7. Greg. l. 7. ep. 109.
and l. 9. ep. 9. Ambr. de Obitu. Theodo. Aug. de moribu^ Eccl. Cath. l. 1. c.
34. Caiet. in 3^ part. q. 25. art. 3*
of Marcellina, Carpocrates, the Gnostikes detested by S. Augustine, Irenaeus
etc. detested also by us. For they (as S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine teach)
had the Pictures of Heathens Homer, Plato, Pythagoras, in equal esteem and
reverence with the pictures of Christ, of Paul etc. They burned incense, and
offered Sacrifices to their Images, worshipping them as Gods, which we renounce;
King Ezechias abhorred, when he brake the Brazen Serpent in pieces for the like
crime committed by the Jews; S. Gregory, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine with the
rest, condemn in such places as they speak against the worshipping of Images.
For as Caietan very learnedly observes: The Fathers sometime say: Picturs
ought not to be adored: Sometime they write, that they ought. They ought not to
be worshipped absolutely for themselves, not with Sacrifices, or Godly homage:
but they ought to be honored respectively with reference to the Originalls,
with a devout and Religious kind of worship, as by Scriptures, Fathers,
Councels, and unanswerable proofs I have manifestly declared to such as will
not shut their eyes against the light of truth.

THE FIFTEENTH CONTROVERSY MAINTAINS Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead:
against D. Field, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. I.
HAVING mantained the honor of Aug. l. de baer. c. 35. Epiph. haer 75. Guido
in summa de haeres. Field. l. 3. c. 17. and in append. 1. part. p. 42. 43. etc.
Fulke in c. 12. Matthew. sect. 6. and in 1. 10. 1. sect. 5.
our noble Patrons the glorious and triumphant Saints in Heaven, the worship
of their Images, the veneration of their Relics: now I come to defend the
cause of our humble suppliantes the poor afflicted souls in Purgatory, the
place of their punishment, the relief they receive by our prayers and
suffrages. The later whereof was first gainesayd by Aerius, as S. Augustine and
Epiphanius; the former by the Waldenses, as Guido reports: and both are now
denied by D. Field, D. Fulke, and all Protestants upon these three grounds.
First, for that they suppose after the guilt of sin remitted no punishment
remains to be expiated, either here by our satisfactory works, or hereafter
by the pains of Purgatory. Secondly for that they allow no distinction betwixt
mortal and venial sins. Thirdly because no mention is made in Scripture or
in the Primitive Church either of Purgatory or Prayer for the Dead. Their
former ground I have overthrown in the treatise of Satisfaction: now to refute
the second. Some Protestams imitating the old Heretics Iran. l. 1. adu. haeres.
(of whom Iraeneus writes, who spoke like Catholics and meant far
otherwise) admit with us the names of Venial and Mortal sins, but in a
far different sense. Calu. lib. 2. Inst. c. 8. and in Antido 2 to Council.
Trident. sect. 6. c. 12. Eulke in c. 1. 1. ep. 10. sect. 5.
Calvin will have all sins Venial to the Elect, because they are not imputed
but pardoned in Christ: all Mortal in the Reprobate. M. Fulke conformably
delivers: Allsinnes are pardonable to the Penitent and faithful, and without
faith and repentance even the least and ligh est sin are damnable and deadly.
Against whom I reason thus.

2. If there be any sins, which even then, when they are voluntarily
committed, without repentance, can stand with grace and Justice, the life of
our souls, they are of their own nature neither damnable nor deadly: but
there are some suchsinnes: Therefore there are some sins, which neither of
their own nature Prou. 24. v. 16.
cause the spiritual death of our souls in this life, nor damnation in the
next. That there are some such sins, I prove out of Scripture, out of the
Proverbs: Seven times does the Just man fall and rise again. If he be Just,
how falls he into sin? If a sinner, how is he called Just, unless some
sin may consist with Justice? Out of Ecclesiast: There is not a Just man upon
earth, who does good, and does not sin. Out of S. John: If we shall say we
have no sin, we seduce Eccles. 7. v. 21. 1. John 1. Aug. l. d^ natu. and gra.
c. 36. Haeb. 5.
our selves, and the truth is not in us. Where S. Augustine expounds S. John
of the sins of the Just, and speaking of our Blessed Lady absolutely
pronounces: This Virgin excepted, if all holy Persons whilst here they lived
were assembled together, with how great sanctity soever they shined etc. they
would all cry out: If we say we have no sin, we seduceour selves. Out of S.
Paul: Every Bishop ought as for the people, so also for himself to offer for
sins. Whence S. Hierome collecteth: He Hier. apud Panigarol. part. 2. lect.
12. Iaco. 3. v. 2. lacob. 1. v. 14* Hier. in Co^menta, c. 5. Mat. Psalm. 31.
Math. 5. 1. Cor. 3. Orig. bo. 5. In Leuit. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Naz. or at. 2.
Iulia. in Cbrys. bo. 24. in Mat. Hier. l. 2. con. Pelag. Aug. l. de natura and
gra. ca. 38. and in Enchir. c. 22. and 71. and ser. 41. de Sanct. Fulke in c.
1. Iaco. sect. 6. Ezech. 18. 4. Romans 6. 23. Jacob. 2. 10. Aug. Ep 29. Cbrys.
bo. 35. in Mat.
should never be commanded to offer for others, unless he were Just, nor for
himself if he wanted sins. Out of S. James: In many things we all offend.
And in his first Chapter. Every one is tempted of his own concupiscence
abstracted and allured: afterward concupiscence, when it has conceived
brings forth sin: but sin when it is consummate engenders death. Behold
three things in man, Concupiscence the ground or entisement to sin,
Conception the first and imperfect motion which yields thereunto, Consu^mation
the absolute and deliberate consent. Concupiscence is no sin, Conception is a
sin, but not damnable, not deadly, Consu^mation or full consent is only that
which engenders death. S. Hierom agreeable heereunto makes a great difference
between (...), and (...), that is; Desire with Consent, and withous Consent.
Many other places I omit cited out of King David, S. Matthew, and S. Paul. I
omit the Fathers, who acknowledge this diversity of Venial and Mortal sins,
Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S.
Augustine etc.

3. M. Fulke obiecteth by Ezechiel and S. Paul: Of all sins in general it is
said: The soul which sins shall die. And, The wages of sin is death. I
answer: They speak of heinous sins, not of every small offense. For God
were too severe, his leagne of friendship intolerable, if for the least idle
word, or slight default he would deprive his Friends of grace, and persecute
them to death. S. James also writes of grievous sin, the breach of Gods
Commandment, in the place you commonly alleadg against us: He that offeudeth in
one, is made guilty of all. For S. Augustine teaches that: he is made guilty
of all; because he breaks the band of Charity, which is the total sum and
perfection of the law: Or can no less escape the sentence of death and
damnation, who transgresses one commandment, then if he were guilty of all,
as the Author upon the imperfect work upon S. Matthew singularly well
expounds. S. Basil and S. Augustine I grant make great account of Venial
sins, in that they diminish the fervor of Charity, are somewhat contrary to
the Easil. in quaest. q. 4. and q. 293. Aug. Con. 3. super Ps. 118. and tract.
12. in Joan.
law, and now and then dispose to the transgreslion of it, in that they truly
offend the infinite majesty of God: yet in a matter so light, and with such
imperfect apprehension, as it diminishes the indignity and wholly alters the
quality of the fault. For if the want of all knowledge, and all consent in
children and mad men utterly takes away the guilt of sin, then imperfect
knowledge, imperfect consent must needs cause imperfect sins: Not such as
absolutely violate the law of God, or thoroughly incur his high displeasure,
but such as are to be shunned notwithstanding, as dangerous infirmities and
diseases of our soul. Which is all that S. Augustine and the rest of the
Fathers intend, when they exaggerate the enormity of small offenses. Thus much
in confutation of our Adversaries second ground. Concerning the third.

4. We stand not upon the name, but uphold the thing, that is, a certain
penal estate, or cleansing of some souls after this life, which cleansing we
call (as Suarez Tom. 4. in 3. par. disp. 45. sect. 1. Esaias 4. Malach. 3.
Suarez well notes) Purgation, and the place where it is made, Purgatory,
which the ancient Fathers themselves have constantly gathered out of sundry
texts of holy Write. In the old Testament S. Augustine teaches it from the
mouth of Isay: Our Lord shall purge the dregs of the daughters of Syon, and
shall wash the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof in the Spirit of
judgment, and in the Spirit of Aug. l. 20. de ^iuit. Dei c. 25. Hiero. in hunc
locu^. Amb. in Psalm. 36. Orig. ho. 6. in Exodus
combustion; or as the English Protestant translation reads: By the spirit of
burning. He teaches it likewise from the mouth of Malachy: Our Lord is like a
purging fire, and like fullers soap; he shall sit down to try and fine the
silver, he shall even fine the Sons of Leui, and purify them as gold and
silver. Where S. Augustine adds: That these words cannot signify a
separation only of the polluted from the pure in the last penal judgment etc.
but must intimate a purgation of the good, who have need thereof. With whom S.
Hierome, S. Ambrose, Origin consent in the interpretation of that place. The
same S. Augustine and Venerable Bede deduce out of that passage of Aug. in Ps.
7. Beda in Psalm. 37. Psalm. 65. Amb. in Psalm 36. and ser in Psalm. 118. Orig.
hom. 25. in Numer.
the Psalm: Lord, rebuke me not in thy fury: nor do thou chastise me in thy
wrath. Where by his fury, they understand the furious flames of Hell, by his
wrath the chastising and correcting fire of Purgatory. S. Augustine says:
Purge me in this life, and make me such a one as shall not need the amending
fire. S. Ambrose, and Origin prove the like out of that verse of the Psalm: We
have passed through fire and water, and thou have translated us into rest, to
wit, through water of Baptism in this life, through fire of Purgatory in the
next. Here (says S. Ambrose) by water, there by fire. By Ambr. in Psalm. 118.
ser. 3 and 20. Rup. l. 3 comm. in Genesis c. 32. and 33. Genesis 3. Pererius l. 6.
quaest. 4. in c. 3. Genesis explicando verse. 24. Field in his Appendix. fol. 50.
Esaias 4. Aug. and Ambr. locis citat. Aug. l. 21. de ci. Dei. c. 23. and 24. and
l de cura pro mort. c. 1. and de 8. quaest. q. 2. Origin. and Cypr. vbi supra.
water that our sins may be washed: by fire that they may be burned. And the
same S. Ambrose together with Rupertus testify this to have been
Allegorically noted by the Prophet Moses in the fiery sword, which our Lord
placed before the gates of Paradise, to show that the passage and entrance to
the gates of Heaven was now by fire, to such as were not wholly purifyed and
refined before, as Pererius notably declares in his exquisite Commentaryes
upon Genesis.

5. And least some Protestants should weaken the strength of these former
testimonies, as M. Field here does the authorityes of S. Ambrose and S.
Hilary, expou^ding them of the fiery trial of Gods judgment, Isay expressly
distinguishes the one from the other, and says: That God shall purge us both
in the spirit of Judgment, and in the spirit of combustion: S. Augustine and S.
Ambrose do the like. For albeit S. Ambrose (as M. Field observes) does
sometime take the fire mentioned in Scripture for the fiery trial of Gods
judgment: yet he purposely also interprets it of the fire of Purgatory in the
places before cyted, and in his exposition upon the third Chapter to the
Corinthians, where he teaches, that some of the Just suffer such pains of fire
as the perfidious and damned suffer not, which cannot be understood of the
examination or trial of Gods Judgment, which the Reprobate suffer as well as
the Just. The same I say of S. Augustine, when he distinguishes three sorts of
men al tried by Gods Judgment, and one only that needs the amending fire.
The same of Origin, S. Cyprian, and the rest.

6. The last place I will allege out of the old law, omitting many for
breuityes sake, is that of Zachary: Thou also in the blood of thy Testament
have delivered thy Prisoners out of Zach. 9. v. 12.
the Lake in which there is no water. And what lake was this out of which
Christ after his death and Passion enfranchised his Captives, but either Limbus
Patrum, as some hold, or rather according to others, the Lake of Purgatory?
Aug. l. 12. de Genesis ad lit. c. 33. and ep. 99. ad Euod.
In which there is indeed no water of Comfort, as there is in Limbo, and out of
which S. Augustine affirms Christ delivered many when he descended into Hell,
for so in the new Testament Purgatory is sometim called by the name of Hell.

7. In the Acts of the Apostles S. Luke writes of Christ: Whom God has
raised up, loosing the sorrows of hell. Of Hell? Of whom in hell? Not of
Christ. For it was impossible (as M. Fulke agrees with us) he should be Act.
2. v. 24. Fulke upon this place. Aug. l. 12. de Genesis ad lit. c. 33.
touched with any after death. Not the dolours of the damned in the lowest
Hell, of whom there is no redemption. Therefore not without cause (I use the
words of S. Augustine, whom M. Fulke impudently here avouches, to have
nothing at all to this purpose) it is believed the soul of Christ to have
descended to the place where sinners are punished, to release them of their
torments, who me he in his hidden Justice thought worthy to be released.
Otherwise I see not how to expound that text etc. For neither Abraham, nor the
Poor man in his hosome, that is, in the secret of his quiet rest, was
restrained in sorrows. Phil. 2. v. 10.
Thus S. Augustine there, where he applies to the same end that saying of S.
Paul: In the name of Jesus let every knee bow, of things celestial,
terrestrial, and infernal: and le^ every tongue confess etc. Which cannot be
meant of the Psalm. 113.
damned in Hell, of whom the Psalmist says: The dead shall not praise thee, O
Lord, nor all those that descend into Hell.

8. Neither of them can that be meant which was Apoc. 3. v. 3.
revealed to S. John: No man was able to open the book sealed with seven
seals, neither in heaven, nor under the earth. For it is not probable the
infernal spirits were privileged Psalm. 73. Apoc. 5. v. 13. Suarez. tom. 4.
diso. 45. sect. 2. in 3. part. D. Thom. ^. Mat. 5. v. 26. Luc. 12. v. 58.
Tertul. l. de anim. c. 35. and 58. Cyp l. 4. epist. 2. vide Amb. in c. 12.
Luc^. Hier. in c. 5. Matt. Eus. Emis. hom. 3. de Epiph. Matt. 12. v. 32. 1.
Reg. 28. Aug. l. 21. de cin. Dei c. 24. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39. Fulke in c.
12. Matt. sect. 6. Field in appead. par. 1. page 40. Bern. ser. 66. in Cant
so much, as to try whether they could open that heavenly book, or that they,
whose pride does always ascend, were comprehended in the number of them, whom
S. John heard saying: To him that sits in the throne, and to the Lamb
benediction, and honor, and glory, and power for ever and ever. It is likely
then S. John spoke before only of the Just, as Suarez hereupon infers; and
by them in heaven understands the Church Triumphant: by them in earth the
Militant: by them under earth the Patient, or Church in Purgatory. For that is
a place under the earth, a Lake or prison as S. Matthew names it, saying: Be
at agreement with thy Adversary betymes, whilst thou art in the way with him:
least perhaps the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver
thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison. Where by the prison
Tertullian and S. Cyprian, and Eusebius Emissenus expound the prison of
Purgatory. Again, it is confirmed more strongly by S. Matthew, where he says:
He that shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him
neither in this world, nor in the world to come. The ancient Doctors gather
from hence that some sins may be remitted in the next life. For whereas it is
written in the first of the Kings: He answered him not, neither by dreams,
nor by the Priests, nor by the Prophets; it is evidently deduced that God was
accustomed to make answer al these ways or else it were an impertine^t
partition: so in this present, S. Augustine affirms, It could not be truly
said that they should not be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world
to come, except there were some, who although not in this world, yet in the
next might be forgiven. And S. Gregory is so plain in our behalf, as M. Fulke
confesses: Purgatory is holden by him for the least and lightest offenses;
Howsoever his Pew-fellow M. Field seem to outface the contrary against
Theophilus Higgons. S. Bernard also thought so well of the pregnancy of this
text, as thereby alone he refuteth the heresy of the Apostolikes: Who believed
not (says he) any purging fire to remain after death: but the soul as soon
as it is divorced from the body to be translated to rest, or to damnation. I
omit Venerable Bede, Rabanus, and others, who follow their stepes heerin. Bed.
in 3. Mar. Rabanus l. 2. de inst. C^er c. 44. 1. Cor 3. v. 12. Psalm. 96. 1.
Cor. 3. 13. lbidem. 1. Cor. 3. 15. Ambr. and Sedul. in hunc locu^. Aug. l. de
fide and oper. c. 16^. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39.


9. With S. Matthew, S. Paul accords in his first Epistle to the Corinthians:
If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood,
hay, stuble etc. where for the manifestation of these works he assigns three
kinds of fires. The general fire: which goes before the face of our Lord, to
devour his enemies in the day of doom, saying: It shall be revealed in fire:
Then the fiery trial of Gods Judgment, of which he adds: The work of every
one of what kind it is the fire shaltrye. Lastly he concludes of the fire of
Purgatory: If any man's work burn, he shall suffer detriment, but himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. Now whether we understand by wood, hay, and
stubble, the curious and unprofitable doctrine of good and faithful Preachers
with S. Ambrose, and Sedulius upon this place: Or the venial sins and frail
imperfections of al true Christians with S. Augustine, S. Gregory, and others:
yet the fire by which the builders of these works are punished and saved,
cannot be well interpreted but of the purging fire of the next life. Fulk. in ^.
3. 1. ad Cor sess. 6. Basi. de spiritu Sanct. c. 15. Chrysostom. and Theod. in hunc
locu^. Stapleton. in Anti. Apost. in 1. ad Cor. c. 3.


10. Not of the fire of temptation here upon earth, as M. Fulke surmiseth,
because S. Paul expressly treats of a fire immediately ensuing the day of our
Lord: or that day, as the Greek reads, which is also taken for the day of
Judgment often in Scripture, and so interpreted here by the Grecians
themselves, by S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, and Theodoret. Besides the fire of
temptation does not refine, and purify the unclean only, but tries the just
and perfect servants of God generally more then the imperfect. Neither can it
be expounded of the trial and examination of Gods judgment after death, as
others insinuate. For of that he spoke before: through that all must pass, be
they never so defiled, be they never so pure: through this only such as are
either stained with the spots, or obnoxious to the punishment of their offenses
past.

11. By the trial of Gods judgment no pain is inflicted, but an approbation
is made, or a redargution of works: by this saving fire besides the
redargution or burning of the work, the worker also suffers detriment or
pain and penalty, as the Greek explaineth. The trial of Gods Judgment is
swift and momentany, not lengthned by our offenses: the trial of fire is
shorter or longer according to the mixture of sinful dross with our gold or
precious metal, as Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine excellently
teach, who conformably Orig. hom. ^ in Exo. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2. ad Anton. Ambr.
in hunc locu^. Aug. in Psalm. 37. Tertul. l. 5. cont. Marc. c. 6. Hier. in Amos
4. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39. August. in Psalm. 37.
expound this place of S. Paul of the fire of Purgatory, with whom all the
Greek and Latin Fathers, with the Armenian Ambassadors, after long
disputation agreed in the general Council of Florence, and before them
Tertullian, S. Hierome, S. Gregory and others. Tertullian says: He shall be
saved by fire. S. Augustine demanding why some are said to be saved by fire,
replyeth, because they build upon the foundation, hay, wood, stubble; but if
they would build gold, silver, and precious stones, they might be secure from
both fires. Not only from that everlasting, which shall torment the impious
eternally, but from that which shall amend them, who shall be saved by fire etc.
and then: Ita plane etc. Even so truly, although they be saved by fire, yet
that fire will be more paynefull or grievous then any thing that can be suffered
in this life. Which sentence is so clear in our behalf, as M. Fulke could
find no color to gloze it, but peremptorily answers: To the authority of S.
Augustine I oppose his own Judgment upon better Fulke in c. 3. 1. Cor. sect. 6.
advise and examination of the text. As though S. Augustine ever retracted that
exposition: yea he often repeateth and inculcateth the same in sundry places,
as I shall declare hereafter.

12. But what opposition (I pray) does M. Fulke find in his writings? He
obiecteth that S. Austine in his Enchiridion Fulke ibid.
to Laurence, interprets that fire of the fire of temptation in this life.
And what then? Shall one place preiudicate the truth of others, and of so many,
so often ratified and never repealed? Shall we not rather embrace them both,
Aug. l. 1 de Trin cap. vlt. and l. 12. Co^fes. c. 31. Fulke in c. 31 ad Cor.
sect. 5. Genesis cap. 3. verse. 7.
and admire the fruitfulnes of Gods sacred word, which out of the same text, as
S. Augustine himself teaches, sometime begets diverse literal senses, not
repugnant one to the other. But here (says M. Fulke) the text will not bear
the former construction. The Apostle takes fire Allegorically as all the rest
of the words, foundation, gold, silver etc. wood, hay, stubble. I answer it is
an idle collection, because some words are used Metaphorically, therefore all.
Almighty God spoke figuratively in the history of our Genesis 3. v. 6.
Forefathers sin, saying: And the eyes of both were opened, (for they were
not blind before.) Did he therefore use Field. lib. 3. page 99. Fulke in c. 3.
1. ad Cor. sect. 6.
a figurative speech in the same place, when he said, The woman saw that the
tree was good to eat etc. And she eat and gave her husband etc. So albeit a
Metaphore be used in the words wood, hay, stubble, you cannot hereupon
conclude the same of the saving fire. Aug. l. 21. de Ciu. Dei cap. 24.


13. But when D. Fulke can find nothing in S. Augustine contrary to his
assertion of Purgatory, he and D. Field mightily labor to craze his credit, as
variable and irresolued in this point. M. Field fears not to write: Aug. l.
2. de Genesis co^^ Mani haeos cap. 20. Et post hanc vita^ habebit vel ignem
purgationis, vel poena^ aeternam.
Augustine to avoid a worse, did doubtingly run into the error of Purgatory.
M. Fulke as insolent as he: The opinion of Purgatory in S. Augustines days
began to be harkened unto, he doubts of it. Notwithstanding S. Augustine is
so far from doubting, as he professes of them that depart with the
remainders of sin not wholly cleansed: Tales constat etc. It is manifest that
those purged before the day of Iudgme^: by temporal pains, which their souls
suffer, are not delivered to the punishments of eternal fire. Again: He who
has not happily tilled his field, but has suffered it to be ouergrowen with
thorns, has in this life the malediction and curse of the earth in all his
works, and after this life Field in appen part. 1. fol. 18. Lodouicus Vi^es in
cum locum
he shall have either the fire of Purgatory, or everlasting pain.

14. To the first authority out of his book of the City of God M. Field
answers: That the words (as Viues notes) are not found in some ancient
manuscripts: nor in that printed at Friburge. But Viues annexeth, which you
most guilfully suppress: Nevertheless the style is not dissonant from
Augustines phrase, peradventure they are either wanting in some books, or else
are interlaced here out of some other work of S. Augustines. So that if Viues
censure may take place, it should have prevailed rather to have made you
reverence that as S. Augustines saying, then insolently reject it as none of
Field. ibid.
his. To the second place he replieth as many cauilling Sophisters are wont to
do to the texts of Aristotle they cannot otherwise avoid, that he speaks: not
according to his own mind, but according to the opinion then prevailing, of
deliverance out of Hell, which S. Augustine in that place would not stand to
discuss, but else where refuteth it at large. What? Does he approve and
disprove the self same thing? And does he approve it here by absolute
asseueration, and not by way of objection? Was he so peevish as to countenance
an error himself taught repugnant to Scripture? Or so far ouerseene as to
give such advantage to his prying enemies the Manichees, whom he impugned, and
you the first to epsy his fault, which he one of the wisest and humblest that
ever was, either wanted grace to see, or modesty to recall in his book of
Retractations? There might be found perchance a man so senseless, as would
give ear unto you, if the same doctrine were not inuincibly confirmed by S.
Augustine in sundry other places.

15. In his book of the City of God, writing of the Infant regenerated by
Baptism: He not only is not adjudged Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 21. c. 16.
to eternal torments: but neither does he suffer after death any Purgatory
pains. Likewise in the 13. Chapter of the same book; As for temporal pain
some endure it here, some hereafter, and some both here and there etc. Some
shall be pardoned in the world to come, that are not pardoned in this. In his
treatise Aug. 50. bo^. ho. 16. Ezech. 24.
of 50. Hom lies he verifieth of the sinful soul after this life that saying
of Ezechiel: Lay it naked upon the coals until her brass be heated, and all
her tin be fried out. There the idle words, and wicked or impure cogitatious,
there the multitude of lesser sins which have infected the purity of the
noble nature, shall sees forth; there the tynne or lead which have obscured the
divine Image, shall be consumed. All which might here by almeesdeeds and
tears after a more short and compendious manner have been purged from the
soul. Whereby you may see how absolutely Field in append. par. fol 19, Field
ibid. fol. 17. Fulke in c. 3. 1. ad Cor. sect. 6. and against Purgat. p. 121.
122. Aug. in Enchir. c. 69. Aug. l. 5. Hypogn. Fulke in c. 12. Mat. sect. 6.
Aug. de. Ciuit. Dei l. 21. c. 26^
S. Augustine is resolved in this point, and how void of sincerity that
protestation of M. Fields is: I dissent not from Augustine in anything he
constantly delivers. But the places which are gathered out of him partly by
M. Field, partly by M. Fulke, and others coveting to discrie some inconstancy
and variableness of his opinion are these. First out of his Enchiridion to
Laurence: It is not incredible that some such thing also is done after this
life, and whether it be or not, it may be found out, or it may be hid.
Secondly, out of his book of Hypognost, where he says, The third place we are
utterly ignorant of: Lastly, out of his book of the City of God: If any one
say the Spirits of the dead all that while suffer such fire etc. I contradict
him not, perhaps he may hold the truth. Where S. Augustine nothing doubts of
the assertion of Purgatory pains after this life, but only of the manner and
quality of them. For in the first place having expounded the fire S. Paul
mentions, of the fire of tribulation in this life; that is of the grief and
anguish that tormenteth them that loose their temporal goods, which they over
greedily affected, he only doubts whether there be any such grief and sorrow
in the next life or Aug. ad Du^cit. quest. 1.
no, for the loss of wordly commodities. Which doubt he makes also in his
treatise to Dulcitius.

16. In the second place he argues against the Pelagians, who granted to the
Baptized Infants a special place Aug. lib. 5. hypognos.
of eternal joy; and as he proves no place of everlasting death but hell: so
he denies any place of continual comfort and joy but heaven alone, saying:
Assign me besides this another place where there may be perpetual repose of
life. A third place of perpetual abode he was ignorant of, and so are we. In
the last passage S. Augustine disputes, and leaves it as it were in suspense,
whether the fire of Purgatory be the same in substance with the fire of Hell:
yet never makes question, but that there is some purging fire after this life.
And it is nothing but desperate boldness in our Adversaries to avouch the
contrary, as the zeal of his honor, and just defense of so great a pillar of
the Church has made me declare more amply, then my purposed breuity would
otherwise permit.

17. I need not repeat the consent of other Fathers of the Latin Church, whose
authorityes I have already alleged, and at whom our enemies and theirs carpe
not so much as they do at S. Augustine. I pass therefore to Fulke in c. 3. 1.
ad Cor. sect. 6. Basil. in c. 9. Isa. Niss. orat. ad Dornicent. Theod. in 3. 1.
ad Cor. Oecum. in eum locu^. S. Dionys. de Eccles. Hier. c. 7. Athan. q. 34. ad
Antio. S. Basil vbi supra. S. Cyr. Cat. Mystag. 5 Chrysostom. bo. 41 in c. 15. 2. ad
Cor. Fulke in his confutation of Purgitory p. 237. 260. 371. 313. Bellar. l. 1.
de Purgat. cap. 11.
the Grecians, whom M. Fulke has the face to belie in this manner: The
opinion of Purgatory was never received in the Greek Church. S. Gregory
Nissen, Theodoret, and Oecumenius, who received, believed, and taught it, bear
witness against him in behalf of their Church. S. Gregory Nissen his words
(not to be over tedious in repeating the rest) are these: Man after sin in
many toylsome labors ought to be exercised, that taught by experience he might
return to his first happynes, all vicious affections being purged forth either
in this world by a sober course of life etc. or after our departure hence by
the furnace of Purgatory fire. S. Dionyse, S. Athanasius, S. Cyril, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ephrem, S. Basil, and Epiphanius, all Grecians, were al of the
same mind, holding with us prayer for the dead, as M. Fulke much forgetting
himself, confesses of most of them by name, in his confutation of Purgatory,
and Prayer for the dead, where also he has these words; In the burial of
Constantine there is mention of Prayer for his soul according to the error of
the time. Which was notwithstanding but 300. years after Christ, about the time
of the first Nicen Council, and he buried in the Greek Church of
Constantinople.

18. Finally, that no proofs might be wanting to fortify a truth so generally
impugned by our new-refined Ghospellers, Cardinal Bellarmine deriueth the
opinion of some purging place after this life, from the common consent of all
sorts of people, of Jews, Gentiles, Philosophers, Poets, and Turks; As from
Josephus, Plato, Cicero, Virgil, Claudian and Mahomet, whose testimonies he
alleges, Josephus l. de bello ludaic. c. 19. Plato in Gorg. and Phaedone.
Cic. in some. Scip. in fine Virg. 6. Aeneid. Claudian l. 2. in Ruffi. circ.
finem. Mahum. in Alcorano. Petr. Gal. de arca Catho. verit. l. 6. c. 9. and 10.
The Author of the Protest. Apol tract. 1. sect. 4. subdi. 2. Fulke in c. 8.
Luc. sect 5. and in 5. Apoc. sect 1. Rabby Haccados l. qui inscri bitur
Reuelator arcanorum. Rab. Simeon apud Rab. Haccados. Oecolamp. in l. ep. Zuing
and Oecolam. l. 1. p. 19. Zuing l. 3. p. 560. 561. Peter Mart. in locis commun.
Anglite page 2. c. 18. D. Barlow in his defense of the Protestant Religion page
173. M. Jacob in M. Bilsons book of the full Redemption p. 188. Bills. ibidem.
and page 189. etc. Danaeus ad Rob. Bellar. disp. par. 1. p. 176. Whitaker
contra Duraeum l. 8. page 567. Rubb. Symeon. in l. Zoar in cap. 18. Genesis Rabbi
David in psalm. 32. Rabbi Isaac in Lucer. lucis con. 1. p. 2. c. 2. Fox in his
acts and monu. 1313. 1315. Luch. in disput. Lipsia.
not to credit their authorityes any furthet then to show that this doctrine
sprang out of the bowels of nature, and not from the private policy or
invention of man: Petrus Galatinus, and the Author of the Protestants Apology
for the Roman Church, learnedly gather it from the old Rabbines, and from the
late Reformers themselves, from some who grant a third place of Limbus Patrum,
which M. Fulke and our English Sectaryes stoutly deny. Rabby Haccados, who
lived before Christ, writes in his person: I have decreed to descend into hell
to redeem the souls of the just, which my Father did abandone thither in the
rod of his indignation. Rabby Simeo^ agrees with him herein. So does
Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, and Peter Martyr, who expressly allow Limbus Patrum.

19. And touching the ancient writers D. Barlow avouches: This passes most
rife amongst the Fathers, who taking Inferi, for Abraham's bosom, expound it,
that Christ went thither ad liberandum liberandos, to conueigh the Fathers
deceased before his Resurrection unto the place where now they are. Which
doctrine M. Jacob confesses: All the Fathers with one consent affirm. Neither
does M. Bilson, Danaeus, or Whitaker deny it, but he discardeth it as their
errors. From others it is deduced who directly acknowledge Purgatory it self.
Rabbi Simeon auerreth of such as are temporally punished in the next life:
After they are purged from the filth of their sins, then does God cause them
to ascend out of that place. See Rabbi David, Rabbi Isaac, and others
confirming the same. Which Latymer also an earnest Protestant, and Foxian
Martyr confesses. And Luther his forerunner says: I strongly believe, yea I
dare boldly say, I know there is a Purgatory. Concerning the Fathers, M.
Sutcliffe grants of S. Gregory the Great: He allowed Purgatory. D. Humfrey
says: He and Austen brought it into England. Nay long before S. Gregory or
this Augustine our Apostles days, the Magdeburgians recite and reject the
sayings of Lactantius and S. Hierome appertaining to Purgatory. They write of
Origin: Sutcl. subtler. c. 4. Doctor Humfrey par. 2. lesuit. rat. 5. page 5.
and 627. Magdeb. Centu. 4. col. 304. and Cent. 3. col. 265. and col. 87. Fulke
in his Confu. of Purgat. p. 78.
He appointed Purgatory as a punishment of sins. Besides: The seeds of
Purgatory are here and there scattered in Origens works. M. Fulke
acknowledges of S. Angustine the Doctor of the Church: Augustine speaks of
the amending fire in the place by M. Allen alleged. He does so indeed, but
Augustine had no ground of that fire, but in the common error of his time. O
too to pittious answer! Has M. Fulke sense to deny, and had Augustine no
ground to affirm? Was it common in Augustines times, and defended by him, and
shall it be repealed and condemned in us?

20. I will stand no longer in gathering the suffrages of these our enemies,
reason it self gives sentence on our side. Two depart this life, one who has
labored in the school of virtue many years together, is free from the
guilt, and has fully satisfied for his offenses past; another who has run a
wicked race all the days of his life: yet through the mercy of God repents in
the end, is pardoned of his sins, but has no leisure to accomplish any
satisfaction at all. If this second person dying Deuteronomy. 25. v. 2.
at the same instant, with the former, partake the joys of heaven as soon as
he, God were unjust to reward him equally with the other, who performed before
condign satisfaction. Therefore he must be delayed for a season of his
felicity, until the penalty of sin be discharged, because it is an
inviolable decree of our upright Judge: According to the measure of the sin,
shall the measure also of the stripes be.

21. Again I suppose three several persons; the one dies pure from all kind
of sin, another guilty of mortal, the third only spotted with some venial
fault. The first whither goes he? To Heaven immediately. The second whither
goes lie? To Hell no doubt. The third whither goes he? Not to Hell, because
he is departed in the grace and favor of God; Not to heaven immediately, Apoc.
21. v. vlt.
because, Nothing defiled can enter that kingdom. Therefore to some purging
place, where his soul may be cleansed from the stains of infection.

22. No such place is necessary says M. Field, for Field in appen. 1. p. fo.
65. 66.
by the dolours of death, at the moment of dissolution all impurity of sin is
purged forth. But how can this be so? Death is the punishment of Original, and
not any remedy against actual sin. It is the state and condition of our
corruptible nature inflicted on the Reprobate, as well as on the Elect. And so
neither by it self, nor by the ordinance of God has force and virtue to
scour out of our souls all the rust of sin; a prerogative denied by you to
the holy Sacraments of God. And such a prerogative, as is proper indeed to the
excellency of Martyrdom, and not common to the departure of every faithful
sinner, whose panges are often more short, and far less painful, then the
grievous dolours of the clean and unspotted.

23. Besides, to procure this abolishment of sin, Field ibid. fol. 60.
M. Field requires, Charity and sorrow, in such perfection as may work our
perfect reconciliation to God. And may not thousands or some at least with the
spot of venial or remainder of mortal crime be taken out of this world,
either in their sleep or unawares before they arrive to that depth of sorrow?
It being so hard a thing in perfect health, much harder in the agony of death,
impossible in time of sleep to attain unto it. Or if you pretend the
providence of God to be so careful of his elect, as they cannot be surprised
upon a sudden; to what effect (I pray) are those exhortations of Christ so
often repeated in Scripture: Matt. 24. Matt. 25.
That we pray, and be watchful, least death prevent us before we are aware? To
what effect the Parable of the foolish Virgins, the Parable of Death stealing
upon us like a thief? To what effect are the labors and works of Penance,
many zealous followers of Christ undertake to expiate the faults of their
former life, when every faithful belieuer, let him be never so slothful in
this behalf, shall be sure in the last hour to have grace enough to redeem the
debt, and cancel the obligation of his sins? This is a doctrine I grant
suitable to Protestant profession, it tends to the restraint of virtue, it
tends to all vicious and Epicurean liberty, it ministers occasion of sloth
to Christian people, and makes God tooto indulgent to their idle sluggishnes.
But they that make him author of the horrible iniquityes of the Reprobate,
what marvel though they would have him a favorer of the small imperfections
and negligences of his Elect? And rather then they will injury (as they fondly
surmise) the blood of Christ, they injuriously blaspheme, and truly wrong
heerin the Justice of God.

24. To be brief, Calvin and Plessy Mornay affirm: The hereditary naughtines
and corruption of Original sin drowneth Calu. lib. 2. I^st. cap. 1.. 8. and
9. and l. 3. inst. cap. 15.. ^. Plessy l. 3. de Eucbar. cap. 2^.
as it were with a deluge the whole nature of man: so that no part remains
free from this filthy contagion. Secondly, they avouch: No work proceeds
from man be he never so perfect, but is defiled with the stains of sin.
Grant these assertions true, which commonly all Protestants defend, how can
there be either charity or sorrow in such perfection as is able to purge out
all impurity of sin? When the most perfect Charity it self is impure and
stained, how shall these staynes be taken forth? By some other act of charity,
or work of repentance? But this work also issuing from the inward rottenes of
man's corrupted nature shall still be putrifyed with Original infection.

25. For this cause D. Field is so unconstant in resolving Field. in append. 1.
part. p. 66. p. 65. ibid. and in appe^. 1. par. p. 4. and p. ^4. 65.
how or when the whole uncleanness of sin is washed from the soul, as he
wauereth and reeleth up and down, not knowing where to take hold. One while he
says: It is purged out by Charity and sorrow of sinning: otherwhile, by the
dolours of death: then, by the very separation of soul and body wrought by
death: but when he dares not avouch; and therefore stammeringly utters: It
is in, or immediately upon the dissolution of soul and body, in the first
entrance of the soul into the state of the other world. What giddines is
here? If by the dolours of death al sinnefullnes be expelled, how in the
moment of dissolution? If in that moment, how immediately upon it? How in the
first entrance into the next life? Or if in that entrance, how does Charity
then work, or sorrow procure it? Read his words. Field. in append. 1. part.
p. 4.


26. The utter deletion, and full remission of their sins, the perfect
purging out of sin, being in, or immediately upon the dissolution in the last
instant of this life, and first of the next, and not while the body and soul
remain conjoined. Pity it is, great pity to see unto what distress a man of
wit and learning may be driven by the weakness of his cause. For here M.
Field in these few words makes either two instances immediately together, the
last of this life and first of the next, and so composeth diuisible times of
indivisible moments against the principles of Philosophy: or he supposes the
instant, in which sin is remitted, to be intrinsecall to this life, and
extrinsecall to the next, and so crosses himself in his own speech,
affirming this full remission of sin, both to be, and not to be, while the
body and soul remain conjoined. Or he takes the instant of Purgation to be
extrinsecall to this life, and intrinsecall to the next. And contrary to the
whole stream of Sectaryes, he allows with us a remission or Purgation of
sin, and Purgatory-place after this life, at least for a moment. For that
which is done, must be done in some place, or else it is not done at all. To
which of these inconveniences he will yield I know not; to one he is
constrained. And if I may guess at the meaning of his variable and unconstant
speeches, seeing he will not have the perfect purging out of sin etc. while
the body and soul remain conjoined, he allows it after the dissolution, and
so admits a remission and purgation of sin in the next life, which his
fellows renounce, and he himself would seem to impugn.

27. But when I pray, is this perfect purging out of of sin made? Before
Judgment, after Judgment, or at the time of Judgment? You cannot say before
Judgment. For such as we are found in the last moment of this life, such are we
summoned before the tribunal seat of God, according to many passages of holy
Scripture, which S. Gregory in his dialogues gathers together: according to
Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39. 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 5. ad Romans 2. ad Gala. 6. Marc. 13.
v. 36. and v. 17.
the express words of S. Paul which I shall quote in the next Chapter. And
according to that of S. Mark, where God says, he shall find in the hour of
death some sleepy, some breeding, and beginning to do well, Woe be unto them.
Neither can this Purgation be either at or after Judgment. For the Judgment of
God is according to truth, therefore such as Protestants are presented before
his throne, such are they judged. They are presented before him not wholly
purged but tainted with the corruption; the last actions of life draw (as they
feign) from the poisoned fountain of Nature. Therefore they must be judged
guilty of sin defiled with those filthy dregs. And whereas you obstinatly
also defend, that the wages of all sin without Faith Fulk in c. 1. Ep. 1. ^^.
sect. 5.
and Repentance is eternal death; no sentence of remission, but the
irreuocable doom of everlasting damnation ought to be pronounced against all
that dye of your profession, unless you repeal the Law of God recorded by
Solomon: Eccles. c. 11. verse. 3.
Where the tree falls there it shall be: or contrary to the decree of our
inexorable Judge, allot time to believe, and place to repent after the warfarre
of this life is ended, to them Field. vbi supra.
that have their sins (as M. Field says) remitted in the first moment of the
next. Cypr. l 4. Ep. 2. Orig. hom. 6. in E^^^d Aug. in ^0. hom. hom. 16. Dan.
7. verse. 10.


28. Lastly the Fathers do not only require an instant, but longer space of
punishment after this life according to the remains of sin. S. Cyprian
says: One thing it is, a long time punished for trespasses to be amended and
purged by fire, and another to abolish all faults by suffering for Christ.
Origin: All must come unto the fire, all to the forge etc. If any one bring a
little iniquity, that little like lead ought to be consumed with fire; and if
more heavy or leady metal, he is more burned that more may be wasted and
melted forth. S. Augustine discoursing Amb. in c. 12. Luc. Tertul. ^. de anima
c. 17. Greg. Nazian. orat. in S. lumina. Lactan. l. 7. cap. ^1. Eus. Emis. hom.
3. de Epipha. Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
of that prophetical speech mentioned by Daniel: A fiery and violent flood
ran before the face of our Lord: Some (says he, in the next life) shall
pass thro^gh a fiery lake, and horrible shallowes full of burning flames: as
much as shall remain of the dross of sin, so long shall the delay of
passage be. S. Ambrose: So long is every one exercised with noisome pains,
until he pay the punishment of his faulty error. Tertullian, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, Lactantius, Eusebius Emissenus, and S. Hilary have many worthy
sentences to this purpose, which cannot be interpreted of M. Fields momentary
Purgation, nor of the guilt of sin, which without repentance deserves
damnation, but either of the punishment due to former faults, or of the
saultines of lesser sins which are of their own nature venial or
pardonable, the chiefest points I intended to prove in this Chapter: the
confutation of Objections I refer to the next.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. WHEREIN Prayer for the Dead is defended, against the
foresaid Doctors, M. Field, and M. Fulke.
PVRGATORY, and Prayer for the Dead, are lincked together in such mutual
dependency the one with the other, as S. Isidore teaches by the proof of the
latter, by necessary consequence the former ensues. Because if our prayers
relieve the souls departed, they cannot be in state of happiness, for then
they should not need Isido. l. de divine. offi. c. de Sacrif.
them: nor in the state of damnation, for then our endeavors could not avail
them. Therefore in the state of Purgatory they suffer punishment for their
former misdeeds, from which they be freed by the Prayers, Almsdeeds, and other
charitable works of the faithful upon earth, as the Holy Ghost witnesses in
the book of Machabees. 2. Machab c. 12. v. vltimo.


1. It is a holy and behoouefull cogitation to pray for the Dead, that they may
be released of their sins. Which although our Adversaries discard as no
Canonical Scripture: yet they ought to credit it as much at least, as Liuie
the Roman, or Thucidides the Grecian Historiographer: they ought to reverence
it as the allowed testimony of a grave, ancient, and most worthy writer; worthy
to out-countenance all the base vpstarts of our latter age, worthy to be
accounted Cyp. de exhorta. Martyrij. Ambr. l. 2. de Jacob. c. 10. 11. 12. Hier.
in prolog. in Machab. Aug. l. 18. de ciu. Dei cap. 36. Council. Carth. can. 47.
Field in appen. 1. p. fol. 69. Eccles. c. 7. Eccles. 38. Cyp. ser. de Eleemosy.
Amb. in l. de Tobia. cap. 1. Basil in orat. de auaritia. Aug. in Spe^ul. Tob.
4. Beda in fine Comment. in l. 1. Reg. Genesis 50.
by S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and by the third Council
of Carthage, One of the Divine Secretaries, and Penmen of the holy Ghost. In
so much as S. Augustine inclines not only (as M. Field writes) to this
opinion: but expressly resolves, The books of Machabees not the Jews, but the
Church esteems Canonical. Likewise it is written: Mortuo ne prohibcas
gratiam: Restrain not thy favor from the Dead. Moreover: My Son, power
forth thy tears upon the Dead etc. And: In his departure make his memory rest
in peace. Tobie also whose book S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Basil, S.
Augustine admit into the Canon of Scripture, counsaileth: Place thy bread and
thy wine on the Sepulcher of the Just: and do thou neither eat nor drink
thereof with sinners.

2. Hence it appears it was an ancient custom amongst the Jews to make a
feast at the funerals of their friends, to inuit the poor and faithful
persons thereunto, who by the charity and Almesdeeds bestowed upon them, might
pray for their souls. And it is most likely the ancient Patriarchs and
Prophets intended this relief to their deceased friends, whom they with
Prayer, with Fasting, with grief and sorrow, so many days lamented, as was
otherwise unfitting, unless it had been addressed (as Venerable Bede well
notes) to the benefit of their souls.

3. The Patriarch Joseph 77. days mourned the death of his father Jacob. The
men of Iabes Galaad 7. days continued a fast at the solemn burial of Saul
and Ionathas. Of whose death when King David the Royal Prophet heard, he wept,
fasted, and cut his garments with the rest of his company: which he likewise
did for Abner.

4. Yea this prayer for the Dead has been a thing so generally received, and
so inuiolaby practiced amongst the Jews, even then when they were Gods chosen
people, as when Judas Machabaeus appointed public Sacrifices 1. Reg. 3. 2.
Reg. 1. 2. Reg. 1. 2. Machab. cap. 12. Joseph. de Bello Iudaic. c. 19. Baruch
c. 3. verse. 5. Vrbanus Regius baec verba Baruch.
to be offered for them, not one was found amongst the huge number of
soldiers, not one amongst the Priests and Leuits of Jerusalem, not one
amongst the Patriarchs and Prophets of God (most vigilant always in checking
Superstuion) who ever reprehended that charitable deed. But Josephus the
Historiographer plainly allows it. And Baruch the Prophet (as Vrbanus Regius
a Protestant of no small account bears witness) made supplication himself
for his Predecessors souls saying: O Lord omnipotent remember not the
iniquities of our forefathers. And now at this present time, the Jews above
all other Nations, peculiarly wedded to the Traditions of their ancestors,
observe by prescription a solemn prayer for the Dead called Paulus Fagius in
c. 14. Deuteronomy. and Genebrard in fine Chronol. VVbitak. cont. Duraeum p. 85. See
Caluino-turcis. l. 4. c. 8. and Hilalar. deca. 4. feria 5. post dominicam 4.
Quadrag. Luc. 16.
Haskaba pronounced by their Hazan, or public Minister, of which M. Wnitaker
auerreth: I know the Jews have Rituall books, which they read in their
Synagogues; and I am not ignorant that even now they are wont to use certain
prayers for the Dead.

5. Neither was it any Ceremonial Rite proper to the Jews, but a general law
or print of nature stamped in the hearts of all both savage and civil Nations;
In Grecians, Indians, Moscouites, Aethiopians, Turks, Persians, Mores,
Arabians etc. Who with a dissonant and disagreeing manner: yet with one and the
same hope of relieuing the departed, offered their Prayers and Sacrifices unto
God. To leave Jews and Gentiles, and come to Christians.

6. Our blessed Savior seems to exhort hereu^to, saying: Make your selves
friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that when you fail, they may receive you
into the eternal tabernacles. Where by friends, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory,
understand the Saints in heaven, whose necessities we once succored here upon
earth, and who when we fail, that is, depart this life not so pure from the
relics of sin as we may by our good deeds presently enter the kindgdome of
heaven, then they (supplying our wants, as we once relieved theirs) receive us
by their prayers and merits into the Mansions of everlasting rest. By their
merit, says S. Austen, charitable men obtain mercy and pardon: and Aug. ser.
35. de verb. Domini and l. 21. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 27. Greg. l. 21. moral. c.
14. 1. Cor. 15:
S. Gregory. If by their friendship we gain eternal Tabernacles. we ought to
consider when we bestow upon them, that we rather offer presents to Patrons,
then give alms to the Poor.

7. Secondly, S. Paul says: What shall they do that are Baptized for the dead,
if the Dead rise not again at all. Here the Apostle argues not from the
erroneous practice, which long after his time was broached by the Montanists,
Marcionists, and Cerinthians, who ministered true Baptism to the living, as
profiting the departed, for whose sake it was received: but he takes Baptism
here Metaphorically for punishment and affliction, as Christ uses Luc. 12.
Marc. 10.
the word: I have a Baptism to be baptized withal. And: Can you drink the
Chalice, which I drink, or be baptized with the Baptism, wherewith I am
baptized? After which manner S. Nazian. orat. in SS. lumina Cypr. ser. de Coena
Domini.
Gregory Nazianzen acknowledges a Baptism of tears and Penance. And S.
Cyprian says: He baptizeth himself in tears Therefore the force of S. Paul's
argument is to this effect; What does it avail the faithful people to
punnish, fast, pray, and afflict themselves for the souls departed, if the
Dead rise not again, and receive the fruit and benefit of their prayers?

8. Thirdly S. John writes: There is a sin to death, 1. Joan. 5.
for that I say not, that any man ask. This sin to death is not every
mortal sin which kills the soul, but that Aug. v* infra. Aug. l. 21. de
ciu. Dei cap. 24. 1. Joan. c. 5. v. 16.
only, as S. Augustine teaches, In which a man dies without repentance:
because the Apostle dehorteth not to pray for remission of any man's sin during
life. And the custom^ of the Church is to pray for Heretics, Schismatikes,
Apostataes, or whosoever, while they live. But, If there be any (says S.
Augustine) that persist till death in impenitency of heart, does the Church now
pray for them, that is, for the souls of them that are so departed? For these
the Apostle exhorts us not to pray; but if we know our Brother to sin a
sin not to death, that is, in which he dies not with final impenitence, for
him he persuades and wills us after his departure, To ask, with confidence
to obtain pardon, saying: And life shallbe given him, sinning not to death.
Which Burchar. l. 19. de poenit. decret. Vas. c. 2. and 4. Carth. vide
Burchard. Cabilon. cap. 39. Flor^^. in initio. Dionys. Areo. de Eccl. hier.
cap. 7. Cypr. l. 1. epist. 9. Tertul. l. de Corona militis. Greg. Nazian. orat.
in Caesariu^ and reliq. Field. in append. x. part. p. 13 Ibid. p. 4. Chrysostom. hom
69. ad Popul^um. Fulke against Purg. page 303. Fulke in c. 21. ^. ad Cor sect.
22.
is a most forcible argument, and a great encouragement unto us to pray for
such as depart not this life in state of deadly sin. Agreeable heereunto it
was defined in the Council of Brachara; as the learned Bishop Burchardus (who
lived about 600. years ago) records; that for such as should cast violent
hands upon themselves, no mention should be made in the oblation for them: yet
for others oblations, and prayers were offered, as the Council of Vase, of
Carthage, of Cabilo, of Florence, and many more have decreed.

9. All our forefathers with uniform consent absolutely teach and confirm this
doctrine, their words I need not rehearse, because the Protestants freely
grant they taught, defended and commonly used Prayer for the dead. Only D.
Field to file their sayings to his purpose affirms first: That the ancients
commemorated the departed by rehearsing their names. Secondly: They offered the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is, of praise and thanksgiving for them.
Thirdly: They prayed for men in their passage hence, and entrance into the
other world. Fourthly: They prayed for the Resurrection, public acquitall in
the day of Judgment, and perfect consumation of the departed. All which
customs and observations I allow (says M. Field) and approve. But he utterly
denies: That the ancient Catholic Church did generally intend in her prayers
and oblations for the dead to relieve souls temporally afflicted in penal
estate. And this is it, which I have established by the former places of
Scripture: now I fortify by the testimonies of many renowned witnesses both of
the Greek and Latin Church.

10. S. Chrysostom writes: It was not without good cause enacted by the
Apostls, that in the Celebration of the reverent Mysteries, a Commemoration of
the dead be made; for they knew that great profit and much commodity redounded
thereby unto them. M. Fulke confesses these words of S. Chrysostom in two
distinct places, and malepartly replyeth in both: first he says, Chrysostom
must pardon us for crediting him. Secondly he answers: Without any good
ground he affirms this memory Tertul. l. de coron. mi^it. Cyp. lib. ep. 9.
Joan Dam. orat. de defunct. Athattas. and Nys. a. pud eunde^. Aug. de verb.
Apost ser. 32. Idem in Enchiridio. c^ 109.
to be of the Apostles decree. Without ground then Terullian, S. Cyprian, S.
John Damascen, S. Athanasius, and S. Gregory Nissen testified the same. Without
ground S. Augustine said, It is not to be doubted, but the dead are helped by
the Prayers of the holy Church, and by the wholesome sacrifice. Again, without
ground he wrote: Neither is it to be denied, but that the souls departed, are
relieved by the piety of their friends, when for them the Sacrifice of our
mediator is offered, or alms is given. Without ground did Eusebius. in vita
Constant.
Constantine the Great: Desire to be buried in a famous Church, that he might
partake the benefit of many devout prayers after his decease. Without ground
Theod. hist. Eccles. l. 5. cap. 25. Hier. epist. ad obitu vxoris. Aug. l. 21.
de ciu. Dei c. 23. and de cura pro mort. c. 1. and 50. ho. hom. 16. Dionys Ec.
Hier. c. 7. Tertul. de monoga. Chrysostom. ho. 32. in Mat. and ho. 41. in cap. 15.
1. ad Cor. Paulinus ep. ad Delph. Epis. Aug. de verb. Apost. sermon. 32. and in
Ench. c. 110. Idem lib. 50. hom. hom. 16.
Theodosius the younger: Prostrated himself at the Relics of S. Chrysostom,
and made supplication for the souls of his Parents Arcadius and Eudoxia.
Without ground S. Hierom: Commended the piety of Pammachius, who not with
lillies or purple roses, but with the odours, ointments, and balm of
Almesdeeds refreshed the venerable bones and ashes of his deceased wise,
knowing that it is written: As water quenches sire, so almesdeedes
extinguisheth sin. But if the souls departed be thus aided and comforted by
our works of charity, they are in some state of need, to use S. Augustines
words, in someplace of distress or penal affliction for their former
defaults.

11. Therefore S. Dionyse teaches our prayers avail them to this end: That God
may remit the sins which hereby frailty they committed: That the dead may
obtain some ease or refreshment, says Tertullian, That they may purchase some
rest or repose, says S. Chrysostom, That their souls may be sprinkled with
some drop of refreshment, says Paulinus: That our Lord may deal more
mercifully with them. That they may have, says S. Augustine, more full
remission, or more tolerable damnation: to wit, more tolerable punishment in
the place of affliction, in which they are banished for a while the sight of
God, until (as the same Doctor discourses) The due correction of fire has
burned out what the guiltynes of the fault deserved.

12. Moreover the four sorts of commem orating the Dead, which M. Field
specifyeth, the Church equally made for all, who reposed in our Lord, for
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Martyrs. She assisted them in their passage; prayed
for their consumation; gave thanks for their victoryes; and for imitation
recounted their names and tryumphes. But besides these S. Augustine mentio^eth
another Aug. tract 84. in lo.
kind of Commemoration behoofull for them, for whom it was offered, saying:
Therefore at the table we do not so remember Martyrs, as others departed who
rest in peace, that we may also pray for them, but that they may pray for us.

13. S. Cyril Archbishop of Jerusalem records it Cyr. Ieros. in Catech.
Mislag. 5. his words in Latin are these. Maximum ^redentes esse animaru^
iuuamen pro quibus off^rtur obsecratio sancti illius and trem^ndi quod in
altari positu^ est Sacrificij. Epiphan. bar. 75. Extat in 5 ^^m. Chrysostom. Aug. in
^nchyr. c. ^^0.
more plainly saying: Over the Host it self of propitiation, we invoke God
for the common peace of the Churches etc. for Kings, for soldiers etc. for the
sick and for the afflicted, and in sum for all that need help etc. After we
make mention of them that are departed, first of Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, that God by their prayers and intercessions, would vouchsafe
to accept of ours. Then for the deceased Fathers and Bishops. In fine we pray
for all who have departed this life amongst us, thinking it a most great help
or ease of their souls, for whom the obsecration is offered, of that holy and
dreadful sacrifice, which is placed on the Altar. The same appears out of
Epiphanius, and out of the Greek Liturgy, extant amongst the works of S. John
Chrysostom, where there is an express distinction made betwixt the Sacrifice
of praise offered for the Patriarchs, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs: and the
supplications made for others, which S. Augustine also excellently describes:
When the Sacrifices (says he) of the Altar, or whatsoever other almesdeeds are
offered for all the baptized departed, for those that be perfectly good, they
be thanksgiuings; for such as be not very evil, they be propitiations: for
them that be passing naught, although they be not any helps or refreshments of
the dead, they be some comforts and consolations of the living.

14. Behold, M. Field, the Sacrifices and Prayers of the Church are not only
thanksgiuings, and grateful remembrances, but Propitiations also for dead, for
them that are not of the worser sort. Which you could not find in your heart to
gainesay in your answer to M. Higgons, who espying a triple difference
between the Comendation of the dead used by the Protestants, from that which
was practiced by the ancient Fathers; As 1. Higgons book 1. part. 1. c. 2.. 6.
p. 38.
That theirs was at the Altar, which Protestants have not. 2. Theirs in the
holy Sacrifice, which Protestants admit not. 3. Theirs with intention to
relieve the dead, whereas Protestants have no such intention: You, M. Field, to
this latter difference deceitfully reply: The Fathers did not intend to relieve
all them they remembered at the Altar, no more do we. And who auerreth that they
did? Field. in ap pen. x. part. fol. 20. Aug. l. 21. de Ciuit. Dei c. 24. and
27 item l. de cura pro mort. cap. 1. de verb. Apo. sermon. 32. Field lo. citato
fol. 20. and 21. Nyss. in orat. de Baptismo. Aug l. 22. de ciu. Dei c. 10.
Dionys. Areopa. de Eccles hier. cap. 4. Council Ag^^hens. can. 14. Aug. ser. 19.
de Sanctis. Optatus lib. cont. Parm. Peter Mart. in his com. places in English
page 227. Cartwrig. in his 2. reply p. 264. Centurist. Centur. 4. col. 409.
Centur. 3. cap. 4. colum. 83. Greg. Nazi. in ep. 8. ad Simplician. Fulke in his
reioynder to Bristowes reply p. 28. Calu. in Haeb. c. 7. v. 9. page 9. 4. and
in tract. theolog. page 389.
Neither M. Higgons, nor any Catholic writer ever maintained any such
intention of helping all. The Patriarchs, Prophets, and Martyrs are remembered,
and not desired to be helped; the damned, who dye in mortal sin, are neither
helped nor remembered, as you may often read in S. Augustine, and generally in
all the rest; howbeit you guilfully misconstrue some of their sayings to be
meant of the mitigation of their pains. But there are some of a middle sort,
who depart this life, neither deadlywounded, nor perfectly recovered of the
infirmityes of sin; these only they intended to relieve, as M. Higgons
proves, and you without iugling should have labored to disprove.

15. Your answers to his former two differences are as full fraught with
untruth, as this with fraudulency and deceit. For you reply to the first. We
have Altars in the same sort the Fathers had etc. To the second: We admit the
Eucharist to be rightly named a Sacrifice. Both cunning escheats. You have
spiritual Altars only; they had corporal and external: By nature common
stones, by blessing Holy and immaculate, S. Gregory Nissen. On which we
Sacrifice unto one God: which were consecrated with Chrisme, and the sign of
the Cross, S. Augustine, S. Dionyse, and the Council of Agatho: Which were
seats and receptacles of the body and blood of Christ, Optatus. Sayings
disliked by Peter Martyr, M. Cartwright and the Centurists, who also affirm:
That the Altars erected within the first 400. years after Christ, from Jewish
observation, crept into the Church.

16. Secondly, they had true and proper Sacrifices, unbloody victimes,
propitiatory Hosts, as I have largely demonstrated in the Controversy of the
Mass. They had, A Sacrifice offered to God the Father, wherein the Priest
supplyeth (as S. Cyprian, according to the Centurists, superstitiously writes)
the room of Christ. They had a Sacrifice: The name whereof (as M. Fulke
affirms) they took of Jews and Gentiles, and not from Scripture. They (as
Calvin says) forged a Sacrifice in the Lords supper without his Commandment;
and so adulterated the supper with adding of Sacrifice. And in another
treatise: The ancients (quoth he) are not to be excused, for it is apparent
they have herein swarued from the pure and proper institution of Christ.

17. Now, M. Field, have you (I pray) such Altars, such Sacrifices as these?
Such Altars as Crept into your Church from the Jewish custom? Such Sacrifices
as were forged without our Lords Commandment? Such as adulterated his supper?
Such as swarued from the pure and proper institution of Christ? If you have,
let your heart abhor these villainous inuectlues pronounced against them by the
principal Captains of your sect: If not, let your Pen retract your former
asseueratio^; Let it disclaim from the Altars and Sacrifices of the Fathers,
and be content to have no society with them in these (as your men account)
Superstitious abuses.

18. In fine, the chief Ringleaders of the Protestants Centu. loc. citat.
profession do not only reject the Altars, condemn the Sacrifices, but they
control also the very manner of prayer the Fathers used for the Dead.
Therefore they practiced some other kind then those four, which M. Calu. l. 3.
Inst. c. 5.. 10. Bulling. Decad. 4. sermon. 10.
Field and his consortes allow. Calvin says: About one thousand and three
hundred years ago it was received as a common custom to use Prayers for the
dead etc. But they were all (I confess) beguiled with error. Bullinger
writes: I know ^he Ancients prayed for the dead. I know the excellent Doctor
S. Augustine, the eloquent S. Chrysostom, and many other old and renowned men,
what they have left written of this matter. I know the Fathers affirm prayer
for the dead to be a Tradition of the Apostls. And S. Augustine Aug. ser. 32.
de verb. Aposto. Centu. 3. c. 5. col. 138. Osiand. Cent. 3. l. 1. c. 5. p. 10
Hosp. in hist. Sacr. page 167. Spark. p. 371. 372. Fulke in c. 10. 1. ep. ad
Cor. sect. 8. prope finem. Fulke in his Confutation of Purgatory page 262.
writes: It is observed in the universal Church, that Sacrifice be offered for
the dead. I know Aerius was condemned, because he disauowed these Prayers. But
I ask, whether the Fathers did well heerin or no? The Centurists and Osiander
blame Tertullian, because he approved Oblations for the Dead, and
Anniuersary-prayers in their Obite-dayes. Hospinian affirms of S. Cyril: He
said indeed, according to the prevailing custom of his time, that the
Sacrifice of the Altar is a great help to souls. Of S. Augustine, D. Sparks:
He was both greatly carried by the sway, and opinions of the multitude, in
determining the auaylablenes of prayers for the dead. Whereupon in the very
next page he says: I may lawfully descent from him in that case. M. Fulke
auerreth: Prayer for the dead was the dross of Augustine and Chrysostom.
Tertullian (says he) S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and a great many
more do witness: That Sacrifice for the dead is the Tradition of the Apostles.

19. Another where he says: But of memories of the Dead, and prayers for the
dead also, we will not strive, but that they were used before the time of Bid,
Ephrem, and Ambrose, but without warrant of Gods word or authorityes of
Scripture. Indeed? Is this the cause you reprove a custom so general,
supported by the greatest Pillars both of the Greek and Latin Church because
they want the testimonies of holy Writ? for such is your common excuse repeated
in another place: We must not believe Chrysostom without Scripture, affirming
that mention of the dead in the celebration of the Lords supper, was ordained
by the Apostles. Would not a man think this Ghospeller meant to embrace S.
Chrysostom, and admit those ancient Writers, if they countenanced their
assertions with the authority of the Gospel? Would not a man think he would
then submit his judgment unto theirs? No other sense I wis can be picked from
his words, notwithstanding far other is his meaning: this is a veil to
cover his shame, a disguised gloss of speech, to pretend the awe and reverence
of Gods word, when as neither God, nor man, neither humane writing, nor
heavenly Oracles does he regard, unless they sound very tuneable to his strain.
Which that you may not condemn as a forgery devised by me, read the sayings of
these Fathers, and confront with them his answers.

20. S. Augustine first proves that prayer for the dead disagreeth not from
Scripture. Not from that of S. Paul: We ought all to be summoned before the
tribunal of Christ, that every Ibid. page 304. 2. ad Cor. cap. 5. Fulke in c.
5. 2. ad Cor sect. 1. Matthew. 12. S. Chrysostom. in c. 15. 1. ad Cor. ho. 14. Fulke
^-Purg. page 251. Job. cap. 1. 4. Reg. 19. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Philip. hom. 3.
Fulke ibid. p. 236. 237.
one may receive the proper things of his body etc. M. Fulke answers:
Augustine holding that error without authority of Scripture that prayers were
profitable to the dead, is driven to invent a distinction, how they may seem
to stand with this text, and not be contrary to the Scriptures. S. Gregory, and
Venerable Bede conuinceth prayers for the Dead out of the place of S. Matthew
cited above. M. Fulke: Gregory and Bid sought not the true meaning of Christ
in this Scripture, but the confirmation of their plausible errors. S.
Chrysostom produces two several places in confirmation thereof, one out of
Job, the other out of the book of Kings. M. Fulke to the former replyeth. I
deny not, but that Chrysostom does allege this example (of Job sacrificing
for his children) for prayers to profit the dead etc. Those good men in that
declyning state of the Church to superstition etc. are driven to such simple
shifts, to vphould their plausible errors, as it is great pity to see. To the
later: Chrysostom alleges Scripture, but he applies it madly, and yet he
often applies it to the same purpose. Then cyting the text out of the book of
Kings which S. Chrysostom brings, he bemoaneth him in this sort: Alas good
man, what manner of reason is this? So he. O Chrysostom! o Augustine! o
Gregory! have your prayers, watchings, travels, industry, al your natural
tallents, and supernatural gifts, in searching the true sense of Scripture
been so meanly employed, as they deserve to be controlled, pittyed and
bemoaned now by the new Ghospellers, new Apostles, new Peter's, new Paul's of
this our unhappy age!

21. But to pursue this matter against my Adversaries, could a more shrewd
Indictment be drawn to convict M. Fulke of desperate audacity then this, which
is Idem in his confut. of Purg. page 362. etc. 303. 393.
taken out of his own words? In challenging to himself the supreme
Censour-ship of judging, rejecting and condemning Fathers, Scriptures,
Traditions, or whatsoever else does distaste his humor? Or could a more
indifferent Jury be impanelled to give verdict of M. Fields hypocrisy, then
these his own fellow-sectaryes, who would never have darkened the foresaid
lights of the Church, had they taught the same kind of Commemorating the dead,
which M. Field mentions, and all Protestants defend? For that would Sparks
have renounced S. Augustine, Spark. p. 371. 372. Fulke in his confut. of Purg.
p. 349. and in cap. 5. 1. ad Cor. sect. 1. Calu. l. 3. Inst. cap. 5.. 10.
Zuing. tom. 1. Epicheresis de Can. Missae fol. 185. Field in oppend. 1. par.
page 13.
and deliver of him: He was greatly carried by the sway and opinions of the
multitude. He went further then either he had warrant for, out of the
Canonical Scriptures, or out of any vnforged and vncounterfeited president. Of
that would M. Fulke have said: Augustine blindly defended it; Augustine held it
without authority of Scripture? Of that would M. Calvin write: The old Fathers
wanted both commandment of God, and authentical example: They were carried
away into error, even as unadvised lightness of belief, is wont to rob men's
wits of Judgment. Of that would Zuinglius affirm: If it be so as Augustine
and Chrysostom say, I do not think the Apostles for any other cause then to
yield to their infirmity, permitted some to pray for the Dead. Would the
fornamed, and many other Protestants reprehend the Fathers, disgrace the
Apostles, resist the current of all Antiquity, for countenancing a point of
Protestants profession? No M. Field, no man of sense can think your men so
senseless, as to condemn in their Predecessors, which themselves uphold.

22. Neither can it be defended that this Prayer for the Dead reproved by your
Ghospellers in the ancient Fathers, was made by them (as you seek another way
to escape:) Either for the mititagion of the pains of men in hell, or for the
admittance of the Just into the Heavenly Palace and presence of God, out of
some wrong conceit that no judgment passed on them, until the general day of
Resurrection. For both these were particular fancies of private men, as you, M.
Field, your self seem to auoch; and it is evident to all that are Field in
appen. 1. part. fol. 4. 12. 13. 16. Bulling. Decad. 4. sermon. ^0. Fulke in his
confut. of Purg. p. 78. and 310.
acquainted with antiquity. But the ancient Commemoration of the Dead,
reprehended by our new Reformers, was generally received by all the Fathers: It
was (as Bullinger writes) observed in the universal Church. It was (as M.
Fulke says) the common error in S. Augustines, and S. Ambroses days. The
prevailing custom (as Hospin. in hist. Sacra p. 167. Vrbanus Regius in 1. par.
operum in loc. Commun. c. 18. and de Missae negotio f. 7^. Fulke in his answer
to a counterfeit Cathol. p. 44 Aug. l. 21. de ciu. Dei c. 23. 24. and de cura
pro mort. c. 1.
another testifyeth) in the time of S. Cyril. The universal observation (as
Vrbanus Rhegius reports) and ancient custom of the whole Catholic Church.
Again, this is affirmed by the Fathers to be a Tradition of the Apostles,
which those errors never were.

23. For gainesaying this, as unprofitable for the Dead, Aerius was condemned,
as M. Fulke witnesses; yet never any was censured by the Church for denial of
those. To mantaine this, S. Augustine and others distinguish three sorts of men
departed, and make the middle only (as I specifyed above) partakers of benefit;
To allow those no such distinction is necessary; for none are so evil, whose
pains may not be mitigated; none so good, whose joys may not be increased, or
felicity hastened. Lastly this is confessed by our Fulke in his confut. of
Purgat. in the places before cited. Kemnitius 3. p. exam. page 93. and 107.
Vrbanus Regius part. 1. operum in loc. Commun. cap. Casaubon in the answer to
the epist. of Card. Peron to the 3. instance fol. 33. in English.
Adversaries to have been defended by S. Dionyse, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Basil, S. Athanasius, S. Cyril, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Epiphanius, S.
Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and many more, who never
dreamed, but some of them stoutly impugned the former errors, of which M.
Field could not be ignorant.

24. Therefore as I cannot but judge him both a deep dissembler, and deceitful
iugler in seeking these gross and palpable euasions: so I truly honor his
Maiestyes plain and sincere dealing, who freely protests, That it was a very
ancient custom in the public prayers of the Church, to make commemoration of
the deceased, and to desire of God rest for their souls, who dyed in the peace
of the Church, few Field in the places cited above. Casaubon in the page
fornamed.
are ignorant etc. This custom although the Church of England condemns not
in the first ages, yet she thinks not good to retain it now etc. Mark this
opposition betwixt the Prince, and his subjects writing. M. Field denies, that
The Church generally intended to relieve souls etc. King James avouches, The
Church did desire of God rest for the departed. M. Field with his Sinagogue
imbraceth all the common and lawful kinds of commemorating the dead the
Ancients observed, excepting only two private and particular errors. K. James
with his English Congregation: Retains not an ancient custom the Church used
in her public prayers: a custom which spronge from a vehement affect of
Charity etc. whereby she gave testimony of the Resurrection to come: a custom
which he reserreth to the head of things profitable or lawful etc. So
clearly is M. Field condemned by the sentence of his Sovereign, who Bucer. in
his Script a Auglican. page 450. Vrba. Regius in par. 1. operum in formula
cau^^ loquendi. f. 8. Ibidem in loc. commu. c. 8. de Purgat. Idem part. 1. de
missae negotio. f. 71. Idem in 1. par. oper. and in loc. commun. c. 19. vbi
supra. Aug. ep. 1^ Field in ap. pend. 1. p. page 2.
was cast before by the judgment of his Peers.

25. Next after K. James, I must needs give praise to some other of his sect,
who flatly confess with us the same manner of Prayer for the dead, which we
require. As Bucer once a Cambrigian Professor, and Vrbanus Regius Luthers
scholar, who affirms the like of his Master, and proves it by the
testimony of all the most learned Fathers of credit and authority in the Church
of God, whose names I rehearsed above. Who appointed also in his reformed
Churches of Sueuia a prescript Prayer for the departed brother: To the end that
God of his mercy would pardon the faults and infirmity of his flesh. Who
concludes at length: To be sollicitous and careful for the dead is both a
work of Charity and fruit of faith, testifying our belief of the glorious
Resurrection, which no man contemns but Epicureans and Sadduceans. They
because they deny the immortality of the soul; these, because they believe not
the resurrection of the flesh. Wherefore if our English Protestants had any
regard, I will not say to the plain texts of Scripture, whose squire they
pretend in all things to follow, nor to the prescription of the Church, whose
universal practice S. Augustine counts, Most insolent madness to call in
question, nor to the ancient Fathers, whose general doctrine M. Field judges
no less the^ Barbarism to attach of error: but if they had respect to their
own illuminated Ghospellers, to the Scriptures they interpret, to the reasons
they allege, they would never reject, as superstitious trumpery, that which
Bucer, A man (by the censure of the Sea this in the letter of the University
extant in Bucers scipt. Ang. p. 944. Fox in his Act. etc. page 416. English
Apolog. par. 4. c. 4. 2. Cor. 2. Fulke upon that chap. sect. 1. 1. Cor. 3. Gal.
6. Romans ^. Apoc. 14. Fulke in en^ loc. ser. 5 Eccl. 9. 5. 6 Eccl. c. 9. 10
Hier. in c. 6 ad Galat. Fulke obiecteth this place against prayer for the Dead
in his confut. of Parg. and prayer for souls departed page 44^.
University of Cambridge) most holy, and plainly divine; which Luther, Their
Elias sent from God to lighten the world; which Vrbanus Regius, his faithful
and royal scholar constantly maintain for Euangelical doctrine. Nay which
King James their supreme head, and chiefest governor in causes
Ecclesiastical, places in the rank of things lawful and profitable.

26. Now let us see what color they have to contradict so clear and manifest
a truth? M. Fulke and his confederates assemble many sentences out of
Scripture, which seem to carry against it some show of repugnance. Out of S.
Paul: We must all be conuented before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the proper things of his body, according as he has done good
or evil. Then: Every one of us shall give an account for himself to God. The
things which every one has sowed, those shall he reap. Thou restorest to
every one according to his works: And not according to the works of others.
Again: Their works follow them: And not the works of their friends who
remain behind. Therefore they cannot be relieved by them. Which is confirmed
by King Solomon: The dead know no more, nor have any further reward: they have
no part in this world, nor in the work that is achieued under the heavens. For
which cause he counsels us here, Diligently to perform whatsoever our hand
can work. Likewise by the authority of S. Hierome, saying: In this present
world we know we may help one another, either by our prayers or counsels: but
when we shall come before the tribunal of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor
Noe can make suite for any; but every one must bear his own burden. These be
the skarcrowes, which terrify our Reformers from exercising their charity
toward the dead: which notwithstanding we easily avoid three several ways.

27. First I say, most of the former places may be expounded of the Judgment in
which no help can be expected either from the works or suffrages of others;
and of this S. Hierome expressly means. But King Solomon in the first place
seems to speak only of the temporal goods left behind them in this world,
of the benefits of this life, in which the Dead have no society with us; and
not of the spiritual works of Charity, of Prayer, Almesdeeds etc. whereby
their souls are benefitted. Secondly they may be all interpreted, as S.
Augustine does the first testimony cited out of the Apostle, which he obiecteth
2. Cor. 5. verse. 10.
to himself: That every one may receive according to his deserts in the body
etc. that is, according as he merited here, he shall truly enjoy in the next
life both comfort to himself and profit by the charity of others. For as S.
Augustine profou^dly Aug. in Enchir. c. 110.
answers heerunto: In this life, and before death he deserved this, that
these works after his death might be profitable unto him. Thus his works are
said to follow him; Or the works of the living may be termed his that is
dead, because he deserved in this life the benefit of them, and because they
are applied unto him either by the intention of the worker, or by the merciful
dispensation of the Treasurer of Gods Church. Thirdly, all these places may be
understood of the works of merit, not of satisfaction, that is, every one
shall give an account for himself in the way of merit, not in the way of
satisfaction. The works of one cannot avail another in the way of merit, in
the way of satisfaction they may.

28. And what barbarous cruelty is this in men of your sect, who grant that
the works of the living may profit the living, and not avail the Dead? For
what have the faithful departed heerin committed they should be less capable
of benefit from you, then the rest of the faithful who live amongst you?
Because you inherit their patrimonyes, enjoy their riches, because they
builded your Colleges, founded Monasteryes, e^dowed your houses with ample
revenues, will you dispossess them of all Christian relief? Imagine their
poor deceased souls, who lie tormented in the pains of Purgatory, should cry
for mercy at your hands, and say with holy Job: Have pity on us, have pity on
us, at least you our friends etc. you to Job. 19. v. 21.
whom we have bequeathed our whole inheritance, you who reap the fruits of our
last Will and Testament, derive some drop of comfort to our distressed
ghostes. Imagine they should make this lamentable suite, what excuse of
ingratitude, what defense of this horrible cruelty could be alleged?

29. In a Country where so many monuments of Upon the ancient plate of the
colleges both in Oxford, and Cambridge it is left engraven: Pray for the soul
of such, or such. Vvestmo^. anno to 67. Math. Pa ris. 1066. Camden in Chorogra.
descript. page 287. Vt virgiues illae sacris suis suffragijs Henrici 2. and
Rosamu^dae animabus subuenis ^nt.
their piety left behind them bear witness against you, where the very
Statutes of your houses, the names of your Colleges, the words engraven on
your plate, the immunityes, charters, and decrees of your founders: where such a
multitude of Deaneryes, Canonryes, Monasteryes, Nunneryes, Churches, Chapells,
and other Oratoryes, have been erected by your forefathers to no other end,
then to have Prayers and Sacrifices offered for their souls. To this end,
All-soules College in Oxford bears that name, and enjoys all the lands and
livings belonging thereunto. To this end the Monastery of Battle in Sussex was
builded by William the Conqueror, to pray, pro ib^ mortuis, for such as were
there deceased. To this end, K. William Rufus his Son in his charter there
extant, ratifyeth and confirms his Fathers grant, to benefit (as he
specifyeth, his said Father, and Mother Matildes souls. To this end, the Nunry
of Godstow, not far from Oxford, builded by the rich widow Ida, was repaired
and endowed with a yearly reuenew by King John; that those holy Virgins
(according to M. Camdens report) might relieve with their suffrages, the souls
of Rosamond, and Henry the 2. To this end, infinite others have been raised
throughout the realm, whose sumptuous buildings or decayed ruins, yet
remaining, lie prostrate at your feet, stretch forth their arms, and call
upon you in behalf of their founders, not to be so careless and unmindful of
them, not to forget with the Egyptian Cup Bearer, the great favors Genesis 40.
23. Amos 6. v. 1, 4. 6.
they have done you, Not to be rich in Sion etc. and neglect the spiritual
wants of your chief benefactours, Not to sleep in beds of Iuory, and play the
wantons in your couches etc. not to drink wine in phials, and suffer nothing
upon the contrition of Joseph; or to speak to my purpose have no feeling at
all of the affliction of your Patrons souls; nay be in worse terms toward
them, then to the poorest friend you have alive, whom you permit to partake of
the common suffrages, of which you debar the Dead in their greatest need; I
know not with what uncharitable and savage hearts.

30. For the reason why the faithful upon earth may by their prayers one
succor another, is twofold. It partly depends of them who receive relief,
because they are in the favor and grace of God, are united together in the
band of charity, by which one member communicates of the benefits and labors
of the other. It partly also proceeds from them who do relieve, that they by
virtue of their intention apply the fruit of their satisfactory works to the
profit of such as they desire. Now which of these conditions is wanting to the
dead, who depart in our Lord? They are endued with Gods grace; they are
combined with us in perfect charity, which can never decay. And that we may
direct our pryers to their behoof, and apply our charitable works by
intention unto them is as clear as that we can intend them unto the living.
Therefore to allow the benefit of our suffrages unto these, and deny it unto
them, is (in the judgment of Regius the Protestant) no less then Epicurean, no
less then Sadducean impiety; it is such perverse partiality, such partial
peruersity, I had almost said brutish iniquity, as the like among Barbaria^s
has seldom been heard.

31. The other objections, which I have reserved for this place, are chiefly
against Purgatory, and consequently against Prayer for the dead. As, If the
tree falls at the North or South, there it shall lie. The Scripture only
mentions two ways after death, the one to salvation, the other to damnation:
the right band and the left. It parts all mankind into sheep and goats. Ecc.
11. v. 3. See these objections made by Lossi' apud Lensae um. l. 2. de Purg. c.
4. Matt. 7. v. 13. and 14. Math. 25. v. 33. ibid. v. 2. Math. 13. v. 24. 25.
and 30. ibid. v. 47. and 48. Apoc. 14.
It compares them to wise or foolish Virgins. The field of our Lord contains
only wheat and cockle. The Evangelical net comprehends good and evil
fishes; none of a middle sort; none of a third sort, after death for whom we
may pray. I answer: There are only two final places, Heaven and Hell, the
North and the South: or there are two estates of men, the estate of salvation,
and estate of damnation, and whosoever dies, finally arriueth, and even then
appertains to one of them. As all that go to Purgatory, belong to heaven,
pertain to the South, are in the number of the sheep of Christ, of the wise
Virgins, of the good fishes, of the winnowed Wheat, which is sure to be
gathered, and laid up for ever in the Garner of our Lord.

32. The place which is objected out of the Apocalips, Blessed are the dead who
die in our Lord, from henceforth now says the Spirit, they rest from their
labors, is expounded of the Martyrs, not only in S. Ambrose, Ansbertus, and
Haymo his Ambros. Ansber. Haymo in hunc locu^. Fulke in c. 14. Apoc. in
Haebaeo. Genesis 18. and 29. in Latino. Hos. 12. Miche. 3. Anselm. in commen. in
hunc locu^. Ribera upon this place.
judgment: but according to the translation of Beza also, as M. Fulke his
pew-fellow grants, after which manner in, is taken instead of for; in
Domino, for our Lords sake, as sometime in the Hebrew, sometime also in the
Latin text it is used. Secondly, from hence forth, is meant as S. Anselme
interprets it, after the day of general resurrection, after which time no
Purgatory remains, but all the elect shall presently reign in peace. Thirdly
that saying is specially directed to those rare and constant persons, that
shall endure the brunt, and withstand the fury of Antichrists persecutions, who
though they be not all crowned with Martyrdom, yet they depart this life, as
Ribera like himself iudiciously notes, with most singular and eminent
sanctity: and consequently with freedom and immunity from all the mulcts and
penaltyes of sin. Or if any sinful dross remain, from which they must be
purged after death, they are said notwithstanding to cease from their labors,
and rest in peace, because they are discharged from the troubles, calamityes
and persecutions of this life, are ranged amongst the number of them who shall
partake of eternal rest; are secure from the danger of sin, and fear of
damnation; and are infallibly certain of the favor of God, and their future
felicity: which affoardeth unspeakable joy, peace, and comfort to their minds.
The words of S. Cyprian objected by M. Fulke, Fulke against Purgat. page 140.
Cyp. trct. 1. cont a Demetr. ianum. Ambros. l. debono mortis. e. 2 Chrysostom. bo.
2. de Lazaro. Fulke in his confut. of Purg. and in c. 2. 2. ad Cor. sect. 1.
After our departure hence, there is no place of Penance, no effect of
Satisfaction: The words of S. Ambrose, No remission of sins can there be
made, which has not been here procured: The like of S. Chrysostom, are all
understood of no remission or satisfaction to be made in the next life of
mortal and deadly sins, of which we have not had in this, detestation and
sorrow.

33. The injury to Christ, the euacuation of his Passion, which M. Fulke often
inculcateth to ensue of Purgatory, is largely refuted in the Treatise of
Satisfaction, to which I refer the Reader for his full satisfaction, and here
conclude in a word; That as the prayers we make unto God do not lessen or
extenuate the fervent prayers of Christ once offered, and earnest intercession
he now makes in our behalf: so neither the dolorous griefs which in this
life we suffer, or Purgatory-paines we endure in the next, do anyway euacuate,
but rather enrich the treasure of his manifold sufferings, since they depend and
borrow their whole fruit, virtue, and efficacy from the inexhausted Mine of his
incomparable merits. Since they are enhaunced by his Passion, and dipped in the
liquour of his precious blood: in which I humbly beseech the divine piety to
soake these my labors, and steep the pains of all such as peruse them; that
it may so fully avail to wash away the lees, and cleanse forth the stains of
our souls, as we may never need hereafter, either the scouring soape, or
raging fire of Purgatory flames.

The end of the third Book.
An advertisement.
GENTIL Reader, whereas M. D. Bilson has printed his book Of Christian
Subjection, both in quarto, and in octauo; these are to advertise thee, that
most commonly I do cite that in quarto: as also the other of M. Whitaker de
Scriptura, and Ecclesia, as they were printed, before they were last compiled
together in one volume; for that the quotations of page and leaf do otherwise
disagree.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing, to be corrected. In the first Part.
IN the Epist. to the Reader. page 3. line 3. ferrret every one out. read
ferret them out of every etc. Ibid. Epist. page 4. l. 14. occosion. read
occasion. Page 7. l. 24. on. read of. page 34. l. 5. Canon. the Canon. page 40
l. 29. one another. to one another. page 49. l. 25. which. with. page 50 l. 17.
out the. read out of the. page 51. l. 13. their. other. Ibid. l. 28. is. it
page 74. l 6. depth. the depth. page 80. l. 1. waits writes, page 82. l. 30.
in. the. page 84. l. 6. same substance. same in substance. page 91. l. 9.
corruption. incorruption. page 95 l. 11. even. ever. page 104. l. penult.
glorifieth. glories. page 110. l. 18 purchased. purchase. page 11o. l. 18.
cruel a ^^^ell. page 15. l. 15. of. to. Ibid. line. 28 clamous. clamorous. page
136. l. 1. refragable. irrefragable. page 115. 11. glorifieth. glorify, page
188. l. 5. Not. Nor. page 190. l. 1. out these. out of these. page 201. l. 25.
others. other. page 207. l. 19. Carninall. Cardinal. page 221. l. 14. But. By.
page 227. 9. Leo. of Leo. page 229. l. 5. makes. marks. Ibid. l. 29. Paul not
bad. Paul had not had. page 233. l. 9. stying. styrring. Ibid. l. vlt.
Crinthus. Cerinthus. page 237. l. 29. sin. sign. page 238. l. 1. parts. are
parts. page 239. l. 3. far. and far. page 240 l. 15. worships. worship. Ibid.
l. 24. Abias. Abdias. page 241. l 15. lawful awful. page 242. l. 4. as
courteous. as a courteous. Ibid. l. 20. nuture. nurture. page 245. l. 16. son.
sons Ibid. l 29. no. not. page 246. l. 27 honor. I honor. page 252. Image
Christ. Image of Christ. page 263. l. 20. expect from. expect it from page 277.
l. 3. and. of page 278. l. 19. a as. as a. page 275. l. 15. deleatur the. page
285. l. 8. some. solemn. page 331 l. 3. of the Judgment. of the day of
Judgment. page 333. l. 26. prayers. prayers. page 335. l. 21. deleatur of.

Other less faults, by reason of the obsoure Copy in many places, and absence
of the Author, the Reader himself will easily observe, and courleously
correct as he reads.

AN ANTIDOTE OR TREATISE OF THIRTY CONTROVERSIES: With a large Discourse of
the Church.

IN WHICH The sovereign truth of Catholic doctrine, is faithfully delivered:
against the pestiferous writings of all English Sectaryes.

AND In particular, against D. WHITAKER, D. FVLKE, D. REYNOLDS, D. BILSON, D.
ROBERT ABBOT, D. SPARKS, and D. FIELD, the chief vpholders, some of
Protestancy, some of Puritanisme, some of both.

Divided into three Parts.

By S. N. Doctor of Divinity.

THE SECOND PART.

Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 30. How should one be able to pursue a thousand, and two put
ten thousand to flight? Is it not therefore, because their God has sold them,
and our Lord has enclosed, and made them thrall? Permissu Superiorum, M. DC.
XXII.

THE principal maintainers of Protestancy, of whom I spoke in the former
page, are D. BILSON, and D. FIELD. THE pillars of Puritanisme, are D. REYNOLDS,
and D. SPARK, who where chosen Proctours, for the Precisian Faction, in the
Conference before his Majesty, at Hampton Court. THE Abbettours of both, are D.
WHITAKER, D. FVLKE, and D. ROBERT ABBOT, who sometimes defend the articles of
the one, sometimes of the other.
THE TABLE Shevving all the Controversies discussed and maintained in this
Second Part.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
The Sixteenth Controversy.
MAintayneth Original sin to be abolished by Baptism, and Concupiscence
remaining to be no ^nne: against D. Whitaker, D. Field, and D. Abbot. page 1.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
IN which Concupiscence is more particularly proved to be no sin: Other
objections to the contrary answered against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Field,
and Master Abbot. page 20.
The Seventeenth Controversy.
DEmonstrateth that our Justice is inherent in us, and not imputed only:
against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot, page 38.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
IN which the former doctrine is confirmed by more reasons, authorities: and
other objections of our adversaries refuted. page 54.
The Eighteenth Controversy.
IN which it is proved, that Faith, Hope, Fear, Love, Sorrow etc. precede as
dispositions to Justification, in such as are arrived to the use of Reason;
against D. Fulke, and Master Abbot. page 69.
The Nineteenth Controversy.
Declares, how faith alone does not justify: against D. Whitaker, D. Field, D.
Abbot, and all Sectaries. page 83.
The Twentieth Controversy.
IN which it is concluded, that our Justification consists in the habit of
Charity: against D. Abbot, D. Whitaker, and D. Fulke. page 10^.
The one and Twentieth Controversy.
IN which it is discussed, how good Works do justify* against Doctor Abbot,
Doctor Whitaker, and D. Fulke. page 116.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
The two and Twentieth Controversy.
DIsproueth the Protestants Certainty of Salvation: against D. Whitaker, and D.
Abbot. page 140.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
Wherein the former Presumption is refuted by Reason, and whatsoever the
Adversary obiecteth against us, is removed. page 151.
The three and Twentieth Controversy.
Declares that true Faith, or Justice once had, may be lost: against D.
Whitaker, D. Fulke, and D. Abbot. page 165.
The four and Twentieth Controversy.
A Voweth Freewill; against D. Fulke, and D. Whitaker. page 177.
The five and Twentieth Controversy.
Shows the cooperation of Free Will to our conversion, and to works of Piety;
against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and M. White. page 191.
The six and Twentieth Controversy.
Wherein is taught, that the Faith u^l by the help of Gods grace do some
works so perfect and entterly god, as they truly please the divine Majesty:
against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot. page 206.
The seven and Twentieth Controversy.
Wherein our good works, are acquitted from the spots of sin: against
Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot. page 216.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
IN which the same is warr^nt^d by the Father^: the objections answered; and
the vn^oluntary motions of Concupiscence discharged of sin. page 227.
The eight and Twentieth Controversy*
Establishes the possibility of keeping Gods Law: against Doctor Whitaker,
Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot. page 336.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
IN which the possibility of keeping the Law, is maintained by other reasons:
and objections answered. p. 243.
The nine and Twentieth Controversy.
Defends God, from being Author of siane: against Doctor Fulke, and his
Companions page 355.
The second Chapter of this Controversy*
IN which some other Heresies are comprehended, and our Sectaries cheif^
objections fully answered. page 372.
The Thirtith Controversy.
IN which the merit of Good works is supported: against Doctor Abbot, and
Doctor Fulke. page 386.
The second Chapter of this Controversy.
IN which the same is strenghned by other reasons and authorities: and the
Objections satisfied. page 296.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
THE SIXTEENTH CONTROVERSY MAINTAINS Original sin to be abolished by
Baptism, and Concupiscence remaining to be no sin: against D. Whitaker, D.
Field, and D. Abbot.
CHAP. I.
IT is the proper badge, and common custom of such as wander from the truth,
sometimes to stray in the extremity of one error, sometime of another; one
while by excess to ouerflow the banks of truth, other while to stick in the
sands by want or defect. Thus Ambr* l. 1. de fide cap. 1. 2^.
Sabellius erring by defect, gaine-sayd the distinction of Persons in the
mystery of the holy Trinity: and Nazi. orat* 5. de Theolog.
Arius by excess multiplied, or rather divided the unity of their Essence.
Eu^gr. l. 2. cap. 2.
Nest^rius would have no Hypostaticall, or Substantial vn^^^ betwixt the
divine and humane nature of Christ: and Theod. l 4. h^ret. fab. c. vl^.
Eutiches would admit no division between them. Aug. l. de haeres. haer. 81.
82.
Iouinian so highly commended Matrimony, as he equaled it with virginity: Iren.
l. 1. c. 22 30.
Saturninus, Tatian, and others misprized it so much, as they wholly condemned
it as an execrable and unlawful thing. The Alfon. de Cast. v. Imago.
Carpocratians, Gnostickes, and Collyridians, honored Images with sacrifices
and divine worship: The in Alcoran. c. 15. and 17. Bilson. 4. par. p 545. and
sequent.
Turks, Image-breakers, and our Protestants deprive them of all religious
worship. Aug. ep. 109. and 107.
Pelagius the enemy of Gods grace, attributed too much; Hier. in praef. dial.
aduer. Pelag.
Manichaus with our late Ghospellers too little to the liberty of Free Will.
And to come to my purpose, the same Aug. l. 4. cont. 2. ep. Felag. c. 2. and 4.
libris cont. Iul. Castro l. 12. her. verbo Peccat. Melanth. in loc. com. de
baptis. infant.
Pelagius, Julian, the Armentians, and Anabaptists of our days extenuate the
fault of Original sin, deny it to be infectious to the souls of Infants, or
any thing necessary for the cleansing of it: M. Luther, Calvin, Field, Abbot,
Whitaker, and all other Protestants exaggerate it so far, and make it so
contagious to the whole of spring of Adam, as it can never be purged or washed
from them.

2. But the Church of God and spouse of Christ by the guide of his holy spirit
shunning the gulf of both extremes, and still sailing in the middst or mean
of truth, neither confounds the Persons of the Blessed Trinity with
Sabellius, nor deuideth their essence with A^ius. She defends the
Hypostaticall union of God and Man in the persons of Christ against Nestorius,
and allows not the mixture of natures with Eutiches. She honors Marriage
as an holy Sacrament against Tattan, yet does notequall it to virginity with
Iouinian, with Whitaker, and the rest of his crew. She condemns the
sacrilegious honor which the Carpocratians allow to Images, and yet bereaueth
them not of all external worship with Turks, (m) Luth. in assert. art 2.
Calvin. l. 2. inst. c. 10. parag. 8. 9. Field in his. book of the Church c.
^6. Abbot in his defense cap. 2. Whitaker in his answer to the 8. reason of
M. Campian, and in his 8. book aduers. Duraum, Whitaker Contro. 2. q. 5, cap.
7. fol. 384.
Images-breakers, and Protestants. She requires the supply and assistance of
grace to fly all sin, and to do good, pleasing to God, against Pelagius, and
excludes not the cooperation of Free Will with Manichaeus. She avouches that
all mankind contracted the spot of Original infectio^ Calu. l. 2. instit. c.
1.. 8. and 9. Abbot in. his defense of the reformed. Cathol. c. 2. sol. 198.
Calu. ibi.. 9. Calu. ibid,
against the Anabaptists, and houldeth also that by faith, and in Christ, by
water and the holy Ghost in the regenerate it is wholly cleansed and washed away
against our Protestants, who stiffly contend, Original sin to be an
inheritable perverseness, an universal corruption spread over the whole man, and
defiling him in all parts and powers both of body and soul. Whereby from the
head to the foot he is so overwhelmed, as with an ouerflowing of water, that
no part of him is free from sin. Neither does this prauity, in their opinion,
ever cease, but like as a burning furnace blows out flame and sparkles, or as
a spring does without ceasing cast out water. So that perverseness never cease
in us, but continually brings forth the works of the flesh: In so much as
whatsoever we think, speak or labor to effect is stained with the flood of
this infectious stream: and which is worst of al, they affirm this cankred
corruption to cleave so fast unto us, as it can never be scoured forth, not by
the oil of grace, not by the strength of faith, not by the precious bath of
Christ's sacred blood, not by any help of virtue, or favor from above, as long
as concupiscence, the law of the flesh (which perseuereth until death, and
according to them is formally sin) inordinatly resists, or stubbornely
rebelleth against Greg. de valent. 12. disp. 6. q. 12. tom 1. Field in his 3.
book of the Church c. 26. f. 131. Field ibid. Abbot in* his defense cap. 2.
Whitaker. l. de pecca. origin.
the law of the mind.

3. Whose gross absurdityes concerning this point, chiefly spring from these
three heads of falsehood: first that Original sin does nor formally consist
in the loss or deprivation of any justice, grace, or perfection ever restored
by the merits of Christ in this earthly warfare as we maintain, but in the
defect and want of the whole righteousness which Adam enjoyed before his fall.
The property whereof (according to M. Field) is to subject all unto God, and
leave nothing void of him. Not any inordinate appetite, not any contrariety
between the flesh and the spirit, which still abiding, Original sin also
remains. Secondly, that this Original righteousness was essentially required
to the integrity of Nature. Thirdly, that all declinings and swaruings from
that perfect subjection unto God, and entyre coniunctio^ with him (which grace
works) are sins, and decays of natures integrity, and consequently that
concupiscence being a declyning from that entier subjection etc. is truly and
properly sin. Thus they. We again otherwise teach, that the former disorders
be defects, wounds, and decays of Nature, but not properly sins: which that
I may more clearly demonstrate, I will briefly declare from whence our
concupiscence, or rebellion naturally arises, what Original sin is, and what
was the original Justice of our first Parents before they fell, or felt in
themselves those dangerous co^flicts.

4. Great was the felicity, and thrice happy was See S. John Damas. l. 2. de
fide ortho cap. 11. S. Greg. in prol 3 psalm. Poenit. Pererius l. 5. in Genes.
the state and condition of Adam at his first creation, when being framed in
the terrestrial Paradise, by the immediate hand of God, he had his soul
beautifyed with grace, or inherent justice, his understanding endued with the
perfect knowledge of all natural, and supernatural misteryes, his will
rectifyed by the love of God, and strong bias of his own inclination directly
carried to the mark of virtue; he had the inferior powers of his soul, the
motions of his flesh subject unto reason, the stern of reason pliable to the
spirit, the spirit always obedient unto God; he had no ignorance, no error,
no perturbation of passions in his mind, no inordinate concupiscence, no Aug.
l. 14. de ciuit. Dei c. 26.
rebellion in his flesh, no propension to evil, no difficulty to good: No
corruption, says S. Augustine, in his body, no trouble or distemper by his
body, bred or engendered in his senses; no Read Pererius in Genes. l. 5. de
statu innocentiae and Gab. Vas quez in 2. 2. q. 8. dis. 131. c. 7.
intrinsecall disease could break from within; no extrinsecall hurt was feared
from abroad; perfect health in his flesh, and all peace and tranquillity reigned
in his soul. There were the admirable effects, this the sweet harmony which
Original justice caused between the flesh and the spirit. Now whether these
extraordinary privileges flowed from justifying grace which was formally all
one, as the best Deuines accord, with Original Justice; or whether they were
caused by the several habits of sundry virtues infused to this purpose, or
whether some of them proceeded from the sweetness of divine contemplation, or
from the special care and providence of God, I will not here dispute; only I
say, they could not be any natural propertyes springing from the roots of
nature, because in some things they elevated and perfected nature far above
her natural course; in others they stooped, bridled and restrained the maine
current of her natural desires and sensual appetites; as God supernaturally
suspended the heat Original justice no natural property but a gift
supernatural.
of fire in the furnace of Babylon, or as he tempered and assuaged the natural
and irreconciliable fiercenes of the wild and savage beasts in the Ark of Noah; neither of which could proceed from nature, the one being as I say above
the other repugnant thereunto: for who can think that the dowry of grace is the
right of nature, or that the gift of immortality is essentially due to a moral
body; or that contrary qualityes, should not naturally resist and oppositely
fight the one against the other? Who can think that Adam and Eve our first
progenitors were essentially just (a prerogative only due unto God?) or
dismantled of that justice, were impaired, yea changed in their essence? And so
not the same after, as before their fall in parts essential. The righteousness
therefore which they lost especially the chief and formal part, was a divine
accident or heavenly quality, not essentially required, Field in his 3. book
of the Church, chap. 26.
which M. Field misdeemeth to the integrity of nature (for that implies if
nature be taken as it ought to be distinct from that which surmounteth nature)
but supernaturally added to the perfection thereof, and with this covenant
imparted to Adam, that if he had not trespassed, it should have been
perpetually propagated and transfused Augu. de peccat. merit. and remis. l. 2.
c. 22. l. 13 de ciuit* Dei cap. 13.
to his posterity. But he transgressing and disobeying the Commandment of his
Lord and Master, was justly plagued with the disobedience of his flesh, his
hand-mayd unto him, a reciprocal punishment (so S. Augustine terms it) of
his disobedience unto God. Hence proceeds the rage of concupiscence, the
commotions of the inferior and baser parts rebelling against the superior,
the auersion from good, the pro^esse to evil: hence the disorder of passions,
the infirmityes of the mind, the diseases of the body, famine, sickness, and
death it self.

5. And although Original sin be now the cause of all these evils, yet it
does not properly consist in them all, but in the privation of that prime
grace, by which the soul of Adam was enriched, adorned, and converted unto
God. For as Original righteousness included these three prerogatives, or triple
rectitude (to speak in S. Thomas language) first the union of the mind with
sovereign goodness, secondly the subjection of the inferior powers of the
soul to reason, thirdly the like subordination of all the members of the body
to the soul: yet it did truly and principally reside in the former, and
contained S. Thom. 1. p. q 95. ^^t. 1.
the later two as accessaryes or dependants thereof: So Original sin (which
is only known by his contrary habit) is truly and formally nothing else, then
the voluntary privation of the same Original justice which ought to be in us,
as it makes the soul deformed, blemished, Field in his 3. book c. 26.
and auerted from God. Wherefore seeing this want and privation is taken away by
Baptism, and the whole grace, as it clothed, beautifyed, and adorned the
soul, entierly restored; the whole guilt of sin is forgiven, the formal
cause or true essence of Original justice recovered again by the passion of
Christ, and the other deordinations, the remaynder of concupiscence, are only
the effects or punishments of the precedent fault, and not any true and proper
fault. For if man had been created in the state of pure nature, as the
Philosophers thought he was, and many Deuines, against M. Field teach he might
be, because it inuolueth no contradiction neither in respect of the creature,
nor Creator: Then I say, he should have been pestered with the same
inordinate concupiscence and rebellion of the inferior parts as now he is: but
then it had been a mere infirmity, langour, or fayntnes of nature, growing out
of the matter whereof man is compounded, and not any wound or punishment also
of sin, as in our case it is. The reason appears: for as man in the state
of pure nature must have been co^pacted of two diverse and repugnant natures, of
soul and body, flesh and spirit, and consequently of a corporal and
reasonable, of asensuall and spiritual appetite, which could not choose but
maintain a perpetual war of contrary and repugnant desires, it being
natural to every thing, according to Philosophy, to covet that which is
convenient and suitable to it self: so the sense even then would hunt after
sensible, pleasant, and delight-some objects, and the spirit would seek for
spiritual; the spirit would often check, restrain and bridle the pursuit of
Aug. de pec. merit. and remis. l. 2. cap 4 de nuptijs and concup. l. 1. c. 27.
l. 13. de Tri^. c. 10. contra Iul. Pelag. l. ^ and 1. retract. c. 15.
sense; and sense would likewise hinder, weaken and repine at the heroical
works, and endeauours of the spirit. Thus the winds of diverse opposite
passions, the fluds of contrary inclinations would naturally strive and resist
one the other: and yet, as in that case this contrariety had been no sin,
but a sequel, a disease, a feeblenes of nature: so now the same abiding in the
regenerate, from whom the dregs of all impurity are cleansed, it is only,
according to S. Augustine, left as an exercise of virtue to wrestle against, or
as a punishment of sin, and not as any true or proper sin. Which by two
irrefragable arguments I convince in this manner. Ezech. 36. v. 25. Mich. 7. v.
19. ^01. las^ v. 12. Joan. 1. v. 29. Psalm. 50 v.


6. Whatsoever filth or uncleanness our souls contracted by the sin of Adam,
is wholly washed away in Baptism, by the grace of Christ: But the filth or
guilt of concupiscence, descended from Adam: therefore it is clean abolished by
the virtue of Christ. The Mayor or first proposition is every where testified
in holy Writ, by the Prophets and Apostles, who often witness that there shall be
left no sin in us after we are once newborn in Christ: for he shall cleanse
us from all our iniquityes, he shall drown our sins in the bottom of the
sea, he shall discoast them from us as far as he East is distant from the West;
he takes away sins, blotteth them out, wipeth them away, dissolueth them
like a clowd, he shall forgive the iniquity to the house of Jacob, and this is
all the fruit, that the sin thereof be taken away. But none Isa. 44. v. 22.
Isa. 27. v. 9. Ad Romans 8. v. 1. Hier. in Com. in hunc locu^. Ad Romans 5. v. 19.
of these Prophesyes, not one of these assertions were true, if the guilt of
concupiscence still lurked in the soul of the regenerate. It were not true
which S. Paul teaches: There is no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
to wit: Nihil damnatione dignum, nothing worthy damnation, as S. Hierome
commenteth upon that place, if any damnable sin remained in them. Not true
which the same Apostle avouches: As by the disobedience of one man many were
made sinners, so also by the obedience of one, many shall be made just, if we
be not as truly justified and purged from the dross of sin Psalm. 50. v. 9.
Ad Ephesians. 1. v. 4. and ad Collos. 1. v. 22. ad Ephesians. 4. v. 22. and 24. and ad
Colos. 3. v. 9. ad Romans 6. ad Ephesians. 5. 2. ad Corinth 6. Chrysostom. ho. 40. in 15.
1. Cor. (...).
by the merits of Christ, as by the fall of Adam we were infected therewith.

7. Secondly King David speaking of the purity of the soul cleansed by grace,
said: Thou shall wash me, and I shallbe made more white then snow. S. Paul
writes, that the justified are holy and immaculate, that they cast off the old
man, and put on the new, that they live in Christ, are light in our Lord, and
temples of the living God: Therefore free from the darkness, free from the
impurity, death and idolatry of sin: for what participation has justice with
iniquity? what society is there between light and darkness? what part has
Christ with Beliall? what agreement has the temple of God with Idols? Only
God, says S. Chrysostom, can deliver from sin, which in this lauer of
regeneration he effects, he touches the soul it self with grace, and
plucketh from thence the rooted sin: he who by the favor of the King is
pardoned his crime, has his soul still defiled; whom Baptism washes not
so, but he has his mind more pure then the beams of the Sun, and such as it
was when it was first created. Which testimony of his so evidently discovers
the spot of Original guilt to be quite abolished, as the Magdeburgian
Protestants censuring this place, doubt not to say, Chrysostom speaks of the
efficacy of Baptism very dangerously. And yet he speaks no otherwise then
the word of God, and general voice of all other Fathers, in whose behalf let
these few give in their verdict. S. Basil discussing the words of the Psalmist,
Our Lord makes the flood to inhabit, calls the grace of Baptism, A flood
or deluge, purging out all that is stained Centu. 5. c. 4 fol. 515. Basil. in
psalm. 28. Ambr. l. 4. in Luc. Greg. l. 9. cap. 39. Aug. l. 1. cont. 2. ep
Pelag. c. 13. and de verb. Apo. ser. 6. item. ser. 5. and 12. Aug. cone. 1. in
psalm. 113. Clem. Alex. l. 1. paeda. c. 6. Hier ep. 83. ad Oceanum.
with the filth of uncleanness. After which he adroyneth: God sits in the
shining soul, making it as it were his throne, S. Ambrose: No man is admitted
to the gain of virtue, unless first washed from all the spots of sins, he be
consecrated with the gift of heavenly grace. S. Gregory the Great often
auerreth, that the soul in Baptism attaineth heavenly cleanesse, celestial
purity, and that sins thereby are wholly cancelled, and scoured forth. S.
Augustine: We teach that Baptism gives a plenary, or fullpardon from all
manner of sins. And in another place, whatsoever passed sins, concupiscence
has caused in us, either by deeds, words or thoughts, are all abolished by
sacred Baptism: one indulgence has released all kind of debts. Whereupon he
compares Baptism to the red Sea, in which our sins like the Egyptians are
demersa and extincta, drowned and extinguished: to whom I might join S.
Clemens of Alexandria, S. Hierome, and sundry more.

8. Three cosening shifts are devised by our Adversaries to infeeble the
strength of these author^^yes and all the former Texts of holy Writ. The first
is, that the imputation of sin is taken away by Baptism, although the spot
and blemish be left behind, which they travail to prove out of S. Augustine,
demanding how concupiscence Whitaker l. 8. aduersus Duraeum. ^bbot in his
defenc^ cap. 2. Aug. l. de nuptijs and concup. c. 25. Romans 8. v. 1.
should be faulty in the child, when it is not in the Baptized parent? To this
(quoth he) I answer, that concupiscence is not so forgiven in parents that it
is no more, but that it is no more imputed to sin. So they expound S. Paul,
there is no damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that is, nothing
imputed to damnation. So the rest. Wherein they flatly contradict the very
words themselves and the whole drift and meaning, both of the Fathers, and of
the Holy Ghost, who testify our sins not only not to be imputed, but to be
cleansed, dissolved, taken away, blotted out, separated from us, cast into the
bottom of the Sea: our souls made thereby light in our Lord, temples of God,
more white then snow, more pure then the beams of the Sun. Which cannot be
true, if they be in wardly darkened with the clouds of sin, if they be still
deformed with the enormity of vice: neither can you without open violence to
the Majesty of Gods word auow that to remain not imputed which he plainly
auerreth to be cleansed, taken away, and blotted out.

9. Again, according to this Antichristian reply, the 2. Joan. 3. v. 8. Ad
Hebr. 9. v. 28.
blood of our innocent lamb, ordained by God to dissolve the work of Satan,
to exhaust the sins of many, that is, to empty and draw them out of the very
bottom, has not been able to lessen or diminish them; he that dyed to
cleanse to himself a people acceptable, to beautify them with his grace, to
adorn them with virtues, to make them fair Tit. 2. v. 14.
and amiable in his sight, offered so mean an oblation, as his Father is feign
to wincke at the defects, to dissemble the weakness thereof, and in behalf of
his eternal Son, to account them clean, who are indeed unclean, to repute
them fairly clothed with the garments of grace, who are miserably apparelled
in the rags of sin, to love them as his friends, adopt them for his children,
entitle them to his crown, who persevere in themselves his deadly enemies,
deserve his hatred, deserve damnation, and to be disinherited for ever, from
the right of his kingdom, which is the greatest blasphemy that ever was
uttered against the passio of Christ. And no less an injury to the justice of
God, who impureth not that unto us which he finds in us, or otherwise deemeth
of us then we are in our selves. What? Is the Father contented for his sons
sake either to be blind and not to see, or seeing not to judge, or judging not
to account us as we are? He, whose eyes see all things, whose judgment (S.
Paul witnesses) is according to truth, and whose final sentence is agreeable
to the desert of every one?

10. Howbeit least any should stumble at S. Augustins saying I here objected,
his meaning is clear, that concupiscence Ad Romans 3. v. 2.
is remitted in Baptism, not that it be not left behind to strive against, but
that it is not imputed to sin, because whatsoever is faulty and sinful
therein is clean extinguished, and made away: which Alexander Halensis also
means, urged by Field, that concupiscence in the baptized Alex. par. 4. q. 8.
de Sa^r. Bap. memb. 8. art. 2. Peild in his 3. book c. 26. f. 133.
transir reatu, manet actu, passes away in respect of the guilt, and remains
touching the act, to wit, the whole guiltines of the fault is gone, and the
only act of alluring, of entising, of rebelling, abides for our greater
conflict combat, and crown of virtue. Mark how S. Augustine speaks of this
matter in his book against Julian. In Christian Baptism perfect newness,
perfect sanctity is attained from these our evils by which we were gulty, not
from these, with Aug. l. 6. contra lul. c. 7.
which we must fight, lest we become guilty. So as not to be imputed in the
phrase of his speech, is utterly to be abolished in respect of al guilt or spot
of sin. And it is a thing worthy to be observed against our Sectaryes, that
not to Ezech. 18. v. 24. Tolet. in psalm. 3. ser. 3. Orig. l. 4. in ep. ad Romans
Aug. tom. 9. l. de diligendo Deo c. 12.
impute sin, is more then to cover it, more then to forgive, remit, or take
it away: for a sin is truly forgiven when the guilt and eternal pain is
wholly remitted; covered, when the soul besides is invested with grace,
clothed with charity, clad with virtues, in which case it may stand liable to
future punishment, it may not be honored with such extra ordinary privilege,
nor advanced to so high a degree of favor, as she had before herfall. But then
sin is said not to be imputed, when the penitent returns to perfect
friendship, and recouereth all whatsoever he had, when no print of fault, no
fine of punishment, no loss of grace, no memory is left of former trespasses,
when all the iniquities he has committed shall not be remembered again, as
Ezechiel prophesyeth. After which sort Cardinal Tolet out of Origin, and S
Augustine notably expounds the words of the Psalmist, Blessed are they whose
iniquit yes are forgiven, and whose sins be covered: blessed is the man to
whom our Lord has not imputed sin, the chiefest place Protestants allege
to bolster their fancy of Gods pardoning of sin by not imputing it, such an
idle fancy as the very time may seem idly spent in disproofe thereof: for what
is it you account not imputed to the regenerate, or other pardoned offendour?

11. In Original, as in every actual sin there be S. Tbom. 1. 2. q. 86. and
87. Vasq. ibid. disp. 206. c. 2. Valent. ibid. q. 16. and 17.
three things; First there is macula culpae, the spot or blemish of the fault,
because every sin defiles the soul with some base and ugly deformity;
Secondly there is that which is termed by some reatus poenae, by others meritum
seu condignit as poenae, that is, the condignity or deserving of punishment;
for whosoever offends does condignely deserve to be punished for his offense;
The third is obligatio seu destinatio ad poenam, to wit, an actual destination
and bynding over to punishment, which is the ordinance and decree of God,
appoynting due chastisement to them that deserve it: Now which of these is not
imputed in your remission of sins? Is the ugly spot remaining, and are you
not deemed to be defiled by him who cannot err or be deceived in his doom? Or
is not the deserving or lyablenes to punishment imputed to this inherent fault
of your spotted soul? It cannot choose, they are inseparable, they necessarily
accompany the one the other, and as it is impossible for the relation of
fatherhood not to arise and follow him who beggetteth a child, or risibility
the power of laughing, not to flow from the nature of man: so likewise
impossible the condignity of punishment should not always attend on the
faultines of sin. It rests then, that the actual destination and binding
over to punishment is not imputed to the pardoned sinner; and that to pardon
sin according to your new Divinity is nothing else, then not to punish it,
which flatly destroys a maine article of our faith, the forgiveness of sins,
defeateth the merits of Christ's bountiful passion, and disanulleth the benefit
of our redemption. For to exempt our persons from the pain of hesl, is not to
redeem our Psalm. 7^. v. 14.
souls from their iniquity, of which King David; nor deliver us out of the
power of darkness, of which the Apostle speaks. The delinquent or malefactor
who is freed from the Ad Colos. ^. v. 13.
sentence of death pronounced against him is not thereby, either loosed of his
chains, or bayled out of prison, no more are we assoyled of the bands of
vice, or bayled out of the iayle of sin, by immunity from the pain, or
exemption from the horror of everlasting death.

12. Besides, as long as the nature of sin truly harbors in the hearts of
Protestants, and by infection adhereth and contaminateth their soul, it makes
it hateful and detestable to God, for his infinite purity cannot but abhone the
defiled sinner, of whom King Solomon says: Sap. 14. v. 9. Psalm. 44. v. 8.
To God the impious and his impiety are odious alike. And the Psalmist, Thou
have loved Justice, and have hated iniquity, but whatsoever he hates he
ordeyneth to punishment, therefore every Protestant who is inherently polluted
with the deformity of vice, how beautiful soever he may seem without, by the
just censure of the Highest, is bound over to the pain which is due unto him:
for as the love of God is nothing else then velle bonum, to procure good to
whatsoever he loves, so his hatred is velle malum to wreak evil to that which
he hates, and because he cannot will the evil of fault, the evil of
punishment must he needs inflict on every vicious and hateful transgressour.

13. In fine this binding over to punishment which you dream not imputed, may
be two ways understood. First it may be taken for the eternal will of the
first and supreme cause ordayning just punishment to such as deserve it.
Secondly for his exterior law promulgated unto us, either absolutely, or
conditionally, declaring the same: in the former acception, it is the will of
God unchangeable, immutable, and cannot be altered: in the later it is a sign
or declaration unto us of his inward will, which if it be absolute, it shall be
infallibly executed according to his word, if conditional or comminatory only,
it may be altered or suspended supposing a change and alteration on our part,
yet being good, of God, and for our repentance proclaimed, it cannot possible
be the sault not imputed unto us.

14. Their second quirke or guilefull deceit, that guiltines is removed from
the person, not from the sin in the person, or from us, not the sin in us,
is a palpable contradiction, because if guiltines still cleave to the sin,
and the sin abide Perkins in his refor. Cath p. 56. Abbot in his defense cap.
2. Bell in his downfall.
in us, we must of necessity remain subject and obnoxious to that guilty
sin. Or if the guilt of Original sin be removed from the person, it is also
removed from the sin in the person. For enquire of S. Augustine, that Miracle
of Wit, enquire of him, how sins abode in sinners, he will answer, no otherwise
then by their guilt: then demand what it is to be free from sin, he will tell
you, this it is not to have sin, not to be guilty of sin. So that sin and
guilt are Aug. l. 1. de nupt. and concup. c. 26.
according to him two inseparable things: leave sin in the regenerate, and
the guilt thereof remains, extinguish the guilt, and the sin is abolished.

15. Notwithstanding M. Robert Abbot takes upon him the defense of the former
brainsicke and fanaticall Abbot. in the place above cyted f. 17*
speech, that guiltines is removed from the person, not from the sin in the
person, and thus interprets the meaning thereof: That sin is pardoned to
the man regenerate, and therefore cannot make him guilty; but yet in it self and
in it own nature it continues such, as that setting aside the pardon, it were
sufficient still to make him guilty and to condemn him. A fit gloss for such
a deformed Text, which runs into more contrarietyes then the contrariety it
self he seeks to reconcile. For will you consider the regenerate pardoned of
their sins, and set aside their pardon? Will you make them not guilty of
sin, as you say, by one, and guilty by the other, at one and the self same
time? Is it possible your tongue should discourse of men endued with faith, and
abstract from faith? Speak of souls adorned with grace, and bereft of grace,
with one and the self same breath? Our question is whether the regenerate,
supposing they be pardoned by the lauer of Baptism, be endued with faith and
replenished with grace through the merits of Christ, have notwithstanding their
former sins truly abiding in them or no? Your answer is, That sin in it
self, and in it own nature continues such, that setting aside the pardon, it
were sufficient still to make him guilty. Is not this to fly from the
question, to destroy the supposall, to forsake the help and defense of your
clyents? For example, I convince a Sectary of gross ignorance, open
repugnance, and contradiction in his writings, if some Attorney after excuse
him thus, that set aside his ignorance, set aside his maleparte and flat
contradictions, no such foolish or repugnant saying has been diuulged by him;
should not he deserve a good fee at his hands? The same do you deserve, who
speaking of the regenerate pardoned of their sins, do prove them sinful,
setting aside their pardon. Howbeit these words that follow, may challenge the
fire rather then a fee. The pardon acquiteth Abbot in the place above cyted.
the man, but yet it cannot alter the nature of the sin; it sets a bar
against the effect, but take away the bar, and the cause is as strong as it
was before. So he. As ill as Proclus, worse then the Messalians. Proclus held
that sins by Baptism, were not cleansed, but covered: the Messalians taught
they Abbot ibidem.
were shaued, clipped, and pared of. M. Abbot avouches them not pared, but
barred, curbed and hindered, only like a violent stream whose current is
stopped, not water dimished. Proclus added, take away the cover and the sins
appear: M. Abbot affirms, take away the bar, and the cause is as strong as
it was before. Wherefore if they for that blasphemous doctrine were justly
censured amongst the rank of Heretics; shall not he receive the same doom,
who is returned guilty of the same, if not more deeper heeresy? Bear with me,
M. Abbot; I write not this to touch your person, whom for your good parts I
honor and love, but only to refell these errors, which zeal of truth and
desire Abbot. c. 2. sect. 1. fol. 171.
of your safety moves me to hate. And so with your good leave, who are also
willing that truth should prevail, I go on: The pardon (say you) acquitteth
the man, but it cannot alter the nature of the sin. No? does it not alter the
nature of sin, when it takes it away, blotteth it out, and extinguisheth it
quite as I have showed above? Does it cancel in man the guilt of sin, and
not alter in him the nature of it? For we speak not here of the destruction
or alteration of sin severed and abstracted from the subject in which it
inhereth, because in that sort sin is not altered, neither in this nor after
this life not altered, as I may say in the Saints of heaven, the murder and
adultry K. David committed, the usury of S. Matthew, the theft and other faults
S. Augustine bewayleth in his books of Confessions are truly thefts, vsuryes,
murders and adulteryes, if we conceive them apart in the nature of sins: yet
when God of his mercy pardoned and forgave them, he did not only alter the
nature, but expelled the bane of the for named offenses.

16. Again how ouerthwartly do you write, the pardon acquiteth the man and
sets a bar against the effect: for Abbot in his defense. cap. 2. sect. 1.
if it set only a bar, it acquiteth him not, if it acquit him the bar is
needles, to no purpose at all. And who did ever hear sins banished from the
soul, taught to be stopped or barred from reigning therein? The Physician who
hinders or abateth the furious increase of his patients disease, cannot be
avouched to free him from it: or if he free him, if he acquit him, they wrong
his art, and abuse his patient, who should contend that a stop only is laid, a
bar applied against his sickness, which once removed the rage thereof willbe as
great as ever. The like wrong do you to our heavenly Physician, the like injury
Abbot in his defense c. 2.
and abuse to us his patients, when not without contradicting your self, you
peremptorily utter, that he has set but a bar against the diseases of our
soul, acquitted by Field. in his 3. book of the Church c. ^6. Abbot in his
defense ^. c. 2. page 176. Perkins in his Refor. Catho. p, 37.
his pardon, or rather cured by the salve of his heavenly grace.

17. The last evasion our Reformers use to avoid the unanswerable proofs above
alleged, is, That Original sin by Baptisine loses his dominion, loses
his command, is abated, and the strength thereof broken, because it rages, it
prevails not as it did, having received a deadly wound, and being resisted
and condemned by us. Fair words: but let me scan the sense and meaning of
them; let me know whether this sin bereft of his reign and dominion, abated by
this mortal wound, does loose thereby, either the whole or any part of the
deformity, with which it blemisheth your souls; not the whole, for then the
whole fault were cancelled as the Scriptures and Fathers define against you;
not any part, for it is indivisible, it cannot be severed into parts, or if it
could, why should one part be utterly extinguished, and not the other? God is
magnificent and liberal in his gifts, he never bestows upon us any mangled
or broken favors. The author of the book of true and feigned penance,
attributed to S. Austine says: It is the crime of infidelity Author de falsa
and vera poen. apud Ang. c. 6.
to expect from God half or imperfect salvation. How then can he be so
imperfect as brokenly, and by peece-meale to pardon one and the same default
partly in this, and partly in the life to come. S. Thomas our Angelical Doctor
teaches it impossible in them that are pestered with many grievous offenses to
have any one forgiven without the rest. And can one part of a deadly crime
which has no parts, S. Thom. 3. par. q. 86. art. 3.
be washed away according to your new Theology, the other remaining? But if
neither the whole, nor any part of the foul impurity be abolished, then I may
draw to an end, and leave my Adversaries branded with this note of reproach,
that they have been dipped (as they say) in the water, and bathed in the blood
of the Son of God, yet no stain of uncleanness, no wart of deformity, no
wrinckle of sin, has that most sovereign and celestial lauer taken from
their souls: an infinite price has been offered, and no true redemption
procured, no true salvation or perfect deliverance from the bondage of Satan.
And therefore as S. Augustine upon a quite contrary occasion scornefully
pursued the ancient Pelagians, so Aug. l. 3. contra. I^l. c. 3.
I may now prosecute them with these his words: Trudg ^n, trudge on, and of
your followers, say as you are wont: In the Sacrament of our Savior they are
baptized, but not saved, ransomed but not delivered, washed but not purifyed,
exorcised and breathed on, but not infranchised from the power of the Devil.
Say also, that blood is shed for them in remission of sins, but they are
cleansed with the remission of no sin: these be strange things which you
teach, new things which you teach, false things which you teach: we wonder at
the strange: beware of the new, reprove the false. If he thus canuased them for
denying the Whitaker l. 8. aduersus Duraeum and in his answer to 8. reason of
M. Campain f. 22^. in English. In his marginall ^ots added out of his defense
purgation of infants souls, who acknowledged in them nothing to be purged;
how would he have ratled you, who acknowledge them defiled, and yet not purifyed
from their ordure? You say, I confess, their persons are accepted through the
mercy of God, their faults are not imputed, they are outwardly covered with the
veil of grace, but within, within lurketh the venom which infecteth the whole
man, within in themselves, in the secret bowels of their soul, they are as
deeply tainted, poisoned, and corrupted, as when they were first borne the
children of wrath, the sons of darkness, and of utter perdition.

18. O Devilish facriledge! O hateful barbarism, which Whitaker himself
would seem to abhor, for being charged therewith, first by M. Campian, after
by Duraeus, he answers: That channel of sin does remain not within them
that have attained true righteousness, as you slander us to teach, but by the
power of the Holy Ghost it is daily purged out. You see, he would feign wash
his hands, and plead not guilty of this hideous blasphemy: but examine him
upon the former interrogatoryes, and you shall find him as innocent as Pilate
was from the blood of Christ. Ask him or any of his followers what is purged
by renouation from the souls of the righteous? Is the whole stain of
Original infection cleansed forth, and do the scarres, the infirmityes only
abide? We desire no more; you recant your heresy, and join hands with us. Or
is any part of the contagion (although it be essentially a privation, and
consist not of parts) scoured out by infusion of grace? Not so: for this liquor
is so precious, as it cannot endure the spot of mortal crime; the bed of our
souls is too narrow to lodge any part of the one with the presence of the
other; And the Holy Ghost too full of purity, might, and goodness to create a
work so imperfect, a monster so deformed, as I have partly already, and shall
more fully demonstrate in the next Controversy which follows. This is more
largly proved in the next co^trouersy of inherent justice.
Notwithstanding let us grant that some part is purged out: heerof it must
needs ensue, that, that which by parts is taken away, may at length be wholly
destroyed: for every finite thing by subtraction of finite parts must of
necessity be exhausted in the end. Therefore if we be often renewed by the
power of the Holy Ghost, we may in this life, at least in long process of
time, and daily increase of virtue, be perfectly cleansed from all spotes of
sin. Which Whitaker nevertheless, and all his accomplices Whitaker. vbi supra*
Field and Abbots loc. citais.
account impossible, obstinatly persisting, that as long as we dwell in this
world, sin must needs dwell in us, and such of it own nature is mortal and
damnable: for venial they deny. What gloss then, what exposition can they
make of the words before cyted? But that the cha^nell of sin is said to be
purged out, because it is resisted, kept in, and restrained from breaking forth
into works of iniquity wrought with full consent (for iniquity still works
as themselves confess;) not much unlike the wickedness of him, who by sleep is
hindered from voluntary mischief; or rather like a hidden impostume or poisoned
canker, which cannot be cured, but is stopped by Physic from further
infection. And this is the abomination of which we condemn them, an
abomination not fit to be proposed to Christian ears, or further refuted (if
necessity did not press us) with pens of Christians.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. IN WHICH Concupiscence is more particularly proved to be
no sin: Other objections to the contrary answered, against Doctor Whitaker,
Doctor Field, and Master Abbots.
MERVAILE not (Courteous Reader) that after so large a discourse and full
confutatio^ premised, I should notwithstanding Original sin in habiting as
Protestants hold in the regenerat is the only ground of many other their
impious paradox^.
more exactly refell this dangerous paradox of our home-b^ed fin irremediably
lurking in the bowels of nature. The reason is, because I find it the general
head-spring, or poisoned source from whence sundry puddles of other venomous
errors are drawn. For from hence our Protestants suck that deadly ba^^, that
all the actions of man, even his deuoutest prayers, best works and desires are
stained with the aspersion of mortal crime, because they pass through the
stinc^ing channel of human corruption. Hence they deny the merit of our good
deeds wrought by grace, because there is no good^es in us pleasing to God,
from which they should proceed: hence their impossibility of fullfilling Gods
Commandments, for that every action of the just is of it own nature a
transgression of his law: hence no inherent, but a vain imputative
righteousness, for each one in all his facultyes pestered with this capital
vice, no inward justice, no inherent grace, but a mere outward imputation
belongs unto him: hence their justification by faith alone, and apprehension
of Christ's promises applied unto them, and not through the dignity of their
works enhaunced by Christ; hence no difference between the works of the
misbeleiuing Infidel and Bell in his downfall p. 49. Abbot in his defense etc.
cap. ^. p. 176.
faithful Christian, but that they both damnably offend in whatsoever they do;
only the misdeedes of the faithful are not imputed unto them, the faults of
the Infidels are; hence no freedom of will to perform any moral good, no
liberty in man to cooperate with God when he first moves, awaketh, and calls
him out of the state of sin; hence, I say, from this Cancker of concupiscence,
as from the sincke of mischief (in our Sectaryes conceit) creeps the
infection of all the fornamed heresies: which pernicious conceit that they may
more plausibly maintain, they distinguish (following the doctrine of our
Deuines) concupiscence into two sorts, actual and habitual: habitual is the
habit, the inward corrupt quality or powers of the inferior portion to
exorbitant motions* actual in the immediate act, the untoward motion or
affection it self, both which they account, not only to undergo the name, but
to partake the essence and nature of sin; in so much as they hold the
vnuoluntary motions of concupiscence, although they prevent the use of reason,
although they be resisted and suppressed, yet to be truly sinful in
themselves, and transgressions of the law* Thus they.

2. We contrary wise teach, that actual concupiscence, much less habitual is
no sin at all, unless the allowance and approbation of our will concur
thereunto, which S. James avouches in his Catholic Epistle: Every one is
tempted of his own concupiscence, abstracted and allured; afterward
concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth sin. Iac. 1. v. 14. 15.
Lo here the act of concupiscence, first tempting to sin before it be
formally sin, therefore of it self it is no sin, neither are the suddayne
motions and suggestions thereof culpable, except we some way yield unto them,
which our thrice learned and ever worthy admired S. Augustine of set purpose
inculcateth in diverse places in his Aug. l. 5. cont. Iul. c. 5.
fifth book against Julian, and cyting that very text of S. James, he says:
Truly in these words the brood is distinguished from that which breeds or
brings forth: for concupiscence is that which breeds, the brood is sin,
but concupiscence begets not, unless is conceive; it conceaueth not, unless it
induce, that is, gayneth the assent of the willer to perpetual evil. When
therefore it is striuen against, this comes to pass, that it may not
conceive Augu. de ciuit. Dei l. 1. c. 25. Idem ep. 200. ad Asel. I^em l 2. de
Gen cont. Ma^i. c. 4. Cyril. l. 4. c. 5^. Chrysostom. ho. 13. in ep. ad Romans Basil.
l. de virg. and l. constable. Monast. c. 2. Ambr. l. de Sacram. regen. Hier. ep. ad
Ocea.
or travel with sin. In his book of the City of God: That rebellion of
concupiscence which dwells in our dying members etc. how much less is it
without fault in the body of him that consents not, if it be without fault in
the body of him that sleeps. In his epistles: If we consent not, to those
disordered motions, we need not say to our Father which is in heaven, forgive
us our trespasses. In his second book of Genesis against the Manichees:
Sometime reason does stoutly resist and bridle concupiscence even stirred up,
which when it is performed we fall not into sin, but with some wrestling are
crowned. With S. Augustine accord S. Cyrill, S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, and all the ornaments, both of the Greek and Latin
Church, as Calvin the Proto-sectary of this our unfortunate age fully
witnesses, writing of Concupiscence in these words: Neither is it needful to
labor much in searching what old writers have thought herein, for as much as
only Augustine may be sufficient for it, who has faithfully and with great
diligence gathered all their judgments: therefore let the Readers gather out of
him such certainty, as they shall desire to learn of the opinion of antiquity.
And then immediately setting down what S. Augustine taught of this matter, and
wherein he dissented from him: There may seem (says he) to be this difference
between him and us, that he when he grants that the faithful so long as
they dwell in a mortal body, are so holden bound with lusts Calu. l. 3.
instit. c. 3.. 10.
that they cannot but lust, yet dares not call that disease sin: but being
content to express it by the name of weakness, he teaches that then only it
becomes sin, when either work or consent is added to corruption or
apprehension, that is, when will yields to the first desire: but we account
the very same for sin, that man is tickled with any desire at all against the
law of God. I need no more. The opinion and judgment of all antiquity touching
concupiscence by Caluins confession, is to be taken out of Augustine. Augustine
avouches it no sin without the consent of the will, as himself also
confesses: Augustine therefore and all antiquity agree with us in this point
against himself and his confederates, by Caluins own confession.

3. But I will not only bear down my adversaries by Caluins testimony, and
authority of Ancient Fathers, Concupiscence without consent proved by reason to
be no sin.
I will wage also reasons with them. I ask, what sin the instigation of
concupiscence is, if it unwillingly invade us, or be checked and restrained by
us? Original or Actual? Not Original, because that equally infecteth all,
this is more violent, more exorbita^t in some the^ others according to the
various complexion and disposition of the persons: that is of one essence and
nature in every sinner, this of diverse, one of wrath, another of lust, the
third of reueng etc. that neither is, nor can be any act, but a defect or
priuatio^ only, this is a personal act in him that coueteth, therefore it is
not Original sin distilled from another. Nor Actual: Aug. l. 3* de lib. arb.
c. 18.
for we cannot sin actually against our will. No man, as S. Augustine
teaches, is said to sin in that which he cannot avoid. Therefore the
vnuoluntary motions which maugre our will often assault us cannot be truly
sins. Our opponents reply, it is sufficient they were once voluntary in their
origin, that is, in Adam. But it is false, that Adam ever voluntarily consented
to the personal motions of concupiscence which arise in us, neither was our
will comprehended in him as head of his posterity in any other thing, then in
keeping or casting of the armor of original justice from himself and us
therein; only his will was our assent, his perseverance our crown, his revolt
our fall, his transgressio^ our sin: in other acts or desirs of ours which are
not of their own nature faulty, though free, his voluntary disobedience cannot
make them faulty. And although I should grant that they willingly proceed from
him as the voluntary cause of all our evils; yet that is not enough to make us
now guilty of the outrage committed, to say we once sinned in the cause whereon
it depended: for you may be faulty in the cause, and yet incur no sin, when
the effect falls out. For example, the Master commands his servant, or
solliciteth his friend to murder his enemy, without doubt he grievously
offends when he gives that charge, or uses such wicked persuasions, yet if
after he heartily repent before it be achieved, and do his uttermost to recall
and hinder the effect, although the Les^^^^. l. 2. de iure and just. c. 13.
^ub. 3. Molits. de Restit. tract. 2. disp. 73^.
censure of excommunication and irregularity sometime may, yet the guilt of
sin never can be incurred, when the slaughter is committed contrary to his
mind, the reason is, because he having recovered the grace and favor of God by
his sorrow and repentance cannot be deprived of it against his will. If this be
true in the effects once caused by our own counsel or advise, how true is
it in the motions caused in us by the consent of another? And if actual
concupiscence may be without sin, much more habitual, which is nothing so
ill as that: for the evil habits of mortal and deadly sin may comply with
grace, the evil acts can never: no man is punished by any either spiritual or
temporal Laws for his evil habit, or bad inclination to rob, kill, blaspheme
etc. for his actual robbing or killing he is.

4. Many morally good, as Socrates the Philosopher, and truly virtuous also,
may be prone to wickedness, and deserve the more praise by ouercomming of it,
but no actual wickedness can purchase any praise, or continuing with us
minister occasion of greater victory. Therefore Naughty habits or inclinations
are not punished by any law but only evil acts.
if the act of concupiscence may be acquitted from fault, a fortiori the habit,
which does only facilitate and inclyne to the act. Moreover habitual
concupiscence grows from the root of Nature, it is, as M. Abbot testifyeth,
the remainder of Original corruption. But I have already demonstrated, that
the whole culpable infection of Nature is clean extinguished by regeneration,
therefore the pronesse to evil, which remains is not properly sin. For man
by Baptism is justified from sin, buried with Christ Abbot in his defense
cap. 2.
into death of sin. He is borne again in him of water and the Holy Ghost. He
does cast off the old man and put on the new. He has the stamp of Adam, the
body of sin destroyed, and the character of Christ, the spirit of God
imprinted in his heart. He Ad Romans 6. v. 4. Joan. 3. v. 5. Ad colos. 3. v. 9. Ad
Ephesians. 4. v. 22. 24. ad 1. Cor. 1^. v. 49.
has his earthly image defaced, and a heavenly restored, conformable to that
of S. Paul: As we have borne the image of the earthly, let us bear also the
image of the heavenly. But what is the old man? What is the stamp, image, or
likeness of Adam, but the ugly shape and deformity of sin, that then is wholly
defaced and blotted out quite by our incorporation with Christ?

5. On the contrary side many things are objected by Whitaker and M. Abbot
against this doctrine: they urge that some leauings of sin stick to the
regenerate, because Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Duraeum. Abbot. c. 2. p. 172 and 233.
234. 235 etc. Augu. d^ pec. merit. and remis. lib. 2. 2. Cor. 7. v. 1. Psalm. 50.
after Baptism they are still counsayled to purify their souls, more and more
to wrestle with the remnants of the flesh, to mortify their members which are
upon the earth, to renew the inward man from day to day, whereupon S. Augustine
argues: He that is renewed from day to day, is not yet all renewed; and in how
much he is not renewed, in so much he dwells in oldnes still. And in another
place, Who is there in this life so clean, as that he is not more and more to
be cleansed and made clean? For this cause S. Paul exhorts the faithful:
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh. King David after his
sin was pardoned, prayed notwithstanding: Create in me a clean heart, renew in
me a right spirit, wash me, and I shall be whiter then the snow. Which prayerthe
regenerate make all the days of their life, therefore they are never thoroughly
purged here upon earth. So they.

6. I answer, the just are exhorted to cleanse and sweep their souls in
manner aforesaid. First from the dust of venial sins, which daily soyleth
and cleaves unto them even after they be by Baptism engrafted into Christ.
Secondly they are counseled to rid themselves also as much as they can from
the untoward motions and crooked inclinations of concupiscence, checking and
restraining them so with the curb of mortification, as they seldom or never
hinder or disturb the race of virtue. This is not to take out the staynes of
sin, but to cure the wounds, repair the fayntnes, heal the infirmityes
which sin has left behind; is it to refresh the weakness Leo ser. 1. and 2.
de ieiunio decimi mensis.
of nature, whilst that which decayed, says S. Leo, in our first Adam, is
restored in our second. Which is not done I grant by the sauer of regeneration,
but by the continual victory and conquest of our selves, by rooting out the
weeds of all immoderate desires, as S. Augustine most notably Augu. l. 14. de
Trinit. c. 17.
discourses, expounding both himself, and all the former Texts of our
Adversaries: This renouation is not made in one and the same moment of
conversion, as that renouation is made in one moment by remission of all sins
in Baptism: For not one (sin) how little, or how great soever, abides,
which is not remitted. But as it is one thing to want fevers, another to
recover of the infirmity which is caused by fevers: and as it is one thing to
draw the festered weapon out of the body, another with second curing to heal
the wound inflicted thereby: So the first remedy is to remove the cause of
Linguor, which is made by the full pardon of all sins; ^. Basil. in cap. 1.
Isa.
the second is to cure the feeblenes it self which is done by little and
little, going forward in the renouation of this image of God etc. Of which
thing the Apostle most plainly spoke saying: Although our man which is without
be corrupt, yet that which is within is renewed from day to day. To which
purpose S. Basil writes: The washing of Baptism suffices not to bring a man
to the whiteness of snow, but there needs also great labor and diligence
etc. and as to make a perfect and abiding color often dipping and much pain
is required; even so in the soul corrupted with the ^ilth of sin. Which
Methodius related by Epiphanius, and Abbot loc. citat. page 137. 138.
Epiphanius, S. Hilary, with the rest of the Fathers and Schoolmen (objected
against us by M. Abbot, Field, and Whitaker) only mean, when they affirm, the
carryon of sin to remain, and not to be quite taken away, but holden in, and
quieted by Baptism, when they usurp this saying, regnum amittit in terris,
perit in caelo: Sin loses his kingdom on earth, it perishes and is
destroyed in heaven. Thus I say they somtymes speak in regard of the remaynder
of sundry defects, wounds, and infirmityes, as S. Augustine calls them; in
regard of the evil habits, customs and rebellious passions, which coming from
sin carry 1. Cor. 15. v. 53.
the name thereof, and are not wholly extirpated by grace, neither can they all
be, until this corruptible (body) do on incorruption, and this mortal be
clad with immortality.

7. Our Adversaries again oppose, that the maladyes of Nature, the obliquity
of the will, and prauity Abbot ibidem page 9. 3.
of concupiscence we mention, is not only languishing and defective, but truly
and properly sinful, not in name alone, but also in deed: which they labor
to prove two Field in his ^. book c. 26. Aug. l. 5. contra Iul.
several ways, by reason and by authority. First by reason, because
concupiscence is a declining from perfect subjection to our Creator, there is
in it disobedience from the dominion of the mind, as Field presses out of S.
Augustine: It is a transgression from the rule of reason: a defection, says
Abobt, from rightetousnes, a swaruing from the law of God; but whatsoever
swarueth or declineth from the prescript of his law, is sin. Therefore
concupiscence is not only a languor, wound or fayntnes, but the true sin of
Nature. Our answer is ready. It is a sin either materially or formally:
formally, if it be a free and voluntary transgression, materially if it want
deliberation or consent of will, as in fools, children, and mad men it does.
But as in them the actual lusts or desires of concupiscence are material
disorders or swaruings from the will of the highest, but not properly sins;
so neither in the regenerate, if, as S. Augustine often auoweth, they yield not
unto them. For which cause we deny, that whatsoever declyneth from the law of
God is sin; every unjust law, every heretical interpretation, every book
which Protestants set forth in defense of their errors is a declyning and
swaruing from his law; and albeit they damnably sin in disgorging such
poison, yet the books themselves, are not properly sins, but so far forth sin
is committed, as they are any way diuulged, embraced or allowed: no more are
the sinful motions of concupiscence, unless by voluntary consent they be
yielded unto, especially such as are seated in the flesh, which is not capable
of sin.

8. Secondly they press the authority of the Apostle and testimony of the
Fathers, as that S. Paul terms Romans 6. v. ^. ad Romans 7. v. 24.
concupiscence, sin, the body of sin, the body of death. S. Augustine,
iniquity, vice, a great evil. Methodius, death, and destruction it self. S.
Ambrose, the defilement of nature, the seed, root, or seminary of sin. S.
Cyprian, a domestical evil. Origin, sin which is the cause of death. I
answer it is named sin, death, destruction etc. for many reasons, which S.
Augustine himself assigns. First for that it is the effect Aug la. de
^uptijs and concup. c. 23.
of sin, as our speech is called our tongue or hand writing: our hand, because
our tongue or hand frames it. The second for which it is so entitled, he
notes to be, because it inclines, provoke, and if it overcome, is the cause
of sin, death, defilement etc. So cold is said to be sluggish and heavy, for
that it makes men heavy, and wine merry, by reason it stirs up to mirth.
And so concupiscence for as much as it continually suggesteth, allureth, and
often induces to all kind of wickedness. S. Cyprian besides the S. Cypr. de
ratio. circumcis. S. Bernard. de sex tri^ul.
precedent names, calls it a raging beast of stinking breath: S. Bernard, A
contagion, a pestilent poison, a manifold pestilence, the cherishment of all
naughtiness, a furnace strongly burning with the affections of ambition,
avarice, envy, willfullnes, lewdnes, and all vices.

9. Thirdly, it is termed a great evil, because it is indeed an untoward and
evil propension, a hindrance from good, a want of due subjection in the
inferior powers, therefore truly called a sickness or evil quality, though not
a sin: for harken what the same S. Augustine writes to Julian the Pelagian:
Thou think est that if concupiscence Aug. l. 6. cont. Iul. c. 5. prope finem.
Romans 7. v. 15. and 19.
were evil, the baptized should want it: thou art much deceived, for he
wants all evil. In this sort S. Paul calls it, the evil which he hates,
and the evil which I will not that I do. Fourthly it does bear the name of
sin, because it was the material part of sin, or that which the formal
guilt of our capital infection materially included: after which manner it may
be improperly said to be (...), iniquity, the name for which John Calvin and
his Ghospellers so eagerly strive; yet if you take the word iniquity in August.
tract. 41. in Joan.
his proper signification, it is wholly cancelled in S. Augustines judgment,
saying: because all iniquity is blotted out, has no infirmity remained?

10. Lastly it does sometime truly undergo that name, because in the
irregenerate, the auersion from God, Aug. l. 5. contra Iul. c. 3.
which is the form and essence of Original sin is annexed unto it. This is
the meaning of S. Augustine, when in his fifth book against Julian, he first
calls it sin, then the cause also and punishment of sin: for so it is
properly sin, not in it self alone, but as it is combined with the aforesaid
auersion to make one complete and vicious habit. So there is in it
disobedience against the dominion of the mind, because it is in them unbridled
and untamed Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum. fol. 576.
lust; so it is that sinful concupiscence; against which the good spirit
(according to S. Augustine) does strive and covet. Howbeit by these words
Whitaker takes occasion to cavil, that he speaks of concupiscence in the
regenerate, because in them only is the good spirit which warreth against it.
But he is much deceived; for S. Augustine means not by the good spirit, the
spirit of righteousness, but the natural propension to good, the right
Synderesis or light of Gods countenance, which he has stamped in the hearts of
the wicked: this often fights and bids war to that concupiscence which is
true sin by reason of the formal guilt conjoined unto it, notwithstanding if
that formal guilt be once forgiven, the material part, that is concupiscence
of it self inhabiting in us, against which we wrestle, is no more sin, then
a dead carcass bereft of life, is a true and proper man.

11. One scruple yet may trouble my Reader, why Vlpid tit. de edilitio edict.
lege prima. Tul. ep. Papirio Paeto. ep. ^. in fine.
S. Augustine should call this concupiscence, vicious or a vice: for heereon we
may undoubtedly argue that it is likewise sinful or a sin. I answer that
the word Vitium, vice, if we sift the native signification and property
thereof, may be taken for any thing that is diseased or defective, either in
nature or art, as Vlpianus in the civil law uses the word, and Pliny styles
the falling sickness by the name of Vice: Tully likewise gives the name of vice
to whatsoever is broken, or out of reparation in the root or walls of a
house. Thus S. Augustine takes the word vice for that which is maimed and
diseased, and not for that which is sinful when he speaks of the wounds
of sin abiding in the regenerate, wherein I appeal to no other sentence then
his own, which I here insert, as a seal and obligation of his belief
concerning this matter: Iam Aug. l. 2. contra Iul. prope init.
ne discernis, iam ne perspicis etc. Do thou now discern, do thou now
perceane, do thou now behold the remission of all sins to be made in
Baptism, and as it were the civil or domestical war of inward vices to
remain with the baptized? For they are not such vices which are now to be
called sins, if concupiscence draw not the spirit to unlawful works, and
conceive and bring forth sin. By which words I may resolve and end this
main co^trouersy, that the repugnance between the flesh and the spirit, the
untowardness to good, the forwardnes to evil, and other defects of nature are
vices indeed, but no sin in the faithful. I may note also by the way the
extrauaga^t examples, which Protestants bring of a woman in travail of a woman
child, of one Viper ingendring another, to prove thereby, that concupiscence a
sin, may conceive and bring forth sin. For that we willingly confess, we
grant that voluntary concupiscence which is a sin, Abbot c. 2 sect. 6. fol.
211.
may cause and beget another sin: But we say, that the sudden motions of
concupiscence which invade our mind against our will, and that concupiscence of
it own nature is not sinful, unless by winning our consent it conceive and
consumate sin, as S. James and S. Augustine here expressly auow. Yet who was
ever so mad, as to teach a woman not to be a womam, unless she conceive, or a
viper no viper, except it breed and engender vipers? Their examples therefore
are impertinent, and all the oiections they make against us, either frivolous,
or fully Willet. contr. 17. q. 1. p. 558.
answered.

12. Nevertheless before I finish this question, some may expect I should more
largly unfold what Original sin is, and how it stayneth our souls against
the Anabaptists, the Albigensians, and Zuinglian Protestants. Likewise how all
the whole progeny of Adam is infected there with against the Caluiuists, and
Puritans of our time Calu. l. 4. instit. c. 16.. 24. 25 Fulk. in c. 3. Joan.
sect. 2. and in cap. 7. 1. ad Cor. sect. 11. Whitaker. controu. ^. q. 6 c. 3.
who imagine the children of the faithful to be received of God into the
inheritance of the covenant from their mothers womb, be regenerated by the
Holy Ghost, and may be saved without Baptism. Upon which wicked ground M. Dod
a silenced Minister, once Preacher at Banbury; resused to christen the Lady
Popes child until their meeting day, before which time the poor infant dyed,
without damage or hurt to his soul, as that wretched fellow delivered. Against
these and many such errors some, I say may look I should reason a little: but
because they are only mayntained by old condemned Heretics, or new
Schismatic Precisians, and not generally embraced by the Synagogue of
England, whose common heresies I here impugn, it shall be sufficient to descry
the rocks, and dangerous shallowes you ought to ^hu^, least you suffer
shipwreck sailing in this difficulty without the card of direction. First then
beware of the Pelagians, who say we incur the corporal death and punishment,
but not the guiltines of our forefathers fault, unless byimitation we follow his
transgressions. Whom S. Paul refuteth, teaching, That we all trespassed in
Adam. Are by nature Rom 5. Ephis. 2. v 3.
the children of wrath. Borne and conceived (as King David says) in sin. On
the other side take heed of Matthias Illyricus his drunken phrensy, who fayneth
our birth-sinne, not to be any relation or accident, but the defiled substance
Psalm. 50. Matthew. Illiric. in. l. de essentia iustit. and iniustit. original.
it self of man. Making thereby either God the author and abettour of sin,
who creates, propagateth and preserves our humane nature, or some other
Creator of things then God with the Manichean Heretics. From whom wicked
Calvin (whose steps our Sectaryes precisely follow) departs not much,
affirming, The whole nature of man is a certain seed of sin; whereby not the
flesh or sensual parts alone, but the very soul is so corrupted, that it
Calu. l. 2. c. 1.. 9.
needs not only to he healed, but in a manner to put on a new nature. Detest
and fly these dotages: and that of Origin, who dreamed our sin of nature to
be the daily crimes Ibid.. 9.
oursoule committed before it was united to the body. Which dream he took
from the Platonists, and it is condemned Council. Brach. c. 6.
in the first Bracharan Council, and by S. Leo, Epiphanius, and others. The
dotage likewise of Tertullian, and Apollinaris, who (imagining that oursoules
descended S. Leo ep. ad Turb. c. 10. Epipha. ep. ad Joan. Ierosol. S. Aug. l.
de ^aeres. c. 86. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 8^. artic. ^. Genes. 2. Vasq. in 1. 2. disp
232. c. 4. sup. q. 83.
by propagation from nature, as the souls of plants and beasts) accordingly
thought Original sin to be the natural contagion which one polluted soul
deriueth from another. Which the whole School not only of Deuines, but also of
Philosophers constantly abhor, and truly teach, the soul of man to be
immediately created by the hand of God, and at the same time infused to the
body, as Moses intimated in the second of Genesis: Our Lord formed man of the
slyme of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life; and man
became a living soul. O there is more near then these, yet not conformable to
truth, affirm, our radical crime to be a positive accident and vicious
quality. But who I pray does produce this accident? Not God, he cannot be the
cause of finne, nor Adam, nor the Devil. nor any earthly creature, they have no
power to effectuate any such positive and hereditary quality, or if they V^sq
ib i^ disp. c. 2.
could, it being corporal as themselves grant, how can it infect the
spiritual soul? Neither yet is Original sin the mere fault which Adam
committed, imputed unto us, as Pighius, and Catharinus teach: for that makes
us by extrinsecall Romans 5. Council. Trident. sess. 5.
denomination only, not truly and properly sinners, as S. Paul, and the
Council of Trent define we are.

13. Nor is it the only binding over or desert of punishment, because these be
sequels both which follow of Vasq. ibid. cap. 3.
sin: for no man is justly designed, or obnoxious to punishment but he that
has deserved it, no man deserves it, but he that has trespassed and
offended. Sin therefore goes before the lyablenes or desert of punishment.
What then shall we say? What is the native and homebred crime of which we
speak? I answer as before, that it is the want and privation of Original
justice, as it is voluntarily caused in us by the disloyalty and transgression
we committed in our first fathers revolt: whereupon we gather out of S. Anselme
this pithy definition of it: It is the S. Ansel. l. de co^ep. virg c. 26.
Dionys. l. de Eccles. Hierar. Council. Trid. s^ss. 5. Can. 2. Aug. l. 1. de
n^^pt. and concup. c. 28.
nakedness or want of justice due to the children, caused by the disobedience of
Adam. Which S. Dionysius means when he terms it, The state of
dissimilitude with God. And the Council of Tre^t calling it the death of our
souls, which is only caused by the defect and absence of grace the true life
of them. If you ask with Pelagius how this death seizes on the hearts of
infants, by what chinke it passes into their soul? I answer with S.
Augustine: What do thou seek for a hidden ^hinke, whereas thou have a wide
and open gate? By one man, says the Apostle, sin has entered into the world.
Behold a wide gate: Adam transgressed, and in him we all fell into the curse
and malediction of sin: for he receiving from God the mantle of Original
righteousness with this express pact and condition, that if he perseuered
loyal, we should all be clothed therewith, if he revolted, we should be
disrobed of the same; hence it was, that in respect of this we were all united
in him, all one and the same in him, as in the head of mankind or first origin,
from whom not only our nature, but together with it the fruit of his obedience
or fault of his treachery was to ensue: therefore he willingly sinning, we all
offended, he disobeying we all violated the Commandment of God. After which
manner, the Apostle, as S. Augustine witnesses, declared the Aug. l. 3. de
peccat. merit. c. 7.
propagation of original infection, when he avouched, by one man sin has
entered into the world etc. in whom all have sinned. All, says S. Augustine,
sinned in him, because in that first planted nature which could engender all,
adhuc omnes vnus Aug. ibid. l. 3. cap. 7.
ille homo fuerunt, all were as yet that one man. But if all the posterity of
Adam were in him, and if all, as S. Paul testifyeth, Ambr. in c. 15. Luc.
Ansel. l. de concep. vir. gin. c. 27. Vasq. in 1. 2. disp. 131. ^. 2.
sinned in him, in him also were the children of the faithful, in him they
likewise sinned. To which purpose S. Ambrose writes: Adam was, in him we are
all; Adam perished, and in him have perished all. Which default of ours, S.
Ans^lme, and a great Divine seems to describe by the example of a subject and
his wife advanced to great preferment by the mere favor of their Pr^nce, and
being after deprived of their dignity and brought into slavery for some
treacherous conspiracy complotted against him, their children partake of the
same misery, they are thrall to the subjection and servitude of their parents.
The ancient Rabbis amongst the Jews were wont to express it, as Galatinus
reports, by this pretty similitude: There Galat. de etc. fidei Cath. l. 6. c.
10.
was a woman great with child cast into prison, who there in captivity fell
in labor, and brought forth a Son, whom there she nursed, there she vveaned,
there she cherished, and there leaving it she dyed: a fevv days after the King
passed by the gates of the prison, whom the Son of this woman seeing,
began to call out, and expostulate with him in this manner: My Lord and
Sovereign, lo here I have been borne, here I have been nursed, and I
know not for whose offense I am here desained? To whom the King makes
answer, for the ^espasse of thy Mother: she was justly committed to this
iayle, where she was delivered of thee a prisoner borne, and a prisoner after
bred by her. Some men are all born in the house of captivity, all conceived in
the thraldom of sin.

14. But you may reply, that this example ^itteth not my purpose, because
faithful parents are redeemed Man^ soul is created pure by God; his flesh not
the subject of sin by what chinkes then en treth Original infection.
by Christ from that captivity of their birth-sinne, therefore their children
cannot be enthralled in that miserable bondage. Or to display the forces of
this argument, and press it to the uttermost: two parts there be in man, his
soul, and his body: his soul he immediately receaueth from God, no way
stained, by the benefit of creation; his body or flesh which is derived from
Adam, is not properly capable of any sin. By what conduits then, by what
secret conueyances is that hateful bane transfused from him to his offspring so
far distant, and through the channels also of such as are regenerate, and
pure themselves from original guilt? I answer, and must often repeat, that
similitudes never consort in all points, but only in some one for which they
are alleged. Secondly I say, that Christians baptized in respect of their
own private persons, are cleansed and purifyed, yet the common nature which is
conveyed unto others is still contaminated with vicious corruption that
remains still captiued in the iayle of sin, from which all A particular and
full answer to every part of the former demand.
men descending must needs be borne in unhappy servitude. Lastly I answer more
clearly, and in particular to every branch of the former argument: the soul I
grant is created most pure by the hands of the highest, the flesh is not
properly taynted with the guilt of sin, yet by the union of the soul and
body, the child becomes the Son of Adam, a member of mankind, a branch of
that vine which dyed in the stock, yea he becomes one of them, who in their
root and origin trespassed, and Augu. ^. 1. retract* c. 13.
infringed the law of the Almighty, and so is justly deprived of the ornament
of Grace, and is borne in disfavor of him, when he by the will of another, as
S. Augustine writes, volu^tarily offended before he was borne. Wherefore
although the Parents be free from the stain of sinful contagion, yet making
their children by generation the Sons of Adam, they necessarily inwrap them
in the bonds of his captivity.

15. Notwithstanding if any wrangling Caluinist should further contend, and say
that as infants draw poison from Adam, from whom they derive the succession of
their pedigree, so they should suck the dew of grace from their baptized
parents, because they more immediately issue, and spring from them: You may
well deny his illation, and assign this difference, because the covenant of
transfusing either sin, or righteousness, God made with Adam, and not with
other parents, the will of all mankind was only included in him, and not in
other progenitors; therefore as we partake not the dregs of any of their proper
faults, so neither the dowryes of their heavenly grace. And yet how the
guiltines of Adams Aug. l. 3. de peccat. merit. and remis. cap. 8. and 9.
fall is distilled unto us, and how regenerated parents breed unregenerated
children, S. Augustine makes manifest by these similituds: by the example of
the circumcised Jew, who begets infants uncircumcised; of the grain of
wheat purged from chafe, and so sowed in the ground, yet growing up again
with reed, chafe and ears: likewise of Christian parents who bring forth
vnchristned babes; of consecrated or anointed persons, who glory Aug. l 2. de
peccat. merit. and remis. c. 27.
not with the issue of consecrated children. Which a little before he does thus
corroborate with the strength of reason, because renouati parents etc. renewed
parents do carnally engender, not of the first fruits of newnes, but of the
relics of oldenes. They communicate unto their posterity not the personal
blessings of new restored life, but the common Aug. l. de peccat. merit. and
remis. c. 12. 1. ad Cor. 7. verse. 14.
maledictions of old depraved nature, and so enthrall their of spring in the
bondage of Adam, cannot indue them with the inheritance of Christ. In his next
book handling that objection the Caluinists now, as the Pelagians then urged
out of S. Paul: How the unbelieving party is sanctified by the faithful, and
the children of their marriage are clean and holy? He solueth it in this
manner; that the Christian is often the occasion of gayning the other unto God,
procures also the baptizing of their children. And concludes a little after,
what other sanctification soever is meant by the Apostle, neither the
incredulous Aug. loc. citato.
can be saved, or purged from their sins without the sacrament of the Church,
Nec paruuli de quibuslibet sanctis iustisque procreati etc. Nor children
begotten of what soever holy and just parents are assoyled of the guilt of
Original sin, unless they be baptized in Christ, for whom we ought to speak
so much the more earnestly, by how much they are less able to speak for
themelues. In fine what follows of the contrary doctrine, but that all
descendents from regenerate parents take from them their right to heaven: that
to know my election, is sufficient to know that any of my carnal progenitors
was a believing Christian in the days of Christ, or at any time since: that no
children or childrens children in any succeeding generation can be damned whose
parent when they were borne was a faithful belieuer. These heresies and the
like hateful to repeat, necessarily attend on the fornamed absurdity, which
I leave as bones for Puritans to gnavv on, and will advance my pen to more
profitable discourses.

THE SEAVENTEENTH CONTROVERSY DEMONSTRATETH That our Justice is inherent in us,
and not imputed only: against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Master Abbot.
CHAP. I.
MASTER Whitaker, M. Abbot, and the rest of their crew, who deny the perfect
remission of sins in the beautiful flock of Christ's chosen sheep which come
up from the lauatory of sacred Baptism Canti^. 6. v. 5.
do much more disauow the inward justice, and splendor of their souls, which
cannot reside with those abiding spots, therefore as they hold their christened
children, and faithful belieuers only rid of their offenses by the mere
exemptio^ from pain, or not imputation of fault: so they affirm the^ no
otherwise justified and beloved of God, then by the sole imputation of Christ's
extrinsecal favor or outward righteousness ascribed unto them. But we that have
proved the true forgiveness and destruction of sin, do likewise maintain the
internal renouation and justification of man, whereby he is not only outwardly
accounted just, but inwardly endowed, beautifyed, and enriched with a heavenly
gift, or supernatural quality, pleasing unto God, which we term with S.
Paul, our spirit of adoption, Romans 8. v. 15. idem. v. 23. Joan. 3. v. 5.
Coloss. c. 1. v. 12. and 13. Ephesians. 5. v. 8. 1. Pet. 2 v. 9.
the first fruits of the spirit, or our new birth, our inherent justice,
because it does inherently dwell, and inhabit in our souls. We teach
moreover, that the purgatio^ and remission of our sins, is formally nothing
else, then the infusion of that celestial gift. For as this material Sun,
with the same beams, expels darcknes, and enlightneth the regions of the
air; so the true Sun of Justice dissolueth the clouds of iniquity, and
garnisheth our souls with the self same rays of grace, which the Apostle
testifyeth: Willing us to give thanks to God, and the ^ulg. l ^. de remis.
pe^. c. 4. Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 3. Luc. 15. v. 24. Ephesians. 2. v. 5. Gal. ^.
v. 15. Aug. ep. 54. Colos. 3. v. 9. Basil. de spirit sant. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118.
Aug. ep. 1^0. and de spir. and lit* c. 27.
Father, who has made us worthy unto the part of the lot of Saints in the
light, who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated
us into the kingdom of the Son of his love. Again to the Ephesians: You were
once darkness, but now light in our Lord. S. Peter: From darcknes he has called
you into his m^rueilous light: Where he compares the state of infidelity, or
vicious life, to darckenes; the state of justification, to light, because it
expels the mists of sin, and adorneth with inward and inherent brightness
the tabernacles of our souls, as S. Fulgentiu^, and the Council of Trent
expound the former place to the Colossians. The same is confirmed by many other
Texts, where we are said to receive life by the benefit of Justification: My
son was dead and is revived: When we were dead by sin, God quickened us
together in Christ. In respect of which we are called: A new oreature, we are
borne again by a spiritual generation, we spoil our selves of the old man,
and do on the new etc. Which newnes of ours, S. Basil calls: The
participation of the holy Ghost. S. Chrysostom: Infused bountifulnes. S.
Augustine: The grace of the new Testament written in the tables of our hearts.
S. John: The seed of God which remains in us. S. Paul: The excellent grace of
God in you, the holy spirit of God in which you Joan. 1. ep. c. 3. v. 9. 2.
Cor. 9. v. 14. Ephesians. 4. v. 30. 2. Cor. 4. v. 7. Rom 15. v. 5.
are signed; a treasure which we have in earthly vessels; Charity diffused into
our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

2. A thing so clear, that our Adversaries have not the face to gainsay it:
But confess an inward sanctification of the Holy Ghost, and alteration of man,
yet together with this sanctification, there is still (quoth M. Abbot) a
remaynder of original corruption, by the touch and stain whereof the holiness
and newnes that is wrought in us is defiled. Likewise inherent righteousness,
although it be the work of God, yet it is soyled in the puddles of our
corruption. What say you? Is sanctification stained? Holiness defiled? The work
of God soyled in the puddles of sin? All the fornamed sentences of holy
Scripture define the contrary; they teach, That we cast off the old man, and
put on the new; that we are translated from the power of darkness, to the
kingdom of light; that we were once darkness, but now light in our Lord; once
dead, but now alive to God. Likewise the Scripture often records: That the
Abbot in his defense c. 4. fol. 403. 430.
puddles of sin are cleansed, destroyed, blotted out, remitted taken away,
separated from us. How do they then abide? Orabiding not, how do they destaine
the brightness of succeeding grace? Can the banished darkness overcome the
conquering and prevailing light? The oldnes cast off, defile the newness
brought in by Christ? The destroyed guilt Ezech. 30. v. 25. Rom 6. v. 6. Act.
3. v. 19. ^ Luc. 7. v. 48. Joan. 1. v 29. Psalm. 102. v. 12.
or death of sin, infect the beauty of restored life? Let S. Paul be judge,
who speeking of some sanctified persons, who before had been fornicatours,
drunkards, idolatours, affirms: These things some of you were, but you are
awashed, you are sanctified, you are justified.

3. Now if these faithful Corinthians were not such as they had been before,
if the spots of their fornication, drunkenesse, idolatry, and all other sins
were cleansed and washed away, by the gift of sanctification, or true
justification created in the^: how durst you give the check 1. Cor. 6. v. ^^.
to so great an Apostle, and say their sanctification is tainted with the loath
some touch of their abiding puddles? Solomon auerreth: Wisdom will not enter
into the malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sin, much less will
ioyn league, and be corrupted with the filthiness of sin. Christ Sap. 1 v. 4.
cannot accord with Belial, nor the Arc of our Lord with the Idol Dagon, no
more can sanctifying grace stand together 2. Cor. 6. v. 15.
with mortal sin: for what participation has Justice with iniquity? What
society is there between light and darkness. Marry M. Abbot will contract a
society between them, at least 1. Reg. 5.
in some low degree, to which purpose he says: Does not Philosophy teach, that
contraryes are incompatible only in their 2. Cor. 6. v. 14.
extremes? But has he quite forgotten, or did he not rightly understand of
what contraryes that was meant? The Philosophers speak of some positive, not
of privative co^traryes, Abbot in his defense c. 2. f. 171.
whereof the one is the habit, the other the privation; of these no Logic or
Philosophy ever taught they could reside together in the same subject in any
remiss degree, as one cannot be both dead and alive, bereft of sight and enjoy
it also, at the same instant; such contraryes are infused grace and mortal
sin, therefore they cannot comply in any measure the one with the other: for
a deadly crime howsoever it be resisted, and curbed of his reign (which is al
you pretend to link it with grace) yet so long as it formally dwells and
soiourneth in man, it must needs denominate and make him a sinner (for every
form gives the formal effect to the subject it informs). If a sinner, a
slave to sin, starcke dead to God, wholly bereft of his favor, truly hated
and abhorred of him, thoroughly unclean, and deservedly guilty of eternal
damnation, therefore he cannot possibly at the same time by any spark of grace
be alive to God, enjoy his favor, be accepted and beloved of him, be truly
clean and Medina i^ 1. 2. q. 113. art. 2. Caiet. ibid Vasq. in 1. 2. disp. 10.
4. c. 4. and 51*
worthy of his kingdom. The soul which by sin is the aduoutresse of the
Devil, and thrall of Satan, cannot be also the spouse of Christ, and the
adopted child of God, unless it be by such unequal shares, as that which is the
Devils by true possession of inherent sin, you will account to be Gods by
outward claim of imputatio^ only, and make the Prince of darcknes too strong
an armed man, to be presently cast forth by the King of heaven.

4. The Fathers likewise so much abhor this diabolical Luc. 11. v. 21.
Phrensy, that the Devil should have any part in us, who are renewed in
Christ, or that the tainture of our contagion should stain the sanctification
wrought by Chrysostom. ho. 40. in ^5. ^. ad Cor. S. Basil. in psalm. 23. August.
tract. 9. in ep. Joan Hier. l. 3. cont. Pela Eusebius. de corp. and sang. Dei.
Niss. l. de perfec. homin. forma. Macar. l. de lib. arbit* Whitaker in his
answer to Campians 8. reason. Fulk. in c. 4 ad Ephesians. sect. 2. Abbot in ^is 4.
c. sect. 10. VVhita^. vbi supra. Aug. l. 6. (...) Iul. ^. ^.
him, as they contrariwise teach, that our inward renouation ever expels the
dregs of mortal, and sometyms also venial default (which I inuincibly proved
in the precedent Controversy) and makes our souls (as S. Chrysostom says)
more pure then the beams of the Sun, so amyable to God, as he sits,
according to S. Basil, in the shining soul, making it as it were his throne:
for which cause S. Augustine calls that internal sanctification, the beauty
of our soul, S. Hierome: The purity of our soul, Eusebius: Hidden purity,
Macarius: A certain hidden or mystical garment of heavenly beauty. But
Protestants do answer, how beautiful soever that grace may seem, it only
declares, quoth Whitaker, the good will and clemency of God toward us; it is
the effect, not the cause of our Justification. This renouation (says Fulke)
is only begun in this life and not perfected. These beams (quoth M. Abbot) are
too dim and dark to justify us in the sight of God, for that righteousness,
that justifying grace, they place, with Whitaker, in the free mercy and favor
of God, who reconciled us to himself in Christ, that, according to them, is in
God only, and not in us, unless it be by mere imputation: but I will manifestly
prove first, that our inward renouation is perfect, and pure from the stain of
sin, though not from the defects and infirmityes which have sprung up from
sin: secondly that grace, by which we are justified is inherent in us, and
not in Christ: thirdly that, that inherent grace or inward justice does truly
instify us before the face of God.

5. The first is testified by S. Augustine, saying: Grace does now perfectly
renew man, so far forth, as it appertains to the d^^^^erance wholly from all
sins, not so far as it belongs to the freedom from all evils. Again:
In Christian baptism, perfect newnes and perfect health is attained from those
evils, by which we were guilty, not from these with which we must yet combat,
least Ibid. c. 7. Augu. de not. and gra. c. 42. Augu. de gra. Christ. l. ^. c.
30. De sprit. and literae. cap. 32. Lib. de not. and great. cap. 63.
we become guilty: and speaking of charity, by which this renouation is made,
he says: Charity it self is most true, most plenteous, most perfect justice.
The second is also warranted by the same S. Augustine, who expressly affirms,
The grace by which we are justified, not to be Gods gracious and extrinsecall
favor, but his charity diffused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given
us; and this charity not to be that, by which he loves us, but that by which
he makes us lovers of him: Likewise by this only charity powered into our
hearts, men are just whosoever are just. Moreover conferring the law written in
tables of stone, with the law of Grace engraven in our hearts, he avouches:
That was written out of man, that it might terrify him, this in man himself
that it might intrinsecally justify him. Further: This justice of ours is the
grace of Christ regenerating us De spirit. and lit. c. 17.
by the holy Ghost. In fine explicating these words of the the Apostle: The
justice of God by faith of Jesus Christ, which the Caluinists gloss to be that
which is resident in Christ, De peccat. re^is. c. 25.
S. Augustine expounds thus: The Justice of God by faith of Jesus Christ,
that is, by faith wherewith we believe in Christ: for as that faith is called
Christ's, not by which Christ belieues; so that Romans 3. v. 22. Aug. de spirit
and lit. c. 9. cap. 11. i^ psalm. 30. Conc. 1. and tract. 26. in Joan.
Justice is called Gods, not whereby God is just: both of them, faith and
justice be ours, but therefore they are termed Gods and Christ's, because
through their liberal^^y they are given to us.

6. The third and chiefest point (whereby the former two are more strongly
confirmed) that our inherent justice does truly justify us in the sight of God,
the Apostle himself manifestly teaches, saying: As by the disobedience of one
man many were made sinners, so also by the obedience of one many shall be made
just. For the fall of Adam made us truly sinners by inward infection before the
face of God, Romans 5. v. 19.
therefore the merits of christ did make us truly just by internal justice in
the sight of God. This place so vexes all Sectaryes, as they know not how to
rid themselves of Calu. l. 3. instit. c. 11. sect. 2.
it. Calvin answers that we are just, because we are declared and pronounced
just by the judgment of God, but to be constituted or made just, as the Apostle
writes, imports more then to be declared such. Again this authentical and
true judgment of God presupposes justice in us, before it can be Ca^^. ibid.
rightly pronounced, as not to depart from Caluins own example. If an Innocent
be brought to be arraigned before the Fulk in c* 5. ad Romans sect. 3. Abbot in
his defense of the reformed Cathol c. 4. sect. 6. 8. Abbot loc. citato. Fulke
vbi supra. Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Dureum. fol. 602. Aug. l. 1. de peccat. merit.
and remis. cap. 9. and 15. Chrysostom. ho. 10. in c. 15. ad Romans Theoph. in hunc loc.
seat of a righteous judge, when judgment is given according to his innocence,
he is said to be justified, quoth he, before the Judge. Well, I say so too: but
as innocence there, so justice here precedeth judgment in the party adjudged,
or declared just, even in the sight of the Almighty, who pronounces his
sentence according to truth. Doctor Fulke and Doctor Abbot help out their
Master, and grant that imputative Justice, by which he is constituted and
made just indeed, goes before the sentence, yet not inherent Justice. But S.
Paul teaches, that as we are made sinners by the offense of Adam, so just by
the grace of Christ: therefore as besides the imputation of Adams default there
is a true and proper sin of nature, which infecteth us all, and makes us truly
and properly sinners in the eyes of God, as both they and all English
Protestants hold with us against the Pelagians: so besides the imputation of
Christ's justice, which cannot make us formally just, there ought to be a true
and inhabitant justice which beautifyeth our souls before the throne of
heaven, or else we could not be truly made just by Christ, as we are made
sinners by Adam, and therein consists the force of the Antithesis S. Paul
uses between them, which M. Abbot and Fulke like cunning Pylots, who warily
shun the most perilous rocks, silently pass over; but M. Whitaker perceives
it well, and rather ventureth to dash himself against it, by denying the
comparison, then not to take notice thereof: Though (says he) we be just in
Christ, as we are sinners in Adam, yet not after the same manner. No? I appeal
again to the sacred Text, to S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Origin,
Theophilact, and all Interpreters (Heretics only excepted) whether the
opposition does not wholly accord in this, that as true sin hateful to God
was distilled from Adam; so true justice acceptable in his sight, is
communicated unto us by Christ: for S. Paul does not only teach, That as Adam
was the author of sin, so Christ of righteousness, wherein Whitaker* loco
citato* Origin. l. 5. in c. 5. ad Rom:
M. Whitaker only places the sum of his discourse; he adds moreover, That
as by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so also by the
obedience of one man, many shall be made just: where he makes (says Origin) a
comparison of sin, and death diffused into all men from Adam, and of
justification and Theoph. in hunc loc.
life from Christ. A little before he explaineth how they are both alike in the
diffusion or communication from one to many, and differ in the thing they
communicate, because from the one sin, from the other justification is
imparted. Romans 3. v. 15. Ibid. v. 17.
And Theophilact: As by the default of one, sin crept in unto comdemnation of
death, so by the justice of one, salvation entered to justification of life.
Besides the Apostle in the same place amplifyeth this point, and affirms that
the grace instilled by Christ has more power to justify, then sin to
destroy, saying: If by the offense of one, many dyed, much more the grace of
God, and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ, has abounded upon
many. Likewise, If in the offense of one death reigned by one, much more they
that receive the abundance of grace, and of donation, and of justice, shall
reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Out of which words we collect five
infallible verityes against the erroneous doctrine of Protestants. First, that
grace communicated by Christ, is not weak and imperfect, but copious and
abundant. Secondly, it is not only imputed unto us, but received of us.
Thirdly, it is not the meer^ grace of sanctification, but of Justice. Fourthly
it reigns and prevails in us to produce works of justification to life, as
sin reigned to bring forth works of iniquity to death. Fifthly, it is much
more powerful to justify and make us acceptable to God, then sin was to
condemn and make us odious unto him. Therefore he concludes* Where sin
abounded, grace did more abound, that as sin raygned to death, so also grace
may reign by justice to life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ibid.
v. 10. and 22.


7. Let us match these Texts of holy Writ with others, and make all modest men
ashamed to spurn against a truth warranted by the collation of sundry places.
The same S. Paul writing to the Corinthians, says: As we have 1. Cor. 15. v.
49.
borne the image of the earthly, let us also bear the image of the heavenly:
but the Image of earthly Adam we have truly borne by the deadly impression of
internal and hateful sin, Cent. 3. c. 4. Column. 48.
therefore we must truly bear the figure of Christ by the beautiful stamp of
internal and acceptable grace, as Origin cyted by the Centurists does plainly
insinuate, and the Apostle likewise confirms in his Epistle to the Ephesians:
Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which according
to God is created in Justice and holiness of Ephesians. 4. v. 24.
truth; behold we have not the new man imputed unto us, but we put him on us,
formed and created, not in sign and sanctification, but in justice and holiness
of truth, and that according to God. Besides it is said: We are buried with him
by ad Romans 6.
Baptism to the end, that as Christ did rise from death, so we may walk in
newnes of life. Upon which words S. Augustine auerreth, Aug. in Enchir. cap.
52.
That as in Christ there was a true resurrection, so in us there is a true
justification. Whosoever then detracteth from the truth of our infused justice,
detracteth from the verity of Christ's resurrection; and whosoever impayreth the
perfection of this, darkneth also the glory of that. S. Chrysostom commenting
upon that passage of S. Paul above cyted: You are washed, you are sanctified,
you are ^. ad. Cor. 6. v. 11.
justified, says: He shows that you are not only made clean but holy and
just: Illuminated and made perfect, says S. Clement of Alexandria, Of old,
made new, of humane divine, says S. Gregory Nazianzen. Which are most evident
testimonies Clem. l. 1. Pedago. cap. 6. Nazian. ora in san. bap.
for my purpose: yet to leave no place of tergiuersation to wrangling
Sophisters, I will further corroborate this chief and fundamental article
with other most clear and irrefragable arguments.

8. That grace and renouation is perfect, entire, and not the effect but the
true cause of our justification by the Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Dutaeum.
very consent of our Adversaries, which absolueth us from sin, endueth us
with purity and holiness in the eyes of our Creator, engrafteth us into Christ,
unites us unto God, and gives us life in him, makes us his adopted children,
entitleth us to the right, and purchases the inheritance of our eternal
kingdom. All this is wrought, not by any other precedent cause, but by that
inherent Romans ^. v. 4.
justice or infused charity, which God deriueth into our souls, therefore that
makes us truly righteous and just before the Tribunal of his highness. First
it cleanses us Ibid. v. 7.
from our sins, as S. Paul to the Romans defines, saying: We are buried
together with Christ, by Baptism, into death. Romans 8. v. 2. Tertul. l. de
resur. carn. c. 46. Basil. de spir. san. c. 15. Aug. l. 1. de nupt. and concup.
c. 22. Lib. de lib. arbit. c. 14. 15. 16. and de sprit. and liter. 8. 17.
What death, but the death of sin, of which it immediately follows, he that
is dead, is justified from sin, to wit, is released and absolved from sin
by the newnes of life, wherein he resembles the resurrection of Christ. Again,
The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has delivered me from the law
of sin, where Tertullian instead of delivered uses the word manu misit, has
set free, like a bound man enfranchized, and set at liberty by the benignity of
his Master. S. Basil explicating the former place, says: The spirit infuseth
lively and reviving force, recovering our souls from the death of sin into a
new life. And S. Augustine, the later, writes thus: The law of the spirit of
life in Christ has dissolved the guilt of concupiscence, procuring remission
of all sins: who does also often testify, that the law of the spirit of life
is the grace, of the new Testament written in our hearts. Secondly it does not
only expel the mists of sin, but garnisheth also our souls with the luster
of virtue, as I have already convinced in my first encounter against M. Abbot,
which cannot be interpreted Ephesians. 1. v. 4.
of signs, of beauty grateful to men, who pierce not into the closet of our
soul, nor behold the light and brightness thereof mentioned above. Therefore it
must Joan. 15. 1. Cor. c. 12. v 26.
needs be expounded of the purity, splendor, and holiness it displayeth before
the face of God, according to that of S. Paul: He chosevs, that we should be
holy and immaculate in his sight, in, charity, that is, by means of his
habitual charity harbored in our breasts.

9. Thirdly this inward renouation does truly incorporate us in the mystical
body of our Lord and Savior, Coloss. 3. v. 13. Gal. 3. v. 17 Romans 8. v. 11.
Aug. de. spir. and lit. c. 29. Romans 13. v. 13. and 14.
it engrafteth us like lively branches into him our true vine, it makes us the
body of Christ, and members of member. Doing on (says S. Paul to the
Collossians) the new man, him that is renewed unto knowledge according to the
image of him that created him: To the Galathians: as many of you as are
baptized in Christ have put on Christ. And how have ye put him on, but as the
same Apostle testifyeth, By his spirit dwelling in you? Whereof S. Augustine
says, By the spirit of Christ incorporated and made a member of Christ, every
one may (inwardly affoarding increase) accomplish works of justice. Besides that
very word, to put on Christ, often used in holy Write, do on the armor of
light, do ye on our Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Hebrew Indui
haebraic^ la^a^. Isa. 61. Chrysostom. in 1. c. ad Gal. and in c. 3. ad Romans Cyril.
l. 9. in Genes. Hieron. ad Pamach. Romans 6. v. 10. 1. Cor. 6. v. 17. Joan. 14.
v. 23. 1 Cor. 3. v. 16. 17. 1. ep. Joan. c. 3 v. 24. 1. Joan. 4. v. 16. 1.
Joan. 4. v. 17. Romans 6. v. 11. Augu. de verbis Apostol. ser. 18. and 28. l. de
ciuit. Dei. c. 24.
phrase, and allusion to the long gowns of the Jews, signifies great plenty
and abundance of grace, sanctity and justice, with which they that put on
Christ are inwardly clad, as it were with a rich and gorgeous robe, which does
not only cover the nakedness, but wholly adorneth the temple of our souls with
heavenly rays of incomparable virtues. Therefore Isay calls it, The vestment
of salvation, the garment of justice, or coat of joy, as the 70. Interpreters;
or vestment Jesus, as other translate it, whereof read S. Chrysostom, S.
Cyrill, S. Hierome.

10. Fourthly by this inhabiting grace, a true union is made, a league is
contracted between God and us: We live to him. Are one spirit with him. He
loves us, makes his abode with us, as in his holy temple. In this we know
that he abides in us, by his spirit which he has given us. He that abides in
charity, abides in God, and God in him: where he speaks not of weak or
impure, but of complete and perfect charity. For it follows in the next
verse: In this is charity perfected with us, that we may have confidence in the
day of judgment. Besides, Think you also that you are dead truly to sin, but
alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord. Therefore S. Augustine often calls the
Holy Ghost dwelling in us, or his charity diffused into our hearts, the Life of
our soul, by which we truly live to God.

11. Fifthly it aduanceth us to the dignity of Gods children: You have received
the spirit of adoption of sons, wherein we cry Abba Father: Again, See what
manner of Charity the Romans S. v. 15. ^. Joan. c. 3. v. 1.
Father has given us, that we should be named, and be the sons of God. To
which end S. John Damascen declares, how God infuseth into our souls certain
divine and supernatural qualityes, whereby we receive a divine and
supernatural kind of being, are partakers of the divine nature, preferred to
be Gods, and children of the highest. Neither is there any former Joan. Damas.
l. 4. de fide c. 4. Romans 8. v. 9. Ephesians. 1. v. 14. Romans 8. v. 17. Tit. 3 v. 5.
6. and 7.
cause of our union with God, whereof this spirit of adoption may be termed an
effect; for S. Paul says: If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same
is not this, by any thing whatsoever going before. Hence we deduce the sixth
prerogative of this inward renouation, that is, our claim to the kingdom of
heaven, therefore it is termed pignus haereditatis, the pledge of our
inheritance, because the sanctity and grace which the holy Ghost works in us,
affoardeth a certain hope and moral assurance of our future glory, as the
Apostle by way of gradation excellently argues in this manner: If sons,
heirs also; heirs truly of God, and coheirs of Christ. Likewise, God
according to his mercy has saved us, by the lauer of regeneration, and
renouation of the Holy Ghost, whom he has powered upon us abundantly by Jesus
Christ our Savior, that being justified by his grace, we may be heirs,
according to hope of life everlasting.

12. Peruse these words, O ye Sectaryes, ponder the sense and meaning of
them, and stoop at length to the voice of truth so often sounded forth by this
great Apople and trympet of heaven: for he says, 1. That we are Ahund^ Greece
(...) Hieron.
saved by this benefit of renouation, but nothing can be the formal cause of
our salvation, but true and perfect justice: Therefore we are made by the grace
of Baptism perfectly just. 2. Not outwardly by imputation, but inwardly by the
holy Ghost powered upon us. 3. And that not sparingly and by peece-meale, but
abundantly, richely, or bountifully, as the Greek, largly, or copiously, as S.
Hierome reads. 4. And to no other effect, then that justified by his inward
grace, we may be heirs in hope of life everlasting. And S. John concludes,
that without this renouation, No man can enter the Kingdom of heaven,
signifying thereby, that it is Joan. 3. ^. 5.
not the effect or sign without which we might enter, but the true cause of
our entrance, not weak and halting, but true and entiere justice; because it
is true justice, says S. Augustine, to which eternal life is due.

13. The last privilege arises from the former, that Augu. ep. 205. paulo
ante medium. (ui debetur vita aeternaver a iustitia est. Romans 8. v. 20. and 11.
Aug. l. de spir. and lit. cap. 29.
it purchases also the resurrection of our bodies, and crown of our eternal
felicity: If Christ be in you, the body indeed is dead because of sin, but
the spirit lives because of justification. And he that rayseth up Jesus Christ
from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of his spirit
dwelling in you. Note this causall addition, because of the spirit dwelling in
you, which S. Augustine advisedly observes, and accounts our Resurrection in
flesh to immortality, meritum spiritus, a deserving of the spirit, which goes
before it in justification as in a meet, convenient, and congruous
resurrection. So that two ways it does properly merit the glory of
immortality, both for that it is given before hand, as a pledge, earnest, Joan.
4. v. 14. Cyril in ^um. loc. Theoph. ibid.
or right thereunto, supposing the benignity and promise of God; as also
because it does produce good works, which do condignely deserve and augment
the same, therefore called by S. Iolm according to S. Cyrils, and Theophilacts
interpretation, a fountain of water spriging up to life everlasting, that is a
celestial fountain of purifying grace, copious in it self and over flowing
with the rivers Whitaker in his answer to 8. ^^ason of M. Camp^on, and in his
^. book against I^^raus. Abbos in ^is defense ^. 4. sect. 3.
of sundry virtues, which wafte us to the haue^ of eternal rest. But if all
this be not sufficient to justify us before God, what is required to atchieue
that happiness here upon earth, if the divine grace and supernatural quality,
which works in us all the forenamed effects, be not grateful and pleasing in
the eyes of our Sovereign? What I pray you is acceptable unto him? Marry,
says Whitaker, and M. Abbot, that which is so perfect as satisfyeth the law of
God. I see your windings: first you answered, that the grace which inhabiteth
in us, is defiled: Then, that it is not perfect, not justifying grace, at least
not such as iustifyeth us in the sight of God: Now, not such as satisfyeth and
fullfilleth the law. Well, you trauerse much ground, but to little purpose: for
S. Paul, S. Augustine, and diverse others manifestly teach, that by this grace
of Christ, by the sweetness of hi^ love, we fulfill the law of God, which by
fear and terror we never could do, whose testimonies I shall allege in the
Controversy of keeping the Commandments, entreating my Reader to peruse them
there, whilst I pursue my victory, and follow the chased enemy, retyring now
for succor to the castle of holy Scripture, where Whitaker Whitaker. in his
answer to 8. reason of M. Camp. fol. 224. 2. ad Cor. 5. verse. ^1. Calu. l. 3.
instit. c. ^^.. 230.
seeks to fortify himself with that saying of S. Paul: Christ was made sin
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Heerupon he
infers, that seeing Christ was not truly and really made sin for us but by
imputatio^, so we are no otherwise made righteousness in him: which argument
Calvin also most eagerly presses and reserueth as his unconquerable or last
refuge in the Rereward of his objections, and yet it is presently at the first
encounter beaten to the ground.

14. For the scope and tenor of the Apostles Analogy does not consist in the
manner, but in the cause of Christ's being made sin, to the end he might make
us just, albeit in a different sort: he, made sin by a mere imputation,
because it was impossible for him to be truly a sinner; we, properly and truly
just, because it is more Tit. 2. v. 24. Leuit, 4. v. 11. and 24. Ezec. 44. v.
29. Osee. 4. v. 8
honorable and glorious unto Christ, to cleanse to himself a people
acceptable, to enrich and endow us with the treasures of his inherent justice,
then to leave our filth and ordure ouershaddowed with the mantle of his
external righteousness. Secondly Christ is said to be made sin, that is, an
host and sacrifice for the extirpation of sin. So the Hebrew word Chattat,
peccatum, Sin, often signifies a victime for sin, as in Leuiticus,
Ezechiel, and Osee, peccatum Hebraice Chattat, Peccatum, in the latin it is
Pecca* ta*
populi mei comedent, they shall eat the sin of my people, that is, the
host or victime for their sin. Therefore as Christ was not by the means of
another, but in his own person truly and really made a sacrifice for sin; so
we not only by imputation, but truly and really in our selves ought to be the
justice of God in him. And the Apostle elegantly says, that we must be not
just, but the justice of God in Christ, to oppose it to sin, signifying
withal, that it is the effect and likeness of Gods increated justice, by
infused and created charity communicated unto us, as S. Cyril expounds it; or
for that it is given us Cyril l. 22. the saur. c 3. August l. de spirit. and
lit. c. 18. Chrysostom. and Theoph. in bunc loc.
through the merits of Christ from God, according to S. Augustine; or lastly to
betoken the excellency of the Justice, which leaves no spot or blemish of
sin, but makes us as it were wholly Grace, wholly Justice it self, as S.
Chrysostom, and Theophilict do insinuate.

15. Another argument they take out of the first to the Ephesians: He has
gratifyed us in his beloved Son, or as they to boulster their heresy
corruptly translate, he has made us Ephesians. 1. v. 6. 3.
acceptable in the beloved. As though we were only outwardly accepted by the
favor of his Son, not in wardly endowed with the participation of his
Justice: how beit the In the Bible set forth by his Majesty.
Greek word (...), does not only import, to accept as gracious, but to make
gracious and acceptable indeed by communicating unto us inherent justice, in
ward ornaments, by which God makes our soul, as S. Chrysostom says,
pulchram, desiderabilem, ac dilectam, beautiful, Chrysostom. in ^um loc.
desired, and beloved of him.

16. Thirdly Whitaker, and Fulke object out of S. Paul to the Corinthians:
Christ is made unto us from God, wisdom, Whitaker in his answer to 3. reason
of ^^. Campian. Fulk. in c. 2. ad Cor. sect. 2. 3. Cor. 1. v. 30.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Therefore say they our
righteousness, is placed in Christ, not heaped up with our virtues. But the
contrary is gathered out of the same words: for Christ is there affirmed to be
our righteousness, as he is our sanctification and wisdom: now he is our
sanctification as they themselves agree by inherent sanctity; our wisdom
likewise by the habit or gift of wisdom infused into us: Therefore our
righteousness, or justice rather, by created justice imparted to our souls. I
answer again, that Christ is called our justice, diverse and sundry ways. 1.
In the way of Communication, because the perfectio^s of the head are
communicated to the body. 2. In way of Richardus Tap. in explica. ar de iustif
Stapl l. 7. de iustit. imputat. c. 9. Romans 8. v. 29. Bernard. ep. 190.
assimilation, for that God the Father has predestined us to be made
conformable to the Image of his Son. 3. In way of satisfaction, because he
has fully satisfied for the debt of our sins, which satisfaction of his is
applied unto us, and made ours indeed by imputation, as S. Bernard testifyeth,
yet not without true and inherent justice also in our selves. 4. In the way of
merit, for that he has merited, and purchased for us true justice from the
hands of God. 5. In the way of causality, for that he is also together with
God the efficient cause of our sanctification and justice. These and other
causes, which Protestants ignorantly Council. Trid sess. 6 c. 7. Aug. l. de
spirit. and ^it. c. 9. and in psalm 30. Hier. dial. aduers. P^lag.
mingle and confound, the holy Council of Trent does wisely distinguish, and
set down in this manner: The sinall cause of our justification is the glory of
God, of Christ, and eternal life, the efficient, God, the ineritorious, his
beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ etc. the instrument all, baptism etc. the
only formal cause is the justice of God, not that by which he is just, but by
which he makes us just, by which he cloatheth man, as S. Augustine speaks,
when he iustifyeth the wicked, or as he says in another place, which God
imparteth that man may be just, which S. Hierome, S. Bernard, and sundry
reasons manifestly Bernard. epist, 290.
approve, as I shall more plentifully discover in the Chapter ensuing.

THE SECOND: CHAPTER: IN WHICH The former doctrine is confirmed by more
reasons, authorityes, and other objections of our Adversaries refuted.
AS the inbred naughtynes of Original infection never cleanly rinsed or
scoured out, is the sluse of filthiness in Protestants judgment, and root of al
their impious opinions, which I named above: so the heavenly beam of
inhabitant grace, which garnisheth the souls of Christ's faithful servants, is
the head and wellspring according to us, of all the good that proceeds from
us. This iustifyeth us before the Tribunal of his highness, this makes our
works pleasing to his Majesty, this aduanceth them to the dignity of merit,
this purchases the crown of reward, this ministers power, and ability to
fulfill his Commandments, and whatsoever else we do acceptable to him, and
worthy of his kingdom, al flows from the veins of this celestial
fountain. Therefore I labor to fense and strengthen it further with some other
impregnable reasons.

2. The first, prosecuted by Andreas Vega, is to this purpose: The justice
which Adam had before his fall, was not imputative, but inherent and true
Justice, which made him amyable and grateful in the sight of God, as all the
Vega l. 7. in Council Trid. c. 22.
Fathers, and our adversaries with them generally confess: but the same
Justice is restored unto us by the merits of Christ, which we lost in Adam:
therefore true Justice before God is here communicated to our souls by the
benefit Romans 5.
of his passion. The minor proposition is taught by the Apostle: that we
receive by Christ more then we lost by Adam, Aug. tom. 3. de Genesis l. 6. c. 21.
Aug. l. d^ spir. and lit. cap. 21. Iraen. l. 3. c. 20 Cyril. l. 1^. in Joan. ^*
25.
and subscribed unto by S. Augustine, saying: We receive not the immortality of
a spiritual body which man had not, but we receive Justice from which by sin
man was fallen. And in another place he affirms: in the inward man renewed by
the grace of Christ, that justice to be written, which fault had cancelled. By
S. Irenaeus, who teaches, that the Son of God was to this end incarnate,
that, that which we had last lost in Adam of the Image and likeness of God, we
might recover in Christ Jesus. By S. Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria: the nature
of man to be sanctified, is to be reformed and renewed by participation of the
spirit, according to the first image; that invested with that first grace, we
may overcome the reigning sin; adhering to divine charity, and wholly given to
the study of virtue: and so the law of the flesh being vanquished, we may
preserve inviolable the beauty of the image imprinted in us.

3. Doctor Abbot ouer-borne with the weight of this reason, and poise of some
of the former auctorityes, Abbot ^. 4. sect* 13. fol. 431.
plainly affirms, that Christ came to restore the inherent Justice we lost
in Adam, yet so, as he begins, but does not perfect it, as long as we
continue in this life, and therefore inherent Justice is not such in any men
here, as that thereby he can be found just in the sight of God. Yes, you cannot
deny, but that Adams justice before his fall was such, as it made him just in
the sight of God, but these Fathers contest that we partake by the merits of
Christ, that justice, from which by sin man was fallen, that which fault had
cancelled; yea, says M. Abbot, we receive the same not really, but in hope.
Neither Abbot lol. citato.
will this serve your turn: for in hope we possess the immortality of our
bodies, of which notwithstanding S. Augustine affirms, we receive not the
immortality of a spiritual body etc. but receive Justice: therefore we receive
this really, and not only in hope as we do immortality. Besides he testifyeth
this justice to be given when man is renewed by grace, which not only the holy
Scriptures, but your selves also confess to be really performed even in this
life. S. Cyrill avouches the like, with whom Irenaeus agrees in such
perspicuous terms, as no shift can be devised to expound them otherwise.
Andreas Vega vbi supra.


4. The second reason insinuated by the fornamed Vega, is, that one and the
same thing can never be both the efficient and formal cause of the same
effect. The Sun for example cannot be the cause of heat, and be the heat
itself which is produced; but the Justice of Christ is the cause of our
justification, and that by producing justice in us: for of his fullnes we al
partake more or less according to the measure of his donation. Which cannot be
meant of imputative justice, which without limitation or proportion of measure
is equally referred to every one: therefore of inherent, whereof Christ's justice
being the efficient, cannot be also the formal cause; or if it be, how is it
also the free favor and mercy of God, as Protestants Whitaker. in his answer
to 8. reason of M. Campian fol. 228.
likewise unadvisedly teach? How does Whitaker avouch, We acknowledge no other
justifying grace, then the great and free mercy of God, whereby he did elect
and predestinate us in Christ, before all eternity unto life everlasting. And
yet he says a little after: This obedience of Christ imputed unto us, and
apprehended by faith, is that righteousness of ours, which you enquire after.
Ibid. fol. 229.
What? Is the obededience of Christ all one with the mercy and goodness of God,
the humility of him that obeys, with the greatness of him who is obeyed? Or do
such diverse causes both work the same formal effect? I need not wonder at
your ignorance in points of divinity, who are so little seen in the principles
of Philosophy.

5. The third reason is, the divine grace with which we are here justified
upon earth, is the same which shall be hereafter crowned in heaven: for the
reward of glory is there proportioned to the small pittance of justice, or 2.
Cor. 9. v. 6.
great measure of grace, which here we obtain: He that sows sparingly,
sparingly also shall reap, and he that sows in blessings, of blessings also
shall reap. Now the harvest of celestial justice, which we shall hereafter
enjoy, is not imputative, but such as shall inhere and beautify our souls,
therefore that which is here either infused by God, or which we purchase by
our good works, is likewise in herent and dwelling in us.

6. The fourth reason, if by the justice of Christapprehended and applied unto
us by faith, we be formally just, we should all equally participate the
perfection of justice; one could not be more holy, righteous, and just, Joan.
14. v. 2. Hiero. l. 2. aduers. Iouin. 1. Cor. 15. v. 41. 42. ^eild in his 3.
book of the Church c. 30. fol. 140.
then another, and consequently because according to the proportion of justice
the crown of glory is assigned, there should be no distinction of glory, no
difference of reward in heaven, contrary to that of Christ: In the house of my
Father there be many mansions; of the Apostle: One glory of the Sun, another
glory of the stars: for star differs from star in glory, so also the
resurrection of the dead. And whereas M. Field avouches, That from imputed
righteousness which is equal in all men no imparity of joy can flow etc. but
from the imparity of inherent righteousness it is that there are so different
degrees of joy and glory found among the Saints of God, that are in heaven, he
avouches two things, which countenance our doctrine: the one directly, that
our justice is inherent, the other consequently, that this inherent justice is
perfect, entiere, clean from al impurity, and wholly pleasing to God: otherwise
it could not deserve any reward at his hands, it could not be renowned,
honored, nor yet admitted into that pure and immaculate kingdom, into which
no defiled thing can enter.

7. Fifthly, the Justice with which baptized infants are endowed by the water of
regeneration, is not the extrinsecal Justice of Christ apprehended by an act of
faith, which sucklings deprived of reason cannot have, but they are justified
(as M. Field with us auerreth, and strives to wrest the meaning of Luther)
with the habits or potentiall habilityes of Faith, Hope, and Charity, but
according to S. Augustine: Field in his 3. book of the Church c. 44. Aug. l.
1. de peccat. merit. c. 9.
God gives to the faithful the most secret grace of his spirit, which
secretly he powers into Infants also; as they then, so likewise we are
justified, not by actual and imputative, but by habitual and inhabtant
Justice, inwardly cleansing and adorning our souls.

8. Sixthly, as no man can be truly accounted the object of Gods hatred, and
worthy of damnation by the mere imputation of fault, unless he be faulty indeed
and guilty of crime; so (as Gabriel Vasquez solidly disputes) none can be
reputed the object of his love, and worthy Gab. Vasquez in 1. 2. disp. 206.
cap. 3.
of heaven by the extrinsecall will of God, not imputing sin, or imputing
Justice, unless he be truly free from sin and endowed with Justice. Again, as
no man can be made truly and formally wise by the wisdom which is in another,
or live by the life which another enjoys, so neither formally just, by the
justice which is in another, Abbot in his defense c. 4. fol. 423. 424.
and so not by the Justice which is in Christ. M. Abbot in his defense
answers, That a man may be formally just two manner of ways. A man is one
way formally just in quality, another way formally just in law. And then he
grants: That it were absurd indeed, that a man should be formally just in
quality by the justice of another: But he may be, says he, formally just in
law. For in the course of Law and judgment, the form of Justice is, not to be
subject to crime or accusation; and he is formally just, against whom no
action or accusation is liable by law etc. And this is the state of our
Justice, and righteousness in the sight of God. Has not he shaped a fine
answer very suitable to Scriptures, and much to the credit of Christ his
Master? For did he give Tit. 2. v. 24.
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all antiquity, and might
cleanse to himself a people acceptable? Did he shed his precious blood, to
take away our sins, purging us by the lauer of water in the word? And has he
only performed it by immunity from punishment, not by cancelling and purging
Joan. 1. v. 29. and z. loan. 3. v. 5. ad Ephesians. 5. v. 26. Joan. 17. v. 19. Romans
8. v. 15: 2. Petr. 1. v. 3. ad Ephesians. 4. v. 14. Field. l. 3. c. 44. of the
Church fol. 178.
our faults? The Scriptures manifestly teach, That he sanctified himself, that
we might also be sanctified in truth; gives us his spirit of adoption, most
great and precious promises, that by these we may be made partakers of the
divine nature, created a new in justice and holiness of truth. And is all this
done in the external proceeding and course of law, remaining in our selves
still tainted with the inherence of sin?

9. All Philosophers accord, that the denomination of a subject is more truly
and properly taken from the inherent quality which abides in it, then from the
outward form, which is referred unto it; as a Black Moore, although he be
apparelled in a white livery, is properly notwithstanding termed black of his
innate blacknes, not white of his outward habit. Therefore if we be truly
sinners by inward infection: If the inherence of sin (as Field confesses) be
acknowledged in every justified person, notwithstanding his justification,
howsoever the justice of Christ be Field ibid.
imputed unto us to free us from the process of the Law, yet we cannot be
truly termed just, holy, innocent, and im^aculate, the children of God, and
heirs of heaven, as we are often called in holy Write: Being as I say, in very
deed impure, defiled channels of sin, by the inherence thereof: and
consequently in our selves slaves to Satan, worthy hell, worthy damnation.
Neither is it enough to say, we may be accounted innocent, because no
indictment can be drawn, no accusation heard, no attachement take place
against us: for as the guilt of sin and heynousnes of treason goes before
the desert of punishment, much more before the action or accusation which is
laid to our charge: so the exemption or immunity from the execution of the law
is no acquittance or freedom from the desert, much less from the guiltynes or
treachery of our hearts. Therefore the holy Ghost, who judges of us as we are
indeed, should falsely term us holy, just etc. once darkness, now light in our
Lord, if we be still darckned with the mists of sin, and are only freed from
the punishment thereof.

10. Moreover, what if M. Field the polisher of the rough and crabbed speeches
of other Protestants, the refiner of their impure doctrine; what if himself
auow, that sin still lurketh in the faithful, not wholly exempted from all
action in law, but only from dominion and Field. 3. l. c. 44. f. 178.
guilt of condemnation. Read his words once again, and return your verdict
of him: The inherence of sin the justified man acknowledges in himself,
notwithstanding his justification, which still subiecteth him to Gods
displeasure, and punishments Field ibid
accompanying the same. Again in the same page continuing his discourse of the
justified, he says: They are not already freed actually from the inherence of
sin, and the displeasure of God disliking it. But how can he be formally just
by course of law, free from all crime, action, and accusation, in whose spotted
soul sin still inhereth liable to punishments, and which is worse obnoxious
to the disfavor of God hating and disliking it? Shall I not think these
iarring Ministers (like the ancient Southsayers, of whom Tully reports)
laugh the people to scorn, and make merry among themselves in their secret
meetinges, when they remember with what contrary tales, and lying fables, they
beguile their Readers? For shall not I think this a cosening devise, a most
exorbitant course, that the Father of heaven should not absolutely extinguish,
but wincke at our faults, cloak our iniquityes, favor whom he hates, wrong
his Justice, and falsify his word in not punishing sinners, according to the
rate of their misdeserts for the love of his Son, who either would not, or
could not offer an equivalent ransom for Call. 4. v. 6.
the cleansing of our souls here upon earth?

11. The seventh is, that we all participate of the same spirit with Christ
our Savior. Because you are sons, Joan. 1. v. 16.
God has sent the spirit of his Son into your hearts. We live with his
spiritual life, of his fullnes we all have received. We receive of the same
fullnes and life of grace in substance, although not in perfection: that in
substance which the Angels enjoyed in their state of merit; for all the members
of one mystical body partake of one life, the members enjoy the same property
of life with the head, the branches are nourished with the sapp or juice which
springs from the vine: but the spiritual life and Justice of Christ, both
is, and was here upon earth inherent, the Justice of Angels inherent and
pleasing to God, therefore ours must of necessity be also inherent and
acceptable unto him.

12. Lastly, why are the faithful outwardly accepted only as just, not
inwardly invested with the garment of Justice? It is, because God will not
honor them so much, whom he most dearly loves for his Sons sake? This
cannot be. It derogaterh from the riches of his infinite goodness. Or because
Christ with his bitter Passion has not made so great a purchase? This were to
debase the treasure of his incomparable merits. Is it because God cannot endow
a frail creature with so rich a raiment? But thus you blaspheme the Majesty
and power of God. What then? Does it plant humility? Does it enkinkle in our
hearts the love of God? As though the smoke of pride, the ordure of hatred, the
contagion of sin abiding in our souls were apter fuel to nourish virtue,
then the seeds of grace, the offspring of Justice, the habits of Charity,
Meeknes, Piety, and the like? Or lastly does it tend to the greater glory of
God, and renown of Christ? Not so: for it is far more honorable to God, to
have all his servants suited in the livery of his beloved Son, far more for
the crown and dignity of Christ, that we be all clad in his Courtely robes,
all shine with the inward beams of his righteousness, then that apparelled in
the rags of our own miseryes, we seem to be clothed with the couerture of
his Justice. Is it not more stately and magnifical for a Prince to be rich,
welthy and valiant himself, and without any impouerishing or diminution to his
own estate, to endow his subjects with the like qualityes and store of riches,
received from him, and still continued by the benefit of his favor, then he in
all his pomp to be attended on by beggarly, ignorant, and cowardly vassals? Is
it not more credit for a Master to be deeply learned, and to make his
Scholars also flourish with learning, then for them, deuoyd of all good
literature, merely to vaunt of their Masters skill? So it is more glory to
God, more honor to Christ, for him to abound with such an Ocean of grace, or
welspring of justice, as without any loss, hinderance, or diminution, Dionys.
l. de diuinis nomin. c. 4. S. Thom. 1. part. q. ^.
he may derive the rivers of true Justice to others, then if he alone should
swim in all abundance, and leave his followers dry, barraine and wholly
destitute of that celestial dew. Chiefly, since it is the nature and sovereign
property of goodness, according to S. Dionysius, and all Deuines, to diffuse and
communicate it self to others, and therefore, as the bounty, wisdom, beauty
and other Aug. l. 1. de peccat. mer. c. 9. 10 Aug. in psalm. 98. Ipsam iustitiam
ipse in nobis fecit, qua illi pla^eamus. Cyril. l. 6. de Trinit. Hieron. l. 1.
and 3. aduers. Pelag. Basil. l. 1. de Bapt. c. 2. Amb. l. 6. exam. c. 8. Vener.
Beda in c. 11. Matthew.
attributes of God are made more glorious, by imparting them to men in some
inferior degree; why should not the Justice of Christ become more illustrious
by communicating it in some convenient measure to the faithful of his flock?
Which according to my custom I will now corroborate with the authorityes of
Fathers.

13. S. Augustine: They are justified in Christ that believe in him, through
the secret communication and inspiration of spiritualgrace, whereby every one
leans to our Lord. Again: We are impious, he the iustifyer, when as he has
created in us that justice it self, by which we may please him. Behold we are
not only sanctified, but justified also through the secret communication and
inspiration of grace; and that grace, the justice it self created in us, by
which we please God. S. Cyril: The spirit is a heat, who as soon as he has
infused charity into us, and has with the fire of it inflamed our minds, we
have even then obtained Justice. The like has S. Hierome, S. Basil, S.
Ambrose; and Venerable Bede houldeth it to be a sin against the Holy Ghost,
to deny his grace, by which sins are remitted to be given in Baptism,
Eucharist, and the rest of the Sacraments. I cite not Origin, because the
Centurists reprehend him, That he does with open mouth declaime Cent. 3. ^. 4.
Column. 78. Idem Column. 82. Cent. 2. c. 4. Colum. 58. Cent. 4. c. 10. Col. ^
49. Luth. in commen. S. Petri. Calu. l. 3. instit. c. 1^.. 15 Kemnitius in* 1.
part. examinat. Council. Trident. Patribus non mouemus litem. Kemnitius ibid.
paul^ post.
of the Justice of Job; nor S. Cyprian, whom they also blame for saying, The
baptizing person imparteth the holy Ghost, and inwardly sanctifyeth the
baptized; nor Clemens Alexandrinus of whom they report, That in all his
writings it appears he never knew the force of Original sin, or the
inherent malady thereof. Likewise touching S. Hierome, they approve that saying
of Luther: This point which in Christian doctrine is to be vndoubtely
established, that in Saints sin abides, was never by Hierome understood. And
why did neither Hierome, nor Clement understand it, but only because they teach
with us the infection of Original sin to be wholly extinguished by the
inhabitant grace or Justice of our souls. Moreover Calvin of S. Augustine
touching this point, says: The very sentence of Augustine, or at least his
manner of speaking is not altogether to be received. And Kemnitius of many
other Fathers writes: We sue not process against the Fathers, albeit they
commonly take the word (to justify) for the renewing, thereby the works of
righteousness are wrought in us. Again: I am not ignorant that the Fathers do
often use the word (justify) in this signification, namely (to make inherently
just.) Thus you have the sentence of S. Augustine, the doctrine of S. Cyprian,
of Origin, of S. Hierome, of S. Clemens Alexandrinus, and the common current of
the Fathers speech, running on our side by the partial judgment of no mean
Protestants. Whitaker. in his answer to 8. reason of M. Campian fol. 231. Abbot
in his defense c. 4. sect. 5. 2. Cor. 5. v. 19. Psalm. 3^, v. 1.


14. Howbeit from these testimonies of Fathers, and deposition of their own
associates, Whitaker, and M. Abbot make their appeal once again to the
Tribunal of holy Scripture, and to those places by name, wherein our sins
are said to be covered, not imputed, hidden etc. As God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to them their sins: And
blessed is the man whose iniquityes be forgiven, and whose sins are hidden,
or covered. Likewise, blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin. To
which I have answered in the former Controversy: now I add, that three several
ways a thing may be covered. First we cover things to preserve them, as sweet
ointments, or perfumes, least they loose their sent and fragrant odor.
Secondly to hide and conceal them from our eyes, by reason of their
loathsomnes which we cannot otherwise destroy or ridd out of the way. Thirdly
to remove and extinguish them quite, as the Surgeon with salues covers our
wounds to cure, take away, and free us from them; and as Christ spread clay on
the blind man's eyes thereby to heal them. Now God cannot cover our sins,
either the first, or second way, because nothing can be immediately kept and
preserved by him which is not good, nothing loathsome which may be hid from his
sight, or which if he list, he cannot abolish; therefore he must needs cover
them after the third and last manner (as S. Augustine, August. conc. 2. in
psalm. 31. Nazian. orat. de Baptism. Gregor. Papa in psalm. ^. poenitent.
S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Gregory the Great declare) by healing and expelling
them with the rich emplaister of his heavenly grace, by clothing us with the
shining vestement of charity, with the glittering robes of virtue, which
inwardly deck and adorn our souls.

15. Not to impute, is so perfectly to expel, so thoroughly to cure the fever
of sin, as no infirmity, no fayntnes, no vntovvard habit, or crooked
inclination, remain behind; therefore S. Hierome admirably well says: Sins
by Baptism are remitted, by charity covered, by martyrdom Hiron. in Psalm. 31.
not imputed: Because Martyrdom takes away all the relics, not only of
fault, but also of punishment, or other infirmityes which ensue of sin.

16. Then against the aforesaid sentences of the Fathers, they oppose other
testimonies wrenched by them to a contrary sense. M. Abbot urges this place of
S. Augustine: Abbot in his defense c. 4. f. 411. 412. Augu. in Joan. tract ^.
All that are justified by Christ, are justified not in themselves but in him:
if a man ask of them in themselves, they are Adam, if in him they are Christ.
Which words make for us; for how are we Adam, but by corruption of nature
transfused from him? How Christ, but by infusion likewise of grace derived
unto us from the sea of his merits? And so it is true, that all are justified
not in themselves, as they descend and enter into the world the sons of Adam,
but in Christ, as they are regenerated in him, and by his spirit of adoption,
August. ibid.
powered into their souls, inwardly renewed the children of God. Thus S.
Augustine interprets himself in the same place: As in Adam all dyed, so in
Christ al shall be quickened. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum. Bernard. in Cant.
sermon. 61. Abbot vbi supra. fol. 419. 420.
Who appertain to Adam? All that are borne of Adam: Who of Christ? All that
are borne of Christ.

17. Secondly Whitaker obiecteth this sentence of S. Bernard, which M. Abbot
also very gloriously displayeth: I will sing the mercyes of the Lord for ever:
Shall I sing of my own righteousness? Lord I will remember thy righteousness:
for that is mine also; for thou art made unto me righteousness of God. Am I to
stand in fear least one (righteousness) be not sufficient for us both? Abbot
in. his defense c. 4. sect. 8. fol. 420. Prouer. 10. v. 12. 1. Pet. 4. v. 8.
Note that by the name of multitude, all sins are meant: therefore Solomon
says Prouer. 10. v. 12. Vniuersa delicta operit Charitas. Charity covers all
sins. Abbot. ibidem.
Is it not a short cloak, such as cannot cover two: this righteousness being
large and everlasting, shall largely cover both thee and me; and in me verily
it covers a multitude of sins: but in thee, what but the treasures of
piety, the riches of Goodness? I answer that the justice of Christ which
covers us, is inherent in us, and termed Christ's by S. Bernard, because he
with his bitter Passion merited it, and through his merciful goodness bestows
it upon us. But says M. Abbot: The righteousness here spoken of, is but one,
and only one, it is righteousness sufficient both for Christ and us, it covers
both Christ and us, it covers in us a multitude of sins, and in him the
riches of mercy: And is this meant of inherent righteousness? Yes, good Sir, the
inherent justice of Christ covers in him the treasures of piety, his inherent
justice communicated unto us, covers in us the multitude of sins, which is
both King Salomons and S. Peter's phrase, writing of charity diffused into our
souls, Charity covers the multitude of sins, or all sins according to
King Solomon, and it truly performs it by remitting the^, by restoring the
vestment of grace, the couerture of Justice of which sins deprived us, as I
have already expounded the meaning of that word.

18. How is this righteousness then (quoth he again) called one, and a holy
one, if it be resident both in Christ and us? I will show him by this familiar
example. The light which inhereth in the globe of the Sun, which garnisheth
the heavens, which illuminateth the earth, which cleaves on the wall, and
which shines in our eyes, although it be (as the Philosophers say) numero
distinct, yet it is termed the one, and the only light of the Sun, it is
sufficient to compass the heavens and reflect on the earth, it is not over
scant to reach unto both, there it adorneth the beauty of the stars, and here
it enlightneth the dungeons of darkness, our prisons of clay. Compare the
Justice of Christ with the beams of the Sun, confront S. Bernards sentence
with this saying of mine, and tell me, what absurdity ye find in the one
speech more then in the other? Tell me why the justice inhabiting in us, may not
be styled Christ's, and the Justice only of Christ (seeing it is only derived
from Christ, only merited by Christ (if we speak of the first) and finally
ordained to the glory of Christ) as the light inherent in the air is called
the light of the Sun, and the light only of the Sun? Why likewise may not
his justice be counted large enough to cover himself and us with the robe of
in ward Justice apparelling both, as the light of the Sun is resplendent and
powerful enough to illuminate all the celestial orbs, and all the clymates of
the earth, by true light abiding in them all.

19. In fine when our Adversaries can scrape no syllable out of Scripture, nor
sentence out of Fathers to underprop their errors, they quarrel at lenght
with us for countenancing the like, namely that by Popes Indulgences (as M.
Abbot obiecteth) we may be maile partakers of the merits Abbot in his defense
c. 4. f. 411. Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Duraum. page 581.
and good works one of another. Whereupon Whitaker thus insulteth over us: If
the merits of Saints as you think, can make them moreiust in whom they are
not inherent: what an impious and absurd thing were it to give less power of
imputation to the merits, and righteousness of Christ? Nay. What an impious and
diabolical slander have you coined? Do we think M. Whitaker, or did we ever
dream, that the Justice or merits of Saints do formally denominate, or make us
just? Do we attribute less power of imputation to their merits then to the
merits of Christ, when we utterly deny the imputation of theirs, and absolutely
grant the imputation of his, yet that it suffices not to make us truly just?
But concerning Saints we only hold that their merits may by way of impetration
obtain for us increase of grace. We teach that the surplusage of their
satisfactions may by holy indulgences be applied unto us: but that their merits
should be thus applied, we never teach. Christ only (say we) has merited for
himself and us, his obedience, his humility, his justice, has been only the
efficient and meritorious cause of our Justice, and not the merit of any Saint
or Angel whosoever.

20. Therefore that which M. Abbot recites out of Abbot loc. citato. Matthew.
Paris. in Hen. 3.
Matthew of Paris of the Cistercian Friars, who communicated unto other the
participation of their good works, is only understood of their penal and
satisfactory works, which by reason of the near conjunction and mutual
intercourse that is between the members of Christ's mystical body, are not
only profitablle to the doers, but appliable also to the benefit of any their
fellow-mem-bers: after which sort we grant that the Passions of Christ are far
more forcibly applied unto us, and the sufferings of Saints, as dedicated and
consecrated by the dignity of Coloss. 1. v. and 24. 2. Cor. ^. v. 6. Cypr. ep.
13. 14. 15. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraum ^ag. 60. Abbot. in h^s (...) cap. 4.
Perkins in his reforms Cath. c. 4.
his precious blood. So S. Paul rejoiced in his tribulations one while for the
Colossians, another while for the Corinthians. And the Martyrs of the primitive
Church often communicated unto others the fruit of their bands, chains, and
afflictions: for although one cannot as I say properly merit for his friend,
yet he may bear the burden and discharge the debt which he owes. Hence our
Adversaries pick a new occasion of quarrel: for, say they, as one may be
truly freed from his debt, and released out of prison by the payment which
another disburseth for him; so we may be truly made just by the justice of
Christ, by which he intierly pleased, and fully satisfied the law of God. But
the difference and disparity is clear, for to discharge the foresaid debt, is
an extrinsecall actio^, which may be performed by another, and accepted of by
the creditor as the payment of the debtor: but to be made just, is an
intrinsecal thing, which requires an intrinsecal form, and cannot be truly
wrought by any outward denomination. Secondly as the payment which is made for
a captive is not his releasement out of prison, or the liberty to which he is
restored, but the procurement and cause thereof: so the ransom which Christ
gave for our redemption, the Justice which he purchased to himself in our
behalf, is not the liberty of Justice or freedom from fault, which he
imparteth to us, but the true cause, which meriteth and procures those
effects by inward grace, infused into our souls. Auant therefore you accursed
Sectaryes, auant you enemies of Christ, and cruel robbers of men, who rob and
despoyle them of the chiefestiewell of their soul. Auant you pleaders for
contagious sin. And thou, O faithful Christian, washed with the blood and
enamelled with the beauty of thy celestial spouse, admire the brightness of thy
inward justice, admire the splendor of thy wedding garment, triumph with the
glory of that heavenly weed; thy stole of joy, thy mantle of honor, thy dowry
of bliss, and pleadge of immortality: yet triumph with humility for fear of
loosing it, triumph with gratefullnes praising the giver of so fair a livery.
And with the cooperation of his grace, who has clad thee with it, labor to
keep it from all stain and infection, labor to preserve it here
vnblemishhed, and present it after white and immaculate before the throne of
mercy.

THE EIGHTEENTH CONTROVERSY. IN WHICH It is proved, that Faith, Hope, Fear,
Love, Sorrow etc. precede as dispositions to Justification, in such as are
arrived to the use of Reason; against D. Fulke, and Master Abbot.
CHAP. I.
HAVING inuincibly demo^strated that our Justification is not imputative, but
inherent, adorning and dwelling in us, three other questions heereupo^ Fulke in
c. 2. Iacobi sect. 9. Abbot in his defense c. 1. sect. 5. and cap. 4. sect. 1.
and sect. 20. fol. 467,
arise. First how we may be disposed and prepared to attain this heavenly
grace and precious gemme of oursoules. Secondly in what virtue it principally
consists, whether in Faith, orin Charity. Thirdly by what means it may be
afterward nourished, and increased. Of all these in their due place. Now
concerning the first: Fulke peremptorily denies all dispositions and
preparations of man's heart by prayer, or other means to procure his first
justification. And M. Abbot in his defense of Perkins most bitterly inueigheth
against them, as the relics of Pelagianisme: and stiffly contendeth, that man
before Justice can no more entreat, ask, or dispose himself to grace, no not
by the aid of God, then a dead man only helped, can prepare himself to his
resurrection. Notwithstanding we constantly teach, that sinners endued with the
use of reason do use the help of sundry virtues as preparations or manuductions
to guide, and bring them to the favor of God, as the holy Scripturs manifestly
teach: Be prepared, O Israel Amos 4. v. 12. 1. Reg. 7. v. 3. Prouer. 16. v. 1.
to meet thy God. And: Prepare your hearts to our Lord. It pertayueth to man to
prepare his heart. Which holy and behoofull preparations commonly proceed in
this manner. He who by the inspiration of God, believes in him, and
considers the severity of his justice, depth of his judgments, riches of his
mercy, goodness, benignity, patience etc. and remembers withal the multitude
and enormity of his sins, first conceaueth a Fear of his most terrible, and
dreadful punishments: Fear stirs up hope of mercy, pardon and forgiveness:
Hope enkindleth love of so good and bountiful a Lord: Love breaks into
sorrow and repentance of former defaults: Sorrow accompanied with the precedent
virtues, and full purpose of amendment inclines the heart of our heavenly
Father to cleanse Hebr. 11. v. 6. Habac. 2. v. 4. Ecclesiast. 1. v. 28. Prouer.
^4. v. 27. Proverb. 1. v. 7. Romans 8. v. 24. Psalm 36. v. 40
and remit all our iniquityes. And that these virtues do not follow as
sequels, but go before as preparations necessary to justification we prove by
the same arguments, by which they convince the precedence or necessity of
faith: for as faith is required because it is written: Without faith it is
impossible to please God. And: The just man lives by faith etc. so fear of
God is likewise necessary, because of that it also said: The fear of our Lord
expels sin. And: he that is without fear cannot be justified Again: The
fear of our Lord is the fountain of life: The fear of our Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. So of Hope it is recorded: By hope we are saved. Our
Lord will save them because they hoped in him. And: Every one that has this
hope in him sanctifyeth himself, to wit, by his free will working together
with Gods grace, as S. Augustine 1. Joan. 3 v. 3. August. in eum locum, 1.
Joan. 3. v. 14. Luc. 7. v. 47. Eccles. 2. v. 10. Marc. l. v. 15. Act. 1. v. 38.
Act. 8. v. 12. Fulk. locot citato. Ezech. 18. v. 27. Ibid. v. 31. 2. Tim. 2. v.
21.
says upon this Text. So of Love and Charity we read: We are translated from
death to life, because we love our brethren: many sins are remitted unto her,
because she loved much. And: ye that fear our Lord, love him, and your hearts
shall be illuminated.

2. Or Sorrow and Repentance our Savior says: Be penitent and believe the
Gospel. S. Peter: do penance and be every one of you baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ for remission of your sins. Again exhorting Simon Magus: do
penance from this thy wickedness, and pray to God if perhaps this cogitation of
thy heart may be remitted. Where he requires penance, in which contrition or
sorrow is included: and also prayer, not as sequells which follow according to
M. Fulks pelting Sophistry, but as necessary preparations which go before
remission of his sin. The Prophet Ezechiel: when the wicked shall turn away
himself from his impiety, he shall viuificate his soul. And, cast away from
you all your preuarications, wherein ye have preuaricated, and make to your
selves a new heart, and a new spirit. S. Paul: If any man shall cleanse himself
from these he shall be a vessel unto honor. What more clear? A sinner may
begin to cast off his preuarications, to cleanse and make himself a new heart,
a new spirit, he may by Sorrow, grief and penance viuificate, or give life,
to his soul, therefore he may, being quickened and stirred up by God, freely
concur to his own justification, as shall yet more evidently appear by this
description gathered out of the sacred Council of Trent, and many most learned
Deuines.

3. Justification is a motion, or change of our freewill, made Council. Trid.
ses^. 6.
by God in detestation of sin, with infusion of grace to the remission
thereof, and gayning of eternal bliss. It is called a motion, or change,
because it is a passage or departure from the state of sin, to the state of
grace, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light, from being wicked, unjust,
hateful, in enmity with God; to be pious, just, dear, and lincked unto him in
the band of friendship, in so much as to justify the wicked, to reconcile the
enemy, to raise the lapsed, and to sanctify the sinner, is one and the self
same thing, although explayned in diverse manners. It is said to be of freewill,
for that the will of man is not forced or violently drawn, but voluntarily and
freely concurreth to this blessed change. It is added, made by God, because
freewill works not of it self, but inspired, quickened, and aided by him. He
first calls on us auerted from him, he knocks at the gate of our hearts, he
awaketh us being a sleep in our sinful letargy, he stirs us up, eggeth us
forward, helps us laboring, refreshes us fainting, and strengthens us,
accomplishing that which he inspireth: he likewise remitteth the wrong we did
unto him, he pardons the fault, cancelleth our depts, we willingly as I say
endeavoring and cooperating with him. For as a lame cripple helped by his
friend to remove from this room to that, does freely go, yet supported by
another: so man by the aid of Gods preventing, corroborating, and helping
grace, does freely consent, and obey his motions, willingly passes from the
prison of vice to the court of his favor, yet succored by the help of his
divine asistance. It is auerred to be in detestation of sin, for as much as
that preventing grace lays before the God stirs us up to the detestation
of sin before he infuse his habitual grace.
eyes of our understanding the turpitude of vice, and ugly shape of our souls,
the beatitude and happynes we lost, the miseryes, the severe punishments, the
indignation we have incurred, and strikes us with the fear and terror of
them, discovers the means by which we may escape them, means to recover our
felicity again. Then it inflameth the affections of our will to love and
embrace these happy means, by detesting our forepassed, and undertaking a new
course of life. Moreover it is inserted with infusion of grace to the remission
of sin, because at the same instant justifying grace is infused, and sin
expelled the temple of our souls. It is lastly concluded, to the gayning of
eternal bliss, to signify that, that is the final end of our justification,
the salvation of oursoules, and purchase of everlasting life.

4. Thus man, through the great mercy and sweet motions of God, is prepared by
an act of Faith, Fear, Tertul. l. 4. cont. Marcion. c. 18. Orig. hom. 3 in
Leuit. Cypr ser. 5. de lapsis. Basil. in psalm. 33. August. tract. 9. In ep.
Joan. and l. de Catechiz. rudibus c. 4. and 5 and l. de natu. and gratia.
Clement. Alexan. l 2. Strom. ^ ante med. Imbr. l. ^. de poe^it. Hieron. l^ 2.
aduers. Pelag. and in comme^ad. ^. c. (...). Greg. him. 13. in ^ua^gelium. Aug.
ep. 105. Augustep. 106. August. tract. 44. In Joan. Cent. 3. c. 4. Colum. 80.
Tertul, l. de poenit, and lib. 4. contra Marcion. Orig. tract. 32. in Matthew.
and hom. 24. in Iosue. and 26. in ^undem.
Hope, Charity, and Repentance to return unto his favor, and to receive the
stole of his heavenly Justice: for he cannot possibly be excited and recalled
from wickedness without grace from above, he cannot believe the way of salvation
without faith, nor dread the judgments of God without fear, nor expect and
desire his friendship without hope, nor love his goodness without Charity, nor
truly detest offenses past without Sorrow and Repentance. Therefore they all
jointly make way to this supernatural justifying of our souls, whereby two
things are manifest. 1. That our freewill before we be justified, does not as
Protestants fancy, passiuely concur, but as we say, actiuely to the callings
of God. 2. That not Faith alone, but Fear, Hope, Charity, Repentence and other
virtues cooperate also to the work of our justification, as the whole Senate
of Fathers agree with us, Tertullian, Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Basil, S.
Augustine, S. Clement of Alexandria, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and the rest, some
affirming one of the former virtues to prepare the way to justification, some
another. And S. Augustine else where, writing of Faith in particular often
teaches, that it meriteth by way of congruity or impetration, the remission of
our sins and true justification, therefore it goes before the life of grace,
and cannot possibly be that virtue in which true Justice consists. Remission
of sins, says he, it self is not without some merit, if faith do get or
impetrate it: neither is the merit of faith none, by which faith he said, Lord
be merciful to me a sinner; and descended justified by the merit of faithful
humility. And in the epistle next following: But if any man shall say that
Faith does merit the grace of working well, we cannot deny it, nay we willingly
confess it etc. They therefore that have faith by which they obtain
justification through the grace of God, have arrived to the law of Justice.
Likewise in another place: This confession, says he, meriteth Justification.

5. The Centurists tax Tertullian, Origin, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Ephrem, S.
Hierome, for favoring heerin our doctrine: Tertullian, say they, seems to
hold that good works do both go before and follow faith; for so he auerreth
of Patience, And in his fourth book against Marcion, he affirms the chief
cause of Zachaeus justification to have been in that he not knowing, fullfilled
the precept of Isay ( break thy bread unto the hungry.) In like manner, Origin
in so many places (I cite their own words) ascribes to works the
preparation to salvation and cause thereof, as in his Commentaryes upon S.
Matthew: Such, truly says he, as do profess their faith in Jesus, and do not
prepare themselves by good works to salvation, are resembled to the foolish
Virgins. And in his homilyes upon Iosue, The habitation or dwelling of God in
us he attributes to our merits (that is, to our merits of congruity, as S.
Augustine taught, whom I cyted before.) Then they reprehend and labor to
refell this saying Cent. 4. c. 10. Colum. 953. Nissen. l. de vita Moys. Cent. 4
c. 4. Colum. ^94. Ephrem l. 2. de compunct. cor. cap. 8. Cent. 4. c. 10. Col.
1249.
of S. Gregory Nissen: The grace of the holy Ghost dwells not in man, unless
be first mortify in himself the force of sin. They accuse S. Ephrem for
teaching, that Contrition does merit remission of sins. Whereupon they reject
this as one of his blemished places: Who does not admire that God by the tears
of this short space forgiueth sins, and that we gauled with the sore of a
thousand wounds, he at the eleventh hour cures us by tears? Again: When he
has healed us, he renders the reward of tears? S. Hierome also they blame,
because in his commentary upon the prayer of Jeremy Nimium tribuit contritioni,
he attributes too much to contrition: they blame him likewise for houlding,
That Cornelius received the holy Ghost by the works of the natural law, by
which Abraham, Moses, and other Saints were also justified. What S. Hierome
there means by receiving the holy Ghost, and whether Cornelius were S. Basil.
reg. 224. ex breuior. Greg. hom. ^. in Ezech.
justified before the coming of S. Peter, I refer my Reader to the
expositours upon that place: and certain it is that S. Basil, and S. Gregory
do insinuate, that the alms, prayers, and other moral good works, which
Cornelius wrought, were acceptable preparatiues to move God to mercy, and to
communicate unto him the grace of inherent Justice. Which preparation Prosper
expressly acknowledges, and freeth it from the heresy of the Pelagians, Prosp.
l. de lib. arbitr. ad Ruffin. Beda in hunc locu^.
saying: that they did not understand that preparation of Cornelius to be made
by Gods grace, as we do. And Venerable Bede out of S. Gregory affirms of the
same Cornelius: He knew God Creator of all, but that his omnipotent Son was
incarnate he knew not: and in that faith he made prayers, and gave alms which
pleased God, and by well doing he deserved to know God perfectly, to believe
the mystery of the Incarnation, and to come to the Sacrament of Baptism. S.
Augustine also thus: Because Aug. l. ^. de Bapt. c. ^.
whatsoever goodness he had in prayer and alms, the same could not profit him,
unless he were by the bands of Christian society and peace incorporated to the
Church: he is bidden to send unto Peter, that by him he may learn Christ, by
him he may be baptized. Whereby it appears that all these allowed his
preparatiue works to deserve in a manner by way of congruity, the justifying
grace of the holy Sacrament of Baptism.

6. It is bootlesse to demur any longer on the recital Romans 4. Joan. 20. v.
29. Matthew. 8. v. 10. and 15. v. 8. Luc. vltim. 25. Marc. vlt. v. 14.
of other sayings in a point so clear, which Protestants themselves could
never gainesay, unless they would have us work like stocks and stones, or like
brute and senseles creatures without freedom and election in the most noble
and supernatural act of our faith, wherein they place the sum of our
spiritual life. For if that be free, as the Holy Ghost declares it to be,
commending the faith of Abraham, and of many other that believed, rebuking the
incredulity of such as believed not, which he would not have done, if it had
not been in their power to believe or not to believe. Then it must needs
presuppose a pious affection of the will to go before, and bend the
understanding to assent unto such hidden misteryes, as he imbraceth, not only
because that alone can affoard it the dignity of freedom, but also because the
understanding being not inclined by nature, nor drawn by the evident sight S.
Tho^. 2. 2.
of the object, nor otherwise enforced, cannot possibly, as S. Thomas the
oracle of Deuines reasons, give assent to dark, obscure and ineuident
articles, unless it be bowed and determined by the force of the will, which
force and Council. Araus. c. 5. Council. Tol. 4. c 55. refer. c. de Iudaeis did.
45. August. tract. 26. in Joan. Ambr ad Romans 4. in illa verb. Ei autem
quioperatur etc.
inclination the Arausican Council terms, Initium fidei, and ipsum
credulitatis affectum, the beginning of Faith, and the affection it self, or
desire of believing. And for this cause the fourth Toletan Council, says:
Mentis conuersione, quisquis credendo saluatur: By the conversion of his own
mind every one believing is saved. S. Augustine recyting many things that man
may do not willingly, immediately infers, but believe he cannot, unless he be
willing. S. Ambrose: To believe, or not believe is the part of the will: for he
cannot be forced to that which is not manifest. Origin, No man is deprived of
the possibility of believing: for this is placed in the arbitrament or choice
of man, and in the cooperation of grace. S. Clemens Alexandrinus: The kingdom
of heaven is yours if you will etc. it is yours if you shall only be willing to
believe. Which words the Centuristes quote, and with their proud and audacious
pen censure as Origin ho. 2. in diuersa loca sacrae Scripturae. Clement.
Alexan. in paren. Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 59. Iraen. Col. ^8. apud. Centur.
erroneous. As also the like of Iraeneus, the like of others. But the authority
it self of these Ancients, the purity of that prime and perfect age is enough
to quite them of that false accusation, enough to clear the truth of our
cause, that some thing goes before the assent of our understanding or act of
faith, that we do not like beasts vnuoluntarily believe: but that we willingly
prepare our selves, and freely work to the obtaining of Justice. Wherein how
far M. Field forsakes his own confederates and runs in the same line
with us, shallbe discovered in the next Controversy.

7. As for M. Abbots argument to the contrary, That Field in his 3. book of
the Church c. 44. Abbot in his defense sect. 20. fol. 467.
as a dead carcass cannot concur to his resurrection, no more can a man dead
in sin any way cooperate to the restoring of his life. I answer, that the
parity haulteth in this maine joint or principal limme, that the dead man has
no working power or ability at all to produce the actions of life. But the
sinner although he be wholly dead in respect of supernatural grace, yet he
lives a natural life, has a natural and lively faculty of free will, which
albeit by it self it be altogether unable to work any good appertayning to
salvation, yet by the assistance and aid of God it is quickened, elevated, and
enabled to cooperate with him unto the works of piety. And it is a thing
usual in the course of Nature (to requite your natural comparison with the
like examples of nature) for a dead and senseles thing to cooperate, if not
actiuely as some do, at least by way of disposition to the receiving of life:
for so the dead and corrupted grains of corn by the fertility, moisture, and
warm bosom of the earth, do according to some part of them, not only dispose,
but also produce their vegetiue life, yea the mortifyed and dead matter (which
example every way sits my purpose) ministered by parents to the begetting of
children, does truly concur by way of disposition to their receiving of life,
to the creation of their breathing and reasonable souls. If dead things have
this efficacy by the supply of dead and senseles causes to concur to natural
life, why should not the lively facultyes of our mind, by the supernatural
succor of the supreme cause, have force and vigor also to dispose our souls
to the supernatural grace?

8. But to grant this, says M. Abbot, is to slide into Abbot in his defense
c. 4. f. 80. and 459.
the heresy of the Pelagians, with whom he impiously consorteth both us and
the sacred Council of Trent in such malicious manner, as when we assign a
substantial difference between us and them, by houlding the precedent acts of
Fear, Hope, Love etc. to proceed not Abbot ibidem. c. 1. f. 104. 106. 107.
Aug. con. Pelag. and Celest. c. 2. and. 4. c. 31. 32. 33. 35. 37.
from the force of nature, not from our own merits, as they imagined, but from
the benefit of Gods grace, he replyeth again, that we do but dally with the
name of grace, as Pelagius did, who acknowledged also the necessity thereof, as
he goes about to prove out of many places of S. Augustine, out of his first
book against Pelagius, and Celestius in sundry Chapters, and out of his
Epistles also. But he willingly or cunningly passes over the collusion, or
legier-du-maine of the Pelagians, who to beguile the Bishops of the Eastern
Church usurped the name Grace, as the same S. Augustine both in the aforesaid,
and in other places testifyeth, in diverse senses most different from Sec Aug.
ep. 90. 95. 105. 106. and 107. Vasq. in 1. part. dips. 9^. c. 9. Molin. item in
1. part. disp 19. mem. 5. Aug. tom. 7. l. 1. and 2. de great. Christ. and de
peccat. Origin.
us. For first they sometime termed the benefit of creation, conservation, and
free will it self by the name of grace, because they be singular gifts by Gods
gracious favor bestowed upon us. We here take Grace always for that, which
above the course of nature through the merits of Christ is supernaturally
imparted. 2. They, although they did after confess a supernatural grace, yet
they say, it was only profitable to facilitate, not necessary to accomplish and
fulfill the commandments, which S. Augustine often reprehended in them: or as
Celestius Pelagius his scholar did temper and qualify the roughnes of his
Masters speech, it was necessary to perfect and consummate, not to inchoate or
begin the perfection of a good and pious work, witness S. Augustine against the
two Epistles of Pelagius. We say it is absolutely necessary, not only to
consummate but also to begin, not only to facilitate, but Augu. l. 2. cont.
2. ep. Pelag. ^. 8^ Aug. l. 1. de great. Christ con. Pelag. c. 4. 5. 25. 26.
Phil. 2. v. 13. August. l. de great. and lib. arbit. ^. 16. Aug. l. 10. cont. 2.
ep. Pelag. cap. 19. Aug. l. 1. de great. Christ. c. 1.
even to perform or satisfy any part of the law as it ought to be pleasing and
grateful unto God. 3. They held that grace affoarded possibility only to the
will, not force and efficacy to shun evil and embrace good: they thought, that
grace, says S. Augustine, does not help us to do, but only that we might be
willing and able to do. We teach with the Apostle that it is God who works in
us both to will and accomplish. His grace, say we, with S. Augustine, does not
only give sufficient, but vires efficacissimas voluntati, most efficacious
forces to the will, to perform and effectuate whatsoever good it wills. 4.
They affirm, the grace of God to be given us for our deserts, and that
it-followeth the determination of our will, which S. Augustine auerreth,
reporting of Pelagius, that man according to him is aided in doing good: Pro
meritis viz. voluntatis bonae etc. for the merits, to wit, of his good will,
that grace deserved might be: estored, not undeserved given. And again:
Whatsoever grace he allows, he affirms it imparted to Christians according
to their desert. So the Semipelagians would have the beginning of faith to
spring from our felues, from the faculty of free will, as appears out of
their ringleader Faustus Regiensis: But Faust. Regien lib. de arbit. c. 8. and
15. Council. Araus. 2. Can. 5.
we say with the Arausican Council, that the beginning of faith or pious
affection by which we believe, is the gift of God. We say that grace goes
before, exciting our will, and is mercifully bestowed on us for our Savior
Christ his sake, wholly undeserved on our part. 5. When the Pelagians admitted
the necessity of grace to awake and stir us up, they understood it, says S.
Augustine, of the law of the doctrine, and of the examples of Christ outwardly
preached Aug. l. 1. de great. Chri. c. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14. ep. 106,
ad Paulin ^ and 107. ad Vitalem.
and proposed unto us. We besides that outward grace and favor of preaching,
believe also an internal grace, which inwardly moves and works with us. For
if a way faring man should fall a sleep in a dangerous wood, where he were
ready to be devoured, and should be so benu^med of his senses, or infeebled
with travail, that he could not move without help, it were not enough for
another to awake and warn him of the danger, to show him the way by which he
may escape, unless he affoard him also his helping hand, unless he succor, stay,
and aid him to depart: so it is not sufficient to hear the word of God
thundered in our ears, to hear the truth delivered, the examples of Christ, of
his Saints, and followers set before our eyes, unless God himself vouchsafe to
enlighten our understanding, inflame our will, touch and open the Act. 1^*
verse. 14.
stringes of our hearts, as he opened the heart of Lydia, to attend ^o those
things which were said by Paul, unless he inwardly inspire, move, and cooperate
with us to embrace the says, which is outwardly propounded.

9. In this therefore and all the former positions of Grace, we dissent from
the Pelagians, as M. Abbot might have seen in the self same places he quoted
out of S. Augustine, if that passion which ministered to his pen those Aug. l.
^. and 2. de great. Chri. and peccat. orig.
odious comparisons between them and us, had not dimmed his sight from
discovering these manifold differences of truth from heresy. He might moreover
have read in the foresaid S. Augustine, that al beit Pelagius by those
ambiguous acceptions of the word Grace, deluded many Bishops in the Council of
Palestine, yet he never could, how beit he endeavored much, deceive or beguile
the Roman Church, that impregnable rock against which no heresy can ever
prevail. But M. Abbot vbi supra c. 1. fol. 105. 106. 107.
Abbot contendeth and struggleth to prove that the Roman Church, the an cient
Fathers, and S. Augustine himself condemned Pelagius, because he confessed not
the habitual quality and gift of renewing grace to be necessary to every
pious and Godly deed, although he acknowledged Idem folio 110.
the work of preparation to proceed from the preventing grace and help which
we and the holy Council of Trent admit, yea (says he) this grace of ours, the
very Heathens Aristotle and Tully allowed, saying: Never any man Arist. de
mundo. Cicero de natura De orum 1. q. Tuscula.
proved great and excellent without some divine instinct. I answer, he
struggleth, I confess, and struggleth eagerly to heap up falsehoods and
hateful criminations, not to all eadge any grounded proofs or substantial
testimonies, either against us, or that Oecumenicall and venerable Council. For
albeit the Heathens acknowledged the divine concourse or special influence of
the supreme cause to all heroical acts, yet they still bounded and restrained
it within the confines and limits of nature: they never dreamed of any
supernatural grace, of any motion or illumination bestowed upon us, through
the merits of Christ, or any special succor or inspiration of God, ordained
to the remission of sins, justification of our souls in this life, or to our
future glory and felicity in the next. For although those heavenly impulses
which God gave to the Pagans were often addressed to that end, as S. Augustine
affirms, of the strange mutation made in Polemo by the Aug. ep. 230. Araus. 2.
Can. 5. 7. and 15. Aug. ep. 105.
persuasion of Zenocrates: Yet they were not acquainted heerewith; they
ingulfed in the lake of superstitious infidelity, never acknowledged the
extraordinary benefit of those supernatural favors, of which we only speak.
Secondly, how falsely we are accused to agree with the Pelagians, and how main
an opposition there is in sundry points between us and them, I have already
declared. Thirdly, that the Roman Church and Ancient Fathers censured Pelagius
among the rank of Heretics, not for his denial of habitual, but chiefly of
actual grace Augu. ep 105. and 107 and l. degra. and lib. arbi. c. 17. l. 1. de
praedest. Sanctor. c. 19. l. 2. de piece. merit. and remis c. 18. in Enchirid.
c. 32 de not. and great. c. 32. l. 1. ad Simpl. q. ^.
which preuenteth and cooperateth with the consent of our will, independent of
the merits thereof, is so evidently expressed, and so often repeated, not only
in the second Arausican Council, but also by the Pelagians chief Antagonist,
our greatest champion S. Augustine himself, as M. Abbots paper might have
blushed for him when he wrote the contrary. For it is not enough to confess an
habitual or inhabitant grace, which S. Augustine calls the grace of remission
of sins: but we must also, says he, acknowledge a grace precedent, which
must dispose and prepare us to obtain remission, styled by him Preventing, and
ayding, or concomitant grace, the one wrought in us without us, that is,
without our free consent, the other in us with us, to wit, with our free
consent.

10. But the dust which stopped M. Abbots eyes from behoulding a truth
testified in so many places, was the cause of his mistaking of some of S.
Augustines words, calling Abbot ibid. f. 105.
the grace, for which he contended with Pelagius, the grace whereby we are
Christians, and the children of God, whereby we are justified etc. And yet he
only graceth with those terms, the former motions or illuminations of the
holy Ghost, because they move, induce, and disspose us to be just, good, and
the children of the highest: Gab. Vasq. 1. 2. disp. 18^. c. 1.
or because they make increase in the perfection of Justice already attained,
as Gabriel Vasquez solidly interprets him. And S. Augustine himself plainly
insinuates in his epistle to Sixtus a little after the midst, saying: No man
is Aug. ep. 105.
delivered and justified from the evils of his transgression or pre^a^ication,
but by the grace of Jesus Christ our Lord, not only by remission of sins, but
first by inspiration of faith it self and fear of God. Now in what sort can
we, by inspired fear, by inspired faith be justified? in what sort can we be
delivered from our offenses, before our offenses be forgiven, before remission
of sins, but only by them as by dispositions, preparations, or certain
merits of congruity to obtain remission, therefore S. Augustine takes grace
by which we are justified, for that which moves or disposes to justification:
in which sense he affirms about the beginning of the same Epistle: That faith
by some kind of merits August. ibid.
obtayneth remission, and yet that remission is not of merit, because faith is
a free gift of God, and not proceeding from our selves, as the Pelagians
boasted of their belief, S. Augustine also in many other his Treatises cyted
above, speaks so expressly of preparing, preventing, and ayding grace, before
the infusion of habitual, as his words can bear no other interpretation then
that which I have mentioned, unless a man would bend his wits, and force his
quill of purpose to misconstrue his meaning.

THE NINTEENTH CONTROVERSY. DECLARES How Faith alone does not justify: against
D. Whitaker, D. Field, D. Abbot, and all Sectaryes.
CHAP. I.
THAT we may not stumble at the beginning, Ch^nitiu^ in. 1. part: examina^. Con
i^. Trid. Calu. l. 30 instit. c. ^.. 9. Fulk. in c. 13. 1. ad Cor. sect. 5
Perkins in his reform, Cath. f. 7^.
nor post away in vain, before I go further, I will truly lay down the state
of this question, as it is controuerted and defended on both sides. Protestants
distinguish three sorts of faith. 1. The historical faith, as they term it,
by which they believe the history of the Bible. 2. The gift of faith to work
miracles, of which S. Paul: If I should have all faith, so as I could remove
mountains etc. 3. The says and affiance in the divine promises of God. So
that the truth and veracity of God is the proper object of the first, his power
of the second, his mercy and goodness of the third. Which later faith they
subdeuide again into Abbot inhis defense cap 4. fol. 453. Whitaker. l. 1.
aduers. Duraeum.
two members, or branches; into a general belief, that God will faithfully
accomplish all his promises, will grant remission of sins to all true
believers: and into a particular and special faith, whereby every Protestant
persuades and assures himself, that his sins by the mercy of God in Christ
be forgiven him. And in this special affiance, and firm persuasion all
Sectaryes place their justifying faith: from whence Charity and good works
according to them only flow as fruits and necessary sequels, accompanying their
belief. Thus they.

2. We on the other side defend, that Charity and good works, are not only
fruits or signs, but the life or Ephesians. 4. v. 5. Cyril. ca* Greg. Nazian. or
at. ^ltim. in sanctum lauacrum. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 2. 5. 7. 8. and l. 2.
conduas epist. Pelag. c. 5. Leo sermon. ^1. de Epiphan Fulg. l. de side ad
Petrum* in prolog. Hebr. ^1. v. ^. Ga^. V^s. ^^ 1. ^. disp. ^10. ^. 7.
substance of justification. Likewise we deny, that counterfeit division of
several fayths, which they devise, and embrace with holy Scriptures, one
dogmaticall and Catholic Faith, by which we believe the Gospel of Christ the
articles of our Creed, and whatsoever in this kind the universal Church
proposes unto us. For as there is but one formal motive or subject of
belief, to wit, the prime verity, or divine auctority obscurely reueiling the
histories of the Bible, the power of working miracles, the promises of God, and
whatsoever else: So there is but one true and Theological virtue of faith,
which with most constant assent believes them all, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism. And to this one sole faith, not to the peculiar persuasion of
Sectaryes is ascrybed by S. Cyrill Patriarch of Jerusalem, by S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Augustine, S. Leo, and S. Fulgentius, the whole force of
justification, which in any part of sacred Writ is attributed unto Faith.
Wherefore although we hold that this Theological Faith be the beginning and
foundation of our spiritual building: for be that comes to God, must believe
that he is. Though it be also the root from whence the life of grace does
sometime spring, by stirring up, and exciting the affections of the will, to
love good, and detest sin; yet it does not fully engender that spark of
life, it does neither wholly dispose to the favor of God, as I have already
proved, nor intierely sanctify and make us just, as I shall now demonstrate.
Math. 25. v. 11. Matthew. 7. v. 22. Joan. 12. v. 42. 43. Matthew. 22. v. 11.


3. The foolish Virgins, who cried: Lord, Lord open unto us, had faith, and
believed in him whom they inuocated. The false Prophets believed, who wrought
miracles in the name of Christ. The Princes of the Jews who loved the glory of
men more then the glory of God, yet as the Scripture says, they believed in
Christ. The guest who was found at the marriage feast without his wedding
garment, he believed also, for by faith he yielded to the calling, and came
into the house Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum and in his a^swere to 1. reason
of M. Campian. Abbot in his defense c. 4. Orig. tract. 32. in Matthew. Hilar.
can, 27. Hier. ep. ad Demetr. Theoph. and Euthy. in cum locu^. August. tract.
54. in Joan. August. tract. 53. in Joan. Beliar. de iustif. l. 1. c. 15.
of God: and yet none of these were justified: therefore Faith alone is not
sufficient to iuftification. M. Whitaker, M. Abbot and the rest will answer,
that: These had not a true, but a faygned, dead and idle faith: dead and idle
we confess it was, yet true and vnfaygned in respect of the essence and nature
of Faith: for the Evangelist speaking of the Jewish Princes, uses the same
word, crediderunt, they believed in Christ, as he does when he discourses of
them who believed indeed, which would breed intolerable ambiguity and
doubtfullnes in expounding of holy Scripture, if he were not to be understood
of true belief. Secondly the ancient Fathers interpret al these places of
true and vnfaygned Faith: Origin, S. Hilary, S. Hierome the first, affirming
the foolish Virgins to be excluded from their bride-grome, not for want of true
faith, but for want of good works. S. Hierome, Theophilact, and Euthymius the
second, of the false Prophets, attributing to their faith the invocation they
made: Lord, Lord, have not we prophefied in thy name? and intimating thereby
that faith alone is not enough to salvation. S. Augustine expounds the third
place likewise of true faith, comparing the faith of those Princes with the true
Faith of such as openly confessed the name of Christ: Affirming that if they
also had proceeded and gone forward in that entrance of belief, they might by
profiting have overcome the love of humane glory. But that Faith as Cardinal
Bellarmine well argues, which by profiting could vanquish the affection of
vain glory, was true faith, otherwise that Faith had Tertul. l. de resurrec.
carnis. Orig. and Chryso. in hunc loc. Ambr. ser. 14. de na^ali. Hieron.
Gregor. Theoph. and Euthy. in ^um locu^. Maldon. in. cap. 22. Matthew. Jacob* ep.
cap. 2. v. 14. 17. and 14. Augu. de ^^de and op^rib. c. 14. Whitaker. l. 1.
aduers. Duraeum and in his a^swere to 1. reason of M. Ca ^pian. VVitak. vbi
supra. Fulk. in c. 2. Joan. sect. 9. Abbot c. 4. f. 476. and 477.
not profited, but another arriving to perfection, that had failed. Lastly that
he who wanted his wedding garment believed also aright, is insinuated by
Tertullian, Origin, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory,
Theophilact, and Euthymius, who conformably teach, that he was cast into
outward darkness, not for any defect of faith, but for want of Charity, good
works, or virtuous life agreeable to his faith. Therefore Maldonate had great
reason to commend this as an excellent place against all them, that hold Faith
alone to be sufficient for salvation.

4. The second argument is taken out of S. James his Epistle, which was, as S.
Augustine says, specially directed against the erroneous maintainers of only
Faith, and contains many passages clean contrary to our adversaries
assertion, as if a man, says he, has faith, but has not works, shall Faith
be able to save him? Likewise: Faith also if it have not works, is dead in it
self. And: Ye see that by works a man is justified, not by faith only.
Whitaker replyeth, that S. James treats of an idle and faygned faith. But
this is evidently false: for he treats of the faith of Abraham much renowned
in holy Scripture, of that faith of his which was consummated by his works,
which together with works did justify him before God, which must needs be a
true faith: for a counterfeit faith had never been commended by the holy
Ghost, nor been said to be consummated by works, much less could it justify
before the face of God. Again, what needed the Apostle labor so much to prove
that a faygned and counterfeit faith nothing avails to the gayning of
Salvation, when none of those Christians against whom he wrote ever imagined
any such matter. And demanding, thou beeleuest that there is one God? how
could he have answered, thou do well, if with a counterfeit Faith he had
believed; which had been rather hypocrisy, then well doing. Another evasion
therefore both he, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot devise, that S. James
speaks of Faith outwardly professed, which declares us just in the face of
men, not of inward faith whereby we are justified before the sight of God. But
by the same argument this is also refuted, for the beloiuing in God, is inward
faith: Then Abraham's faith there mentioned, was justifying faith in the ^ight
of God, that alone did not justify him, but works consummated; they perfected,
not another, but the same Aug. l. 21. de Ciuit. Dei c. 26, and l. de vnic.
Bapt. c. 10. Cyril. l. 10. in Joan. Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Genesis and hom. 2. in ep.
ad Philemon. Hier. in c. 5. ad Gal. and tom. 2. in Apol. ad Pamm^. c. 2. Aug.
l. 83. q. q. 76. Aug. l. de fide and operi. c. 14.
justification; therefore they also perfected the justification before God, or
faith alone performed it, which the Apostle denies. And thus S. Augustine, S.
Cyrill, S. Chrysostom, and S. Hierome understand S. James of true Faith, which
they also teach, not to be auailable to salvation without other virtues.
Likewise it is clear, that S. James takes Faith in the same sense S. Paul
did, when he taught that a man is justified by faith, for which cause S.
Augustine notes, that he took the same example of Abraham, which S. Paul
used, purposely to disprove the peruersity of some, who misconstruing S. Paul's
meaning, pleaded the sufficiency of faith alone: of which see S. Augustine in
his book of Faith and Works, where he auerreth, that because this opinion of
only faith sprung up in the days of the Apostles, therefore S. Peter, S. John,
S. James, and S. Jude in their Epistles directed their intent specially against
the same, earnestly auouching that Faith without works avails nothing. By
which it is manifest, that S. James and the rest spoke not of the outward
profession, but of the inward faith and belief of the heart, to which S. Paul
with charity attributes justification: or else they all roued from the mark,
and disputed in vain, or S. Augustine the most faithful Herald of all
antiquity, utterly mistaketh the scope of their intention.

5. My third argument I frame in this manner: The Protestant who by faith is
justified, may after fall into fornication, adultery, and other damnable
sins, or not. He will not seek to persuade us, that he cannot fall into any
sin, for that were to broach a new the Iouinian heresy, which S. Austine, and
S. Hierome have long Aug. ep. 29. and de haer. c. 82. Hier. l. 1. co^t. Iou.
since buried in the lake of hell. Fall then he may, as experience teaches of
sundry forward Protestants and Ministers also arraigned and condemned for their
villainies in this kind. Well the^ suppose they may sin: I ask whether falling
into these horrible crimes, they loose their true faith, which they had before,
^ retain it still? To grant that they loose it, is to make all sinners not
only grievous offenders, but either Atheists, Heretics or Infidells also: for
he that is bereft of Faith, must needs be infected with Atheism, Heresy, or
plain Infidelity: It is to divide and separate them from al union with Christ,
and to cut them off with Wicliffe from being members of the Church: it is to
deprive them of the patronage of Christ's imputed righteousness, or not imputing
their sins, and to make them sin like misbeleeuers to death and damnation
(for Christ covers not the sins of any according to them, but of the
faithful only:) it is against the common axioms of Fulke, Whitaker, and their
followers, who ween that true faith once gotten can never be lost, the print
thereof, according to Calvin, can never be blotted out of the hearts of Gods
elect, To hold that they still retain their true faith, notwithstanding they
wallow in Cah^. l. 3. instit. c. ^.. 11.
these sudds of uncleanness, and that their faith alone does justify them, is to
hold that they still abide in the state of salvation, and may enjoy the
kingdom of heaven, if they should chance to depart in that wretched case,
which is quite contrary to the Apostle: Do not err, neither fornicatours, nor
seruers of Idols, nor aduowterers, nor the effeminate, 1. Cor. 6. v. 9. and. 10.
nor the liars with mankind etc. shall possess the kingdom of God. I know the
iuggling they use to delude this argument is, that in these sinners faith is
darkened during that time, like the Sun ouercast with clouds, like the fire
covered with the ashes, like the tree in winter bereaved of her blossoms. But
all these exampls war against them: for the tree in winter is truly a tree
enjoying her vegetiue life, the fire raked up is perfect fire, the Sun
ouerclouded loses not the beams of his natural light, although they be
hindered from shining unto us. Therefore the darkened and Calvin in An ^id. ad
Canonem 28. sess 6. in Council. Trid, ^ffirmeth. Particulam aliquam vitiae fidei
manore inter grauissimos lapsus.
covered faith of the adulterer is true faith, perfect in the nature of faith,
loses not any motion of life, or beam of grace which is due to faith: and if
that alone be sufficient to justify remaining in the adulterer, it affoardeth
to him the benefit of justification, and by necessary consequence also of
salvation: for no winter barrenes, no embers or ashes, no clowd of sin can
deprive the justified person of his right to heaven, which do not dismantle him
of the robe of Justice. Answer therefore heereunto what you list: escape you
cannot, unless you leap into some detestable heresy.

6. My fourth argument is, when the Protestant persuades himself, or
undoubtedly believes, the remission of his sins; either he has his sin by
that act of faith remitted before, or after: he that says, it is after,
allows his precedent persuasion to be false and deceitful, believing the
forgiveness of his sins which then was not: he that will have it before,
admits a remission of sins, and consequently a true justification before
his belief, which cannot be: for without Faith it is impossible to please God:
he who holds, that his belief causes the remission which it believes, will
have his belief Gab. Vas. in 1. 2. disp. 110. c. 3.
and knowledge so omnipotent, as to make the object which it knows, the
mystery it believes: as if a man by believing himself to be a great Lawyer, a
great Physician, a great Divine, should endow himself with the Aug. l. 4. de
Genes. ad lit. c. 32.
perfect knowledge of Law, Physic, and Divinity, wherein they seem to
surpass the nature of God, whose knowledge being most efficacious and
practical; yet it follows, as Gabriel Vasquez teaches, the object it
knows according to the posteriority of understanding: It follows I say in
affirming, or knowing it to be true. In which sense S. Augustine teaches, that
no knowledge can be unless things known precede: and we may auow that no faith
can be, unless it first presuppose the article believed: for as our knowledge is
true or false, because the object we know is such: so our belief is certain
and undoubted, because the thing is infallible which we believe.

7. M. Field beholding the ruins this Cannon-shot makes in the walls of their
perfidious and faythles persuasion, rayseth the engines of his wit to divert
the battery and annoyance thereof: and first proposes the argument thus: When
men begin to believe, either they are just, and then their faith iustifyeth
them not, being in nature after their justification: Field in his 3. book of
the Church c. 44.
or else they are not just, and then special faith making a man believe he is
just, is false: and so man is justified by alye. To this horned argument, we
answer, says he, that special faith has sundry acts, but to this purpose
specially two: the one by way of petition, humbly entreating for acceptance
and favor; the other in the nature of comfortable assurance, consisting in a
persuasion that that is granted which was desired. Faith by her first act,
obtayneth and works our justification, and does not find us just when we
begin to believe; by her second act she does not actiuely justify, S. Thom. 1.
2. q. 83. ^^t. 3.
but finding the thing done, certifyeth and assures us of it etc. So then
(quoth he) faith in her first act is before the justification, and procures or
obtayneth it. Hitherto M. Field, and very profoundly without doubt,
distinguishes faith into two acts, whereof the first he mentions is no act
of Faith, but a prayer or petition humbly entreating for acceptatio^ Fulk in c.
2. Iacobi sect. 9. circa finem. Abbot in his defense cap. 4. fol. 487.
and favor, which properly, as S. Thomas proves, is an act of Religion, as
much different from faith, as a man from a Calfe. And the second seems rather
to be an assured confidence of the will, then any supernatural assent of the
understanding, in which Faith consists. But these things I let pass. The
opposition here he makes against his own adherents, the contradicting of
Doctor Fulke, the ouertwharting of M. Abbot, the impugning of another
principal and general article of Protestancy is more remarkable then a
private absurdity or ignorance of his. For to affirm, That faith by way of
petition humbly intre^^eth for favor, obtains and works our justification,
and does not find us just, is to grant a certain kind of preparation,
congruency, merit, or disposition to go before the life of grace, and
justification of our souls; which how earnestly M. Fulke and Doctor Abbot
gainesay, I have declared and refuted in the precedent Controversy. Then it is
opposite to that common principle, which Protestants maintain, That the
captiued will of man concurreth passiuely only to his justification, until he
be truly justified in Christ. Howbeit M. Field here teaches, this petition,
to obtain, to procure, to work our justification, before it be effected:
which M. Abbot writing against our preparatiue works of prayer and petition
reproves thus: There can be no true prayer without the spirit of grace,
without the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Abbot c. 4. sect. 20. fol.
4* ^.
Father: the spirit of adoption, and grace is the spirit of sanctification. It
follows then that we pray not, but by being first sanctified, and because
sanctification is consequent to justification, it must follow also that
justification must go before prayer. Hitherto he, warring against M. Field, one
Sectary against another, as Esaias prophesyed of them, saying: I will make the
Egyptians to run together against the Egyptians: and a man shall fight
against his brother, and every man against his friend. But I will not further
exaggerate these horrible breaches between him and Isa. 29. v.
his fellows. I will not entreat M. Field to reconcile his assertion with
their other fornamed principles. I only desire him to tell me, whether the
petition which works our justification, and does not find us just, be in his
opinion an act of true justifying faith, or no? Let him answer that it is, and
he yields, that faith alone does not justify, he yields this first act to
be an act of true faith, and yet that it does only impetrate and procure
justice, and not make us formerly just: but if the first act of true faith does
not justify, neither can the second, or third, or any other ensuing act,
affoard that benefit: for they being all, and every one of the same special
nature, they having all the same essential form, that effect which in no
degree is performed by one, cannot be effected by any other, except they dream
that one and the same virtue should consist of diverse essential forms, and so
by diverse acts yield diverse formal effects, which very nature it self, and
every Puny in Philosophy will condemn of implicancy and contradiction.

8. Let him deny it to be an act of justifying faith, and he denies his own
division of special faith into sundry acts, he deludeth our argument, proposed
not of any other virtue, but of their special faith: and of the first act
thereof, which can be but one, and of that one it proceeds whether
justification be before it, after it, or caused by it, as is urged above.

9. Again supposing these two acts into which he brancheth his special
faith, how is man justified by Faith? The second act of comfortable assurance
does not as he says, actiuely justify, but finding the thing done, certifyeth
and assures us of it: the first does but impetrate, obtain, and procure it by
way of request, no act can he assign between the first and the second,
therefore no act of faith can he assign, whereby he may be formally justified.
On the other fide I think the Protestants petition, which humbly entreats
for acception and favor, must needs proceed from faith. For how shall they
humbly ad Romans ^^. v. 14.
entreat? How shall they in^ocate in whom they have not believed? Believe
then they do, before they entreat, and yet they are not just: therefore Faith
alone does not justify, but only by way of impetration, by stirring up our
affections, and exciting our will to crave and desire it, which with S.
Augustine, and the whole school of Catholic August ep. 105. de. praedest.
Sanctor. c. 7.
Deuines we willingly embrace. And to which M. Field must at length retire for
rest and safeguard, or else well canuased he is driven to the wall, which way
soever he turns.

10. The fifth argument which I mean to prosecute, is of the regeneration of
young baptized Infants, who Field in his 3. book ^. 44. fol. 179.
cannot be justified by an act of special faith, because they can have none, as
M. Field accords with us, but by the habitual qualityes or inherent habits
of Faith, Hope, and Charity, therefore all others are justified by the like,
because the same spirit of adoption, the same title of divine Augu. l. 1. cont.
2. ep. Pelag. ^ 7. etc 21. l. 1. de^ pecc. meri. c. ^^. ep. 157. Marc vlt. v.
16. Act. Apost. c. 8. v. 37.
filiation, the same new birth, and regeneration in Christ, the same seed of
life, the same formal cause of justification, is in every one of these
faithful, in every child of God, in every state whatsoever, as S. Augustine
teaches.

11. Likewise when the Adul^i, or such as arrive to the use of reason are
baptized, faith is required as a necessary disposition for them worthily to
receive the grace of Baptism, therefore our Savior said: He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved. And S. Philip to the Eunuch desirous to be
christened, answered: If thou believe withal thy heart, thou may. But the
Faith which Christ, the faith which Philip exacted before Baptism, was no
doubt true and perfect faith, that faith which together with the Sacrament was
sufficient to salvation, and yet that faith alone did not justify; or if it
did, it remitted them their sins, it regenerated and implanted them in
Christ, and acheiued before all those heanenly effects, for which that holy
Sacrament was ordained: in vain then was it instituted, in vain was it after
applied. No, say you, it is after applied, as a sign or seal of regeneration,
as the outward pledge of adoption, Rogers art. 27. Whitaker. l. 1. aduers.
Duraeum fol. 675. Calu. l. 4. instit. c. 24.. 3. Calu. ibid.
as an addition to confirm and ratify the promise of God, to establish us in
the faith thereof. But this pledge, seal, and addition is not requisite in the
behalf of God: for his truth (says Calvin) is by it self sound and certain
though, and cannot from any other where receive better confirmation them from
it self. Neither is it needful: for the ignorance, as he fancieth, and
dullness of Protestants, for their special affiance being as they brag
certain, known, and infallible justifying faith, gives them more assurance
of the remission of their sins, and promises of God applied unto them, then
any outward signs or additions whatsoever. Again the performance 2. Pet. 1.
v. 10.
of good works, to which S. Peter exhorts, the word of God heard or read, is
more apt and efficacious to excite and stir up our Faith, to confirm us
therein, then the dumb elements of water, bread, and wine, which you only use.
Besides the Scriptures and Fathers attribute unto Baptism not only the force
of a sign, or seal, to Tit. 3. v. 5. Joan. 3. Ephesians. 5. 1. Cor. 6. Ambr. l.
^. de Sacra^. c. 4. Leo. sermon. ^. de natiuiitat. Clement. Alex. l. 1. paeda. c.
6. Basil. l. c. de spirit. sant cap. 15. Hier. l. 3. cont. Pelag Hilar. in
psalm. 65. Tertul. l. de Bapt. c. 1. Dion. c. 3. Eccles. Hiera. p. 1. Nazian. in
sanctum lauacrum. Aug. in psalm. 73. and l. 19. in Faust. c. 13. Iren. l. 4.
cont. baer. c. ^0. Chrysostom. bo. 17. in Genesis Orig. bom. 3. in Genesis Epiphan. baer.
30. Basil. l. de spir. sanct. c. 14. Eusebius Caesar. l. 1 demon. Euan. c. 10: and
^. bistor. c. 1. Emisbom. in Sabb. post. 1. Domin. Quadr. Ambr. ^p. 72. ad
Iren. and in cap. 4. ad Romans August. ep. 19. ad Hier. tract. 41. in Joan. q.
25. in ^. Numer.
ratify grace, but the true efficacy of an isntrumental cause, to justify, and
cleanse our souls from the filth of sin, therefore sound and entiere faith
which goes before as a preparation necessary, does not work the effect, but
the Sacrament which is after ministered. Whereupon it is termed not the pledge
or token, but the lauer of regeneration, by which we are borne a new, are
cleansed, are washed from sin. So S. Ambrose also says of the baptized: By
this fountain he has passed from things earthly to heavenly, from sin to
life, from fault to grace, from defilement to sanctification. S. Leo: The power
of the most high which made that Mary brought forth a Savior, does make that
the water regenerateth the believer. S. Clemens Alexandrinus terms Baptism
the grace, perfection, illumination, and lauer by which we are washed, and wipe
away sins. S. Basil, S. Hierom, S. Hilary, and Tertullian have the like.

12. S. Denis, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and other also of the Greek Fathers, call
Baptism (...) illuminationem, illumination, because in Baptism man is
illuminated, and enlightened with the faith of Christ, he receaueth the
fellowship or society of the first and increated light, and the beginning or
head spring of all divine and celestial illustrations, as the same S. Denis
affirms. S. Augustine assigns this difference between the Sacraments of
the old, and the new Law: that they promised a Savior, these affoard
salvation: and that these are greater in virtue, for profit and vtility better.
They, according to S. Iren^us, S. Chrysostom, Origin, Epiphanius, Eusebius
Caesariensis, and Emissenus, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine were signs and
shadows only (even Circumcision in the opinion of some, their chiefest
ceremony) which betokned the verity of our Sacraments, yielding and exhibiting
Grace. And S. Basil says: that the Baptism of Basil. hom. 1. de Bapt.
Christ gives the Holy Ghost, which the Baptism of John did not give.

13. Which it has pleased also our mighty Sovereign K. James in his answer
to Card. Peron fol. 32. in Latin. fol. 20. in English.
K. James, to patronage in his answer to Cardinal Peron, (for although that
answer be set forth under Casaubons name, yet his Highness vouchsafes to adopt
it for his own Royal offspring in his reply to the fore^ayd Cardinals Oration).
The words are: His Majesty and the Church of England do allow the necessity of
Baptism in respect of the divine institution, as well as you etc. God has
appointed this as for the ordinary way to obtain remission of sins in his
Church, and Christ himself denies the entrance into the kingdom of heaven to
those which are not borne again of water and the spirit. Therefore it is not
the seal which signeth the Charter of Justice already made, not the addition
hanging at it, but the instrument which by virtue communicated unto it by God,
does effect and make us just. And so the true and intier faith which the
Apostle exacted of the Eunuch Act. 8. v. 37.
before Baptism, what not sufficient to justify in the sight of God, nor to
remit his sins, nor to open the gate of heaven, unless he had been also
sprinkled with the precious and saving water of that holy Sacrament.

14. Lastly the faith so often celebrated and commended in holy Writ, is not
your presumptuous confidence, not your confortable trust, or affiance of the
will, but our humble and firm belief, the submission of captiuating of our
understanding, to the obedience of mysteries revealed by God. Such is the Faith
defined by S. Romans 1. v. 8. and 17. Heb. 11. v. 1. 4. 5. Heb. 11. v. 7. Romans 4.
v. 21. Heb. 11. v. 11.
Paul, and by him so much extolled in Abel, Henoch, Noe, Abraham, Sara: for Noe
his faith was not any special persuasion of the remission of his sins, by
the righteousness of Christ, but the assent and credit he gave to the
revelations which God made unto him of the universal deluge, which should
drown the word; whereupon fearing, he framed the Arc for saving of his house.
Abraham's faith was his general acknowledgment, that whatsoever God promised he
is able also to do, his assured belief that his seed should be as the stars
in heaven, notwithstanding his old age, and the dead matrice of Sara his wife.
Sara her faith the Apostle declares, saying: By faith Sara also her self
being barren, received virtue in conceauing of seed, yea past the time of age,
because she believed that he was faithful which had promised. But to pass
from the faithful of the old Testament to those of the new.

15. The renowned Faith of the Centurion admired and praised by the divine
wisdom it self, what was Matt. 8. v. 8. Matt. 16. v. 10. Joan. 10 v. 28.
it; That Christ being absent by his only word could cure his diseased servant:
Only say the word, and my boy shallbe healed. The faith of S. Peter, by which
he deserved the Primacy of the Apostleship, what was it? Thou art Christ the
son of the living God. The faith of S. Thomas after his incredulity, what was
it? his faytfull exclamation, My Lord, and my God. To be brief, the faith in
which S. John, in which S. Paul places the life and salvation of our souls,
what Joan. 20. v. 31.
other is it, Then to believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that
believing you may have life in his name? This is the word of faith (says S.
Paul) which we preach: for if thou confess Romans 10. v. 8. and 9.
with thy mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thy heart, that God
raised him from death, thou shall be saved. M. Abbot is so mightily embroyled
in answering of these sentences Abbot inhis defense c^p 4. sect. ^8.
strongly urged by M. Doctor Bishop, as to the first example of Noe, forsaking
the written word, the sovereign refuge to which they make their last appeal,
he recoyleth from the rule of Faith, and literal exposition of all ancient
writers, and labors to scramble out of the brakes by the help of some
Allegoryes, or other mystical sentences of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysoftome,
which if they were sincerely alleged (as they are fondly wrested by him) yet
they could not avail to establish any truth in matters of faith, as all
Deuines agree.

16. To the second of Abraham he is forced to confess that not the mercy of
God remitting sins, but the power of God in being able to perform his promise,
was the object of Abraham's faith. To the example of the Centurion he replyeth:
It follows not, that because the act of faith is no further expressed here,
therefore there was nothing further in his faith, Abbot in his defense c 4.
sect. ^^ f. 456.
for his justification toward God. Yes M. Abbot, it inuincibly follows
against you, and your consorts, who still provoke us to the express words of
Scripture, therefore if the faith you mention, be neither there, nor else where
expressed in Scripture, you devise a faith of your own heads not expressed in
Scripture. To the confession of S. Peter, to the texts cited out of S. John,
and S. Paul: he answers Abbot ibidem*
by teaching us this strange lesson, That faith is a compounded action, not of
the understanding only, but of the heart, will and affections. O how were you
here ouerseene to cast into writing a speech so contrary to the Apostle, and
repugnant 1. Cor. 1^. v. 13.
to the doctrine of all Deuines! The Apostle says: Now remain Faith, Hope,
and Charity, these three. Lo he terms them three distinct and several
virtues; he flatly sequestreth faith from Charity, which you transform into a
compounded action: Yet with such an untoward composition, as thereby is
destroyed the very compound it self. For if Faith be an act of the
understanding, it cannot be also an act of the will; or if you once make it an
affection of the will, you utterly overthrow the nature of faith, and so are
become such a solifidian Patron of only faith, as you quite abolish all kind of
faith. Again S. S. Thom! 2. 2. q. 4. and, 23. Lo^. and Banne^ in eadem q.
Arist l. 7. phis. c. 17. l^ ^. Eth. c. ^. Augu. l. 4. cont. Iul. c. 3.
Thomas and all Deuines assign to faith, her proper subject, in which it
inhereth, her peculiar object, to wit, the prime verity obscurely revealing the
mysteryes of our belief, her peculiar excellency, and proper act, her special
difficulty, her singular praise, her particular merit, distinct from Charity,
therefore it has all which either Aristotle, or S. Augustine require to the
integrity of a sole and single virtue.

17. Notwithstanding we say, that all true and perfect virtues are linked
together with the golden chain of mutual society, therefore we cannot
perfectly believe in Christ, unless we love, hope, delight, and joy in him: In
whom we look to find (as you say) blessing, peace, immortality, and
everlasting life, which is the only meaning of S. Augustine, Abbot c. 4. f.
456. Augu. in psalm. 130.
and others objected by you, when they affirm, This is to believe in Christ,
even to love Christ etc. And which is also the only root and cause of your
error, who partially attribute that to faith, which is the chiefest privilege
of Charity, and function of other virtues, not essentially co^pounded, but
mutually conjoined in friendship together: The principal objection M. Abbot
and other Protestants urge against us, is, that if faith be not compounded of
an act of Love etc. it is nothing else but the bare assent of the understanding,
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God. But this is the faith of the Devils:
for they, says M. Abbots, profess so much: O Jesus of Nazareth, Abbot c. 4.
sect. 18. fol. 456.
I know who thou art, even the holy one of God. I answer there are sundry
differences between the faith of Christians and the faith of the Devils:
first because that if it be lively and formed, it is always united with
Charity, Marc. 1. v. 24.
Hope and other virtues, which in the Devils are never: If dead and formeles,
as in wicked believers, yet in them it is a supernatural and theological act,
in Devils natural, and not so much as a moral virtue, in them voluntary and
free, in Devils forced and coacted, in them it proceeds from the pious
affection of the will, moving the understanding to that theological assent, in
Devils it is wrested from them by the powerfullnes of miracles, or evidence of
things appearing unto them. Whereupon S. Augustine faith: That the Devils knew
Christ, not by the light Aug. l. 9. de ciuit. Dei c. 21.
which illuminateth the pious, who believe by faith, but by other effects, and
most hidden signs of the divine power. And as they differ in these, so they
agree in some other points: they Aug. tom. ^0* l. 50. Hom. hom. 17. tract. 10.
in epist. Ia^n.
agree, in that both give assent to the misteryes of our faith, both are
fruitles and wholly insufficient to justify us before God. In which respect S.
James in his Catholic Epistle, and S. Augustine often compares the faith of
Devils with the unprofitable faith of ungodly Christians, not tha^ this is not
true and supernatural faith, but that without Charity and good works it no
more avails to purchase salvation, then the natural knowledge or belief of
Devils.

18. When M. Whitaker insisteth, that Charity and Whitaker. l. 8. aduers.
Duraeum and in his a^swere to 8. reason of M. Campian.
good Works are inseparable companions of true faith, and that it neither is,
nor can be without them; besides the arguments already made by which this fancy
is reproved; I ask how Charity is inseparable from true faith? is it a fruit
which springs from it, as the apple from the tree? then as the tree remains
a true and perfect tree, although it be sometym barren and void of fruit, so
faith ^hay have all things requisite to the essence thereof, howsoever it be
somety me deprived of Charity. Is it an aceidental quality of inseparable
passion which flows from faith, as the power of laughing from the nature of
man? It should follow that Charity could not be in heaven separated from faith,
no more then risibility can be divided from man. Is it an essential form
which is required to the integrity of faith? Then faith alone does not justify,
but Charity also, which is essentially conjoined and works with it. Finally
who taught you thus to enterfeite and wound your selves, that faith is the
fountain of spiritual life, the root which sprouteth from branches of
Charity, Hope, and all good Works, and yet that all the works which proceed
from the faithful, be all of their own nature damnable and deadly sins, all
stained with the infection of mortal sins. I would you were once constant in
your absurdityes, and mindful of your leasings, that we might know where to
have you, and what to refute.

19. Thus having stopped the gappe by which the wily adversary thought to
escape, having compassed him with reasons, hemmed him in with Scriptures, I am
Cyril* l. 10. in Joan. cap. 10.
now to put him to open confusion with the testimony of Fathers. S. Cyrill
affirms: The faithful by sincere faith to be s^^ps or branches inocculated in
the Vine. And yet he says a little after: It is not enough to perfection, that
is, to sanctification Chrysostom. l. ^ cont. vitu monast. vitae. Basil. in Psalter.
psalm. 110. Greg. l. 6. ep. 15. August. tract. 10. in ep. Joan. Aug. l. defide
and operi. c. 14. and 15. l. 21. de ciuit. Dei c. 16. ^n ^^chir. c. ^8. and de
octo dupl quaest. q. 1. Augu. in. praef. Psalm. 31. Cent. 2. c. 4. Colum. ^0.
and 61. Cent. 3. c. 4. Colum. 79. 80. Cent. 4. c. 4. Colum. 292. and 293. Cent.
5. c. 4. Colum. 504. 505. 506. 507. 508. 509. 510.
which by Christ is wrought in spirit, to be admitted into the number of
branches. S. Chrysostom: What profit will faith affoard us, if our life be not
sincere and pure? S. Basil: Faith alone is not sufficient, vntes there be added
conversation of life agreeable thereunto. S. Gregory: It is manifest, that
since the Incarnation of our Lord, none even of them can be saved, who have
faith in him, and have not the life of faith. S. Augustine: Many, quoth he,
say, I believe, but faith without works saves not. And he vvriteth a whole
book of purpose, besides many other inuectiues against this dangerous
persvvasio^ of only faith to be sufficient to salvation: he likewise shows
many sayings of the Apostle to be false; that saying of Christ, If thou vvilt
enter into life, keep the Commandments, to have been in vain, unless other
things were necessary besides faith, yea besides true faith: for discoursing
of the faith of Abraham, which you cannot deny to be true, he pronounces,
that even that Faith of his had been dead without works, and like a stock
without fruit, dry, withered and barren. But what should I recyte particular
authorityes of this or that Father? We have on our side by voluntary confession
and judgment of our Adversaries the Magdeburgian Protestants, the general
consent of all most ancient and illustrious vvriters, which lived within the
first five hundred years after Christ: for in the second hundred, they accuse
by name S. Clemens Alexandrinus and Theophilus for approving in this point the
truth of our doctrine, cyting their words and quoting the places vvherin they
approve it. They attach of the same fault Origin, Methodius, Tertullian S.
Cyprian, in the third. Lactantius, Nilus, Chromatius, Ephrem, S. Hierome, S.
Gregory Nissen, S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nazianzen, and S. Ambrose in the fourth.
In the fifth S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Cyrill, S. Leo, Prosper,
Sedulius, Theodulus, Saluianus, Salonius, Eucherius.

20. Wherefore to conclude (for the objections which belong to this and the
next, I shall jointly make answer in the Controversy of good works) if all
these renowned Authors, both of the Greek and Latin Church, if all these
famous Writers of the first five hundred years after Christ, agree with us in
the partial eye of sworn Catholics freed from leuity or disaffectio^ to their
Prince for cleaving to the ancient Fathers.
enemies, that faith alone cannot purchase salvation, or justify us before God;
I hope my sovereign Liege King James, who vouch^afeth to submit his royal
wisdom and princely judgment to the censure and trial of that perfect age,
will not deem it any l^uity in Catholics, or disloyalty to his person (to
whom we owe and are ready to perform all the dutiful service which ever any
subjects have yielded to their Prince) but fear of God, zeal of his honor,
love of Religion, care of our souls, and mere respect of conscience, which
makes us afraid to wander out of this strait and trodden path of so many our
holy and learned predecessors, and afraid to follow crooked turnings, and
by-ways of Heretics, which wind into the labyrinth of eternal perdition.

THE TWENTIETH CONTROVERSY, IN WHICH It is concluded, that our Justification
consists in the habit of Charity: against D. Abbot, D. Whitaker, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. I.
ALTHOUGH we make not any separation or divorce between those divine and loving
sisters, Faith, Hope, and Charity, but that they all three concur to the
spiritual marriage of our Vide Scot. in 4. did. 27. q. 1. Vega l. 7. super
Conci. Council. Trid. c. ^5. Gab. Vas. in 1. 2. dis^. 198. c. 3. 1. Joan. 3. v.
1. Luc. 7. v. 47. Joan. 13. v. 35. 1. Joan. 4. v. 7. Rom* 13. v. 10. Coloss. 3.
v. 14. Whitaker. l. 8. aduns. Dur^um. and in his a^swere to 8. reason. Abbot in
his defense cap. 4. Romans 1. v. 17. 1. Joan. 3. v. 14. Act. 13. v. 39. Joan. 14.
v. 21. Col. 1. v. 23. Ephesians. 3. v. 17. Hebr. 11. v. 6. 1. (...). 1^. v. ^. 1.
Joan. 5. v. 1. ^1. Joan. 4. v. 7. 1. Cor. 13. v. 13.
souls with God; yet we assign to every one her part or function which she
performs herein. To Faith the entrance, to Hope, the progress, to Charity
(which I suppose as most probable to be all one with grace) the complement and
consummation of this happy Wedlock: As the holy Scriptures declare, when they
term it the band of our union and conjunction with God: He that abides in
Charity, abides in God, and God in him. When they attribute unto it the right
of our adoption and title of divine filiation: See what manner of Charity the
Father has given us, that we should be named, and be ^he sons of God. The
remission of our sins: Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved
much. When they make it the badge and cognizance of Christ's faithful servants:
In this all men shall know that you are my disciples, if you have love to one
another. When thereby we are said to be borne a new and regenerated in Christ:
Every one that loves is borne of God, and knows God. When they call it the
accomplishment of the Law, and sum of all perfection: Love therefore is the
fullnes of the Law. And, Above all these things have Charity, which is the band
of perfection. All these places inuincibly prove that Charity is the virtue,
which espouseth and marryeth us unto God, which adopteth, renews, and truly
iustifyeth us in his sight.

1. The same I also euince by the like testimonies, by which our Adversaries
would seem to challeng it to Faith alon. Of faith (say they) it is written:
The just lives by Faith. Of Charity we read the like: We know that me are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren: (...) that loves
not abides in death. Of Faith: Every one that belieueth is justified. Of
Charity: He that loves me shallbe loved of my Father, and I will love him. Of
Faith: If ye continue in the faith grounded and stable. Of Charity: Rooted and
founded in Charity. Of Faith: Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Of
Charity: If I have not Charity, I am nothing. Of Faith: Whosoever belieueth
that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. Of Charity: Every one that loves is
borne of God. Wherefore if Faith by reason of these testimonies is not the
fruit or sequel in our Sec^^^yes judgment, but the true cause of
justification, why should not Charity have the same pri^iledge, which is ouery
way warranted with the same authority, and with more ample also for S. Pa^^
expre^^y prefers Charity before Faith, saying* Now (...) Faith, Hope, and
Charity, these three, but the great^^^ of these is Charity, Before he
insinu^^^th that Charity is such, as it shall never fail, Faith imperfect and
shall be made void, when we see God face to face: Therefore Faith cannot be here
that garment of Justice, which shall there Ibid. v. 2.
remain, and adorn us for ever; but Charity which shall still abide and
continue with us. Likewise the Apostle Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum Fulk. in
c. 13. 1. Cor Abbot. c. 4. Origin. tract. in Matthew. 4. Hier. Bed^ and Strabo in
cum lo* Aug. l. 15 de Trin. c. 18. Abbot in his defense c. 4. sect. 22 p. 479.
avouches in the beginning of that Chapter: If I should have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. He does not
say, as Whitaker, Fulke, and Abbot misconstrue him: If I had the gift of Faith
to do miracles, but, if I should have all faith, all historical, and
dogmaticall, all faith of miracles, all whatsoever, yea quoth Origin, S.
Hierome, Venerable Bede, and Strabo, If I had that excellent, that solid,
entiere and most perfect faith of all others, which is able to remove
mountains, without Charity it does no good. Whereupon S. Augustine says:
Nothing but Charity makes faith it self auailable: for Fath may be without
Charity, but it profits not without Charity. Abbot answers: He speaks of
faith after the vulgar understanding, a^ S. James did, not of true faith. No,
then neither he, nor S. James, nor the Apostle spoke anything at all to the
purpose: for of what Faith could there be any question, but of that Faith,
which is a Theological virtue, has her proper and intrinsecall form,
distinct from Charity, of that which with Charity avails to justification:
for of a false and counterfeit faith no doubt could be made, neither was there
ever any heretic so mad or bereft of his wits, as to imagine a false faith to
be sufficient to justification: what needed then S. Augustine, what needed S.
James, what needed the Apostle with such vehemence, so often, and so seriously
to inculcate, that a feigned belief, Whitaker* l. 1. aduers-Dur^um
a diabolical faith, as Whitaker calls it, which no man dreamed to be
sufficient, avails nothing in the sight of God? For join to such a faith,
join to your mere historical faith, to your gift of faith for the working of
miracles, as much Charity as may be, that can never according to you, work
your justification; and yet they all speak of a faith, which by Charity
profits, by Charity iustifyeth.

2. And if S. Augustine may construe his own meaning, he expounds himself
to mean of the same faith not to profit without Charity, which having Charity
Augu. l. 15. de Trin. c. 18.
works by love: so discerning it from that faith, with which the Devils
believe and tremble. But that faith which works by love, that which is so
distinguished from the faith of Devils, is even in our Protestants opinion true
Faith. True faith then may be, but profits not without love, of which love S.
Augustine writes thus in the beginning Aug. ibid. Nu^^um est isto dono
excellentius: solum est quod diuidit inter filios regni aeterni, and filios
perditionis aeternae. Whitaker: l. 1. aduers. Duraeum. Abbotc. 4. August.
ibidem. Dilectio igitur quae ex Deo est, diffunditur in cordi. bus nostris, Dei
charitas per quam nos tota inhabitat Trinitas. Whitaker. l 8. aduers. Duraeum.
August. l. de not. and great. c. 42. Ibid. c. 70. August. tract. 5. in epist.
Joan.
of that Chapter: No gift is more excellent then this, it is the only thing
which makes a difference between the sonns of the everlasting kingdom, and
sons of eternal damnation. And he affirms not that of any outward
difference, or external division of justification in the sight of men, which
is another subtle devise of the Adversary, but of the internal before the
face of the highest: for he there concludes of the same gift of Charity: The
love therefore which is of God, and is God, is properly the holy Ghost, by whom
the Charity of God is diffused into our hearts, by which the whole Trinity
inhabiteth in us. But the inhabiting of the Blessed Trinity, the infusion or
dwelling of the Holy Ghost in our souls, is not any outward sign,
distinguishing us in the eyes of men, but an inward seal, or hidden stamp of
our hearts, truly justifying in the sight of God, not imperfectly nor
defectiuely only, as Whitaker Snake-like finds another hole to creep away,
stopped up in my former Treatise of Justification, but intierely, and
perfectly. Therefore S. Augustine avouches of Charity in another place: Ipsa
Charitas est verissima, plenissima, perfectissimaque iustitia: Charity it self
is most true, most full, most perfect justice. And, Great Charity is great
justice, perfect Charity is perfect justice. Likewise: Only Love discerns
between the sons of God, and sons of the Devil. And a little after: They
that have Charity are borne of God, they that have not, are not borne of God.
Enjoy whatsoever thou will, and only want this, it profits nothing: other
things if thou want, have this, and thou have fullfilled the Law.

3 S. Paul says: In Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails ought, nor
prepuce, but Faith that works by Charity. Gal. 5. v 6.
If Protestants would stand to the determination of the Apostle, this
exposition of his were enough to instruct them, that the Faith which he so
often commended before, the faith to which he attributed our justification, is
not as they imagine sole faith, but faith formed with Charity, and that Charity
is the virtue which gives faith it self motion, and actiuity toward justice
and salvation. But M. Abbot, and his Accomplices interpreting Abbot in his
defense c. 4. sect. 22. Perkins in his reform. Cath. c. 4. 1. Tim. 1. v. 5. ad
Col. 3. v. ^4. Romans 13. v. 10. 1. Cor. 13. Abbot c. 4. f. 475. and 476.
Scripture, according to their own fancy will have the Apostle to teach, that
Charity is the instrument of Faith for moving and stirring abroad, yet that
faith by it self does wholly justify, which is notwithstanding refuted by the
Apostles plain discourse, proving Charity to be the end, perfection, and
accomplishment of the Law. Therefore not the instrument of faith, or inferior
to it, but the chief and most excellent of all other virtues, without which,
faith it self profits nothing: and comparing it there, with Faith and Hope,
he affirms: mayor autem horum est Charitas, the greater of these is Charity.
Wherefore to retort the argument in behalf of Charity, which M. Abbot uses for
the patronage of Faith, Seeing with God we cannot think that the greater is
accepted for the less, but rather the less for the greater, not the Mistress
(so to speak) for the hand maids sake, but rather Abbot c. 4. sect. 22. ^.
474. and 475. protests that never any translatour could light upon this.
the band-maid for the Mistress sake, we must needs make faith. (says he)
clean opposite to the Apostle: Charity, say I, conformable to the Apostle, not
the hand-mayd, not the instrument, but the Mistress, the chief and principal
cause for which faith is acceptable to God, in the way of justice, as the
Greek word (...) does import, which signifies a hidden energy, and inward
efficacy, force, and operation, which Charity ministers unto faith for the
performing of virtuous deeds. And the Syriacke Interpreter puts it out of
all doubt, who maugre M. Abbots protestation to the contrary, reads it here
passiuely, haimonuto deem thgameno ve ku^^o: Faith which is made perfect or
consumate by Charity. Thus Guido Fabricius passiuely also translateth it: Fides
quae perficitur, faith which is perfected by Charity. Fabric. in ^^s book
d^dicated to Henry the third King of Fran^e, prin^ed Ann. 1 503. la^. c 2. v.
26.
S. James explicating what kind of perfection this is, calls it the
perfection of life, and resembles says without works, that is, without
Charity, the fountain from whence good works proceed, to a dead corpse
without life, soul, or vital operation: therefore as the soul is not the
instrument of the body, but the true form and principal cause which gives
life and motion unto it, so does Charity likewise unto Faith, not that Charity
is the essential form of Faith, as it is a Theological habit, for so it has
her proper form distinct from Charity; but that Charity first aduanceth it to
the state of perfect virtue to the pre-eminence of justice, giving it the true
form and life of justification, to which faith only disposes and makes way
before. Secondly it affoardeth it the dignity of true and proper merit, by
giving us the spirit of adoption, whereby our works are meritorious and
grateful in the sight of God. Thirdly, it directs and leuelleth it to a
supernatural end, ordayning all our actions to the honor of God. This is the
life, actiuity, and operation which Charity communicates to faith, and to all
virtue Abbot. c. 4. sect. 23. fol. 494.
also. To avouch, as M. Abbot does, that faith, any one of these three ways,
is either the seat or fountain of spiritual life; the nest wherein we lay our
works, that we may hatch them; the mother which breeds and begets them
unto God, is Ibid. sect. 26. f. 48^.
quite contrary also to the Apostle, who acknowledges Charity only to be the
fountain, nurse, or mother of virtues, saying: Charity is patient, is benign
etc. Charity 1. Cor. 13. v. 4. v. ^.
suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, bears all
things. But how is it patie^t? How benign etc. not formally, for that were to
make it a monstrous virtue, compounded of diverse special forms. Causally
then, because it is the Mother that begets, the nurse that cherishes, the
soul that gives life of grace, vigor of justice, pre-eminence of merit, to
the whole army of virtues.

4. How inexcusable now are our seduced Protestants, how wretchedly inchaunted
with their Ministers charms, who engrosse all to faith, which the Secretaryes
of the Holy Ghost ascribe to Charity? How entitle they faith alone, to the
possession of life, which S. James affirms to be dead without the works of
Charity? How enthrone they faith in the highest chair of eminent dignity, when
S. Paul defines Charity to be greater then it? Marry a veil they have to
mask themselves under. For Fulk. in c. 13. 1. Cor. sect. 3. Abbot cap. 4.
sect. 22. fol. 478. Ephesians. 3. v. 17.
Charity, says M. Fulke, and M. Abbot with him, is the greater in regard of
continuance, because faith is but for a time, Charity abides for ever. Then it
is the greatest also (quoth M. Abbot) if we respect latitude of use: for
Charity is extended every way to God, to Angels, to Men etc. But if we
consider man privately in himself, and for his own use, Faith is more
excellent then Charity, as wherein our communion and fellowship with God, by
which Christ dwells in our hearts, into which as a hand God puts all the
riches of his grace for our salvation, and by which whatsoever else Abbot fol.
479.
in us, is commended unto God. Therefore he concludes, that to save and
justify, faith is the greater. So he. It is true that Charity continues when
Faith is euacuated, but one truth ought not to impeach another: that cannot
derogat from the excellency of Charity in many other points, wherein both
Scriptures and Fathers give her the pre-eminence. But as for latitude of use,
as you there take it Bern. sermon. ^. in vigil. not. Christ. Fides veluti quodda^
aeternitatis exemplar praeterita simul and praesentia ac futura ^i^u suo
vastissimo co^prehendit.
for the material objects which they respect; very false it is that Charity
extends to more things, then Faith, because faith mounteth to God, to
Angels, to men etc. it descends to hell, to the Devils, to their perpetual
torments, it stretches it self to the fall of Adam, to the deluge past, to
the future judgment, and many other objects which Charity imbraceth not, it
reaches besides to all times, which either are, have been, or shallbe
hereafter. Therefore S. Bernard calls it: The image or pattern of eternity,
which in her wide and vast bosom, comprehends all things, both, past,
present, and to come.

5. Howbeit let this go on the score of other the Authors rash, and
inconsiderate speeches. The mark I shoot at, is that Charity is preferred
before faith, even in the work of justification and salvation of our souls:
and in all these particulers, in which M. Abbot, gives the first and Abbot vbi
supra. 1. Cor. 13. Joan. 1. c. 4. v. 12. Romans 5. Ephesians. 3. 17. Aug. de spir.
and lit. cap. 17. Charitas lex est fidei and spiritus viuificans dilectorem.
August. tract. 9. in ep. Joan. Chrysostom. de inco^p. Dei not. hom. 1. Leo ser. 8.
de Epipha. Basil in proem. de vera and pia fide. Prosp. l. 3. de vita co^temp.
c. 13. Ambr. in c. 13. Cor. Berna. ser 24. super Cant. Idem sermon. 2. de resur.
chiefest place to faith: for when the Apostle defines, we are nothing without
Charity, he means surely that we are nothing in the favor of God, nothing in
the way of grace, in the way of justice, and salvation. S. James, and S.
Augustine mean the like, whom I cyted above. Moreover have I not already
showed, that Charity adopteth us to be the children of God? that by Charity we
are regenerated, and newborn in Christ? that by Charity the Holy Ghost, by
Charity God himself is harbored in our souls: If we love one another, God
abides in us, and his Charity in us is perfected? Also: The Charity of God is
powered forth into our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given us? And if M.
Abbot had not used his dexterity leaving out the words which makes against
him, he might have read in that very place which he quoteth for his purpose,
that not in Faith, but in Charity originally stands our communion and
fellowship with God: for after these words, By faith Christ dwells in our
hearts, it immediately follows, rooted and grounded in Charity. Therefore
Charity is the root, the origin, or first beginning of Christ's viuificall
presence: for as the tree draws from the root, the sap of life; so faith
from charity the lively inhabitatio^ of God in our hearts. For which cause S.
Augustine says: Charity it self diffused in the heart of the believers, is the
law of Faith, and the spirit that gives life to the lo^er. He calls it
otherwhere: The health, the beauty of the soul. S. Chrysostom: The chief
good, and head of all good things. S. Leo: The mother of all virtues. S.
Basil: The proper budge or ensign of a Christian man. S. Prosper: A Summary
and abridgment of all good doings, of the which every good work takes his
life. S. Ambrose: The head of Religion is Charity, and he that had not the
head, has not life etc. Immediately after: Charity is the foundation of
Religion. S. Bernard says: The separation of Charity, is the death of faith,
and he that deuideth them, is termed by him, Fideicida, The murderer of
Faith: then he testifyeth with S. Augustine, That Faith takes her life or
soul from Charity. Aug. l. de cognit. verae vitae c. 37.


6. Further they affirm of Charity, that it unites Aug. de subst. l. di^ect.
and amoris.
and knitteth us to God. Marryeth Bern. sermon. 83. in Cant.
our soul to the word. Marketh Amb. l. 2. ep. ep. 7.
man a friend to God. Imparteth Chrysostom. in psalm. 132.
heaven and unspeakable good things to us. He Basil in institut. Monach.
that has Charity, has God. And Idem in constit. Monast. c. 35.
he that is deprived of Charity wants divine grace. By Aug. l. de mor. Eccles.
cap. 13.
Charity only it is wrought, that we be not auerted from God, and that we
conform our selves, rather to him, then to this world. Moreover say they:
Charity Hilar. comment. in Matthew. ca. 4.
covers the multitude of sins. By Orig. hom. 3. in c. 3. Leuit
the abundance of Charity remission of sins is made. The Chrysostom. hom. 7. in
2. ad Tim.
fervor of Charity destroys all things. The Gregor. hom. 33. in Euang.
fire of Charity burns and consumes the rust of sin. Only Aug tract. 1.
ep. Joan. Abbot c. 4. sect. 22. Aug. despir. and lit. c. 17. Aug. l. de not and
gra. c. 63. qua vna iusti sunt quicumque iusti sunt. Abbot c. 4. sect. 22. fol.
477. 478.
Charity extinguisheth sins. Which places I more willingly and diligently
cite, because they cannot be passed over with that common answer which the
Adversary uses, That Charity is the chief and principal virtue for outward
use, as the instrument of Faith for moving, or stirring abroad: Faith the only
virtue which works our justification. For that which is the life, the health,
the beauty of our souls is not the outward instrument, but the inward quality
which iustifyeth us before God, that which unites and weddeth us unto him,
makes us his friends, conuerteth and conformeth us unto him, covers our
iniquityes, extinguisheth our sins, that which is the head and life of
Religion, the spirit which quickneth the lover, cannot be a sign or effect,
but the cause, the soul of justification, Which intrinsecally iustifyeth,
says S. Augustine: By which one (Charity) they are just, whosoever are just.

7. Besides, if Charity, as M. Abbot confesses, Gives the outward and
accidental moving and working to faith etc. is the performance of all duties
recommended unto us, both to God and men, that is, touching all external
actions of righteousness, or justice; it cannot be denied, but that Charity also
is the inward gift, the heavenly quality, which makes us just: for so we see
in all, both natural and moral things, the faculty which gives external
power and ability to work is the inherent form, virtue, or accident, which
works within. For example, the gravity, or heauynes which causes the stone
outwardly to descend, and cover the center, is the innate property, which
indueth it also with inward heaviness. The quality which affoardeth power to the
fire to warm and send forth the ardour of heat abroad, is the inward accident
which makes the fire hoate and ardent it self. In man, that which enableth
his body to stir and move, that which ministre^h ability to perform all
external offices, and function of life: is the inward soul, the internal
life, which quickneth the body. In moral affairs, the habit which
facilitateth us outwardly to exercise the acts of temperance, is the virtue it
self which makes us temperate. That which readily exciteth, and stirs up
the soldier to enterprises, and exployts of valor, is the inherent valor,
which incourageth his heart. Therefore in things supernatural that which
rayseth, and eleuateth us externally to accomplish the works of justice, is
the internal virtue, the internal justice, whereby we are just. And seeing
Charity ministers power, even in our Adversaries opinion, to atchieue all
outward duties, acceptable to God, Charity also must needs be the ornament it
self, and splendor of our souls, which makes us acceptable. For as Vega
wittily argues from Vega l. 7. in Con^. Trid. c. 2^.
the deriuation of the word: If whitenes makes white, wisdom wise, valor
valiant, Faciet nimirum Charitas charos: Charity undoubtedly shall make us
dear, and grateful unto the highest. Hence it is, that Charity is the
heavenly spring, or spiritual fountain, from whence the rivers of all good
works, the streams of all virtues Gal. 5. cap. 2^. August. tract. 87. in ep.
Joan.
receive their purity, and perfection: whereupon the Apostle S. Paul, as S.
Augustine teaches, when against the works of the flesh he would recommend
unto us the fruit of the spirit, he begins with this: The fruit (says he)
of the spirit is Charity, and the rest be receives after August. ibidem.
as flowing and depending of this head which are, joy, peace, long animity,
benignity, goodness, Faith etc. For who does solidely re^oyce that loves not
the good from whence he ioyeth? Who can have true Abbot in his defense cap. 4.
Hier. in c. 5. epist. ad Gal. Aug. loc. citato. August. tract. 5. in ep. Joan.
Haec est margarita pretiosa, Charitas sine qua nihil tibi prodest quod cumque
habueris: qua^ si sola habeas sufficit tibi. Aug. ser. 50. de verb. Domini.
peace, but with him whom he unfeignedly loves? Who is long animous in good
works constantly perseuering, unless he burn with loving? Who is benign and
merciful, unless he love him to whom he exhibiteth mercy? Who is good, except
by loving he be made good? Who is profitably faithful, but by that faith which
works by love? So that not Charity, as Abbot dreameth, from faith, but faith
it self (I mean lively Faith) and all other virtues derive their chiefest
dignity, and pre-eminence from Charity. For what other virtue (says S.
Hierome) ought to hold the primacy among the fruits of the spirit, but Charity,
without which other virtues are not accounted virtues, and from which all
things that are good take their beginning.

8 Worthily therefore (I return again to S. Augustine) our good master so
often commends love, as if that alone were to be commanded, without which
other good things cannot profit. And in another place: I take this to be the
margarite, for which the merchant is described in the Gospel, who found one
precious stone and sold all that he had to buy it. This Charity is that
precious margarite, without which whatsoever thou have,, it profits nothing:
which only if thou have it suffices thee. Likewise: add Charity, all things
profit thee, take away Charity, other things avail thee naught. Aug. ser. 42.
de temp.
Charity is the light, the oil which surpasses all other virtues. Aug. tract.
17. in Euang. Joan.
By Charity only the law is fullfilled. Greg. hom. 38 in Euang.
Charity is the nuptial garment which adorneth our souls. Ruper. and Hugo
Card. in eum locum
Charity is the fire-tryed gould which makes us rich with all celestial
treasures. Chry. de incomp. Dei not. hom. ^. Richard. de sanct Vict in psalm 44
Charity is the Queen of virtues. Richard. in eum locum and Chrysostom. in psalm.
232. and hom. de Char.
The mother and mistress of heavenly virtues. Augu. sermon. 42. de tempor.
By which the soul is happy and blessed, that deserves to have it. It is the
height and consumation of spiritual life. Origin: I think that the beginning
or ground work of our salvation is Faith, the increase or augmentation Hope,
the perfection and top of the building Charity. S. Clemens Clemen. Alexand. l.
2. Strom. Aug sermon. 20. de verb. Apost. Cent. 4. ^. 4. Colum. ^ 92. Ephrem. l.
de vera poenit. c. 1. Cent. 5 c. 4. Colum. 505. Sedul. in c. 5. ad Philip.
of Alexandria: Faith precedeth, Fear rayseth the building, and Love does
consumate, or end it. S. Aug. The house of God by belief is founded, erected
by hope, and perfected or finished by Charity. The Centurists among the
stubble, rubbish or errors of S. Ephrem reject this ^aying of his: What does
it avail if we have all things, and only want Charity that saves us? Among
the dross of Sedulius they report this: All justice consists of Faith and
Charity.

9. Innumerable others do they reprehend for houlding with us in this point of
justification, who partly in the former, partly in the ensuing Chapter are
recounted. Yet I think it not amiss to knit up this discourse with two or
three Theological reasons, borrowed from S. Thomas, and his followers, by which
they demonstrate the excellency of Charity, even in this life, beyond Faith or
Hope. The first is, that Charity in more noble and perfect S. Thom. 2. 2 q. 23^
art. 6. and 1. part. q. 82. art. 3 and q. 108. art. ^. and 1. 2. q. 65. art. 6.
Lorin. Bannes, ^^iet. ^s haec loca.
manner, aymeth and inclines to the incomparable bou^ty and goodness of God,
then either of those virtues: for Faith has reference unto him according to
some special and restrained manner, as he is revealed unto us. Hope as he
shall be the goal or center of our Beatitude. But Charity imbraceth him, as he
is in himself infinite, illimited, the sovereign good and main Ocean of all
perfection: for although the supernatural knowledge of faith, be required as a
condition to propose the amiablenes of the beloved object unto us, yet love is
not bounded within the limits of our knowledge, but extends it self to all
the perfections of the thing proposed, without any exception, restriction, or
limitation, which apparently conuinceth the precedence of Charity, because that
virtue is more noble and worthy, which after a more noble and worthy manner
expresses, tends, and draws near to the dignity of her object, as all
both Deuines, and Philosophers agree. Secondly in this life, the love of
things superior which exceed the compass of nature, is more perfect then the
knowledge or understanding of them, because we know them only answerable to the
proportion of restrained forms, which represent them unto us. We love them
according to the full sea of goodness, which Porphir.
is included in them. In so much as Porphiry the Philosopher writes: That to
speculate divine things does purify the soul, Aug. ser. 28. de te^p. Est 27.
in append. and tract. 2. in 1. ep. Joan. Dionys. de divine. nomin. c. 4. Plato.
to love them does deify, or turn the same as it were into God. S. Augustine
agreably, If thou love God, I dare say thou art God. Thirdly, love weddeth,
and conioyneth us with the thing we love, it transformeth (to use S. Dionysius
his word) the lover into the bowels of his beloved: Makes (says that Divine
Philosoper Plato) the soul more where it loves, then where it lives. Howbeit
Faith and Hope suppose a disjunction and separation from their revealed, or
desired objects: for Hope expects not the thing possessed, and Faith gives
not assent to the mystery clearly or manifestly proposed: Hence S. Thomas
infers the pre-eminence S. Thom. 1. 2. q. 66. art. 6.
of Charity above Hope or Faith, because the property and nature thereof,
consists in a more perfect union, conjunction, or marriage with God, by
reason of which it must needs more effectually concur to our justification,
then either of them.

10. Therefore M. Abbot after much ado to the contrary, yields to Charity so
great a prerogative, as he contenteth himself, if Faith may have some part
with Hier. in c. 22. Matthew.
it in the work of justification. For in answer to that saying of Hierome:
The wedding garments are the Commandments of our Lord, and the works which
are made up of the Abbot c. fol. 610. and 611.
Law and the Gospel, and do make the garment of the new man. M. Abbot
replyeth: Why does he (M. Doctor Bishop) allege these words to exclude Faith
from being a part of the wedding garment? Then, The works that are made up of
the Law, and Abbot ibidem.
the Gospel consist not only in Charity, but in Faith also etc. Lastly,
Though any do by occasion name Charity for the wedding garment, as men by
diverse occasions speak diversely thereof; yet no man Ibidem.
was ever so absurd, as expressly to exclude Faith from being one part thereof.
I think so; that never true Catholic was so absurd; but so absurd are you,
as to accept that for a part, which you and your companions have hitherto
challenged to be the only cause of Justice. For I cannot judge that you should
account this wedding garment, which only admits us to the banquet of heaven,
which only is acceptable to the Master of that heavenly feast, any other then
the robe of true Justice, so pleasing unto him, wherein if Faith have only a
part, if it consist in Charity, not excluding true Faith; why put you this
question in suite in behalf of Faith alone? Or if the wedding garment be not
the true livery of Justice grateful unto God, how is any part thereof wouen by
Faith, which only concurreth according to you, to justify before God?

THE XXI. CONTROVERSY, IN WHICH It is discussed, how good works do justify:
against Doctor Abbot, Doctor Whitaker, and D. Fulke.
CHAP. I.
AFTER the first Justification which i^ accomplished by Charity, there
follows the second, that is the increase and augmentation of the same by good
works, in which holy men daily walk and go forward, until they arrive to the
supreme degree of that finite perfection, which God foreseeth they will climb
unto, by the concurrence of his grace, as the wiseman teaches ^. Prouer. v. 2^.
in the fourth Chapter of the Proverbs: The path of the just, as a shining
light, proceeds even to perfect day. That is as the dawning appears more
bright and bright until it approach to noone tide, or to the fullnes of the
day: so the just man aduaunceth himself forwards in the way of perfection,
until he come to his determined pitch or state of virtue, in which course
every step that he treads truly augmenteth his former justice. For as S. John
says: He that does instice is just. And he that is just let him be justified
yet. Doctor Whitaker, D. Fulke, and Doctor Abbot 1. Joan. 3. v. 7. Apoc. 22.
v. 11. Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Duraeum. Fulk in c. 22. Apo^. sect. 3. Abbot c. 4
sect. 35. 36. Ibidem.
with one accord reply, that S. John speaks not there of true justice before
God, or of that justice which purchases heaven, but of inward sanctification,
or outward justice before men only. But if you distinguish sanctification from
justice (as deceitfully you do) the proper notion and signification of the word
makes against you, which says not, a man is sanctified only, but justified,
and more just, by doing justice. Then S. John expounds himself adding: He
that does justice is just, even as he is just. But he, to wit Christ, is truly
just before God by Justice worthy of heaven, therefore he that does justice, is
also just before God by the like justice, or else the similitude S. John makes
is wholly defeated.

1. Again S. John in both places compares him that works justice and
increases therein, to the perverse and wicked sinner, who still continues
heaping sin upon sin: but he that walloweth in the filthiness of sin
waxes more filthy, not only before men, but also before God, by hoording up
wrath, and extremity of torments against the day of wrath and indignation.
Therefore he that goes forward in the course of Justice, augmenteth the same,
not outwardly in the eyes of men, but inwardly in the sight of the highest, by
increasing here his treasure of mercy, and reward of glory hereafter, which
S. Paul punctually confirms: As you have exhibited your members Romans 6 ^. 19.
to serve uncleanness, and iniquity unto iniquity; so now exhibit your members
to serve justice unto sanctification. Lo here sanctification is all one with
justice, or it is (as Hugo says) the Hugo in illum locu^.
stay or confirmation of Justice. Besides, they that proceed external works
of justice, increase the sum thereof, and become more gracious unto God, even
as when they were subject to sin, by continual and often sinning they
Theophil. in ^um loc. Tertul. de resur. carn. c. 47. Orig. l. 6. in e. 6. ad
Romans Chrysostom. ho. 12. in. c. 6. ad Romans Ambr. in hunc loc. Cum hic salus, illic
damnatio operetur.
augmented their wickedness, and waxed more odious, and detestable in his
presence. For those words, to serve iniquity unto iniquity, are uttered after
the Hebrew Phrase, which signify as Theophilact notes, as it were an addition
of sin to sin: the like addition is after required of Justice to Justice,
as Tertullian, Origin, S. Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose expressly interpret the
Apostle, of such addition and increase of Justice, by which we obtain
salvation, saying: He has commanded us with the same measure, or degree of
diligence to serve God, with which we served the Devil; whereas we ought more
obsequiously obey God, then the Devil, because here salvation, there
damnation works. Heerupon the law of God, his very Commandments are termed
our Iustifications. Would God my ways might be directed to keep thy
iustifications. My soul has coueted to desire thy iustifications. I was
exercised in thy iustifications. It is good for me that thou have humbled me,
that I Psalm. 118. v. 5. Verse. 120. Verse. 48. verse. 71.
may learn thy iustifications. And why is this? But because the observation
and keeping of his law does make us truly and perfectly just, because it does
quicken, revive and give life to our souls (which cannot be without perfect
Justice, gracious and allowable before the throne of grace) whereof the
Psalmist in the same place is also witness. Ibidem v. 93.
I will not forget thy iustifications for ever: because in them thou have
quickened me. And Ezechiel. When the impious shall turn away himself from his
impiety and do judgment and justice, he shall Ezech. c. 18. v. 27.
viuificate, or make his soul to live.

2. Likewise S. Paul avouches: He that ministers seed to the sower, will give
bread also to eat, and will multiply your seed, and will augment the increase
of the fruits of your justice. 2. Cor. 9. v. 10. Theophil. in buncloc. Anselm.
in bunc loc.
Where the Apostle resembles almesdeeds to seed, which sowed in the hands of
poor, and needy persons yields increase of grace, says Theophilact, in this
life, and glory in the next; or they are compared to seed, which he that once
sows, twice reapeth, according to S. Anselme: The fruit thereof abundance of
temporal goods in this world, of heavenly in the world to come. Which
supposes it to be the increase of true justice, and of such whereunto the
glory of heaven is due, as the very Text it self declares, both in this and
in the former two places. Here the words immediately before are: He
distributed, he gave to the poor, his justice remains Ibid. v. 9. Romans 6. v.
21. Apoc. 22. v. 12.
for ever. In the sixth Chapter to the Romans after the forementioned
exhortation it is added: You have your fruit to sanctification, but the end
life everlasting. In the two and twentieth of the Apocalips, the words ensuing
are: Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me to render to every man
according to his works. Therefore by conference of places and connection of the
Text, it evidently appears, that the Apostle spoke of the going forward in
true Justice before God: for no other remains for ever, to no other
everlasting life and reward of glory belongs. For this cause S. Paul prays
for the Collossians: that they may walk Coloss. 1. v. 10.
worthy of God in all things pleasing, fructifying in all good works. Every
word strengthens our cause, that we fructify in good works, and in works
pleasing God, worthy of (...)
of God, as the Greek Text more plainly opens. Solomon: Fear not to be
justified even to death, because the reward of God abides for ever. Where
although M. Abbot out of Calvin contendeth that the Greek word (...)
betokneth, ne differas, do thou not procrastinate or delay, yet it also
signifies, ne cesses, surcease not, leave not off. And S. Augustine Eccles.
28. v. 23. Abbot c. 4. sect. 36. fol. 541. Ang. in speculo ex vtroq: Testament.
ex Ecclesias. 1. Pet. 2. v. 2.
reads, ne verearis, fear not, according to our approved vulgar translation.
S. Peter: As infants even now borne, reasonable milk without guile desire you,
that in it you may grow unto salvation, the L^^haije ^ Aug. ser. 16. de verb.
Apost.
Syriacke has, that in it you may grow to life. Both translations import, that
by going forvvard in virtue, we daily grow and increase our salvation, our
life of grace upon earth, our right and title to the life of glory in heaven:
whereupon S. Augustine says: We are justified, but that justice it self
increases when we profit and go forward. Thus he.

3. But because the cauilling Protestant will hardly be satisfied with this;
expound, O Augustine, expound yet more plainly, what justice it is, in which we
increase. He tells you: That we proced and increase in that justification, in
which we obtained remission of sins, by the Aug. ibid.
lauer of regneration; in that by which we received the Holy Ghost, in that
whereof we have some part by Faith, some beginning by faith, in that we profit
from day to day; that is augmented partly by Hope, but most of all by Charity,
as by the most supereminent way, demonstrated unto us by the Apostle, by which
our faith is circumcised, and discerned from the faith of the Devils. And in
his second book against Julian: Justification in this life according to these
three means, is Aug. l. 2. in Julian, c. 8.
imparted unto us. First, by the lauer of regeneration in which all sins are
remitted. Then, by wrestling with vices from whose guilt we are absolved.
Thirdly, when our prayer is heard by which we say, forgive us our trespasses.
Finally S. James: Do you see that Iac. 2. v. 24.
by works a man is justified, and not by faith only? which as I have declared
above, cannot be understood of outward, Genesis 15. v. c. Romans 4. v. 9.
but of inward justification before the face of God, of that wherein Faith does
justify yet not only, not alone. Of that wherein Abraham was justified when it
is said of him: Abraham beeleued, and it was reputed to him to justice, the
chief place which D. Whitaker, M. Abbot, and their confederacy, so often
allege for their true justifying and internal Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum
Abbot in his defense c. 4. Whitaker. in his preface to the reprehens. p. 4.
Cent. 2. c. 4. Colum. 71. Sciendum est esse eam adulterina^.
Faith. In so much as many of the Lutheran, and Zuinglian Protestants, either
traduce that saying of the Apostle, or discard the whole Epistle out of the
Canon of holy Scripture, by reason he disputes here so mightily against them.
For this moved Luther to account it no better then an Epistle of straw, in
comparison of the Epistles of Peter and Paul, as Whitaker after impudent
denyalls, was constrained to confess, by finding an old edition, wherein
Luther disgorged that blasphemous parallel, that poisoned speech, which his
whelps the Magdeburgian Centurists licking up after him, cast forth in this
manner: It is to be understood that, that is a bastard, or an adulterous
Epistle. Among other reasons they allege this: Because against Paul, and
against all Scriptures, the epistle of James ascribes Justice to works, and
peruerteth as it were of set purpose that which Paul argues out of Genesis,
that Abraham was justified by only faith without works, and avouches that
Abraham obtained justice by works. Romans 4. Genesis 15. Cent. 2. c. 4. Colum: 71.
Cent. 1. c. 4. Colum: 54. Pomeran. ad Rom c. 8 Musculus in locis co^mun. c. de
iustific. number. 5. p. 271. Vitus Theod. in annot. in nouum Testam. p. vltim.
Illiricus in praf. Iac. Romans 4.
And in the first Century: The Epistle (say they) of James swarueth not a
little from the Analogy of the Apostolical doctrine, whereas it attributes
justification not to only Faith, but to works, and calls the Law, a Law of
liberty.

4. Pomeran another Lutheran of singular fame among them, accuses S. James of
no less then three notorious faults heerin. First, of making a wicked
argument. Secondly, of concluding ridiculously. Thirdly, of cyting Scripture
against Scripture. Wolfgangus Musculus also a famous Zuinglian rebukes S.
James, That he alleges the example of Abraham nothing to the purpose etc. He
confounds the true and properly Christian Faith, which the Apostle ever
preaches, with that which is common to Jews and Christians, Turks and
Devils etc. and sets down his sentence so different from the Apostolical
doctrine. The like is affirmed by Vitus Theodorus once preacher of Norimberge,
and by Illyricus a great Sholler of Luther, who join with us against their
own sect-mates (the Caluinists, and all English Protestants, in these two
points. First that S. James cannot be expounded of faith outwardly professed,
but of the inward Christian faith. Secondly, that Faith alone does not justify
according S. James, but works also, in the same sense, as S. Paul attributes
justification to Faith. Therefore Luther boldly confesses a contradiction
between them which cannot be Luth. in collo. conutualib. latin. tom. 2. de
libris noui Test. Idem in c. 22. Genes.
reconciled. Many (says he) have taken great pains in the epistle of James to
make it accord with Paul, as Philip endeavors in his Apology, but not with
good success, for they are contrary: faith does justify, faith does not
justify etc. In another place he has these words. Abraham was just by faith
before he is known such an one by God: Therefore James does naughtily conclude,
that now at the length he is justified after this obedience, for by works as by
fruits, faith, and justice is known: but it follows not (vt Iacobus delirat,
as James dotingly affirms) Therefore the fruits do justify. From whence we
also gather that the spirit of our English Reformers, is different from the
spirit of Lutherans, from the spirit of Zuinglians (and so one of them a lying
spirit) in a capital point, in receiving the epistle of S. James for
Canonical, and containing the true doctrine of the Apostles, which they
contemn^ as apocriphall, and varying from the Apostolical doctrine in a
substantial article of faith.

5. But these things I leave, and come back again to my former discourse.
After the example of Abraham, he confirms it with another of Rahab, saying:
Also Rahab the harlot, was not she justified by works, receiving the
Messengers, and Romans 4.
putting them out another way? And then he concludes, for even as the body
without spirit is dead, so also faith without good works is dead. From which
words these consequences may be manifestly drawn. First, as the body is a true
body deprived of the spirit of life, so faith may be true faith bereft of the
life of Charity, although dead and fruitles without vigor, force, or actiuity
to justify, as the body is dead without Iac. c. 2. v. 25.
the soul. Secondly the spirit is not any outward effect only, or sign of
life, but the true inward form which gives life to the body, no more are
works the effects only (as Whitaker Ibidem v. 26.
calls the) and manifestations of righteousness, but the true causes also
thereof. They do (as Hugo commenteth upon that passage) by the works the faith
was consumate, perfect Faytlr, declare it, augment, and consumate it. Yea they
give it the life Whitaker. in his answer to M. Camp. 8. reason. Huge in illum
lo^u^ Iac. c. 2. v. 22.
and efficacy, both of the first, and second justification: for if we
understand by works, the spring or fountain from whence lively works proceed
(whch is Charity) they formally impart to Faith the first life and efficacy of
Justice. If other actions and operations which flow from Charity, they
meritoriously attribute the second life of justification, which is the
augmentation, perfection, and full accomplishment of the former. S. Ambrose
interprets them of the fountain and first life, explicating those words of
the Apocalypse: I know thy works, that thou have the name, that thou live,
and thou art dead. He has the name that he lived, that Ambr. in c. 3. Apo.
is the name of a Christian, but he was dead, because he had not the works of
faith, which is Charity etc. as the body is dead without the soul; so also if
all good things we seem to have, they are dead, if Charity be wanting. S.
Augustine and S. Chrysostom Ambros. ibidem. Aug. l. 83. q q. 76. de fide and
oper. c. 14. 15 and praes. in psalm. 3^. and Chrysostom. ho. 3. in. c. 1. Genesis
expound them of the works, which flow from Charity, and so they are true
causes in way of merit of the second life, which is the increase, and
consumation of justice.

6. To which purpose I remember an argument, with which a Priest taken prisoner
in Oxford, once urged D. Rauies, then Deane of Christ's Church, and after
pretensed Bishop of London, to prove that good works (taking them in the
former two senses here specifyed) truly concur to all kind of justice. His
first Syllogism was this.

Omnis iustificatio est ex fide viua. Omnis fides viua ex bonis operibus. Ergo,
omnis iustificatio est exbonis operibus.
In English thus.
Al justification proceeds from lively Faith. All lively faith from good
Works. Therefore all justification proceeds from good Works.


Doctor Rauyes answered by distinguishing the Minor proposition thus: Omnis
fides viua est ex bonis operibus, concomi^anter concedo, cooperanter nego. That
is, all lively faith proceeds from good works, concomitantly as a figne which
accompanyeth it, not cooperantly, as the cause which works and effects the
same. Against which distinction the Priest replied in this manner.

Vita non concomitatur, sed cooperatur ad substantiam rei cuius est vita. Sed
bona opera sunt vita fidei viuae. Ergo non concomitantur, sed cooperantur ad
substa^tiam fidei viu^.
In English thus.
Life does not accompany or concomitate, but work or cooperate to the
substance of the thing whose life it is. But good works are the life of lively
faith. Therefore they do not accompany or concomitate, but work or cooperate
to the substance of lively faith.


M. Rauies not knowing against what proposition he should contest, yet ashamed
either to yield, or say nothing, denied flatly the argument, with this
exception, habet enim quator terminos, it has foures terms. And when the
disputant replied it had but three, the Deane could not be drawn to assign
any fourth term, or discover any fault in the Syllogism, but dismissed the
Priest from his lodging, and brake off the disputation, without any further
satisfaction, either to him, or the auditory. Which I leave to the scanning of
the judicious Reader, and will support the main Controversy I have in hand, by
some other suffrages of antiquity, besides those I have here and there
interlaced in explaning the Texts of Scripture.

7. Origin: As often as we sin (says he) we are borne of Zabulon (that is of
the Devil.) Unhappy is he who is always engendered of Zabulon, and again very
happy who is always borne of God: for I will not say, that this man is once
borne of God, but Orig. hom. 9. in Isa.
by every work of virtue, the just man is ever borne of God. And if you demand
how? He tells you: even as he^ that offends, becomes the slave of Satan,
more wicked and detestable before the face of God. S. Augustine: Have thou
money, August. sermon. 20. de verb. Dom. secund. Matthew. c. 3. Psalm. 1^1.
bestow it: by bestowing money thou increasest justice. For he dispersed, he
distributed, he gave to the poor, his justice abides for ever. Be hold what
is diminished, and what increased; that is diminished which thou art to
dismiss, that is diminished which thou art to forsake, that is increased which
thou art to possess for ever. Could he write more pregnantly for us? But it is
labor lost to cite more authorityes. The Centurists have gathered innumerable
to my hands, whose words I will only repeat to check our Protestants with a
double argument at one instance with the testimony of the Father, and
acknowledgment of the adverse part that he gives in evidence unanswerable on
our side.

8. In the first hundred years you have heard what they write of S. James. In
the second flourished, as they Cent. ^. c. 4. Colum. ^4.
recount them, Ignatius, Theophil^s Antiochenus, Serapion, Papias etc. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Quadratus, Aristides, Dionysius Corinthus, Bacchylus, Justinius,
Irenaeus, and the rest. Of whom they avouch: The article of justification they
have not unfolded clearly enough, they have ascribed more then they ought to
the works of the justified, which proceeded perchance from the error of the
false Apostles, concerning the necessity of works to Prefat. in Centur. 2.
dedicated to the most illustrious Princes John Frederike the second, and John
Albertus etc. and placed insome editions before the second book^ of the first
Century, Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 60. and 61. Clem. in paren. and l. 6. strom. Cent.
2. c. 4. Col. 60. and. 61. Theophil. l. 2. ad. Autolic. Niceph. l. 3. histor.
c. 15. Gent 2. c. 10. Colum. 169. 170. 171. Cent. 3. c. 4. Colum. 79. 80. 81.
salvation. The Martyrdom of Saints they extolled with such incredible
praises, that some began to think them expiations, or appeasements of sins.
Then they censure by name Clemens Alexandrinus, for contradicting himself in
writing thus: Let it not repent you to have labored: It is in your power if
you will, to buy most precious salvation with your proper treasure, with
Charity and Faith of life, which is truly a just price which God does willingly
accept etc. He places square and complete justice in the perfection of virtue,
and to that he accommodateth the imputation of Abraham etc. The like
altogether has Theophilus, Of set purpose he says, that God created man
free, and of his own arbitrament, which yet might be excused, if he added not
these things which follow: God has communicated a Law, and holy Precepts unto
us, which if a man observe, he may attain salvation, and rising may purchase
an incorruptible inheritance. Besides: He seems (say they) either to have
been wholly ignorant, or not to have sufficiently explicated the word of the
Gospel: for he does plainly affirm, that man by the obedience, according to
the Law may procure salvation, and life everlasting to himself. And yet they
observe, that Nicephorus accounts this Theophilus the sixth Bishop of Antioch,
to whom S. Luke dedicated his Ghospel, and the Acts of the Apostles: and
themselves commend him for his learning, zeal, and constancy, and report him
to have been, A writer of many excellent works, a propugnatour of the faith,
and vanquisher of many heresies, the less are they to be credited, when they
after accuse him, as wholly ignorant of the word of the Gospel.

9. In the third hundred years they reproach Origin, the author of the
Homilies upon the Canticles, Methodius, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian for the like
error, and first affirm of them in general: They attributed unto works
justice before God etc. So Origin with full mouth declameth of the justice of
Job. He only pronounces him to be justified for his virtues Orig. l. 1. in Job.
and legal works etc. He also thinks some whose faith is enobled with no
access of works may indeed be To wit infants and such as by Baptism or
contrition being justified, are prevented by death. before they can accomplish
any good works. Method. sermon. de resurr. Cuius fragmentum extat apud Epiphan.
l. 2. tom. 1. Tertul. l. aduers. Iudaeos Cent. 3. c. eo. Colum. ^40.
saved, but attain not to the height of the kingdom, or liberty, which (say
they) what is it other then without works no man to be perfectly justified? And
the Author of the homilye^in Cantica, makes a double justice, one of Faith,
another of Works, and truly to each of them ^e imputes salvation etc.
Methodius seems to hold that we are justified by the observation and
fullfilling of the natural law, which is performed by the aid and help of
Christ. Tertullian says: The Saints were just by the justice Done by grace and
faith in Christ. Cent. 3. c. 4. Col. 80. 81. Cypr. l. 3. ep. 25. Sermon de
eleemos. Tob. 4. v. 11. Eccles. 3. v 33. Joan. 5. v. 14. Sermon. de eleemos.
Cent. 4. c. 4. Colum. 292. 293. Cent. 4. c. 4. Col. 292. 283.
of the law of nature. He attributes to satisfaction, remission of sins,
teaching nothing in the mean time perspicuously of the faith in Christ, or of
free remission of sins, as almost no where does he either touch plainly
enough, or handles very slenderly, the article of the Gospel, and
justification. With which error Cyprian yields to descipline, or strict
observation of good life. That it is the guardian of hope, the retentiue or
stay, it makes us always remain in Christ, continually live in God, and to
arrive to the heavenly and divine promised rewards etc. So he professedly
teaches sins committed after Baptism, by alms deeds and good works to be
abolished. At once (says he) in Baptism remission of sins is given, daily
and continual doing of good, after the imitation of Baptism, imparteth the
indulgence and mercy of God; which he endeavors to prove by words of
Scripture, as by almesdeeds and faith, sins are purged: As water
extinguisheth fire, so almesdeeds sin: also by the saying of Christ, Behold
thou art whole, see thou sin no more least some worse thing befall thee: he
reasons, that by good works salvation had, is to be kept, and lost to be
recovered.

10. In the fourth hundred year, they reprove for the same cause, Lactantius,
Nilus, Chromatius, Ephrem, S. Hierome, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Hilary, S.
Ambrose, and Theophil^^ Alexandrin^^. Some of their words I will set down, as
they are recorded by the Centurists: the rest I omit for breuityes sake.
Lactantius (say they) auerreth, that God gives eternal salvation for our
virtues, labors, afflictions, torments etc. Lactant. l. 7. c. 27. and l. 3. c.
9. Chrom. in conc. de beatid. Cent. 4. c. 4. Col. 301. Voluntariam paupertatem
suo merito diuitias regni caelestis acquirere ait. Eadem cent. col. 192. l. 8.
comment. in Isa. Eade^ cent. Col. 293. Ambr. l. 10. ep. ep. 82. Qui sunt hi
Preceptores noui qui meritu^ excludunt i^iunij? Eade^ cent. col. 293. Theoph.
Alexand. l. 3. Pasch. Cent. 5. c. 4. Colum. 504. 505. 506. 507. 508. 509. 510.
etc. 10. colum. 1008. Chrysostom. hom. 6 in c. 1. Joan. c. 4. col. Cent. 5. c. 4
Colum. 504. Chrysostom. hom. 20. in e. 2. Joan. eadem cent. 506. Cyril. c. 18. in
Joan. Eadem cent. c. 4. col 505. citant Aug. it a dicentem l. 2. de peccat.
merit. c. 3. and 4. etc. haec de Aug. cent. 5. c. 4. colum. 507. 508.
To serve God (says he) is nothing else, then by good works to maintain and
preserve justice. Chromatius attributes so much to voluntary poverty, that he
auerr^th, the riches of the heavenly kingdom to be attained by the merit
thereof. Hierome says: It is not enough to have the wall of faith, unless faith
it self be strengthened with good works. S. Ambrose: What salvation can we
have, unless by fasting we wash away our sins? When as the Scripture faith,
fasting, and almesdeeds delivers from sin. Who are therefore these new
Masters who exclude or deny the merit of fasting? Is not this the voice of the
Gentiles, saying: Let us eat and drink etc. Theophilus Alexandrinus: Such as
fast, that is, imitate in earth Angelical conversation through the virtue of
abstinence, by a short and small labor gain to themselves great and eternal
rewards.

11. In the fifth age are traduced by them in like manner, S. Chrysostom, S.
Cyrill, S. Leo, S. Augustine, Theodoret, Sedulius, Prosper, Hesychius,
Primasius, Theodulus, Saluianus, Maximus, Salonius, Thalasius, Marcus Eremita,
Eucherius, and Paulinus. For in the beginning of that Paragraffe of
Justification, thus they write: Most of the Doctors of this age ascribe also
too much to works in justification, and acceptance of men before God etc.
Chrysostom speaks of many ways or kinds of justification etc. Chrysostom
is an immoderate Encomiast, or prayser of humane works. For this he says, Let
us endeavor withal our forces to attain salvation by our own good works
etc. Again: Is it enough to life everlasting to believe in the Son? No truly
etc. Cyrill also contendeth, that faith alone suffices not to salvation but
faith and works* Augustine attributes sometime too much too works etc. He
recyteth some testimonies, by which he proves evil works to condemn, good
works to merit eternal life. As out of the first to the Corinthians the sixth
Chapter. Out of the first to the Galathians, out of the ninetenth, and five and
twentieth of S. Matthew. Theodoret contrary to himself affirms, The^d quest.
63. in Exodus ita asserunt de Theod. cent. 5. c. 10. col. 1008. Prosp. l. 1. de
vit. contemp. c. 19. Cent. 5. Col. 505.
that only faith is not sufficient to salvation, but it needs works. Prosper
says: Neither works without Faith, nor faith alone without works does
justify. Hitherto the Centurists.

12. And yet they are not singular in condemning all these Doctors of the
Church. Pomeran once Superintendent of Wittemberge says: In the books of the
Ecclesiastical Doctors seldom shall you find the article of Justification
purely expressed, not certes, in the books of Athanasius. A little after:
Touching Justification they write at a venture whatsoever comes in their mind.
Then he concludes: You ought not to believe the Fathers, because out of the
same mouth they blow both heat and could. Chytraeus another Protestant,
complains that not Chytr. l. de stud. theol.
only Basil, and Hierome, but most of the Fathers, either very slightly touch,
or darken and deprave, with politic opinions concerning the justice of the
law, the special doctrine of the Gospel, touching the grace of God, and
Justice of faith, which is the chief and proper patrimony of the Church.
Schnepsius one of the same fraternity, says: Augustine never understood the
true and settled Sch^^ps. l. de Euchar.
opinion of the Church, concerning imputative Justice. The like accusation of
the most ancient Fathers made by Bullinger, D. Whitguift, Humfrey, Whitaker and
others, you may see hereafter recyted in the Treatise of merit, and in the
first part of this work, in the Controversy of Satisfaction, which more then
abundantly conuinceth the consent Field in append. 1. p. fol. 19.
of the Primitive Church (for of the later there is no doubt) to be wholly with
us in this substantial point of Faith, and that our Reformers bandy against
it, and the long continued current of truth in all times and Countries ever
since. Howbeit M. Field to win credit with the simple, audaciously craketh: We
no way oppose our selves against the universal resolution, and practice of the
whole Church, which to do, Augustine pronounces insolent madness. Let this then
M. Field be your task, or let some of your Thus S. Ambrose derideth
Protestants before they were hatched l. 10. ep. ^p. 82.
new Masters take the payns to discover some other public or hidden
Congregration of theirs, some other pastors besides the fornamed, who taught
your doctrine and reproved our errors in S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S. Austine,
and the rest, as the true sheepheards, and watchme^ over the house of God, have
always done. Were they reckoned such small defects, as might be cloaked and
dissembled? And not essential, not fundame^tall points of faith, which shake
the whole ground of Religion? Were they whispered in corners by some unknown
or obscure companions, and not printed in books, preached in pulpits, diuulged
to the whole world, by sundry troops of learned men, in such vast Regious, and
kingdoms, and not one of your ^olifidian professors to open their mouth
against them? Shall we expect after so long time your wresting of their words
to some favorable exposition of your devising? The Centurists (your own
Colleagues and partners in belief) wanted neither will, wit, diligence, or
cunning to have performed it, had they not found their sayings unanswerable,
their words vndefeatable, the main drift and scope of their discourses wholly
incapable of other construction. Shall we think they also favored the opinion
of Protestants, and so breathed out of the same mouth truth and falsehood, fire
and water, heat and Pomeran. vbi supra.
cold, as Pomerane blasphemeth? or which is all one, that they contradicted
themselves (as the Centurists stick not in plain terms to auerre of Clemens
Alexandrinus that famous Cent. 2. c. 4. Colum. 6^. Cent. 5. c. ^. Colum. 1008.
Writer, and Master to Origin, and of Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus?) It were too
notorious a stumbling, and headlong course not heard of before, that so huge an
army of devout and learned pillars of the Church, should all uniformly
precipitate and contradict themselves in this sole point: In a chief point of
Faith, and that not once or twice, but each of them diverse and sundry times, and
none to have the grace to see so great an oversight, or seeing it to amend it,
to recant it, to seek to reconcile it with other of their sayings: no zealous
man in the whole world, for so many ages who durst note, or twite them of it,
until drunken Lutherans, enraged with the fury of an Apostata Friar, began to
espy that horrible Antichristian, and often repeated contradiction. It is
incredible, it cannot be imagined, or of it could, certes they were no
Protestants, who maintained and believed an article of Faith, quite opposite to
the life of Protestancy, or worse then Infidells, who sought to persuade and
inculcate to others, that which they believed not, or knew to be falfe. Fie
upon such impious Chams, as cannot uphold their follyes, without disgracing
their predecessors, who cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, without they
condemn these Saints into the pit of hell, nor become Christians themselves
without making them impious Luth. tom. 5. in Gal. c. 4. f. 382.
hypocrites, damnable Idolaters: for no better does Luther account such as
dissent from him and his mates in the justice of only Faith. Let us hear his
words.

13. Whosoever falls from the article of Justification, he becomes ignorant
of God, and is an Idolater, and therefore it is all Luth. ibid. fol. 400.
one, whether he be a Monk, a Turk, a Jew, or Anabaptist: for this article
once taken away, there remains nothing but mere error, hipocrisy, impiety,
idolatry, although in show there appear excellent truth, worship of God,
holiness etc. And some Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Dureum and in his answer to
(...). C^mpia^ ^. r^ason. Abbot in his defense ca^. 4. Fulke upon sundry of
these places against the new Testam.
few lines after: If that face and form of old papistry stood now, if that
discipline were observed now with so much seruerity and rigor, as the
Here^its, as Hierome, Augustine, Gregory, Bernard, Francis, Dominicke, and many
others observed it, little perhaps should I profit by my doctrine of Faith,
against that (state of papistry:) yet nevertheless after the example of Paul
inueighing against the false Apostles, in appearance most holy and good men, I
ought to fight against such Justice workers-of the Papistical kingdom. Thus he
confessing S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bernard etc. to have been
iustice-workers of our kingdom, and to have been bondmen of the law of sin,
and the Devil, cast out of the house of God, as he wretchedly auoweth in the
same place; of which some of his followers being since ashamed, have clipped
and pared off much of this his discourse in the later editions. But it is high
time to view the forces wherein the Adversary confideth.

14. The huge host of objections, which the mutinous enemy disorderly leuieth
against us, and the Tenent of their Ancestors in ^his, and the former two
Controuersyes, I for more perspicuity and orders sake, sunder and part into
diverse wings, or squadrons. In the first, I rank those texts of Scripture,
which attribute unto Faith the corporal benefit of health or salvation, by
which the Matthew. ^. v. 22. Luc. 18. v. 42. Luc. 8. v. 50. Luc. 17. v. 19.
Matthew. ^. v. 2.
spiritual was betokned, because our Savior seldom cured any in body, whom
he cured not also in soul. As when to the woman troubled with an issue of
blood he said: Have a good heart daughter, thy Faith has made thee safe. To the
blind man: Do thou see, thy faith has made thee whole. To the Prince of the
Synagogue: Fear not, believe only, and she shall be safe. To the cured leaper:
Arise go thy ways, because thy faith has made thee safe. Likewise: Jesus
seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy: Have a good heart Son,
thy sins are forgiven thee. These and the like which our adversaries produce,
rather witness against them, then speak in their behalf: for not one of them
mentions their special assurance, and particular faith relying on the mercy
of God, remitting their sins, of which the fornamed Calu. l. 3. instit. c.
2.. 2. Luc. 18. v. 41.
persons had not at the first any thought or imagination, unless it were in a
covert, implicit (as the Schoolmen call it) and unexpressed Faith, which
Protestants deride with Calvin their forerunner; but they all specify the
Faith of miracles grounded on the power of God, which our Reformers deny to be
sufficient for salvation. For what was the faith of the woman healed of her
bloody flux, but the faith of miracles, by which she believed such power and
virtue in Christ, as she said in her heart: If I shall touch only his garment, I
shall be safe? What was the faith of the blind man, but the faith of miracles,
that Christ could restore him his sight: What will thou that I do ^o thee? He
said: Lord that I may see. What the faith of the Prince of the Synagogue, but
the faith of miracles, that Christ could recall to life his deceased daughter?
The same I auerre of the rest, yet this later was not the proper faith of the
revived daughter, but the faith of the Father. So the Faith which Christ
chiefly regarded, in pardoning the man sick of the palsy, was the ^ayth of
those that* carried him, and brought him up upon the roof, and through the
tyles let him down, Jesus seeing their faith: whereby Matthew. 9. v. 2. Luc. 5.
v. 19.
though we Catholics prove, that the Faith of one may prevail to obtain
health and safety for another, yet no Sectarye grants that the faith of one
can justify another. Therefore not one of these places serves to raise, but
all pluck down the rampire of their justifying faith, in so much as they
labor to underprop it by some other testimonies crowded into the self same
rank, as, the just lives by Faith. Abraham believed and it was reputed him
to justice. Being justified by Faith, let us have peace toward God. Likewise:
Abac. 2. v. 4. Romans 4. v. 3. Romans 5. v. 1. Act. 13. v 39. 1. Joan. 5. v. 1.
Gabr. Vasq. in 1. 2. disp. 210. c. 7. Clemens Alexand. l. 2. Strom. Orig. in. 4
ad Rom August. sermon 22. de verb. Dom. de hono perseu. c. ^. sermon. ^6. de verb.
Apo.
In him every one that believes is justified: whosoever believes that Jesus
is Christ, i^ borne of God.

15. All which have so many true and litterall expositions, as it can betoken
no less then gross dulnes in Protestant Ministers, who either for want of
reading did not find, or finding conceived not some one of them, The first is,
that by Faith we live, are justified, and are made the children of God
inchoatiuely, as the Deuines speak, because faith is the first supernatural
seed, root, or beginning from which our justification springs, and the first
foundation, or groundwork upon which our whole spiritual building relyeth,
as Gabriel Vasquez solidly proves by the authority of Clemens Alexandrinus,
Origin, and S. Augustine. Secondly, Faith iustifyeth by way of impetration,
excyting our will by the consideration of Gods goodness, and other believed
mysteryes, to ask and obtain the remission of our faults, and justice of our
souls. Thus S. Augustine often interprets those and the like words of S.
Paul, saying: Therefore by faith the Apostle affirms man to be justified, not
of works, because says is first given, by which the rest are impetrated: by
the law the knowledge of sin, by faith impetration of grace against sin, by
grace health and salvation of the soul. The same in diverse other places: Not
works, but faith does inchoate merit. Aug. l. de praedestin. Sanctor. c. 7.
and de spir. and lit c. 30. Idem epist. 105* and 106 Idem l. de gra. and lib
arbit. c. 14. defide and oper. c. 21. August. l. de great. and lib. arbitr. cap.
7.
Thirdly, all the former places, may be understood of lively faith, formed with
Charity, and accompanied with the retinue of other virtues, which wholly and
intierely justify us in the sight of that infinite Majesty. So also S.
Augustine: Men not understanding that which the Apostle says (we count a man
to be justified by Faith etc.) did think that he said, Faith would suffice a
man though he lived ill, and had no good works: which God forbid the Vessel
of Election should think, who in a certain place, after he had said: In
Christ Jesus, neither circumcision, nor prepuce avails any whit, he straight
added, but faith which works by love. Fourthly, faith (as all other virtuous
and laudable acts) flowing from Grace, does likewise justify meritoriously by
procuring increase of former justice: Therefore S. Paul to the Hebrews says
of holy men and Prophets: That by faith they overcame kingdoms, Hebr. 11. v.
33. Cypr. l. 4* ep. 6.
wrought justice, obtained promises. And S. Cyprian teaches, That God in the
day of judgment, pays the reward of Faith, and devotion. These four ways,
the forenamed Texts may be truly understood, howbeit our Reformers stupidity
was such, as they could not light on them, every Apo. 22* v. 17. Isa. 55. v. 1.
Romans 3. v. 24. Ephesians. 2. v. 8.
where obuious to the diligent searcher.

16. The second band of Objections are those, which affirm our justification
to be freely made by the benefit of grace, therefore without the supply of
works, viz. He that thirsts, let him come, and he that will, let him take the
water of life, gratis. All ye that thirst come to the waters etc. come buy
without silver, and without any exchange, wine and milk. Aug. l. de spir. and
lit. c. 10. and 16. Cent. 5. c* 4. Colum. 505.
Again: Justified gratis by his grace. By grace you are saved thorough Faith.
I answer, our first Justification is free and gratis, because faith which
first begins and stirs us up unto it, is freely given us, and Charity
which after accomplisheth it, is likewise freely imparted, not due to nature,
or having any connection, or dependence with our natural actions, be they never
so good or commendable in themselves, which is not my exposition, but the
interpretation of S. Augustine (confirmed by the divine sentence of the thrice
holy Council of Trent) By grace man is justified Similia habet Aug. in psalm.
18. exp. 2. ep 106. de praedest. Sanctor. c. 15 and praef. in psalm. 31. Council.
Trid sess. 6. c. 8. Joan. 6. v. 2^.
that is, no merits of his works going before, and (which the Centurists
reprehend) the Apostle will have nothing else understood in that which he says
gratis, but that works do not precede Justification. The Council of Trent
has defyned the same. Therefore we are said to be freely justified, because
none of those things which go before justification, whether it be faith or
works, do promerit the grace it self of justification. But if our Adversaries
by reason that justification is free, and of the grace of Christ, will renounce
all works, they must even renounce true faith itself, of which S. John says:
This is the work of God, that ye believe in him. Or if that work does not
hinder the free grace of justification in Protestants conceit, because it is
the gift of God, because it does not justify according to them, as it is an
actio^ proceeding from man, but as it takes hold, and applies unto them the
justice of Christ. Why should our preparatiue works any way preiudicate the
freedom of that favor as long as we acknowledge the^ also the mere gift of
the highest, and not to dispose us to the life of grace, as they are achieued
by our own forces alone, or flow from the dry and barren soil of Nature, but
as they are made fertile by the water of the holy Ghost, as they are elevated
and inspired by his viuificall motion. For if the Beggar (which is Cardinal
Tolets example) who of his own accord Tole^. in c. 3. ad Romans
stretches out his hand to receive the offered alms, does not hinder the
francke and liberal bestowing of the money, much less should the cooperation
of our freewill, which not of our selves, not of our own endeauours, but moved
and strengthened by God yields to his motions, any way withstand his liberal
donation, and free gift of Justice.

17. In the last wing wherein the only hope of their victory remains, such
sentences of Scripture are ranged as flatly debar the concurrence of works
from all kind of Justice, to wit, By grace you are saved through faith (and
that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God) not of works, that no man
glory. We account a man to be justified by faith without the Ephesians. 2. v. 8.
Romans 3. v. 28. Romans 11. v. 6. Romans 4. v. 2.
works of the law. If by grace, not now of works, otherwise grace, now is not
grace. If Abraham were justified by works, he has glory, but not with God,
with many others to the same purpose. I answer, that the Apostle excludes
indeed from the grace of justification, either first or second, all works
which proceed from the vigor or strength of nature, on which the Pelagians so
much relied. Then he excludes the good use and exercise of freewil done
without Christ, to which the Semipelagians ascribed the dowry of grace. Thirdly
he excludes the moral virtues performed by the Act. 15. v. 1. Aug. l 5. cont.
2. ep Pelag. c. 7. in pr^f. ps. 3^. ep. 107. and tract. 50 de verb. Domini
secundum Euang. Matthew. Hier. l. ^: com. in c. 3. ad Gal. Prosper. cont. collat
c. 22. Cent. 3. c. 4. Col. 80. ci^ant. Orig. l. 8. in epist. ad Romans
light of reason and precepts of natural Philosophy, wherein the Gentiles
boasted, and placed their happiness. Lastly he excludes all works achieued by
the sole notice of the Law, both cerimoniall and moral, in which the Jews
trusted so far, as they deemed themselves thereby only assured of Gods
favor, and some of them urged the necessity of circumcision, the observation
of their ceremonies, even to Gentiles converted unto Christ, of whom they
avouched: Unless you be eireumcised, you cannot be saved.

18. Against these the Apostle so often inculcateth, that neither circumcision,
prepuce, nor any work, either of Jew, or Gentill, done by themselves, or by
the knowledge of the law without the grace of the Spirit inwardly moving, is
able to save them: but he never excludes the Sacraments of Baptism, or
Penance, nor the works proceeding from the help of supernatural grace to be
dispositions to attain the first and true causes of increase in the second
justification; whereof read S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and Prosper, who
interpret the Apostls meaning in the self same manner, as I have here
declared; which interpretation the Century-writers have also espied, and
reproved in Origin, engrossing these words in the Catalogue, as they account
them, of his errors: It is to be understood that the works which S. Paul
rejects, and so often reprehendeth, are not the justices which are commanded
in the Law, but those things in which they boast and glory, who observe the
law according to the flesh, or rites of sacrifices, or observation of Sabaoths,
and new Monnes, these and the like, are the Council. Trid. sesl. 6. Can. 1. Fulk
in c. 2. Jacob. sect. 9. Fulk. ibid. Vasq. in 1. 2. disp. 210. cap. 9. Whitaker.
l. 1. aduerf. Duraeum. Whitaker. in his answer to M. Campia^ 8. reason. ^ulke
in c. 2. Iac. sect. 9. Abbot in his defense c. 4. Ambr. in c. 3. and 4. ad Romans
Chrysostom. in c. 3. ad Gal. and hom 7. in c. 3. ad Romans Basil. sermon. de humi^it.
Aug. l. 1. cont. 2. ep. Pelag. c. 21. and l. 83. q. 76. Hesich. in Leuit. l. 4.
cap. 14. Hilar. cap. in Matthew. August tract. 49. in Joan.
works by which he avouches no man may be saved. Hitherto Origin quoted by
the Magdeburgians. To which purpose the Council of Trent has very divinely
decreed: If any shall teach man may be justified before God by his works, which
either by humane nature, or by the doctrine of the Law are accomplished,
without the divine grace of Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. According to
this authentical exposition S. Paul and S. James, are clearly discharged from
that irreconciliable contradiction M. Fulke imagines between them in our
opinion: for either S. Paul speaks of the first justification, and S. James
of the second, which is not as he mistaketh another kind of justification, but
the augmentation of the former; or they both treat of the first and second
also, as Gabriel Vasquez thinks most probable, and the one excludes works
wrought without the inward motion of grace from justification; the other
acknowledges such works to cooperate thereunto, as proceed from grace, which
is no contradiction, but the true and undoubted position of our Catholic faith.

19. Although all the sentences of the Fathers which are stumbling blocks in
our Reformers way, be satisfied in the same manner, as these Texts of
Scripture: yet to ease the studious Reader from further travail, I will
particulerly set down, how the chiefest of them are to be understood, whom
our Reformers oppose against us, concerning this point. S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Augustine, Hesichius, and S. Hilary when they affirm
us justified by faith alone without any works, they mean without any works,
either of our own, or of Moses law done without grace. Or they are to be
interpreted of Faith, which is lively, indewed with Charity, and accompanied
with other virtues. So S. Augustine in his treatises upon S. John, when he
says: Faith is the soul of our soul. Prosper, S. Bernard, and S. Augustine
again in the seventh Chapter of his book of predestination of Saints, Prosp.
de voca. gent. l. ^. c. 8 9. Bernar ser. 22 in cant. Aug. de praedest. Sanctor.
c. cap. 7. Leo sermon. de Epipha^ and alibi. Orig. in c. 3. ad Romans Chrysostom.
hom. de fide and lege n^turae. Vasq. in ^. 2. disp. 210. c. 9.
are to be interpreted of faith alone inchoatiuely. S. Leo auerreth: That the
only Catholic faith quickneth, sanctifyeth, and gives life, excluding not any
works, but the false belief of Heretics. Origin upon the third Chapter to
the Romans, and S. Chrysostom in his book of Faith, and the law of Nature,
attribute Justification to faith alone, without the outward accomplishment of
any external work, or without the precedent observation of the law, whether
it be external or internal (according to Vasquez) both exemplifying in the
these upon the Cross: so that among all the Fathers whom they object, no one
gives sentence on their side.

20. Finally, besides these authorityes and the former common objections, one
the Adversary yet reserueth as his sole Achilles, and properly belonging to
this place, that our pious and godly works are outward tokens only, and
manifestations (as whitaker calls them) of inward righteousness, but not the
causes which augment, or make us more just: for as the tree is not made good by
the Whitaker. in his answer to the 8. reason of M. Campian fol. 254.
fruits it bears, but only declared and known to be such, no more can a
just man become more just by the fruits of good works which he produces, but
only be discovered, and known to be just, because as the fruits presuppose the
goodness of the tree, from whence they spring, and do not make it good: so good
works prerequire justice in the worker, and cannot concur to constitute
Matthew. 71 v. 17. Maldon. in c. 7. Matt.
him just. Whereupon Christ compares the just man with a good tree, which
brings forth good fruits, and cannot produce evil; the wicked to an evil
tree, which shoots forth evil, and cannot bring good. I answer with
Maldonate, first by retorting the argument upon my Adversaries. If by good
works we cannot be made, but only known to be good, it follows by necessary
consequence, that by evil works we cannot become evil, but only declared and
signified to be such. So Adam being once a good tree planted by God, either
could not degenerate and bring forth the evil fruits of sin (as he did) or
by sinning was not made evil or worse then before, by iniustly transgressing
the Commandment of God, became A difference between natural and moral causes
necessary to be noted.
not indeed unjust, but was only marked and figured with the notes of
injustice, which cannot be affirmed without plain impiety. Secondly I answer,
that there is a great difference between natural and moral causes, as every
Nouice in our Schools can instruct you. Natural causes by their good or evil
effects, are neither made good or evil, better or worse, as the fire waxes
not more hot by the heat it casts, nor the stock of the vine in it self
more fruitful by the outward branches it spreads abroad, but these only
demonstrate the fruitfullnes of the vine, or heat of the fire. Moral causes
do not only work well or badly, because they are good or evil, but by
vvorking well, or euilly, they grow good or evil, become better or worse:
As we do not only live temperatly, because we are te^perate, but by many
acts of temperance become Arist. l. 2. de mori. c. 1. Ibid. c. 2. Whitaker. l.
1. and 8. aduers. Duraeum August. l. de fide and oper. c. 14. and in psalm. 31.
S. Thom. in Gal. 3. lect. 4. Ambr. in cap. 8. ad Romans Beda in c. ^. ep. lac.
temperate, and by the like, daily go forward and increase in temperance. For
says Aristotle: As by building, builders, by singing to the harp men arrive
to be cunning harpers or musicians; so by doing good things men become just, by
temperate things, temperate, by valiant exployts, valiant. Likewise, by
accustoming our selves to contemn and endure things fearful, and to be
dreaded, fortes efficimur, we grow stout and courageous. Therefore although the
tree which is a natural cause of budding fruits, receaueth not from them any
spark of life, or increase of goodness, yet the just man who is a moral cause
in acheiuing good works, is more quickened in spiritual life, and perfected in
justice by achieuing of them.

21. Then they urge out of S. Augustine: That good works go not before the
justified, but follow him that is just. Out of S. Thomas: Works are not the
cause that any one is just before God, but rather the executions and
manifestations of Justice. The like out of S. Ambrose, Venerable Bede, and
others. I answer, they are manifestations and remonstrances of the first
justice, of the first infusion of grace, as S. Thomas expounds himself, and
so they follow, and are not the cause, S. Thom. in c. 2. ad Gal.
that any one is just in that kind, yet this withstandeth not, but that they
perfect and increase the infused justice, as true meritorious and moral causes
thereof, which is all that we require, all that the Oecumenicall and holy
Council of Trent has enacted, touching the Justice of our works, quickened
with the seed, or watered with the due of Gods celestial grace.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE XXII. CONTROVERSY, DISPROVETH The Protestants certainty of Salvation:
against D. Whitaker, and D. Abbot.
CHAP. I.
SO deep and unsearchable are the judgments of God, so close and inscrutable
the inuolutions of man's heart, his foldes so secret, so many his retraytes, his
search so weak in matters of spirit, so hidden and unknown the operations of
grace, the fears, the doubts, the anxiety so innumerable, which the best
believing Protestants, and Ministers themselves feel in their consciences, as
I am wonderfully astonished at this arrogant speech, that they should be all
infallibly assured, and undoubtedly certain of their salvation: and my
astonishment is the greater, when I read the sentence of God, and E^^^^^. 9. v.
1. and 2.
verdict of the holy Ghost pass against them in these terms uncontrollable:
There are just men and wise, and their works are in the hand of God, and yet
man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred, but all things are
reserved uncertain Prou. c. 20 v. 9.
for the time to come. And, who can say, my heart is clean, I am pure from
sin? Where Solomon does not affirm, as Venerable Bede notes upon that
place: That a man cannot be, but that he cannot certainly say, or know himself
to be pure from Beds in eum locum, Eccles. 5. v. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers.
Duraeum. Abbot in his defense c. 4. f. 330. and 331. etc. Calu. l. 3. instit.
c. 2.. 38.
sin. Likewise: Of sin forgiven be not without fear, or as whitaker
reads out of the Greek, Of expiation or pardon be not secure. To the first
of these three testimonies M. Abbot replyeth with Calvin his Master, That by
outward things, by things that are before our face, a man knows not, whether
he be beloved, or hated of God, howbeit he may otherwise infallibly know it.
But this answer cannot be shaped to the latter clause of that sentence: All
things are reserved uncertain for the time to come. For that cannot be
absolutely auerred to be uncertain to man, which he certainly knows by any
means whatsoever, much less which he certainly knows, although not by the
outward event and sequel of things, yet by the inward light and persuasion of
his heart: as the mysteryes of our belief, which we only know by faith, cannot
be said to be uncertain, hidden, and unknown to us. Therefore M. Abbot
seeks another Abbot in his defense c. 3.
evasion, to wit, that the Text is corrupted, and not faithfully translated
word by word out of the Hebrew. And therein he appeacheth S. Hierome, whose
translation it is, he makes him a corrupter, and deprauer of holy Lorin, in
his comment. upon that place. Bellar. l. 2. de verb. Dei c. 12. Hieron. in in
cum loc. 1. Cor. 4. verse. 4. Psalm. 18. v. 13.
Writ, therein he accuses the whole current of the Latin Church, which from
his time to ours has received that translation, wherein the true and perfect
sense of the hebrew words; is punctually and elegantly expressed, as Lorinus
and Bellarmine declare, even by the exposition of S. Hierome himself, who
commenting upon that place, says: I have found the works of the just men to
be in the hand of God, and yet themselves not to know, whether they be loved of
God or no. I omit how S. Paul says: I am guilty of nothing, yet in this I am
not justified. How King David seeming not to know his own estate, cried out:
Sins who understands? From my secret sins cleanse me. How Job
notwithstanding his innocence durst not challenge to himself the certainty
Job. 9. v. 20. and 21. Basil. de constitut. Monast. c. 2. Theod. in illum loc.
S. Pauli Bernard. epist. 42. Ambr. ser. 5. in psalm. 118. Hier. 1. and 2.
dialog. con. Pelag. Augu. in psalm. 18. etc. 9. de contri. cordis. Chrysostom. hom
11. in 1 ad Cor. Greg. 9. moral. 17. and 19. Dan. 4. v. 24. loel. 2. v. 13. and
14. ^onas 3. v. 9. Act. 8. v. 22. Hieron. in ^. lonae. Hieron. in 4. Dan.
Beatus Daniel praescius futurorum, de sententia Dei dubitat, remtemerariam
faciunt qui audacter veniam pollicentur peccantibus.
of grace, saying: If I will justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me:
If I will show my self innocent, he shall prove me wicked: although I shall be
simple, the self same shall my soul be ignorant of. I omit also S. Basil, S.
Bernard, Theodoret, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and
S. Gregory, confirming our doctrine by these former Texts.

2. I pass to the doubtful phrases and terms of hesitation, as, perhaps,
who knows, peradventure, used by Daniel, Joel, Jonas, and S. Peter, by which
they intimate the uncertainty of Gods favor, even to the faithful and
repentant, in respect of some want of disposition, which may be required on
their sides. Daniel says to Nabuchodonozor: Redeem thou thy sins with
alms, and thine iniquityes with the mercyes of the poor, perhaps he will
forgive thine offenses. Joel: Turn to the Lord your God etc. who knows if he
will convert? Jonas: Who knows if God will convert and forgive? S. Peter: Do
penance etc. and pray to God, if peradventure this cogitation of thy heart may
be remitted. Lo the Prince of Apostles, the Prophets of God presume not to
assure their penitents of the remission of their sins, as our jolly Ministers
now adays, but left them in fear or suspense: That whilst men (as S. Hierome
commenteth upon the former Text of Jonas) are doubtful of their salvation,
they may do penance more fervently, and more studiously provoke God unto
mercy. And expounding the forecyted place of Daniel, he writes thus: Blessed
Daniel foreknowing things to come doubts of the judgment of God: they take a
rash and temerarious thing in hand, who boldly promise pardon to sinners. Which
saying of his, pinched Melancthon so much, that he reprehendeth S. Hierome.
First, for adding that doubtful particle (perhaps) to the Text: then for
teaching more imprudently the remission of sins to be uncertain. Yet I
believe S. Hieroms assertion warranted by such evident Scripture, willbe sooner
embraced, then the snarling reprehension of a thousand Melanct. in Apol.
confess. Aug. Andr. Ve. gal. 9. c. 11.
Melancthons, or the whole kennel of Luthera^ whelps. And as for the Aduerbe (
forsitan) it was not intruded by him, but read and contained in most
authentical copyes, and translations, as Andreas Vega professor Salamanca
diligently opens and shows; first, that the Hebrew Chaldean Text has the
particle Hen, equivalent unto it; then that the 70. Interpreters, that Sanctius
Pagninus, that the Tigurine edition have all the Aduerbe it self fortasse,
perhaps, or peradventure. So innocent and inculpable was S. Hierome from
inserting it, as Melancthon traduceth him, besides the purpose.

3. Moreover we are often counseled in holy Writ so to strive for the garland
of our feliciry, as we also stand in fear of loosing the same. To the
Philippians: Work your salvation with sear and trembling. In the Apocalypse:
Hold that which thou have, that no man take thy crown. To the Hebrews:
Philip. 2. v. 12. Apoc. 3. v. 11. Heb. 4. v. 1. Romans 11. v. 20. 21. Psalm. 2. v.
11. 12.
Let us fear therefore, least perhaps forsaking the promise of entering into
his rest, some of you be thought to be wanting. To the Romans: Thou by faith
do stand, be not too highly wise, but fear, if God has not spared the
natural boughs, least perhaps he will not spare thee neither. In the Psalms:
Serve our Lord in fear, and rejoice to him with trembling. Apprehend
diseipline, least sometime our Lord be wrath, and you perish out of the just
way. Now this fear cannot consist with infallible assurance of salvation: for
he that is assured by the light of Faith, that there is a God, that there is an
eternity of life to come, cannot withal, fear the contrary, howsoever Abbot
c. 3. sect. 10. fol. 328. and 329. Matt. 8. v 26. etc. 14. v. 31.
M. Abbot talks that he may, and that little faith is subject to fear and
doubt; and for proof thereof he refers us to these Texts of Scripture: Why
are you fearful, o ye of little faith? which Christ spoke to his Disciples:
and to Peter, O thou of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt? which no way
fit his purpose. For the Disciples were not warranted by faith, that they
should not be cast away in that boisterous tempest, nor S. Peter that he should
not sincke walking on the water: his doubt did not shake the stedfastnes of his
faith, nor any way belong to any article thereof: but the assurance of
salvation is to every Protestant an article of Faith, therefore no fear, no
doubt can comply with that by the foree of these Texts, nor by the virtue of
that example, which he ilfauouredly applies to Abbot c. 3 sect. 10. f. 326.
the contrary: As (quoth he) a man upon the top of a high tower is afraid to
fall, and trembles to think thereof, when notwithstanding being environed with
the battlements, he is without danger of falling, and not afraid that he shall
fall: so the true believer trembles with the horror of the conceit of falling
away from God, knowing the end of them to be most unhappy that so do, when yet
he reposeth assured trust in God, that being compassed about with his
protection, and dwelling under his defense, he himself shallbe preserved for
^uer. What miserable stuff is here? Will men, otherwise prudent, otherwise
wary and judicious, hazard their souls with such palpable iuglers? Upon such
open and manifest cheating tricks? For if the battlements be so high and
strongly laid, that one cannot ouerturne if he would, the fear proceeds
merely from the deceaueable fancy, and imagination of the mind, such as often
surpriseth us in our sleep, without any cause or ground at all. But here in
our case the fear arises, not from the mere conceit, or troubled phantasy,
but from the peril and danger of the thing it self, from the danger we are
in, of Psalm. 2. v. 12. Apoc. 3. v. 11. Romans 11. v. 20. 21.
loosing our salvation, if we do not work and live as we ought. Here God does
not warn us to apprehend discipline, least the imagined horror or thought of
perishing afflict our hearts, but least our Lord be wrath, and we perish out of
the just way; least another take and bereave us of our crown; least we be cut
off, as the natural boughs, the nation of the Jews, who were not abandoned by
mere apprehension, but truly and really, cut off from Christ: therefore he
puts us in fear of the like separation, otherwise these grave and earnest
admonitions, should be rather foolish jests, or idle scoffs, then heavenly
counsayles and aduises from God. For as it were a foolery to warn him who
securely sleeps in his bed, and fears the skirmish of war, the dangerous
swimming or flying in the air (of which he dreameth) to beware he be not
killed by his enemies, be not drowned in the sea, or dash not his head against
a wall; And that I may insist in his own example, as it were a mere vanity,
seriously to bid him take heed he fall not, who by reason of the battlements
could not expose himself to any danger of falling: so a vanity it were and
foolery also in these divine watchmen or se^tinells of God, to put us in fear
of loosing that, which according to Protestants we cannot loose. Away then with
this base trumpery, away with these ridiculous examples, more agreeable to the
bench of Montebankes to beguile the simple, then befitting the chair of
Doctors, the seat of Abbot in his defense c. 3. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers.
Duraeum. fol. 620. Romans 11 v. 33. 2. ad Tim. 2. v. 10. Aug. l. 6. hypogn. c. 7.
2. Tim. 2. v. 9 August. tract. 12. in Joan. Aug. l. ^ hypog. c. 8 August. l. de
corrept. and gra. c. 13. Bernard* sermon. 1. in Septuag.
Professors, and professors of Divinity to instruct the unlearned. I keep on
my course.

4. Another Argument which we propose, is, that no man can be certain of his
salvation, according to Protestants, unless he be certain also of his eternal
election, and predestination. But this the Apostle recounteth among the most
hidden misteryes and secrets of God: Odepth of the riches, of the wisdom, and
of the knowledge of God, how incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways
vnsearcable! For who has known the mind of our Lord, or who has been his
Counsailour! Again: The sure foundation of God stands, having this seal:
Our Lord knows who be his. By the (sure foundation) the best Interpreters
understand, the decree of God, the predestination of his elect which he has
sealed up as a hidden secret reserved only to himself: Our Lord (says S.
Augustine) knows who remain to the crown, who remain for the fire, he
knows in his flower the wheat, he knows the chafe, he knows the seed,
he knows the cockle. And none but he. Therefore he writes in another place:
Let no man glory, let no man despair: for our Lord only knows who be is. And
again: Who among the multitude of the faithful, as long as he is conversant in
this mortality, may presume that he is in the number of his predestinate: Who
(says S. Bernard* can affirm, I am one of the elect, I am one of the
predestinate to life, I am one of the number of the children? Certainty truly
we have not, the confidence of hope solaceth us. S. Prosper, and S. Prosper ad
12. object. Vincent. Greg hom. 38. in Euang.
Gregory affirm the like. If these men, if S. Bernard had no certainty, if S.
Augustine were ignorant of his election, how do Protestants arrogate the
knowledge heerof? If it seemed so unsearchable to that heauen-rapt Apostle S.
Paul, how do earth-creeping Ministers attain unto it? If God has sealed it
with his own signet, how do they enter his secrets? how break they up his
seal, without his particular warrant?

5. Our Adversaries answer to this argument, and to the authority of the
Fathers, That no man by any apprehe^sion, or light of flesh and blood, can say,
I am one of the elect, I am one of the predestinate: no man by judgment of
reason or humane Abbot cap. 3. sect. 11. f. 331. and sect 12 fol. 337. Whitaker.
l. 8. aduers. Duraeum.
knowledge can conceive it, yet by ordinary faith God does ordinarily in some
measure or other reveal the secret of his election unto the faithful. Less
faith then had S. Paul, less S. Augustine, less S. Bernard, less Job, and
King David, then every ordinary Protestant, to whom this secret was not at the
least by ordinary faith ever opened or disclosed. Again, no article of our
belief, not Christ crucified, not his Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection
are known unto us Matt. 16. v. 17. 1. Tim. 3* v. 16. Coloss. 1. v. ^3. 6. ^7.
^8. August. vbi supra.
by any other means, then by the light of Faith: Flesh and blood (as Christ
said unto S. Peter) has not revealed this unto us. And yet S. Paul writes of
them: That they are preached, manifested* and made known to us, that the
secret decree of predestination is hidden and unknown. Therefore he auerreth
it to be hidden and unknown, by the ordinary illustration of faith, by which
the former mysteryes are only manifested and known: and of which S. Augustine
must needs be expounded, who does not say, Who among the carnal, or fleshly
men, guided by sense or reason, but who among the faithful, that is, by the
ordinary beams of Faith, may presume that he is predestinate: neither can it
ever sincke into the brain of any, but some brainsicke Minister, that either
he, or S. Bernard, or any other Father should so earnestly inculcate the
unknown certainty of our election, to sense, reason, or humane judgment, more
then of any other mystery of our redemption to which notwithstanding they are
equally unknown.

6. Further you teach, M. Abbot, that by ordinary faith every man is made privy
to his election, and yet, that no See Abbot cap. 3 and Whitaker. vt infra.
man can be certain of his faith, unless he be sure he be one of the elect. For
true faith in your fancyes, is only granted to the elect; but by faith to know
election, and by election faith, is to wheel about without end of knowing, and
never come to the full point of knowledge. It is to run the circle you reprehend
in others: Notwithstanding what entrance I pray do you make, which is primo
cogni^um, the first known in this circled round? Do you first ascend into the
Counsails of God, there see your names written in the book of life, and from
thence discover the beams of your belief; or first see your true belief, and
thereby mount unto the knowledge of your election? A question which much
perplexeth the learned Protestants. For Whitaker clymeth the former way, and
VVhi^^k. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum. fol. 620.
by assurance of election receaueth the certificate of salvation and belief,
saying: Whosoever do certainly know themselves to be elect and predestinate,
they are certain of the remission of their sins, and of their salvation etc.
Therefore the Protestant must first know that he is enrolled in the number of
Calu. l. 3. instit. c. 24. 4. reproves VVhitak^^^ answer. His Majesty with
the Bishops at Hampton Court reprove the same f. 29. and 30.
the predestinate, before he can know, that he is incorporated, by remission of
sins wrought by Faith, in the congregation of the faithful: which clyming of
Whitakers, Calvin condemns as a dangerous tentation, and perverse desire of
seeking to know election out of the way. I call i^ seeking out of ^he way says
he* when a wre^ched man enterprise^h to break into the hidden secrets of the
wisdom of God, and to pierce even to the highest Eternity, to understand what
is determined of himself at the judgment seat of God: for then he throws
himself headlong to be swallowed up in the depth of the v^measurable devouring
pi^, then he wrappeth himself with i^^^merable snares, and such as he cannot
wind out of, then he ouerwhelmeth h^mselfe with the bottomless gulf of blind
darcknesse.

7. Therefore Calvin, and M. Abbot compass about Calu. l. 3. instit. c. 24..
4. 5* 6. Abbot cap. 3. sect. 12. fol. ^^7.
the second way, and by ordinary faith travail to ascend into the bosom of
Gods secrets, and assure themselves of their election: but this is already
refuted by S. Paul, S. Augustine, and S. Bernard, that God by faith reuealeth
other mysteryes, but seals up this, and reserueth it still unknown,
concealeth it to himself as a depth unsearchable. Likewise your special faith
is nothing else, but an assured affiance of your heart, which certifyeth you of
the remission of your sins, of your adoption in Christ, of your election and
predestination. But, as the object, according Aug. 4. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 32.
to S. Augustine, goes before the knowledge thereof; so your predestination,
moving you to believe, precedeth (even in respect of you) the affiance of your
heart by which you believe. Howbeit if you ignorantly suppose that true faith is
known by it self, and leads you to the object of election, which thereby is
known; although it be a foolery unworthy to be refuted, yet I shall cast so
much time away by and by, as to disprove that foolery. August. de dono perse.
l. 2. c. 22. Chrysostom ho. 11 in ^. 3. ad Philip. 1. Cor. 10. v 12. Ibidem c. 9.
Greg. ep. ^8^. quae est l. 6. ad G^^g. Cubi^ul. Aug. Bernar ser. 2. in octau.
Pen. and ser. 1. in Sept. Hier. l. 2. cont. P^l^.


8. My custom is, after the authorityes of holy Scriptures, to allege by
themselves the testimonies of Fathers, but now (besides those I have here
interlaced, and shall add hereafter) I will content my self with these few.
First with S. Augustine: Serve our Lord with fear, and rejoice to him with
trembling, because of everlasting life, which God (not lying) has promised to
the children of promise etc. No man can be secure until this life be finished.
Then with S. Chrysostom: Of resurrection we cannot be confident and secure: to
which purpose he bringe^h in S. Paul speaking thus: I acknowledge my self to
have believed in Christ, in the power of his resurrection, that I have by^ m^de
partaker of his sufferings conformable to his death, notwithstanding after all
these things I am no^ secure. In proof whereof he alleges these two
sentences: He that seems to stand, let him look he do not fall: and I fear
(so S. Chrysostom reads) least whilst I have preached to others, I become a
reprobate my self. With him S. Gregory, S. Bernard, and S. Hierome agree, who
excellently corroborate and confirm the same. Moreover S. Hierome says: I
contaminated with the filth of all kind of sins, Hier. ep. ad Florent. citatur
ep. 5. in Gloss. Hieron. in vita ^ius.
day and night expect with trembling, to render the Last farthing, and the time
in which it shall be said to me; Hierome come forth. So S. Hilarion, and the rest
of the Saints stood in fear and dread, not presuming to challenge the security
of Protestants: against which I also wage war by the strength of reasons.

THE SECOND CHAPTER* WHEREIN The former Presumption is refuted by Reason, and
whatsoever the Adversary obiecteth against us, is removed.
FIRST al Sectaries teach, that nothing is to be believed as an article of
faith, Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Duraeum. fol. 618. and 619. Abbot c. 3. sect. 2.
f. 262. 263. and 264. 265. loan. 3. v. 15. Mar. 1. v. 15. Mar. 16. v. 15. 16.
but what is either contained in Scripture, or by manifest deduction is
gathered from thence. But where is it written in Scripture, that Richard Field
Doctor of Divinity, or Robert Abbot Titulary Bishop of Salisbury, have their
sins remitted, and shall infallibly be saved? Whitaker, and Abbot make answer,
that in these general propositio^s, Whosoever believes shallbe saved, repent
and believe the Gospel, and ye shall be saved, is inuolued: Richard Field
believe, and thou shall be saved: Robert Abbot repent and believe, and thou
shall be saved. Therefore although the Scripture names not any in particular,
yet it affoarde^h every one a sufficient warrant, that by his repenting and
believing, he shall be saved. But this warrant is conditional, as M. Abbot there
confesses, and this condition is, if he rightly repent, if he righly believe,
which Abbot ibi^^^.
are acts depending of Gods grace, and his freewill, no way comprehended in
that general assurance, nor by any infallible means deduced from thence,
therefore his certainty still wauereth in respect of these conditional works.
For although it be so, that a man may sometym know he repents, know he
believes with some faith, with some repentanc^ or other, because he sensibly
feels the inward throbs of his heart, behouldeth the tears trickling from his
eyes, apparent tokens of sorrow and repentance, because faith is a light which
manifest it self, an act of the understanding which cannot be hidden; to which
effect M. Whitaker and M. Abbot urge out of S. Abbot c. ^. Whitaker. l. 8.
aduers. Duraeum. Augu. ep. 112.
Augustine, That the faithful man does see his faith it self, by which he
answers that he believes: Although I say, all this be true, yet the knot of
our difficulty remains still untied. For neither does S. Augustine teach, nor
any reason persuade that he infallibly knows his repentance to be such, as it
ought to be done for so pure and divine a motive, as is requisite for the
justifying of his soul, to be true Christian, and not false Herodian, not
Antiochus his sorrow; that his tears are distilled from the Rose of Charity,
not squeazed out of the nettles of private and self love. Likewise he cannot
certainly know, whether his faith be natural or supernatural, whether it rely
upon the authority of God duly proposed and immediately credited for it self,
or for some other humane reasons as the formal motives of his belief, because
there is such co^nexion and affinity between the natural and supernatural
acts, they are paralelled and consorted together in so many branches of near
alliance, as it is impossible by infallible certainty to discern, without
special revelation, humane faith from divine virtues infused by God, from
virtues gained by man's labor and industry. Then it is above the reach, and
skill of man, to diue into the secrets of God, to trace his steps, or discover
the operation and working of his grace. In so much as Job said: If God come to
me, I shall not see him; and if he depart away from me, I shall not understand
Job. 9. v. 11. Greg. l. 9. in c. 9. Job. c. 10. and 11. Aug. in psalm. 41. and
sermon. 13. de verb. Dom. Iraen. c. 17. v. 9.
it. Which S. Gregory interprets, of Gods coming, and departure from our
souls, of his abiding or forsaking our hearts, that it is hidden, and concealed
from us in this vale of tears, for our greater humility. Again we are
obnoxious to sundry illusions, our heart is inueagled with diverse phantasyes,
has such a multitude of folds, and windings in it, as it is too hard to define
what it thoroughly abhors, or sincerely imbraceth, with all behoofull
circumstances as it ought, especially in the pious course of virtue; which
perplexityes and abstrusenes of our heart, Jeremy deciphreth saying: The heart of
man is perverse and unsearchable, who shall know it? And Calvin delineateth in
this manner: The heart of man has so many secret corners of vanity, is Calu. l.
3. instit. c. 2.. 10.
so full of hypocrysy, that it often deceaueth himself. In the next Paragraffe
he adds: Experience shows that the reprobate are sometime moved with the
same feeling that the elect are, so that in their own judgment they nothing
differ from the elect, wherefore it Hebr. 6. v. 4. Luc. 8. v.
is no absurdity, that the Apostle ascribes to them that taste of the heavenly
gifts, that Christ ascribes to them faith for a time. If this be so, if our
heart often beguile us, if the reprobate be sometime moved with the same feeling
as the elect are, if they have a faith for a time, how is your conscience
infallibly sealed, that yours is perpetual? May not your heart, your judgment,
your firm persuasion deceive you, as it deceaueth others? The Anabaptist
assures himself, that his sins by special faith be remitted, and that he
and all of his sect shallbe certainly saved. The Lutheran, the Caluinist
assures of the like, and each of them is certain that the contrary to him,
notwithstanding his assurance, shallbe infallibly damned. Whom shall we
believe? When every one is equally by faith assured of salvation, and yet each
one condemns the other two, and the whole Catholic world condemns them
all, to the pit of hell, if they obstinatly dye in their perfidious belief.

2. Secondly if special faith remitteth sins, and Sectaryes by the same
faith are assured of the remission, they can never say our Lords prayer without
mockery, or infidelity. For as they cannot entreat the Son of God may be
incarnate, as they cannot entreat his death, and passion for the redemption of
man, unless they deny or misdoubt the accomplishment of them: So if they
certainly believe the remission of their sins effected by faith, they cannot
without dissimulation, irrision, or Field l. 3. cap. 44. fol. 178.
plain infidelity cry unto God, forgive us our trespasses, which they
assuredly believe to have been forgiven before. Field answers, The justified
man knows that the dominion of his sins is taken away, and that the guilt of
condemnation, whereunto they subject such as are under the dominion of them, is
already removed, and therefore he does not desire, nor ask forgiveness of
sins in this sort, but the inherence of sins he acknowledges in himself
notwithstanding his justification, which still subiecteth him to Gods
displeasure, and punishments accompanying the same. These things he desires
to be removed, and in this sense asks forgiveness of his sins. So he. The
loosenes of whose answer, is already discovered in the first Controversy of
Original sin, in which place I have largely demonstrated, that when sin is
truly inherent, the guilt of condemnation still remains, or where the guilt
and dominion is abolished, there sin is extinguished, there sin inhereth
not: not wholly, because the dominion is removed, not in part, because the
blemish of sin is indivisible, and has no parts: or suppose we speak of
diverse sins which have diverse spots, diverse deformityes, one deformity cannot
be cleansed, or taken away without the other, which M. Abbot had once an eye to
discern, disputing Abbot c. 6. sect. 7. fol. 766.
thus against Doctor Bishop: Let him say the sin in part is pardoned, but
not wholly, and then let him show us what warrant he has, that God in that sort
forgiueth sins by patches and pieces,, which because he cannot do, let him
give us leave to take him for that, that he shows himself to be. Thus with
one eye; what with the other, the diligent Reader may perceive in my foresaid
Treatise of original sin. Then this reply cohereth not with it self, nor
with other of his, and his fellows barbarismes. For if the justified man
knows the dominion of sin, the guilt of condemnation to be removed, how
does the inherence thereof, notwithstanding his justification subject him to
Gods displeasure, whereas this common song is chaunted among you, and by you
also M. Field: That where the Field in his 3. book of the Church cap. 16.
Abbot c. 6. sess. 7.
fault of sin is once remitted, there no amercement or debt of punishment
remains behind to satisfy God displeased: Where sin (says M. Abbot) is
forgiven, there is no punishment, because there is no imputation of that to
which the punishment is due. Strange men who can never pursue the game in hand,
but every foot hunt counter to themselves, counter to their own companious.

3. Moreover if Protestants do not desire, nor ask forgiveness of sins for
any fear of condemnation, to which they may be subject, then they cannot pray,
at least to avoid that danger of perdition, they cannot pray they may not be
utterly abandoned by God, swallowed up by Satan, or cast with the miscreants
into outward darkness. They cannot say with King David: Destroy not O Psalm. 25.
v. 9. Psalm. 50. v. 13. Psalm. 6. v. 1. Psalm. 37. v. 1.
God my soul with the impious, and my life with bloody men: Cast me not away
from thy face: Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastize me in thy wrath,
that is, torment me not in thy fury with eternal, nor punish me in thy wrath
with Purgatory flames, which they fall into, who depart this life not perfectly
cleansed, as S. Augustine expounds that place, whose testimony S. Gregory
cyteth, and following his interpretation, wills every faithful soul to
consider Greg in 1. psalm poe^, verse. 1.
what she has done, and contemplate what she shall receive, saying: Lord,
rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastize me in thy wrath, as if she said more
plainly: This only with my whole intention of heart I crave, this incessantly
withal my desires I covet, that in the dreadful trial thou neither strike me
with the reprobate, nor affict me with the purging and revenging flames. So he,
so Manasses, so the ancient Fathers, so the whole Church of God has ever
prayed to have the guilt of condemnation removed from them. Therefore they were
never acquainted with our Protestants presumptuous faith, who do not ask
forgiveness of sins in this sort. M. Abbot therefore not satisfied with this
answer of Feilds, windeth about three other ways to creep out of the mudd, in
which he and al Abbot c. 3. fol. 289. and 290.
his adherents are stabiled. First says he: Our prayer obtayneth pardon at
Gods hands, therefore we pray, and by Faith do rest assured, that undoubtedly
we have that for which we pray. Secondly, we pray for forgiveness, not that we
have no assurance thereof, but for that we desire greater assurance, and more
confortable feeling thereof. The third reason of our praying continually for
the forgiveness of our sins, is for the obteyning of the fruit thereof (to
wit) a freedom from all miseryes and sorrows.

4. Neither of these fetches can rid him forth of the mire. For the first, that
prayer obteyneth pardon, is refuted above, in the Controversy of only faith,
against M. Field, by M. Abbots own discourse, and can no way be verifyed,
Protestants pray like the proud Pharisee.
according to their principles. The second and third as little avail: for who
did ever read so idle an interpretation, Forgive us, O Lord, our trespasses,
pardon our sins, that is, give me greater assurance they are forgiven, they
are pardoned; or grant me full freedom from all earthly misery, which is the
expected fruit of their forgiveness. Is this to accuse your selves of sin, to
sue for mercy with the humble Publican, or rather to say with the haughty
Pharisy: I acknowledge, O Lord, thy favor, in having remitted my offenses, yet
yield me more comfortable feeling of this thy remission: free me, I beseech
thee from all miseryes, as thou have freed me from my faults. O proud oraison!
O Pharisaicall prayer! far from the humility of K. Manasses: I am not worthy to
behold, and look on Manasses in orat. sua.
the height of heaven, for the multitude of mine iniquityes etc. Forgive me, O
Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not together with my offenses, neither
reserve thou for ever, being angry, evils for me, neither damn me into the
lowest places of the earth. Far from his humility, who durst not approach to
the Altar, nor lift up his eyes to heaven, but standing a loof said: Lord be
merciful to me a sinner. These men I hope believed aright, and yet they were
not assured of the remission of their Luc. 28. v. 13.
sins, they knew not for certain, that the guilt of condemnation was removed
from them: and you no sooner believe, but you presently receive a warrant that
your faults are cancelled, you need not crave further pardon at the hands of
God, but only that he would seal up your ha^^s with more assurance of his
grant, you incontinently, not only approach to his Altar here upon earth, but
even to his throne and presence in heaven, instantly asking, without more ado,
the fruit and consummation of your happynes begun, the fulness of redemption
which there is prepared after this life. What is arrogance, what is presumption
if this be not?

5. Besides, your second kind of petition wholly proceeds Abbot ibidem f. 289.
sect. 4. fol. 283. 284. Abbot sect. 4. f. 283. 284.
from imbecility of Faith. For, Our faith (say you) being weak, gives but
weak assurance, and therefore we beg of God that our hearts may be enlarged,
that the testimony of the spirit may more freely sound into us: Yet you
affirm, That some special men with the like assurance, believe their own
salvation, as they do the doctrine of faith expressed in the articles of the
Creed. Then at least, after you obtain the enlargement of your hearts, after
you be once in the number of those special men; then you enjoy that security,
as you cannot ask a surer certificate of the remission of your sins; then at
the least you can say no longer, Forgive us our trespasses: for as we cannot
without blasphemy desire more assurance of the Incarnation and Passion of
Christ, then that they are proposed in our Creed as articles of our belief; so
if you as infallibly believe your own salvation, and consequently the
remission of your sins, as those revealed mysteryes, it can be no less then
horrible impiety to crave more assurance of them; or if you may still crave for
more by reason of the weakness of your wavering faith, why do you boast and
glory so much in the prerogative of your faith, when never any Protestant could
yet arrive to this strong and steadfast Faith.

6. Thirdly, your assurance of salvation is noisome and pernicious to the
progress of virtue, it expels So S. Gregory calls it.
fear, the nurse of wisdom, the anchor of our souls, the guardian of good
life. It loses the reins of careless liberty, engenders pride, arrogance,
presumption, breeds a neglect of wholesome discipline, and many other weeds of
dissolute and wanton demeanor. Whereas the uncertainty, whether we be worthy
of love or hatred, whether our works be acceptable to God or no, as long as we
have a moral confidence, and steadfast hope that they be, cherishes the seeds
of sundry virtues, it nourishes humility, exciteth care, procures
watchfullnes, restrayneth us within our bounds, whetteth us forward Hier. in c.
3. lonae. Aug. l. de correp. and great. c. 13. Chrysostom. ho. 8. in c. 2. ad Philip.
Greg. ep. 186. quae est l. 6. ad Greg. Cubi^ul. Aug. and lib. 9. mora. c. 17.
Andr. Vegal. 9. cap. 17. in Council. Trident. Abbot c. 3. sect. 7. Greg. epist
286. quae est ad Gre. Cubicul. Aug.
in our duty, makes us more narrowly sift and examine our actions, more
deeply repent and do penance for our sins, more diligently work to the
attayning of virtue, and more fervently cry and call upon God to succor and
assist us in our daily conflicts and combats against vice. These fruits of our
uncertainty, and the former evils of Protestants security are set down by S.
Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory the Great, and diligently
proposed by Andreas Vega in his defense of the holy Council of Trent.

7. Now when Protestants account these fears, tentations, when they compare
them to sin against which they fight, and seek wholly to abandone, they
bewray the Anuil on which their devises are hammered quite opposite to the
touchstone of holy Scripture, which commends timidity as behoofull: Blessed
is the man, who is always timorous: work your salvation with fear and
trembling. Are these counsels, suggestions? Is this happynes to be abandoned?
Renounce you, as dangerous assaults, which the holy Ghost proposes, as
wholesome remedies, and stays of our souls? And which S. Gregory writing to
the Lady Gregoria notably pursues, telling her: That she ought not to have
security, but always jealous, always fearful, dread her sins, and wash
them away with incessant tears? A verity so often repeated in holy Write, and
celebrated by the rest of the Fathers, as Calvin is constrained to co^desce^d
unto it, at least in show of words. For Calu. in c. 6. ad Heb. v. 4.
he affirms, That God sprinckleth the reprobate with some taste or smacke of
his grace, shi^eth on their minds with some sparks of his light; affoardeth
them some feeling of his goodness, and engraueth in a sort his word in their
souls. Otherwise where is that faith for a time, of which S. Mark makes
mention? There is therefore Mar. 4. v. 17.
in the reprobate a certain knowledge of God, which after vanishes away,
either because it took not so deep root as it ought, or because being choked
it degenerateth. Hitherto Calvin. Which discourse Call. ibid.
of his, because it drives the silly Protestant into a thousand perplexityes,
still casting doubts, and questioning with himself, whether his faith has
taken sufficient root, may not hereafter be choked, may not degenerate?
Whether the motions he feels be proper to the elect, or the common sparks of
light, tastes of grace, feelings and impressions which are communicated to the
reprobate? Calvin quieteth his conscience with this final Conclusion. And by
this bridle our Lord keeps us in fear and humility. And truly we see how
slippery and prone humane nature is otherwise to security and foolish
confidence. Whose words be these? The words of a Protestant, or of a
Catholic? They are the words of a Protestant, of the ringleader of
Protestants, taking herein the face of a Catholic, and condemning the
infallible certainty, vain security, and foolish confidence of his Sectaryes.

8. The objections here heaped together by our late Reformers, are of diverse
sorts; some insinuate an assurance of salvation by reason of Gods spirit
dwelling in us: others seem to challenge it to the condition of faith, others
to Gods protection, safeguard and preservation Abbot c. 3. Whitaker. l. 8.
aduers. Duraeum.
of such as he has once called to the participation of his grace. The
principal of the first kind are these: In this we know that we abide in him,
and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit: the spirit himself
gives testimony to our spirit, that we are the sons of God; and if sons*
heirs also. We have received not the spirit of this world, but the spirit
which is in Fulk in c. 8. ad Romans and 2. 1. ad Cor. K^mnitius in examine. Con.
Trid. Calu. l. 3. iustit. c. 11. 1. Joan. 4. v. ^3. Romans 8. v. 1^. 1. Cor. 2.
v. 12. 1. Joan. 5. v. 19. ^. Joan. 3. v. 2. Romans 8. v. 38. Hier. ep. ad Algas.
quaest. 9. Ambr. in eum loc. Vatablus, Beza, and Erasmus in eum locu^. ^. Cor.
2. v. 12.
God, that we may know the things that are given unto us of God. We know that
we are of God, and the whole is in wickedness: We know that when he shall
appear we shallbe like unto him: for we shall see him as he is. I answer that
this knowledge which the Apostles mention, is not the certain and infallible
assurance of faith, but a probable knowledge, a moral certainty, such as
begets a joyful confidence, and assured hope, as S. Paul had, when he said:
I am sure, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels etc. shall be able to
separate us from the Charity of God. Where the Greek word is (...), which
signifies only a propable persuasion; and so S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, the
Syrian interpreter Vatablus, Bedae also, and Erasmus read it: or the Apostles
may speak in some of those places of themselves in particular by special
revelation (if they had any such imparted unto them) concerning their
perseverance in grace (as some think they had) or they are to be understood of
the predestinate in general, and benefits of grace, glory, and everlasting
life revealed for them in Scripture, and by the instinct of faith, and spirit
of God infallibly believed, of which S. Paul namely writes in the second
Chapter of the first to the Corinthians. But Protestants urge against my former
answer: That the testimony of the spirit is the testimony of the Holy Ghost:
the testimony of the Holy Ghost is sure and infallible, therefore the testimony
of the spirit which witnesses to our spirit, or with our spirit, as the Greek
imports, is not only probable and coniecturall, but infallibly certain. I
answer it is so. I confess in it self as it is witnessed by the Holy Ghost,
but as it is intimated unto us by the inward love of God, zeal of souls,
hatred of sin, peace, sweetness, joy, comfort, dilatation of our heart, and
such like, which are the pledges, testimonies, and certificates the holy Ghost
affoardeth, it is fallible and subject to deceit. For as the truth of holy Writ
is of irref^agable authority in it self, yet proposed by men, who may be
deceived, is also deceaueable; so that which the Holy Ghost witnesses by
himself immediately, or such expositors as cannot err, is infallible; that
which he testifyeth by probable and coniecturall signs, is only probable unto
us, and obnoxious unto error. Howbeit it passes the bounds of truth, and
modesty: That, with a wonderful tormenting of conscience, we mistrust Reynolds
in his 5. conclusion fol. 656.
still, and stand in doubt of salvation (wherewith M. Reynoldes slaundereth us.)
For the probability or moral certainty which we acknowledge ought not to
trouble the peace of our Consciences, nor anxiously distract, much less
torment the quietness of our minds. It is a probability intermixed with fear,
and nourished with such comfortable Whitaker. l. 8. aduer. Duraeum.
and steadfast hope, with such filial love, as banisheth all combersome anxiety,
all wavering doubtfullnes, all servile, base, and troublesome solicitude. That
which Whitaker so eagerly presses against Duraeus: Try your owneselues, if you
be in the faith; prove your selves; know you 2. Cor. 13. verse. 5. Cornelius
Cornelij a Lapide in eum locu^.
not that Christ Jesus is in you, unless perhaps you be reprobates, is
interpreted, as Cornelius declares out of Theophilact, of Christ's abode not in
every particular person by justifying grace, but in the Church of the
Corinthians, by power, miracles, conuersions, and other external gifts wrought
by S. Paul: and to the trial of this his presence, he exhorts them by the
remembrance and consideration of the works acheiued among them, and not to try
their justifying faith, unless it be by some probable tokens.

9. The objections of the second kind, which ascribe Joan. 3. v. 36. ^. Joan.
5. v. 13. Romans 10. v. 9. Romans 9. v. 33. Joan. 3. v. 15. 16. Joan. 6. v. 35.
the certainty of salvation to faith are these: He that believes in the Son,
has life everlasting: They that believe in the name of the Son of God, are
to know, that they have eternal life: confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be safe.
He that believes in Christ shall never be confounded, nor perish, but have
everlasting life: He that believes in me, shall never thirst: He that eats
this bread, shall live for ever. To which I answer, that these general
promises, which assure life and salvation to the believer, are understood
conditionally, if he believe as he ought, with a true faith working by charity;
and he is said to have everlasting life, because by Cyril in Joan. 3.
faith he has entered the gate and way, which leads thereunto, or has
received the seed thereof, the pledge, right and title unto it, by the spirit
of adoption, or divine filiation imparted unto him. He is promised also to be
saved conditionally, if he persevere in that state to the end; after which many
other universal sentences of Scripture Joel. 2. v. 3^. Romans 10. v. 13. Prou.
1. v. 28. Matthew. 7. verse. 8. Iac. 4. v. 3.
are to be expounded. It is written: Whosoever shall invoke the name of our
Lord, shallbe saved: and contrariwise: Then shall they invoke me, and I will
not hear them. Christ says: Whosoever does ask shall receive: Contrariwise:
you ask and receive not, the reason he subioyneth, because you ask amiss,
that you may consume it in your concupiscences. Therefore these general
sentences, whosoever inuocateth or believes shallbe saved, are to be construed
also with this promise, If he invoke, and believe with true faith, sincere
affection, and purity of life, as it behooves him to do.

10. Secondly whereas many causes concur to the Hebr. 5. v. 9. Romans 8. v. 24.
Eccles. 1. v. 27. Tob. 12. v. ^.
works of Justification or salvation, the holy Scripture sometime attributes
it to one, sometime to another. To obedience: He was made, to all that obey
him, cause of eternal salvation. To Hope: By hope we are saved. To Fear: The
fear of our Lord expels sin. To Almesdeeds, Almesdeeds delivers from
death, because each of them, if nothing else be wanting, is sufficient to save
us, and so faith acheiueth our salvation, if we be not defective in other
things required thereunto, or rather because it is the first supernatural
habit, origin, or root of life which springs and brings forth the lively
motions of all other virtues, and for this cause our justification is more
often assigned to faith, then to any other virtue: nevertheless if it fail,
dye, or be lost (as in the next Controversy I shall prove it may be) it
procures not the health of our souls, to which it was ordained.

11. The last troop of their misapplyed sentences, which retire under the
standard of Gods care and protection, Joan. 10. v. 27. 28. Whitaker. l. 8.
aduers. Duraeum. Abbot c 3. Joan. 17. v. ^0. 21. Matt. 24. v. 24. Romans 8. v.
30. 1. Cor. 1. v. 8.
for security of salvation, are: My sheep hear my voice etc. and they shall
not peri^h for ever, and no man shall pluck them out of my hands: Christ
prayed for the faithful, that they might be all one with him, and no doubt
obtained it: affirms it impossible for the elect to be induced into error:
Whom he has predestined he has called; and whom he has called he has
justified and glorified. He confirms and strengthens them unto the end. I
answer, here is a new throng of witnesses, but no evidence brought in our
Protestants behalf. For they are all veryfied of the elect in general that
they shall not perish, but be preserved and glorified in the end, into their
hearts he strikes his fear, with them he makes his everlasting covenant; but
here is no word or syllable, that this, or that man in particular is one of
them; he may be in the number of such as are outwardly Matt. 20. v. 16. Aug.
ser. 16. de verb. Apostol.
called: For many are called, but few elect. He may be also inwardly justified
for a time (which yet S. Augustine auoweth to be unknown to him) but that he is
one of the happy band of those, who are called according to the purpose, and
eternal election of God, is an inscrutable mystery, fit and expedient (says
the same S. Augustine) to be Aug. tom. 7. de corr. and gra. c. 13.
hidden in this place, where elation and pride is so much to be decaded etc.
That all, even those who run, may fear, whilst it is concealed who shall
ariue to the goal.

12. In like manner to answer the authorityes of the Fathers, four
observations are carefully to be noted. Nazian in orat. conso. in grand.
Ambros. sermon 5. Bernar. ser. ^. de annu^. August. tract. 22. in Joan.
First, that they avouch us certain of Gods grace, as S. Gregory Nazianzen
does; Certain of salvation, S. Ambrose; Of remission of salvation, S. Bernard;
Of final perseverance, S. Augustine, to wit, conditionally, if we keep the
commandments, if we strive manfully against vice even to the end etc. Secondly
they speak sometime of the certainty of hope and confidence, not of the
certainty of faith, or of the certainty only of humane faith by probable
conjectures, not of divine and supernatural. Thus S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S.
Leo, and S. Gregory in the places here quoted. Thirdly they say, that we are
infallibly assured Hier. in c. 6. ad Gal. August. tract. ^. and 8. in epist
Joan. and in psalm. 4. Leo hom. 2. defest. Pas. Greg. 34. in Euang. Dionys. de
divine. nom. cap. 7. Aug. in psalm. 88. Hilar. in c. ^. Matt. Cypr. con. Dem^^.
Aug. sermon. 28. de verb. Dom. Bernard. sermon. 59. in Cant. de Euang. Sept^^g.
Pan. ser. 3. and ser* 5 de dedi^. Eccl. Conc. Trid. sess. ^. ^. 9.
of our Christian faith, whereof S. Denis writes; or of Christ's perpetual
reign in the empire of his Church, of which S. Augustine affirms: That no
man ought to preach that with trepidiation and fear, of which he ought not to
doubt; or of the article of our Resurrection, and Gods future kingdom, of
which S. Hilary: The kingdom of heaven, which our Lord professed to be in
himself, his will is, that it be hoped for without any doubtfullnes etc.

13. Lastly, the Fathers often inculcate the infallible certainty of Gods help,
and concurrence on his part, of his general promises, of the merits of Christ,
of the power of the Sacraments etc. and in this sense they bid us rest assured
of salvation. So S. Cyprian when he says: There is with us a strength of hope,
and stedfastnes of faith etc. a soul always secure of God to be our God. S.
Augustine: To presume of Christ's grace is not arrogance, but Faith. S. Bernard:
I know whom I have believed, and I am certain or sure, because he has
adopted me in great love, because he is true in his promises etc. Yet this
withstandeth not, but that we may doubt, and fear, least there be some lets
and impediments for want of disposition on our side, which the thrice venerable
Council of Trent has enacted in these words: As no pious man ought to doubt
of the mercy of God, of the merits of Christ, of the virtue and efficacy of the
Sacraments: so every one whilst he considers himself and his own proper
infirmity, and indisposition may tremble and fear, whether he be in grace or
no. The soundnes of this distinction in mistructing our own weakness, and
imbecility only, not the goodness and bonity of God, is worthy to be marked: for
thereon depends the whole decision of this our debate, and the ignorance, or
inconsideration Stapleton. l. 9. de ^^^stifi^. c. ^^.
thereof in our Adversaries, is well observed by M. Doctor Stapl^ton, to be
the very root and seminary of all their heresies, touching this point. God
give them grace to see, and humility to acknowledge it before it be too late.

THE XXIII. CONTROVERSY, DECLARES That true Faith, or Justice once had, may be
lost: against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and D. Abbot.
CHAP. I.
ANOTHER licentious, or Iouinian Paradoxe, which bolstreth the former
presumption, or vain security of our Sectaryes, is; that their lively faith,
grace, and righteousness once had, can never be extinguished, or taken Fulke in
c* 11. ad Romans sect. 2. Whitaker. in his answer to the 8. reason of M. Camp* f.
236.
from them. He that is once the child of God, and believes aright, is sure to
continue still in his favor, whatsoever villanyes he after commit. For he that
stands (says Fulke) by the grace of God, whereof he is assured by a lively
faith, cannot fall. Whitaker: Faith is either perpetual, or else it is none at
al, either it perseueres to the last breath, or else that which is esteemed for
faith, is but some fancy. M. Abbot* Where there is true repentance, faith,
justification, knowledge Abbot. c. sect. 10. f. 322. Whitaker. contro. 2. q. 5.
p. 236. Fulk in c. 3. 1. Joan. sect. 5. 1. Tim. 1. v. 19. 1. Tim. 4. v. 1. 1.
Tim. 6. v. 10. Apoc. c. 2. v. 4. 2. Tim. 2. v. 17. 18. Act. 8. v. 1^. Whitaker.
in his answer to the 1. and 8. reason of M. Campian l. 8. aduers. Duraeum.
Abbot c. 3. Fulke in c. 1. ad Tim. sect. 2. Act. 8. v. 13.
of God, there infallibly follows perseverance to the end. Hen^^ they
infer, That sins are not hurtful to him that does believe: that King David
was the son of God, when he committed adultery. But if no man can loose the
faith, and consequently with them, the justification and charity he once truly
inioyed, what mean these words of holy Write?

2. Having faith, and a good conscience, which certain repelling have made
shipwreck about the faith. In the last times certain shall depart from the
faith. The root of all evil is covetousness, which certain desiring, have
erred from the faith. I have against thee a few things, both because thou have
left thy first Charity. Their speech spreads as a canker, of whom is
Hymenaeus, and Philetus, who have erred from the truth. And of Simon Magus it
is written: Simon also himself believed, who after notwithstanding became an
Arch-heretike, a reprobate, and miserably perished. D. Whitaker, D. Abbot,
Fulke, and their fellows reply: That neither Simon M^gus, nor any of the rest,
who fell from their faith, did ever truly believe with a lively faith, but
only with a fruitles, dead, and counterfeit. Thus our Protestants. The
Apostles, the Evangelists otherwise. To whom shall I give credit? To S. Luke,
to S. Paul, or to Fulke, to Whitaker, to Abbot? S. Luke says: That Simon Magus
also believed, and cleaued to Philippe, he matcheth him with the rest who did
truly believe, and expsicateth the fruit of his true belief, that he was
astonished with admiration. S. Paul blamed certain who departed from their
faith, erred from the faith, made shipwreck about the faith, which he would
never have done, if they had only forsaken a counterfeit faith; or else show us
any one place in the whole corpse of holy Scripture, where men are commended,
or recorded by the holy Ghost, to have believed the preaching of the word, with
a fruitles, and counterfeit, or reprehended for departing from a fruitles
faith. And to put the matter out of doubt, S. Paul again has these words: It
is impossible for them that were once Hebr. 6. v. 4.
illuminated, have tasted also the heavenly gift, and were made partaker of
the holy Ghost, have moreover tasted the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come, and are fallen, to be renewed again to penance. I cannot
stand to exaggerate the Fulke in c. 6. ad Heb. sect. 3. Calu. in idem cap.
heinous glosle, which Fulke and Calvin heretically frame upon these words,
more hateful and enormous, then the impiety of the Nouatians, who
misconstruing the before passage, taught it impossible for them that reuolat
after Baptism into a deadly and notorions crime, to be after received by
penance into the lap of the Church. But Fulke, and his Sectaryes, more cruel
then they, barbarously Ezech. 18. v. 21. Ezech. 33. v. 15. Joel. 2. v. 32. Isa
55. v. 7. Ambr. l. 2. de poenit. c. 4. Hier. ep. ad Ocean. Aug. l. 1. retract.
c. 19.
maintain, that he who wholly falls from his faith and once maliciously
abandoneth Christ by wilful heresy or Apostasy, can neither be admitted here
by true repentance into the bosom of the church, nor (which is worse) ever
hereafter to the mercy of God, contrary to these express sentences of holy
Scripture: If the impious shall do penance for all his sin, which he has
wrought etc. living, he shall live, and shall not dye. Every one that shall
invoke the name of the Lord, shall be saved. Let the impious forsake his way,
and the unjust man his cogitations, and return to our Lord, and he will have
mercy on him. Which I might strengthen with the authorityes of S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome, and S. Augustine, but I am to prosecute the matter in hand. And
touching these Apostata's of whom S. Paul mentions, I ask our Reformers,
whether they were ever implanted into Christ by justifying faith, or by the
beams of sactification, and renouation only, which they impiously distinguish
from the beautiful rays of Justice? grant they were once united unto him by
a lively faith, as every member, every verse of the sentence seems to
demonstrate, saying: They were once illuminated, with the light of Faith, have
tasted the heavenly Chrysostom. in cum lois.
gift, that is, as S. Chrysostom interprets, the remission of sins; which
if Protestants also allow, where then is the security they promised to the
justified of never falling? Where is their certainty of salvation, when these
just persons, after the abundance of heavenly sweetness, have tumbled back
into such irremediable Apostasy, as they can never as long as Protestants may
sit in judgment recover Gods favor again, never have any possible means to
obtain mercy, or purchase salvation. But if Fulke and his fellows cavil and
say, that they were only sanctified and renewed by the grace of the holy Ghost,
through the merits of Christ's passion, yet not truly justified, which is
impossible, at least to proppe up one, they undermine many ruinous castles of
their own defense, to wit, that some not predestinate, but plainly reprobate,
may be inwardly regenerated and newborn in Christ, that internal renouation
is no infallible seal of Gods election, that the grace of justification which
Christ purchased by his death, is common other while to the reprobate, as well
as to the elect, all repugnant to the principles, which they themselves defend.

3. Lastly, if they answer with Calvin (for their replies are as various and
different as their fancyes) that C^lu. in c. 6. ad Hebr. ^. 4. and l. 3. Inflit.
those Apostata's were never truly sanctified, but only sprinkled withsome
smacke, or relish of grace, shined on with some sparks of light, lightly
ouerwashed, not thoroughly soaked in the waters of heavenly blessing* (So he
wantonly dallyeth with the oracles of God laboring to pervert them with his
simpering speeches:) let him open his mouth and tell me plainly, whether those
sparks of light, or relishes of grace, were any the least drams, or particles
of true renouation, and inward justice, or not? If they were, they expelled
sin, and justified them for the time; if not, how fell they from that which
they never enjoyed? How does the Apostle teach it impossible for them to be
renewed again, who never received any renouation at all. How were they
illuminated, how tasted they the heavenly Greece (...) id est supercaeleste
donum.
gift, the powers of the world to come, how were they made partakers of the
Holy Ghost, who lay still oppressed with the darkness of vice? I am ashamed to
see these new Evangelists boasting of Scripture, and yet oppose themselves so
obstinatly against it, and against the Venerable Consistory of all expositors,
both ancient and modern (heretics only excepted) who albeit they vary in the
manner, yet all agree in interpreting S. Paul, of these Apostata's loosing and
recovering justice: their only difficulty and variance is, in explicating what
he means by the word impossible. For S. Anselme, Hugo, Dionysius, and
Lyranus, with many late writers expounding him of true renouation to their
former grace, through the virtue of penance, by the word (impossible)
understand very hard and difficile for those ungrateful, and malicious
Apostata's, after such lights, Chrysostom. in eum locum. Hier. l. 3. cont. Iou.
Ambros. l: ^. de poen* August. in in^hoatione ep. ad Romans Sedulius, Primafius,
and Theod. in eum loc. 1. Cor 9. v. 27. Chrysostom. ho. 1. in c. 3. ad ^hilip. and
hom 23. ^. ad Cor. August. apud Pe^rum Lum^^^^. in hunc locu^. Paulin. ep. 58.
ad August. 2. Pet. 2. v. ^1. Aug. defide and oper. c. 14. 15.
graces, and benefits received wilfully reuolting, to recover Gods favor
again by unfeigned sorrow and perfect repentance. But S. Chrysostom, S.
Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, and others
interpreting S. Paul of renouation by the penitential water of Baptism, take
the word (impossible) properly, as though the Apostle should extend his speech
to all such, as fall after they have been purifyed by the lauer of
regeneration, and should affirm it impossible for them to be repaired again
in that full and plenteous manner, to receive a new remission and perfect
indulgence from all, both fault and punishment due to their sins, by the
benefit of that precious and all-sauing liquour: which is most true, although
the former exposition seems more literal, and both maintain the right of
our cause.

4. Further more the Apostle says: I chastize my body, and bring it into
servitude, least perhaps when I have preached to others my self become a
reprobate. Which reprobation from God and utter extirpation of grace, if S.
Paul feared, how much more we (says S. Chrysostom?) Here may we lambs tremble
(quoth another) when the ram, the guide of the flock must so labor and
punish himself. For in lieu of chastize, the Greek has (...), which
Paulinus, and Erasmus translate, liuidum facio, I make black and blew. S.
Peter witnesses the same with S. Paul: It was better for the^ not to know the
way of justice, then after the knowledge to turn back from that holy
commandment, which was delivered to them. Where according to S. Augustine, he
writes of them who once enjoyed, and were after deprived of justifying grace.
And S. Peter explicating himself straight way after, affirms: That of the
true proverb is chanced to them, the Dog returned to his vomit, and the 2.
Petr. 2. v. 22. Ezech. 10. v. 24.
Sow washed into her wallowing in the mire. Likewise the Prophet Ezechiel: If
the just man turn away himself from his justice, and do iniquity according to
all the abominations, which the impious uses to work, shall he live? Yet
least Fulke should reply, that he may return away for a time, but shallbe sure
to return before he dye, it follows in the same place: All his justice which
he had done shall not be remembered in the preuarication which he has
preuaricated, and in his sins which he has sinned, in the^ he shall dye. Can
there be more clear testimonies?

5. Nevertheless if any simple and bewitched Sectary should be so miserably
inueagled by the charming Ministers, Zanchius ep. ad Misc. testifyeth this of a
Geneuian Protestant Luc. 8. v. 13. Ezech. 28. v. 12. Greg. l. 32. mora. c. 28.
alias 24. 25. Basil. in psalm. 32. Hier. in c. 3. Ozee. Damas. l. 2. de fide c.
3. Prosper. de vita contempl c. 3. Anselm. in l. de casu Diabol. c. 4 17. and
27.
as one in Geneua was by Calvin, who openly protests: That if S. Paul should
preach at the same time with Calvin, he would leave Paul, and give ear to
Calvin: So least any beguiled soul should rather follow the constructio^ of
some glosing Fulke, then the plain text of Ezechiel, of S. Peter, and the
assertion of S. Paul, I will add heereunto the testimony of Christ, that his
authority may outcountenance the follyes of their greatest Rabbyns. Our Savior
speaking of some, who with joy receive the word, and have no roots, gives the
reason hereof, saying: Because for a time they believe, and in the time of
tentation they revolt. Which belief of theirs, Christ compares
notwithstanding with the lively faith of such, as bring forth a harvest of
fruit, therefore it was not dead and counterfeit for that short time in which
with joy they believed and received the word.

6. Besides Lucifer was once just when he was the signet of Gods similitude,
full of wisdom and perfect in beauty, when he walked in the midst of fiery
stones, as S. Gregory collecteth out of those places, with whom S. Basil, S.
Hierome, S. John Damascen, Prosper, and S. Anselme accord in the same opinion.
Judas also (says S. Hierome) was once a good tree. And Adam without doubt in
the state of innocency was likewise good. Yet the former two eternally perished,
and the later for a time was wholly deprived of the seed of Grace. So was King
David in the time of his adultery and murder. Saul was once a just man, when
the holy Ghost commended him, as chosen and good. King Solomon was highly in
the 1. Reg. c. 9 v. 2. 2. Reg. 12. v. 25. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 5. August. l. ^2.
cont. ^aust. c. 28 Bern. epist. 42. ad Henric. Archiep. Luc. 8. v. 13.
favor and grace of God, when he was styled by the name of Amabilis Domino,
amiable to our Lord, because our Lord loved him: yet the one of them dyed after
reprobate, as the Scripture does insinuate, the other is also thought to be
damned by S. Cyprian, and by S. Augustine, and much doubted of by others. S.
Bernard egregiously argues and conuinceth this matter out of that passage of
S. Luke: They believe for a while, but in time of tentation they depart. From
whence, says he, and whether do they depart? From faith truly to infidelity.
Again I ask: Could they be saved in that faith, or would they not? If they
would not, what injury to our Savior, or what delight to the tempter, that
they depart from hence where no salvation is? For neither does our Savior
desire any thing, but salvation, nor the malignant (spirit) envy at any thing
but salvation. But if they could, how are they either without Charity, as long
as they are in that faith, when without charity salvation cannot be had, or
forsaking faith do not also forsake charity, when as charity and infidelity
cannot stand together? Some therefore revolt from faith, because verity
avouches it, and by consequence from salvation, because our Savior rebukes
it. From whence we conclude, that from Charity also, without which salvation
cannot be obtained, Hitherto S. Bernard victoriously writes in our behalf,
with such perspicuity of words, as receaueth no gloss, with such pregnancy of
reason, as admits no reproof.

7. Moreover we are often exhorted to stand steadfast in our calling, to remain
constant to the end, least Apoc. 3. v. 11. 2. Joan. v. 8. 1. Cor. 10. v. 12. 2.
Tim. 2. v. 5. Romans 8. v. 17. Matthew. 10. v. 22.
we loose the goal of everlasting bliss. As: Hold that which thou have, that
no man take thy crown. S. John again: Look to your selves, that you loose
not the things which you have wroght. S. Paul: He that thinks himself to
stand, let him take heed least he fall. It is possible then for a man so to
fall, as he may wholly fall away from God, and be deprived of his crown, or else
these admonitions were to no purpose, to as little these conditional
propositions: He that strives for the maistery is not crowned, unless he fight
lawfully: If we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him: He
that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved. If whosoever has the grace
of God, shall fight manfully, shallbe sure to suffer with Christ, sure to
persevere to the end. Wheerin if you expect the sentence of the most Calu.
instit. l. 3. c. 3.. 10.
faithful herald of all antiquity: Of Doctor Coued in his book against M.
Burges.
the chiefest Doctor that ever was, or shall be, excepting the Apostles. Of yr
Edwar. Hob. in his. Counter. page 8. August. de correp. and gra. c. 13. Aug. l.
11. de ciuit. Dei c. 12. Abbot in bis defense c. 3. sect. 12. page 337.
that marble-piller, that glorious Saint, that ever admired Augustine, he
says: It is to be believed that some of the children of perdisio^ receiving
not the gift of perseverance unto the end, do begin to live in faych which
works by Charity, and for a time do live faithfully and justly, and after
fall. And in another place: Although (quoth he holy men are certain of the
reward of their perseuera^ce yet of their own perseverance they are found
uncertain. For what man can know that he shall persevere, and hold on in the
action, and increase of justice unto the end, unless by some revelation he be
assured thereof from him, who of his just but secret judgment, does not inform
all men of this matter, but deceaueth none. To which M Abbot replyeth as
before, that we have no certainty, or assurance of these things, by
apprehension or light of flesh and blood, by sense, reason, or plain
appearance, but by faith etc. Neither is there any necessity to restrain S.
Augustines words to extraordinary revelation. No? Why does S. Augustine then
expressly exclude not only the natural knowledge of sense and reason, but the
supernatural intelligence of ordinary faith, affirming them to be so
uncertain of their own perseverance as they are certain of the reward thereof:
but they are certain of the reward not by reason or plain appearance, but
only by assurance of faith: Therefore they are uncertain, whether they shall
persevere even by the sam knowledge which proceeds from faith, neither can they
possible know it, unless they be enlightened above the course of ordinary
belieuers. Secondly S. Augustine discourses there of holy men indewed with
justice, which they cannot have without ordinary faith, and yet he testifyeth
of the^, that they could not know whether they should persevere and go forward
in the way of justice without revelation, therefore he must needs be understood
(maugre M. Abbots out facing the contrary) not of the ordinary revelation of
faith, which they had, but of some special and extraordinary which they had
not. It were too long to lay before you the agreement herein of S.
Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, Prosper, Chrysostom. hom 5. in c.
1. ad Tim. and l. 1. de compun. cordis. Hier. ep, 127. ad Pabiol. and l. x.
comm. in c. 7. Matthew. Greg. l. 6. in 1. Reg. Bernar. ep. 107. Prosp. l. 2. de
vocat. gent. Luth. de capt. Babil c. de Bapt. Abbot. c. 3. sect. 10 fol 321. 1.
Joan. 3. v. 9. Psalm. 37. v. 24. Sect. 9. f. 318. Fulke in c. 13. 1. ad Cor.
sect. 5. Fulk in c. 3 ep. Joan. sect. 5. 1. Ioan^ 3. v. 14. and 15.
and others.

8. Therefore to conclude, Luther some few years since stained his breath with
this contagious speech, That the faithful man cannot perish, if he would, how
wickedly soever he live, unless he cease to believe: which the whole Christian
world then abhorred, as the furnace of licentiousnes, as the mouth of hell. But
his disciples more pernicious then he, dare now auerre, that he cannot only not
perish, unless he forsake his faith, but that he cannot at all forsake his
faith, that he cannot by any deboyshnes, by any lascivious and wanton
demeanor, be finally abandoned and cast off from God. For though the justified
by occasion fall, yet they never so fall, but that his seed remains in them.
And his hand is under to lift them up again. In the Section before he opens
his meaning in this sort: When we say that the regenerate man is never wholly
cut off from Christ, we mean as touching inward and spiritual grace. Another
of that crew: Though all sin be against faith, and Charity, yet we do not
hold that either faith, or charity in them that are justified is utterly lost
by deadly sin. Likewise: He which is borne of God, cannot be void of love
toward his neighbor, though he sin particulerly against the rule of
Charity. If Beelzebub should send his preachers abroad, could he desire a
fitter Ghospeller, a more zealous promoter of his kingdom, then this? A more
ready to further iniquity, to smother the truth of Christ, and splendor of his
Ghospel? Which quite oppositely preaches: He that loves not abides in death:
whosoever hates his brother is a murderer: And you know that no murderer has
life everlasting abiding in himself. What is this life everlasting, but the
inward and spiritual grace? The inherent charity, the seed of God, springing
up to eternal life? Which the holy Evangelist S. John denies to abide in him
that sins against the rule of Charity, contrary to the auouchement of this
new Evangelist. Of him I say and some other his confederates: for all are not
attainted with so mischievous a corruption. D. Field interpreting Fiel, l 3. c.
22. fol. 118.
the recited words of Luther, A man cannot perish though he would, and how
wickedly soever he live, unless he cease to believe: Luther (quoth he)
constantly teaches, that justifying faith cannot remain in that man that
sins with full consent, nor be found in that soul wherein are peccata
vastantia conscientiam, as Melancthon speaks following Augustine; that is,
sins raging, ruling, preuayling, laying wast, and destroying the integrity of
conscience which should resist against evil, and condemn it. This is all then
that Luther says, that no wickedness, which with faith may stand can hurt us,
as long as faith continues; but if sin once become regnant, and so exclude
faith, we are in the state of damnation. Here you see that faith may be lost,
that the justified may fall into the state of damnation, and utterly perish.

9. More plainly D. Ouerall then Deane of Paul's in the public conference at
Hampton Court, sets down his judgment, namely that whosoever (though before
justified) In the sum of the Confer. before the Kings Majesty. 41. 42. fol.
42. and fol. 30.
did commit any grievous sin, as adultery, murder, treason, or the like, did
become, ipso facto, subject to Gods wrath and guilty of damnation: whose
opinion his Majesty with his Princely censure most iudiciously approved; and
taxed the contrary, as a desperate presumption, with whom the greatest and
learnedest part of that Assembly in all likelihood consented: therefore I might
have spared this my labor, if by the retchlesnesse of inferior officers, that
execrable doctrine had not been printed anew, nor permitted to be sold, and
spread abroad in former writings, which because the secret fauourits of
dissolute security are willing to dissemble, Joan. 4. v. 15. and 14. Joan 6. v.
37. Joan. 15. v. 2. Philip. 1. v. 6. Romans 11. v. 29.
I must be as careful to destroy the rest of their bold affiance, which are
these Texts of Scripture: He that shall drink of the water that I will give him
shall not thirst for ever: All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and
him that comes to me I will not cast forth. Every branch that bears fruit
the Father purges, that it may bring forth more fruit: He that has begu^ a
good work in you will perfect it: Without repentance are the gifts and
vocation of God. Therefore whom he once iustifyeth, who^ he once inocculateth
in the stock of life, he pruneth, cultiuateth, and never suffers to perish
or decay.

10. To all these passages, I answer as Maldonate does: Maldon. in ^^loca.
to the first and second out of Rupertus and others, that they only declare the
condition of God, the benignity of Christ, and nature of his grace; that it is
not like our corruptible water, which is disgested, consumed and dried up in
time, tormenting them again with thirst who drink thereof: but the spiritual
water of the holy Ghost never perishes, is never consumed, is of that
incorruptible property of it own nature, that it makes us never to thirst any
more; it is a lively spring which of it self spouteth up to the mountain of
eternal bliss. So Christ of his own benign and sovereign clemency casts
off none, but imbraceth all that repair unto him: God the Father is ready to
cut off all superfluityes from the mystical boughs which grow in his Son;
he is ready to bring to perfection the work he has begun, never willing to
revoke his gift, unless we by sinning make our selves unworthy, unless we destroy
his building, break 1. Joan. 3. v. 9. Matthew. 7. v. 38. Ierem. 32. v. 40. Abbot
fol. 268. and Whitaker. l. 8. f. 626.
ourselves off from that heavenly vine, fly from under his wings, vomit out
his graces infused into us; then the fault is not his, nor any defect in his
grace, but the whole blame lights upon us, who wilfully conculcate his
heavenly favors.

11. Here our Adversaries make a new sally out against us, and contest, that
we being once quickened with the seed of life, and thoroughly soaked with the dew
of heaven, cannot wax barren with the sterility of sin, cannot renounce or
disgorge these waters of life. For every one that is borne of God commits
not sin, because his seed in him abides: A good tree cannot yield evil
fruits: I will make an ever lasting covenant with them, and will not cease to do
them good: I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart
fro^me. So M. Abbot aduantagiously reads it, whereas the passage it self
truly translated, has no difficulty at all. For it is either understood of the
Church in general, which God will never cease to protect, or of his forwardnes
(as much as lies in him) to affoard sufficient means to all the members
thereof, that they The Hebrew. Lebilti surmehalai, ad non recedere a me. The
Greek (...) The Latin vt non recedant a me: That they revolt not from me* Aug.
de na. and gra. c. 54. l. 2. de pec. mer. and rem. c. 7. de gra. Christ cap.
21. and tract. 5. in epist. Joan. Hier. l. 1. aduers. Pelag. and 2. ad Iou. and
l. 1. comm. in 7. c. Matt. Dydim. and Beda in illum locum Joan. Aug. de not.
and great. c. 14. Possumus si volumus non peccare propter vim gratiae and in
qua^tum in ea manemus. Chrysostom. in c. 5. ad Romans Whitaker. in his answer to the
8. reason of M. Campian. l. 8. aduers Duraeum fol. 625.
reuol^ not from him, as the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin words manifestly
betoken. To the former two, which Iouinian pressed, for the bolstering of his
heresies: that the faithful once regenerated, could never si any more. I
answer with S. Austine, S. Hierome, Dydimus and Venerable Bede, that he who is
borne of God cannot sin ne whilst he perseuereth the child of God, and
retayneth in his soul the fire of Charity, which is repugnant to all sin, or
rather that he cannot sin as long as he lives and works according to his
new, and divine regeneration received from above, and that the good tree cannot
of his own nature produce evil fruits, no more then the sower, and unsavory
crab, affoard from his own natural juice, or radical disposition, any other
then unsavory; yet as by some other accidental quality or foreign graffe,
the one may yield sweet fruits, and the other sower: so albeit as S. Augustine
says: We may if we will not sin, through the force of grace, and as far
forth as we abide in it, notwithstanding, by the infirmity of the flesh, malice
of will, or corruption of nature, it is in our power grievously to offend, and
slide back from God.

12. That which Whitaker, and his fellows oppose out of S. Chrysostom: The
grace of God has no end, it knows no full point, but it makes progress
unto greater, choaketh an heresy of their own, that true justice increases
not, but stands at a stay etc. maintains the truth of our contrary doctrine,
that seeing grace and justice are beams participated from the illimited
fountain of Gods justice, they may be daily augmented by new meritorious deeds
with new access of grace; after which manner it is true, that it had no end,
knows no full point, still makes progress to greater by multiplying greater
store of good works. The rest of the Fathers, to whom our Reformers lay
claim, are semblably quitted: otherwise they speak of the certain
perseverance of the election in general, or else they mean that grace, faith,
and justice are perpetual of their own natures, and always flourish with the
spring of virtues, unless we blast them in their buds, or suffer them to be
ouergrowne with the weeds of sin.

THE XXIIII. CONTROVERSY, AVOVVETH Freewill, against D. Fulke, and D. Whitaker.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE I begin to enter the list and combat with my Adversaries, concerning
the liberty of man's Freewill, I think it expedient exactly to set down the
whole state of this question, what Protestants hold, and what we in all things
uphold against them. First then they distinguish with us a fourfold estate or
condition of man. 1. The state of Innocence, which Adam enjoyed before his
fall. 2. The state of Corruption, which he and all his posterity incurred Four
estates of man. Perkins in. his refor. Catho 1. Chapter of freewil.
by sin. 3. The state of vprising and Entrance into Grace. And 4. the state
of Justification, which the Righteous enjoy by the merits of Christ. Secondly
they divide the actions of men into three sorts: Into Natural or Civil, as to
eat, sleep, walk, discourse, buy, sell etc. Into Moral as to be temperate,
just, liberal, merciful etc. And into Divine or Supernatural, which
appertain to the spiritual good of oursoules, and gaining of eternal life,
as to believe, to hope, to love God above all thing etc.

2. These divisions premised, they all accord about the first estate, granting
therein (at least in show of words) a liberty (as they term it) of Nature, of
which I will not Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 16.. 8. and l 2. c. 4 * 6. Bucer. l. de
concord. art. de lib. arbit.
now dispute. About the second they vary amongst themselves. For Calum, Bucer,
and their Adherents) with the ancient Heretics Clem l. 3. Recog.
Simon Magus Tert. lib. de anima cap. 10.
Marcion, Hermogenes Aug. l: de Hares. cap. 46.
the Manichees, and (d) Wiclisse) utterly deny the liberty of Freewilll to any
action whatsoever. Which Luther and Melacthon defended at the beginning, but
after forced by our arguments to recant that point of Heresy, they grant
Freewill to actions Natural and Civil; whom Whitaker, Perkins, White, and
many of our English Protestants seem to follow. Nevertheless they all close
again and comply with Calvin: that man in this case has no freedom to any
Moral good work: Man, says Whitaker, lost his freedom by sin: the will of
man (according to Fulke) is bound to Sin, and not free: Is thrall and sliue
to Sin: It avails to (b) Conc. Constable. ses. 8. art. 26. Luth. in as. sert.
art 36. Melancth. in loc. communib. editis an. Domini 15* 1. Whitaker l. 1.
contra Duraeum. p. 77. 78. and in his answer to M. Camp. first reason, Perkins
in his Reform. Catho. in the Chap. of Free Will. White in the way to the true
Church.. 40. fol. 277. Fulke in cap. 6. Joan sect. 3. In ^. 10. ad Romans sect.
1. In c. 7. ad Romans sect. 7. and in c. 2. ad Philip. sect. 4.
nothing but to Sin. In the Regenerate it has some freedom and strength
against Sin, which it has not at all in them that are not Regenerate.
Likewise: Free Will is servile, Captive, lost, until by Grace it begin to be
enlarged and restored. Note that by Grace he, and all Protestants understand
Justifying Grace, without which every action, every thought that proceeds
from the unfaithful is (as they misdeeme) a damnable and deadly crime, and so
imputed.

3. Touching the third estate of vprising or entrance into Grace, all in like
sort agree, that man, albeit he be excited and called upon by God: yet does not
work, or as much as consent to his conversion, until he be truly justified by
Faith in Christ, which I shall disprove in the Chapter following.

4. In the fourth and last estate they allow also to man with uniform consent,
the Liberty (as they call it) of Grace, which Calvin and others interpret to
be: A Liberty from Constraint only, and not from Necessity, and so deprive man
in this case as well as in the former, of his free Arbitrament. Against whom I
am now to prove two points of chief importance.

5. First, the Liberty of Man's Freewill since his fall, not only to Civil
actions, but also by the special aid and assistance of Gods Grace, to the
conquest of any new sin, and performance at least of some Moral good.
Secondly that this Liberty is from Necessity, and not from Coaction only. Yet
remember, I take not Grace before mentioned for Justifying Grace (as
Protestants do) not for habitual Grace or Inherent Justice dwelling in our
souls: but for Actual Grace: that is, for any heavenly Motion, illustration,
or other extraordinary succoursent from above for our Savior Christ's sake, by
help whereof he that is prostitute to some kind of ^ices, may well subdue and
ouermaster other. He that transgresses the Saboath, may dutifully honor and
reverence his Parents: he that walloweth in fleshly lust, may of compassion
relieve the necessity of his Neighbor: and, He that sits in the Chair of
Pestilence, may rise and walk the way of Gods Commandments, if he diligently
Psalm. 1.
give ear, and correspondently work according to his Divine Inspirations. All
which our Sectaries obstinatly, impiously, blasphemously deny, Not knowing the
Scripturs, Matthew. 22. 2. Petr. 3. v. 16.
or wilfully deprauing them to their own perdition.

6. For to comprise the proofs of the former two points both together, is
there any thing in Scripture more seriously recorded, or promulgated more
solemnly, then Deuteronomy. 30 ^ verse. 19.
that which Moses denounced to the Jews? saying: I call this day Heaven and
Earth to witness, that I have set before you Life and Death, Benediction and
Malediction: therefore choose Life etc. He speaks of the Moral observation or
breach of the Law, and bids them choose Life by observing, not Death by
transgressing. Whereon it follows most evidently that they were not Thrall to
transgression, or in the Bondage of Sin: but might if they would, have
embraced life, and were not by necessity determined either to life or death.
For which cause the wise and ancient Philo notably Philo in libro, quod deus
fit immutabilis Iosu. 24.
concludes: Man has Free Will etc. To which purpose is extant the Oracle of
God in Deuteronomie: I have placed before thee life and death, good and evil,
choose life. In like manner Iosue proposing the worshipping of God or Idols to
the people said: Choose this day that which pleases you, whom you Dan. 23. 22.
ought especially to serve.

7. Susanna in danger of incurring either the offense of God, or disgrace of
the world, after she had reasoned Amos 5. v. ^4.
with herself on both sides what she might do, made choice not to sin in
the sight of God. The Prophet Amos exhorts the Jews: Seek the good and not
the evil: that ye may live. Almighty God propounding three several 2. Reg.
24. v. 12 13. 3. Reg. 3. v. 5.
chastisments to David, bids him take his choice, which he would have. To
King Solomon likewise he said: Ask what thou will? who demanded the Moral
virtue of Wisdom, and not riches, or the death of his enemies, as they Arist.
l. 3. Eth. c. 4. and 5. Orig. l. 3. de Prin. c. 1. Nissen. l. 7. de phi. c. 1.
Nazian. in Apolog. Ambros. l. 2. c. 3.
very Text declares he might have done.

8. Therefore both he and the rest had perfect freedom, some to Civil, some
to Moral actions, some from the Captivity of sin: and all enjoyed the
freedom of Choice, the freedom of Election, in which the true liberty, not
only from Constraint, but also from Necessity consists: as both Aristotle the
Philosopher, and Origin, Saint Gregory Nissen, Saint Gregory Nazianzen, Saint
Ambrose, those great Deuines, affirm, which no man of sense or judgment can
deny. For when it is in our free power to take this or that, one thing or
another, as in all the Eccles. 15. v. 17.
former examples it was, we are not restrained or necessarily inclined by
inevitable influence to yield to either.

9. Moreover in Ecclesiasticus the wiseman says: God Vhitaker in his answer to
the first reason of M. Campian.
has set before thee water and fire: to which thou will stretch forth thy
hand. Before man is life and death, good and evil; that which pleases him,
shall be given unto him. Which words because M. Whitaker could not otherwise
avoid, he discardeth the work and rejects the Author in this lewd and
arrogate manner: That place of Ecclesiasticus I nothing esteem: neither 1.
Cor. 7. v. 37.
will I believe the liberty of Freewill, although he affirm it a thousand
times. But if others affirm it, against whom he can take no exception, will he
give credit to them? If S. Paul, Act. 5. 4.
if S. Peter, if Christ, if God himself affirm it, will he give credit to
them? S. Paul: He that has determined in his heart Aug. ser. 10. de Diverse.
being settled, not having necessity, but having power of his own will, and
has judged this in his heart to keep his Virgin, does well. S. Peter speaking
to Ananias about the price of his Mat. 12. v. 33.
Land: Remaining, did it not remain to thee? And being sold, was it not in thy
power? Whereupon S. Augustine teaches, that before we vow, it is in our power
to vow or not to vow: but after we have vowed, we ought to perform the same
Aug l. 2* de Act. cum Feli^e Manich. c. 4. Genesis c. 4. ver. 7.
under pain, not of corporal death, but of everlasting fire. Christ says:
Either make the Tree good, and his fruit good; or make the Tree evil, and his
fruit evil. Which place the forenamed S. Augustine urges against Felix the
Manichee, and proves it to be: In the Free will of man, either to choose good
things, and become a good Tree: or evil, and become a bad Tree. And God
himself in his own person fore warning Cain: If thou Amb. l. 2 l de Cain. c.
7. Bern^ser 5. de quadrages. Ruper. l* 4. Comment. in Genesis c. 3. See their
English Bible printed Anno 1594. the Annotat. in cap. 4. Gen marked with (g)
do well, shall thou not receive again? And if thou do ill, shall not thy
sin forthwith be present at the Door? But the lust or appetite thereof shall
be under thee, and thou shall have dominion over it.

10. Here M. Whitaker, here M. Fulke, here you see that neither man since his
fall, nor Cain fretting with malice is enchained in the fetters, or Necessarily
subject to the Captivity of Sin, but sin is rather subject to him, and he
might, if he would, reign over it, as S. Ambrose, S. Bernard, and Rupertus
gather out of the former speech. And will M. Whitaker now, will his Rebellions
faction believe the Apostles, believe Christ, will they believe this Oracle of
God? No, They rather venture to pervert and falsify the same, forcing it to be
spoken of Cains dominion over Abell, not over sin. And in liew of those
words: The lust thereof shall be under thee etc. they guilefully translate:
Also unto thee his desire shall be subject, and thou shall reign ou^er him:
with this Gloze in the Margent: The dignity of the first borne is given to Cain
over Abell.

11. O pernicious! O sacrilegious Adulterers of holy Writ? What connection is
here? Thy sin shall be present at the Door etc. And thou shall rule over
Abel. What Texts? What Pererius l. 4. in Genesis c. 4. ver. 6. and 7. Aben Ezra in
Haebr. comment. in hunc lo. Aug. l. 15. c. 7. de Ciu. Dei. Hier. quest
haebraic. in Genesim.
Manuscripts? What Copyes? What Originalls? What Comments? What Scholies have
you for this Translation! The Latin delivers a quite contrary sense, as you
have heard. The Greek of the seauenty Interpreters, cited by Peterius, and
allowed by S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, conformably reads: To
thee is the conversion thereof? and thou shall rule and master it. The Hebrew
has thus: unto thee is the appetite thereof, and thou shall bear rule over it:
that is, over sin, as Aben Ezra a great Rabin commenteth upon this Text,
affirming it to be a mere forgery to expound it otherwise. And S. Augustine
reprehending in the old, this vile corruption of our new Manichees says: Thou
shall bear sway over it: What? Over thy Brother? God forbid. Over what then,
but sin? With whom S. Hierome: Because thou have Freewil, I warn thee that
sin have not the Sovereignty or Maistership over Justin in Apolog. ad
Imperat. Antoniu. p. 31. Orig. bom. 12. in Nu^.
thee, but thou over sin.

12. To these two excellent Lights I might join many other both of the Greek
and Latin Church, who although they allude not particulerly to this place, yet
strongly defend the liberty of Free Will I have now in hand. S. Justin Martyr:
Unless man by Free Will, were able both to eschew dishonest things, and follow
good and virtuous, he were without fault, as not being cause of those things,
which are Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
done after what sort and manner soever. But we teach that mankind by free
arbitrament and free choice does both well and ill. Origin handling that
passage: And now (Israel) what does our Lord require at thy hands, but only to
fear him etc. Let them be ashamed (says he) at these words, who deny
Free Will. How should God require, unless man had in his power what he ought
to offer to God requiring? S. Hilary. To every one of us God has permitted
liberty of life and judgment, not tying us to necessity on my side. S.
Augustine of whom Calvin above all other chiefly vaunteth. The Divine precepts
themselves should not profit Aug. de gra. and l. Arb. c. 2. Idem l. 2. contra
Faustum. c. 5.
Man, unless he had free liberty of will etc. And against Faustus the
Manichee: We put no man's Nativity under the destiny of Stars, that we may
exempt the free liberty of the will, by which we lead a good or bad life,
according to the just judgment of God, from all bond of necessity. The same
freedom also from the servitude of sin, he proves by innumerable places
both of the Old and New Testament, as, Be thou not vanquished Romans 12. Psalm 31.
Prouer. 1^ Psalm. 35. Psalm. 77.
of evil, Do thou not become like unto a Horse or Mule etc. Refuse not the
Counsels of thy Mother. He would not understand that he might do well. They
would not receive discipline. And infinite such what do they show (quoth he)
but the free liberty of human will?

13. M. Fulke replyeth, that S. Augustine does defend Fulke in c. 12. Mat.
sect. 1 and in cap. 25. sect. 5.
the liberty of Free Will against the enforcement of Nature the Manichees
feigned, not against the Servitude of sin, which he and his Mates uphold. But he
cannot thus escape. For S. Augustine disputes not against the ground, but
against the denial itself of Free Will, upon what ground soever it be denied.
Therefore although the Protestants dissent from the Manichees in the cause of
Man's captivity: the Manichees Fulke vbi supra.
affirming it to proceed from Nature by creation of the evil God: the
Protestants (according to M. Fulke) not from Nature, but from the free and
sinful fall of Adam: yet in the effect it self and captivity of our will they
fully agree; and S. Augustine fiersly impugning and fighting against that
wherein they accord, with the same forces battereth the Protestants, with which
he beats down the walls of the Manichean Aug. l degrat. and l. arbit.
heresy. Let the Reader peruse that one book Of Grace and Free Will S.
Augustine dedicateth to Valentine, and he shall perceive all Protestants as
sore annoyed with his shot as the Manichees themselves: and that his maine
Discourse drives as mightily against them, as the whole power and strength of
the other Fathers, whose writings many principal Sectaries endeavor to
disgrace, for being too favorable in defense of Free Will.

14. Calvin says: All the ancient writers except Augustine Calu. l. 2. Instit.
c. 2.. 4. Melanct. lib. de loc. com. Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 55. Ibid. Col. 58
Cent. 2. c. 10. Col. 227. or 221. according to another edit. c. 4. Col. 59.
Cent. 3. c. 4. Col. 77. Tertul. l. 2. aduers. Marc. l. de exhort. castitat. de
Monog. Orig bo. 9. innum. and hom. 12. in eosd. Cypr. l. 3. ep. 3. and l 3 ad
Quirinu^ c. 52. Metho^d, in ser. de Resurrect. Cent. 4. c. 4. Col. 291. printed
at Basil 1562. D. Hu^frey Iesuitis. part. 530.
(who notwithstanding is as opposite to him as any of the rest) either
exceeded, wauered, or spoke intricately of this matter. Melancthon: Presently
after the Infancy of the Church by Platonicall Philosophy (so he terms the
liberty of Freewill) Christian Doctrine was defaced. And a little after:
Whatsoever is extant in Commentaries altogether sauoureth of this Philosophy.
The Magdeburgian Centurists writing of the two hundred year after Christ,
Although this age (say they) was near to the Apostles, yet the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles began not a little to be darkened, for many monstrous
opinions are commonly found uttered by the Doctors. Amongst which, they reckon
the liberty of Free Will, saying: there is almost no point of Doctrine which so
soon began to be obscured as this of Free Will. But by whom? by the ancient
Author who goes under the name of Justinius, by S. Irenaeus; to which end they
censure him to wrest many sayings of the Prophets, of Christ, and S. Paul
grossly, deducing from thence Free Will, not in works only, but also in faith.
Likewise he admits Free Will in spiritual matters. By S. Clement of
Alexandria: Of whom they testify, he does every where avouch Free Will: that
it may appear not only all the Doctors of that age to have been covered with
those mists, but that they also were augmented in the succeeding ages.
Therefore in the third hundred year they adiudge Tertullian, Origin, S.
Cyprian and Methodius guilty of the same error: taking the pains to quote the
places and recite the words where they defend this Doctrine.

15. After they go foreward, and set down the agreeable consent of the
Fathers of the four hundred year, condemning by name Lactantius, Athanasius,
Basilius, Nazianzenus, Epiphanius, Hieronymus, and Gregorius Nissenus, for
maintayning with us the liberty of Free will: Citing as before their very
words, and pointing to the places where they affirm it. Now that our English
Protestants may not be thought to dissent from these forreners, Doctor Humfrey
says: It cannot be denied, but that Irenaeus, Clement, and others contain in
their writings the opinion of Free Will. D. Whitgift: Almost all the Bishops
of the Greek Church and Latin also, for the most part were spotted with the
Doctrine VVhitgif^ in his defe^c^ against Cartwright page 453. D. Couel^i^^
exam. p. ^^0. Rabby Moses Hardar. in c. 4. Genes. Rab. Akiba c. patrum:
according as Paulus Fabius iutepreteth his words. Rab. Selomo cited by Petrus
Galatinus. li. 6. cap. 6^ de arcani^ Catho ver. Fulke in his defense of the
English translation page 320.
of Free Will. With the error of Free Will, says Doctor Couell, rejecting
that as an error, which was generally maintained in the flower of the Church.

16. Furthermore, when we convince the same doctrine to have flourished, not
only amongst Christians, but also amongst the learned Jews by the
uncontrollable testimonies of the ancient Rabbis, who lived either before or
immediately after the nativity of Christ, by Rabby Moses Hardarsan, Rabby
Akyba, Rabby Selomo cited by Petrus Galatinus, and by many other, M. Fulke will
not stick to discard them, as the Centurists do the Fathers saying: The
Jewish Rabbis Patrons of Free Will do err. Finally when the like is urged
out of Plato, Aristotle, and the general consent of all Philosophers, Calvin
and Melancthon distaste it the rather as springing from the roots of
Philosophical Superstition. Alas (good Syrs) what course should we take? What
proofs will serve your turn? The Scriptures we produce. Some you deny, some
you falsify. The Fathers. They were covered, you say, with the mists of
darkness. The Jewish Rabbis, you profess, they erred. The learned
Philosophers. They savor of superstition: whom shall we bring? What shall we
urge? May experience, may reasons take place? Many are gathered out of the
Fathers writings, which I refer unto the next Chapter, there they shall be
more commodiously rehearsed. In the mean time I am to grapple a little with M.
Field who finding not how to avoid the shame, or hide the fault of this his
Progenitors Luthers and Caluins heresy, denies them to teach any Field in his
3. Book of the Church. c. 17 f. 135, 136.
such absolute Necessity of things whereof we here accuse them, and appeacheth
Bellarmine of iniuring them both in laying it to their charge.

17. But they, who have perused my former Treatises, have discovered (I hope)
such fraudulent dealing and detestable Sycophancie in this man's writings, as
they will little regard his desperate and headdy asseuerations. For he that
has borrowed the Harlots face to excuse his Sectmats in things inexcusable: he
that will protest no variance, after due examination, betwixt the Lutherans and
Caluinists touching the matter of the Sacrament, in which themselves and all
the world does witness, A most Essential (as Peter Field in his 3. Book of
the Church c. 42. f. 170. Pet. Mart in prae^at. l. cont Step. Vinton. Luth^in
asser. art 36. Calvin l. ^. Inst. c. 2. 3. and 5.
Martyr accounts it) and Fundament alivariance: what will he not avouch in
matters more intricate and less palpable dissensions? And yet this, of which
we now attach, and he labors to free his chiefest Protestants, is no small,
private or hidden fault. It is so manifest in Luther, as he says: Free Will is
a feigned thing. A vain title etc. Because all things fall out (as the Article
of Wicliffe condemned at Constance rightly teaches) of Absolute Necessity. As
manifest in Calvin. For he having distinguished these two sorts of Liberty, the
one from Coaction, the other from Necessity; that he grants, this he
resolutly denies. He disliketh also the word, Liberum arbitrium, in Latin; and
much more (...), in Greek, and disswadeth all men from the use thereof. He
maruelleth this speech of his should seem harsh to any man: The will by
Necessity is drawn or led to evil. His reason is: Because the will,
ordinance, and decree of God is a Necessity of things. Thus he.

18. His scholars M. Fulke, M. White, and others conning of him their lesson,
repeat the same word by Fulke locis citatis. White in the way to the true
Church.. 40. digr 42. p. 275. and 276.
word. M. Fulke you have heard in part already. M. White handling this matter of
purpose, delivers it thus: The nature of free will stands not in freedom
from all Necessity, but from all external Constraint etc. but from Coaction
only. Immediately after he mentions and rejects our opinion saying: Others
contrariwise dispute our will to befree, not in this respect, but because it is
subordinate to no Necessity etc. But such an absolute freedom there seems not
to be. Then he confirms it by the authority of other Deuines, misconstruing
them to teach: The will to be no otherwise free, but from compulsion: and twice
in one Page he gives the same reason hereof, as Calvin did: Because Gods will
(says he) orders and determines all wills, from which determination no
Creature is free. Again: Gods will is above ours, and flows into it, and
moves it, and determines it. Whereupon it follows, that our will, of
infallible Necessity must needs ^e moved and determined, for Gods will cannot
be in Ibid.. 40. page 275.
vain.

19. Mark these words: Our will of infallible Necessity must needs be moved:
and forget not that he takes necessity for that which is free, but from
coaction only. Whereon it ensues that we are so Necessarily moved and
determined by God, as it is not in the power of our will to move or Suarez i^
opus. Theo^og. l. 1. c. 10. and 13. and in breu. resol., 26.
not to move, to will or not to will, nor to use any choice, election or
liberty at all. For as Suarez profoundly teaches, that which neither in it
self is free, nor in the cause by which it works, is no way free. The will
of man, according to Calvin and his Sectaries, is not free in it self, because
of it self it can do nothing without the motion and predetermination of God:
nor in the cause, for it is not in the power of man either to appoint, remove,
change or resist this determination of God immouably made from all eternity.
Therefore no liberty remains in us bereft of all indifferency, and
Necessarily determined to every particular act by the ouer-ruling motion of the
prime and supreme cause. What wrong then has Bellarmine done to Luther and
Calvin, of which M. Field has the forehead to challenge him? What injurious
imputation has he laid upon them or their followers, in taxing their Doctrine
with the Manichean heresy, which they (as you see) boldly profess, and labor
to support with sundry arguments, sorted and disposed into three several
classes or seats? 1. Cor. 12. v. 6. Isay. 26 v. 12. Hierem. 1^* v. 23.


20. In the first, they place those which attribute all our works to the
general concourse and premotion of God, who first moves, inclines, and
principally flows into our actions, as: All in all things he does work. All
our works (O Lord) thou have wrought in us. I know (O Lord) that man's way is
not in his own hands: nor in his power to direct his steps etc.

21. I answer, it is true that, God works all things in us, and we with him:
he as the universal, we as the particular causes: yet so as the influence of
his action neither alters nor hinders, but rather sustaineth, helps Fulke
in c. 8. Io. sect. 2. in cap. 9. ad Romans sect. 7. and in c. 2. 2. ad Tim. sect.
1. Augu. de verbo Domini ser. 2. Ide^in Ench. ad Lauren. cap. 30. Aug. l. de
Natu. and Great. cap. 53.
and perfiteth ours. He concurreth to every creature according to their own
nature and condition, with things contingent contingently, with necessary
things necessarily, with free things freely.

22. In the second class Doctor Fulke rangeth those authorityes of S.
Augustine, wherein he affirms Freewil to be lost by the fall of Adam, to wit:
Man when he was created, received great strength of Free Will, but by sinning
he lost it. And: Man abusing his Free Will, lost both himself and it. The like
he urges out of his book of Nature and Grace and other places. M. Whitaker
also obiecteth the former sentence of S. Austine out of his Enchyridion, and
adds thereunto the authorityes of S. Ambrose and S. Bernard, to whom I shall
reply in the next Chapter: here I answer to S. Augustine.

23. Man lost by sin that strength of freedom and perfection of Nature,
which he had at his first creation, and so he lost (as S. Augustine excellently
discourses) both himself and his Free Will: himself in respect of God, and
the Aug. l. 1. ad Bonif. c. 1. Aug. epi. 107. ad Viclaem. Aug. tom 7. de Praed.
Sanct. c. 2. Aug. l. de perfect. Iustitiae. and de spiri. and lit. de Na^. and
gra. etc.
final end whereunto he was created: his Free Will, which he had in Paradise.
First, Habendi plenam cum immortalitate iustitiam: Of having full and perfect
Justice with immortality. Secondly: He lost his Free Will of loving God by the
grieuousnes of his first sin. Thirdly: He lost his Free Will of beginning or
performing any good and pious deed. Fourthly: He lost his Free Will of
fulfilling the Commandments of God, of vanquishing all tentations, of
perseuering still in the state of Innocence, in which he was created: For Adam
ourforefather endowed with the habit of original justice could by the liberty
of Free Will, aided with the special cooperation of God, always fulfill, and
perform those things without any new excyting grace to quicken, and stir him
up: which we though justified in this state of corruption by reason of many
carnal allurements, assaults of Satan, and dulnes of nature, cannot atchieue
without his divine grace of excitation, direction, and protection. Therefore S.
Augustine speaking of the accomplishment of the aforesaid duties says: This is
not Aug. lib de bono perseue. cap. 7.
in the forces of Freewil as now they are, it was in man bedore his fall. Those
freedoms then Adam lost, himself according to that height of dignity he lost;
yet as he did not absolutely loose, but impair himself; as he lost not the
nature, and Ioa. c. 8. v. 14. Romans 6. v. 16. 2. Pet. c. 2 v. 19. Aug. l. de
corr. and gra. c. 13. Aug. cont. 2. ep. ^ela. l. 3. ca. 8. Council. Arausi. can.
7. and 22 Mileuit, can. 4. Ambr. in c. 6. ad Roman. Ruper. l. 4. com. in Genesis
c. 3. Aug. tract. 41. in Joan. cap. 8. noli in quit, liberate abuti ad libere
peccandum, sed vt^r^ ad non peccandum. Aug. l. 1. ad B^^if. c. 2. liberum
arbitrum vsque adeo in peccatore non perijt, up per illud peccent maxim^ omnes
qui cum delectatione peccant.
condition of man, so neither the faculty of his will; which still continuing
remains free. 1. To things in different with Gods general concourse. 2. To
things morally good with his peculiar assistance. 3. To accept or refuse his
motions offered. 4. To work and purchase his salvation by means of infused
grace.

24. In the third and last class are digested such sentences, as insinuate the
will of man to be in the bondage and slavery of sin, as: He that does sin,
is the servant of sin. And: You are servants of that to which you obey.
Servants of corruption. And S. Augustine: I say Free Will, but not made free.
Free from justice, but slave of sin. To which purpose M. Fulke often
repeateth this other saying of S. Augustine: Free Will being made captive,
avails nothing but to sin.

25. I answer, S. Augustine in this later place, writing against the
Pelagians, speaks after the manner of two Venerable Councels, who define and
teach as he does: that the will of man of it self without the grace of God,
avails to nothing but sin, that is: to nothing of piety, oriustice, to
nothing appertayning to Salvation, or damnation, but only to Sin.

26. To all the former instances I jointly reply with S. Ambrose, Rupertus, and
the same S. Augustine, that he who sins, supposing he does sin, is slave
to the sin he does commit: yet hence it follows not that he necessarily
sins, or is deprived of his natural freedom, By which (as S. Augustine
auerreth) men sin, chiefly all who sin with delight. Secondly I say, he who
makes himself the bond-slaue of sin, is so far from being necessarily tied to
trangresse the Law in every action he goes about, as he has always
sufficient aid and help from God if he earnestly crave it, and crave it he
may, if he answer his motions) Leo ser. 16. de Passione.
to avoid the infection of any new crime, whenever the danger thereof
occurreth. Whereupon S. Leo says: God does justly urge us with his Precept,
who preuenteth us with his grace, to eschew the enormity of every fault.
Thirdly such is the benignity and goodness of God, in seeking 1. ad Cor. 1. v. 3.
to mollify the obstinate will of rebellious sinners, that albeit not at every
moment, nor for any desert of theirs: yet in due time and place through the
merits of Jesus Christ, every one who is held in the prison of vice, has
means sufficient, not only to resist any new offense, but also to deliver
himself from that wretched thraldom and state of sin, The Father of
mercyes, and God of all comfort and consolation, often vouchsafing to call,
inuit, and being always ready to help him forth.

27. Cease therefore (O ungrateful man) cease to excuse thy self that thou art
unwillingly subject to the tyranny Aug. l. 1. ad Bonifa. cap. 3.
of sin. Cease to lay the blame of thy misdeeds to blameless Necessity.
Charge not Adams fall, as the only cause of thy voluntary faults: but confess
with great and humble S. Augustine, that every one who offends God, all who
are bound in the chains of iniquity, By their own will are detayned in sin:
by their own will, are tumbled headlong from sin to sin.

THE XXV. CONTROVERSY, SHOWS The cooperation of Free Will to our conversion
and to works of Piety; against D. Whitaker, D. Fulke, and M. White.
CHAP. I.
ALBEIT the perfect decision of this Controversy now in hand may easily be
gathered out of the former Chapter, where I treated of man's Liberty, not only
to Civil and Moral actions in the state of corruption, but also of his
absolute freedom from Necessity in what state soever: yet least I should be
thought to huddle up many things together, and lap them in obscurity after
the fashion of our dark and obscure Reformers, I purposly handle this
difficulty a part, that is: Whether man clogged and laden with sin, has any
freedom of will, before he be justified, to lift up his heart, and give assent
to Gods heavenly motions, when he of his boun tiful mercy vouchsafes to call
and stir him up. All Protestants defend the Negative; all Catholics the
Affirmative part.

2. M. Whitaker teaches, that man wants Free Will to Whitak. l. 1. contra.
Dur. p. 78. Fulke in c. 3. Apoc. sect. 4. In c. 6. 2. Cor. sect. 2. In cap. 9.
Romans sect. 4. White in the way to the true Church. 40. fol. 283
the duties of Faith, because till the Son has made him free, he must needs
be a servant to sin. And M. Fulke more plainly: It lies not (says he) in
the freedom of man's will to give consent to Gods calling. It lies not in man's
Free Will to follow the motion of God. Man has no Free Will, until it be
freed. Man's will works nothing in our conversion, until it be converted. And
M. White semblably: Our will (quoth he) when Grace first enters is merely
passive etc. As my paper whereon I am writing, receaueth the ink passiuely,
and brings nothing of it to the writing etc. Whence it follows, that in
those whom God effectually will renew, their will can make no resistance, as
my paper cannot reject my writing. Thus they.

3. We on the other side acknowledge indeed, that man's will is much weakened,
his understanding dimmed, and all the powers of his soul and body made faint
and feeble by the infirmity of sin incurred by his first Parents revolt. In
so much as neither the Gentills by the force of Nature, according to the decree
of the holy Council of Trent, nor the Jews by the letter of Moses Law, could
arise ou^ Conc. Trid. sect. 6. can. ^ and 2.
of that sinful state etc. except God the Father, when the happy fullness of
time was come, had sent his only Son to redeem both Jews and Gentiles, and
make us all his adopted children. We grant moreover that the freedom of man's
will cannot prevail, without the special concurrence and help of God, to any
Divine or Supernatural work: nor to the due performance of Moral duty: nor to
the true love of God with all our heart: nor to the vanquishing of any one
temptation, nor to persevere long without falling into sin: nor so much as
dispose our selves, or use any means to win Gods favor. We sav with S. Berna
d: The endeauours of Freewill are both Ber^. l. de great. and liter. arbit.
void and frustrate, unless they be aided, and none at all, vules they be
stirred up by him. Notwithstanding we hold, that as by his assistance we may
accomplish many Moral good works, and overcome any offense whatsoever: so
when he in the abundance of his sweetest blessings calls upon us, and
affords his helping hand, we may likewise by the faculty of our Free Will
truly consent, and actiuely cooperate to our Conversion. Iuc. c. 10


4. And therefore the condition of man is resembled in this case to him that
descended from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst thieves, who robbed him
of his temporal riches, and maimed him in his corporal members: so man by
sin is despoyled of his Supernatural gifts, wounded in his natural powers,
and therein left not stark dead, nor wholly alive, but half dead and half a
live, alive Maldon. in c. 10. Luc. ver. 30. fol. 222. Ioa. c. 11.
in body, dead in soul. Alive (as Maldonate well notes out of the ancient
Fathers) because he had remorse of Conscience, and liberty of Free Will; dead,
because he lay buried in the sepulcher of sin, out of which he could not
rise, unless it pleased our Savior Christ to call and say, Lazarus come
forth: Unless he by the Oil of his mercy and Wine of his precious blood
healed the wounded, refreshed the languishing, not restored the perished powers
of our soul, all natural faculties remaining after sin Thom. 1. 2. quest.
85. Dionys. c. 4. de diuinominib. Concilium. (...) c. 1. Tridentinum. ses. 6.
cap. 1.
whole and uncorrupted, as the Deuines prove out of S. Dionyse. So that
Free Will was not utterly lost (as M. Fulke above contended) but less able to
work: not enthralled, but maimed: not altogether bound, but vehemently
inclined to the corruption of vice. It was, as the sacred Arausican and
Tridentine Counsels define: Non extinctum, sed attenuatum: Not extinguished,
but weakened and diminished; yet being moved and strengthened by our Lord, it is
full able to accept or reject his offered grace. Wherein we have the voice of
God on our side, not darkely delivered in any particular place, but often and
many ways perspicuously uttered by the Prophets, Apostles, and by the heavenly
mouth of his beloved Son.

5. By whom he sometime inuiteth and exhorts us to forsake sin and repair
unto him: Return ye, and do penance. Return unto me withal your heart.
Return o Israel etc. Cease to do evil, and learn to do good. Rise thou
that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ will illuminate thee.
Otherwhile he entreats us upon condition if we be willing: If ye will, and
shall give ear unto me, ye shall eat the good Ezec. 18. 30 Joel 2. 12. Iere.
3. 12. Isa. 1. 16. Ephesians. 5. 14. Isa. 1. 19. Mat. 16. 24. Apoc. 3. 20.
things of the earth etc. If any man will come after me etc. Now, he seems to
stay and expect our consent: I stand at the door and knock. If any man shall
hear my voice and open the gate, I will enter into him. Our Lord expects to
have mercy upon you. Do thou contemn the riches of his goodness, and
patience, and longanimity, not knowing that the benignity of God brings thee
to Penance? Then he complains or rather expostulateth with us, what we mean
to soiourne in sin: Why will ye die o house of Israel etc.? Return and
live. Why art thou angry? And why is thy countenance fallen? Here he
beseeches us not to harden our hearts against his calling: This day if ye
shall hear the voice of our Lord, harden not your hearts etc. Be not stiff
necked as your Fathers were etc. There he lays the whole blame of our
impenitency to our own froward and stubborn wills: How often would I gather
together thy children, as the Hen does gather together her Chickens under her
wings, and thou would not? All the day I stretched forth my Isa. 30. 18.
Romans 2. 4.
hands to a people incredulous. I have called, and ye have refused. These and
many other the like sayings were both vain and deceitful, if man awaked by
God out of the sleep of sin, had no power to concur to his vprising. In
Eze^b. 18. 31. and 32. Genesis c. 4. 6. Psalm. 94 8. 2. Paralip. ^. 38. Mat. c. 23.
37. Isa. 65. 2. Prou. c. 1. 24.
vain should God exhort and command our return; in vain should he expect our
consent, or complain of our delay, if we could not possibly hasten our
coming, or return unto him at all. Without cause are we entreated not to
harden our hearts: without cause is the blame of our obstinacy laid to our
charge, if we have no means in our selves by the help of his grace freely to
will or nill our conversion.

6. But S. John the Evangelist, and the Apostle S. Paul auerreth that we have
free liberty to become the servants I^a. ^. ^^.
of God. S. John says of Christ, and those that believed in his name: He gave
them power to be made the Sons of God. S. Paul: If any man shall cleanse
himself from these, he shallbe a vessel unto 2. Tim. 2. 21. Collos. 3. 9. 10
Ioa. 6. 27.
honor. To which purpose he writes to the Colossians: Cast off the old man,
and put on the new our Savior Christ: Work not the meat that perishes, but
that endures to life euerlacting. Therefore men are of ability to work and
perform these things by the Cooperation of their Free will with the grace of
God. In regard whereof they are called Gods Workmen, his Coadiutours, and
Collabourers. S. Paul: I have labored Calu. Gratia quae mihi aderat.
more abundantly then all they: yet not I, but the grace of God with me; and
not, as Calvin detorteth it, The grace of God which was present to me, as
though the Grace wrought all, the Apostle nothing. But S. Paul joins himself
with the Grace The Syriake has Hham^i* mecum. Sap. c. 9. 10. Aug. l. de Gra.
and lib. arb c. 15 Aug l. 50. hom ho. 16. Aug. l. 2. cont* 2. ep. Pelag. c. 8.
laboring together: so does the ancient Syriacke text: The goodness or
benignity of God with me. So the wiseman prays: Send Wisdom out of thy holy
heavens, that she may be with me, and labor with me. So S. Augustine
expounds the Apostle: Neither the Grace of God alone, nor he alone; but the
Grace of God with him.

7. Besides this, S. Augustine has many notable testimonies in behalf of
Free Will. God has left it in thy own free choice, to whom thou will prepare
a place, to God or to the Devil. When thou have prepared it, he that
inhabiteth, shall bear sway therein. Man prepares his heart, yet not without
the aid of God, who touches the heart. Again: who does not see every man to
come, or not to come by Free Will? In them, who are saved Aug. in Psa. 78.
by Election of Grace, God the ayder works both the will, and operation or
perfourmance thereof. God is here and often in Scripture termed the aider,
and not the sole worker, because man also works and cooperateth with him. For
he (as S. Augustine gathers from hence) that is aided, does also by himself
work some thing.

8. I rehearse not the authorities of S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom answerable hereunto; read what the Centurists and their
Confederates write of them. Of Irenaeus they say: He admits Freewill in
spiritual actions. Of S. Cyprian, Tertullian, S. Clement Alexandrinus, Origin,
S. Iustine, Athenagoras, they confess Centu. cen. 2. c. 10. col. 221. Osiand.
cen. 2. l. 4. cap. 4. In the Apology tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuis. 5. Calvin.
l. 2 Instit. c. 3.. 7. and. 11.
the like, as you may see related in the Protestants Apology. Of S. Augustine
Calvin vaunteth much; yet he refelleth this saying of his: That the will
prepared by our Lord does accompany him in working: And a little after,
obtrudeth this ouerth wart doctrine of his own. God moves the will, not as
it has been taught and believed for many ages, that it is after in our choice
to obey or resist the motion, but effectually working it. Therefore that so
often repeated by S. Chrysostom is to be abandoned: Whom he draws, he
draws willing to be drawn. O ye Caluinists, blush you not at this arrogance
of your Patron, who controlleth S. Augustine, renounceth S. Chrysostom, and
impugneth the doctrine the Church of God for many ages, both taught and
believed. If ye blush not at him for honors sake, blush at your
fellow-Sectary M. Fulke, who contradicts Aug. de spiri. and litera ad Marcel.
c. 34. Fulke in cap. 3. Apoc. sect. 4. Aug. l. 2. de pecca. mer. and remis. c.
5. and tract. 4. in ep. Ioa. Fulke vbi supra
also S. Augustine in this point, as though he directly sought to cross him in
his speeches.

9. S. Augustine says: To consent to Gods calling, or not to consent, lies in
a man's own will. M. Fulke: It lies not in the freedom of man's will to give
consent to Gods calling. S. Augustine continually inculcateth: That man's will
is helped by Gods grace: and that his Grace does not wholly of it self work
our conversion. M. Fulke: His Grace does not only help, but wholly convert man.
S. Augustine interpreting those words of S. John: They could not believe. If
any man ask (says he) why they could not believe, I answer roundly: Because
they would not. M. Fulke: They neither would, nor could be willing, because
they were reprobate. Did ever Reprobate write more opposite to Gods Elect then
this? Well. If blessed S. Augustine and the whole Churches authority for many
ages be so little regarded, Aug. tract. 53. in Joan
will the reasons I insinuated above, take place with our Gospellers? Many (as
I said) are gathered out of the Fathers writings, amongst the rest four
principal. Fulke in c. 12. Ioa. sect. 3. Nys. l. 9. de Phi. c. 3.


10. The first is taken from the advice and consultation, which all prudent men
observe in their actions both good and bad; an argument much urged to this
purpose by S. Gregory Nissen saying: It is necessary that he who consulteth
should be Lord and Owner of his actions. For if he be not Lord and Master of
his actions, he consulteth in vain etc. But to have dominion and rule over our
actions is altogether the property of Free Will. Therefore man who deliberateth
and consulteth, as well in Spiritual matters, as in Moral and Civil, has
free will in all.

11. The second reason, is drawn from the counsels, precepts, encouragements,
and exhortations to virtue: and from the prohibitions, threatenings, and
disswasions from vice: likewise from the commendations, honors, and rewards,
which wait on that: and from the disgraces, punishments, rebukes, which
always attend on this, things often repeated in the Psalms, in the Proverbs,
in the Prophesies, and almost in every page of holy Scripture. Howbeit S.
Irenaeus, S. Clement Alexandrinus, Origin, S. Cyril, and S. Augustine
frequently avouch, they were all to no purpose, if man were spoiled of his
freedom and liberty. S. Irenaeus: If it were not in our power to do these
things or not to do them, what cause had the Apostle and our Lord himself
Iraen. l. 4. cap. 72. Clem. Alex. lib. 2. strom. Orig. Phil. cap. 21.
long before to give counsel what things we should do, what leave undone? S.
Clement Alexandrinus. Neither dispraise, nor honors, nor punishments were
just, if the soul had not free power. Origin: When our Lord gives
Commandments, what other thing does he insinnate, then that it is in our power
to perform the things we are commanded. S. Cyril: The Devil suggesteth unto
thee the thoughts of wantonness, if thou will, thou entertaynest, if not, thou
withstandest them. For if of necessity thou should commit fornication, to
what end has God prepared the torments of Cyr. Hieros. Cateches. 4.
Hell? And if thou live uprightly by nature and not by will, why has he
reserved the Crowns of Heaven? The sheep is a mild and innocent beast: yet
is not for her mildnes crowned. S. Augustine: Unless the motion whereby the
will is led to and fro were voluntary, and rested in our own power, man should
neither be prayse-worthy, Aug. l. 3. de lib. arbit. cap 1.
turning as it were the thing of his will to heavenly things: nor worthy of
blame, winding it down to earthly. Nor to be admonished at all etc. But
whosoever thinks that man is not to be admonished etc. deserves to be
banished out of the company of men.

12 These wise sayings of the learned Fathers, daily observation and course of
experience does inuincibly strengthen. For who is so simple as to use
exhortations, precepts, threats, or reprehensions to things not endued with
freedom of choice; for example who does exhort the sun to rise, or fire to
burn? Who gives precepts? Who enacteth laws to fools, madmen, or children
before they ariue to the use of reason? And does not every Tribunal, every
Judge, every Jury, rather acquit then endite them of their fault, who plead
this excuse? Was there ever any law made, how tall men should grow; Mat. cap.
6. verse. 27.
or what complexion or stature they should be of? And why? Because it is not in
the power of man, as the Scripture says: To add to his stature one Cubite.

12. The third reason Eusebius gathers from the Eus. l. 6. de praepar. Euang.
cap. 7.
common practice and custom of them who deny Free Will. For they admonish and
reprehend their followers; they take advise, use deliberation, care and
diligence in their affairs; they persuade others to be of their mind: they
blame and severely chastise (if they be able) all such as refuse to subscribe
to their assertions. In which kind our English Protestants above all others are
now most peruersly bent. For besides the exhortations, preachings, writings,
conference, and sundry persuasions they use, to make us Catholics revolt unto
them, they also to this purpose disgrace and revile us both in private and
public: they daily enact most severe laws against us: they ransacke our
houses: confiscate our goods: imprison our persons: punish and afflict us with
as many heavy pressures, penalties, molestations, and aggrieuances, as ever any
Christians of Christians endured. And all this to no other end, but to enforce a
conformity of our belief and Religion to theirs. Howbeit if their Religion
were true and orthodoxal (as I prove it Heretical) and we wanted the freedom
of will (as they hold) to yield our assent unto it, their Conferences were all
in vain, their persuasions foolish, their laws wicked, their punishment
unjust, to compel us to that, which lies not in our power and ability to do.
For who accounts it not (says S. Augustine) a foolish thing to guie
Commaundme^ts Aug. tom. 6. de fide cont. Manich. c. 9. and. 10. Arist. l. 2.
Eth. c. 4. Aug. l. 1. Confess. cap. 11. and tom. 6. in Disp. ^. cont. Fortunat^
Idem. tom. 4. 38. quaest. q. 24. Calu. in l. 3. and 4. aduersus Pighium and l.
2. Instit. c. 2 and 3. Fulke in c. 12. Matt. sect. 1. and in c. 25. sect. 5.
perkins in his refor. Catho. 1. point touching free will.
unto him, who has no freedom to execute what he is commanded: and an unjust
thing to condemn him, who has no power to fulfill the precepts imposed upon
him.

14. The fourth and last reason is grounded in the intrinsecall nature of
virtue and condition of vice. For as no action according to Aristotle and all
Deuines can be morally good: so no sin sinful, except it be voluntary and
freely done. S. Augustine says: no man unwilling does good, although the thing
be good which he does. And Sins, except there were Freewill in us, were no
sins. Also. Neither Sin nor well-doing can be justly imputed unto any man,
who of his proper will does nothing. Therefore both sin and well doing is in
the free arbitrament of the will.

15. Calvin, Fulke, Perkins and their Adherents answer this latter point: That
sin is justly imputed unto man deteyned in the servitude thereof, because he
freely through his own fault fell into that captivity and thraldom by the
fall of Adam. But I ask them, whether it be in the power of man, supposing
this captivity to eschew sin or no? If it be, he is free, and not bound to
sin; If not, he necessarily sineth and cannot be charged with the imputation
of sin, as S. Augustine and experience teaches. For when a man by his own
inordinate passion willingly falls into a fit of madness, although after
he is once distracted, he be worthy of blame for the furious rage which caused
his distraction: yet the enormities he after runs into not foreseen before,
are neither faulty nor punishable by any upright law. Much less can the sin
which Adam freely incurred, make us guilty of our actual crimes, which we not
willingly, but Necessarily commit.

16. Calvin therefore frames another answer and Calu. lib. 2. inst c. 3.. in
5. and l. 2. aduer. Pighium.
says: Man sinning does truly sin, because he voluntarily and willingly
offends; not only in Adam, but also in himself by his own voluntary and
proper will. And thus he expounds many places of S. Augustine, and allows
that, Sin is so voluntary, that except it were voluntary, it were no Sin.
Where I entreat the Reader to note how he plays the Sophister, and goes
about to delude him by the ambiguous and doubtful acception of the word (
Voluntary) which in the true judgment of all Deuines is diversely taken. First
it is extended to that which proceeds not from the will but from the sensual
and prone instinct of nature, and is called in Latin Spontaneum, as the beast
without inforcement of his own voluntary appetite and prone inclination
falls to his meat. Secondly it is taken for that which flows from the will,
but necessarily and not freely, as the Saints and Angels in heaven voluntarily,
willingly and joyfully love the infinite goodness of God: yet Necessarily too,
because his incomparable beauty clearly proposed, so rauisheth their hearts, as
they cannot withhold or suspend their affection. Thirdly, Voluntary is taken
for that which is freely done, and was in the choice and liberty of man to do
or not to do. Thus it is used by S. Paul in his ad Phil. v. 14. Fulke in c. 5.
ad Gala. sect. 1. and in cap. 7. ad Romans sect. 9. and in c. 11. Apoc. sect. 11.
Aug. tom. 6. cont. Fortunat. Manich. disputa 1. Aug. l. 3. de li. arb. c. cap.
3. Arist. l. 3. Eth. c. 4. and 5.
epistle to Philemo^: Without thy counsel I would do nothing, that thy good
might be, not as it were of necessity, but voluntary.

17. Calvin uses the word ( voluntary) after the second, S. Augustine after
the third manner. Calvin contendeth man to be guilty of sin, because he
sins voluntarily, allthough not freely; by his will, although not by his
freewill. Not by constraint (says Fulke) or Compulsion, but by necessary
thraldom: By miserable captivity. S. Augustine avouches the will which
trespasseth, to be not only a will, but also a free will, free from Necessity,
saying: He that is forced by Necessity to do any thing, does not sin: but he
that sins, sins by his free will. He does not evil, oho does nothing by
his will. And that you may be assured what will he means, he opens his
meaning himself: Our will (says he) were no will at all (except it were in
our power, but because it is in our power, it is freeto us. Free (I say, not
only from constraint, but also from Necessity, and from that which after the
second and more large acception is termed Voluntary, as Aristotle
distinguishes it in his Moral Philosophy; teaching that to be free (distinct
from voluntary, not free) which is in our power to do, or not to do. This will
therefore which is in our power, S. Augustine requires necessary to make us
Aug. tom. 1, de ver. Relig. c. 14.
incur the guilt, or deserve the punishment due to sin. Of this he
auerreth: Men could not serve God freely, if they serned him not by Will, but
by Necessity. And this he accounts an universal Axiom, generally known to
all kind of men Aug. de duab. animabus eo^t. Manichaeo^. cap. 1.
in these words: Neither need we ransacke obscure and antique volumes to
learn, that no man is worthy of dispraise or punishment, who performs not
that which he cannot do: For do not shepherds upon the downessing these
things? Do not Poets upon the stages act them? Do not the unlearned in their
meetinges, and the learned in their libraries acknowledge them? Do not
Masters in Schools, and Prelates in the pulpits; and finally all mankind
throughout the whole world profess and teach this?

18. Good God, what have our sins deserved, that so lewd an Heresy should
reign amongst us; as gainesayth that which Poets, sheepheards, stages,
pulpits, hills and dales proclaim! An Heresy, which robs us (to use S.
Cyrils words) of the most excellent work or gift of God, the liberty Cyril.
Hieros. Cateches. 4: Aug. tom. 6. in Disp. 2. cont. Fortu.
of Freewill! Which in the weightiest matters of his soul makes man work
like a brute beast without any freedom, or liberty of choice. An heresy which
takes away according to S. Augustine, The merit of doing well, The Divine
precept of repentance and knowledge it self of sin. An Heresy, which
spoyleth us of all virtue, and discharges us of vice, frustrateth all
exhortations, counsayles, deliberations; makes void all threats,
reprehensions, laws and commandments. A barbarous Heresy which takes away
Aug. epist. 46. Hiero. l. 2. ad Iouian* cap. 2. Bern. l. d^ Gra. and li. Arbit.
circa initium
heaven; takes away hell; leaves no recompense of good, or punishment for
evil; leaves no salvation, no damnation, no judgments hereafter to pass; no
God at all to discuss, to reward, to condemn our doings. For if the Grace of
God be not (says S. Augustine) how does he save the world? And if there be not
Freewill, how does he judge the world? Where Necessity is (says S. Hierome)
there is neither damnation nor crown. Take away Freewill (says S. Bernard)
and there remains nothing that can be saved: take away Grace, and nothing
remains whereby Salvation can be attained.

19. Notwithstanding that our Adversaries may not seem without all show of
reason, to hold an opinion so unreasonable, some arguments they use to
countenance their error. First they urge, that Sinners are compared in Ephesians. 2.
v. 1. Luc. 15. v. 24. Hier. 18. 6. Romans 9. 20. 21. Eccles 53. 1. 1. 4
holy Scripture to dead men: When you were dead by your offenses and Sins,
etc. My Son was dead, and is revived. Likewise to clay: As clay is in the
hands of the Potter: so we in the hands of our Lord But as the clay works
nothing, and the dead man concurreth not to the receiving of life: so neither
the will of man dead to sin, does any way cooperate to the recovery of Grace.

20. I answer; Similitudes (as it is commonly said) always halt on one foot,
that is, never agree in every point, but only serve to illustrate that, for
which they are alleged. And touching the former instances, Sinners are
likened to dead men, because they are deprived by sin of the favor and grace
of God, the true life of their souls, and cannot by their own private forces
ever recover the same again. Yet because the life of nature, and all natural
powers of the soul remain, being breathed upon by the spirit of God, they
receive such strength as they concur with him to the winning of his favor,
and recovery of his grace; which the dead carcass cannot do, bereft of all
both spiritual and natural life.

21. In like manner we are resembled to the Potters clay; First because as the
Potter is master thereof, as he frames and fashioneth it to what form he
list, without wrong to the clay: so God is Lord and owner of all mankind, he
turns, windeth, orders, and directs the wills of the proudest, without
restraint of their liberty, to what end he pleases, according to that of King
Solomon: As the rivers of water: so is the heart of the King ^rouer. ^^. verse. 1.
in the hand of our Lord; whither soever he will, he shall incline it.

22. Secondly, as the clay deserves nothing, why it should be rather made an
honorable then a contemptible vessel: so there is no merit, no desert at al in
the sinful man, why he should be preferred to be a vessel of honor in the
house of our Lord, and not left and given over by reason of his sin, to the
co^tumelious abuse and service of Satan.

23. Thirdly, as the clay cast off unfitting for any use, cannot challenge the
Potter for his refusal: so neither the sinner left in the suddes of sin, can
justly complain of Gods partiality in forsaking, rejecting, and not delivering
him as effectually as others, all being equally guilty of damnation. These and
such other resemblances betwixt the Potters clay, and the corrupted mass of
mankind, are Fulke in c 2. ad Rom sect. 7.
so far from making them like in all things, as M. Fulke says: I suppose
there was never man so mad to say, that a man has no more Free Will then a
piece of clay. Yet many Protestants are so mad as to urge this Similitude
against Free Will. M. White. 40. digres^ 42. ^. 283.
White so made, when he avouches the will of man to have no more freedom at
his first conversion, then a piece of paper. For if we respect the want of
liberty, what difference is there betwixt paper and clay? Now to the rest of
their objections. Whitaker. l. 1. cont. Dur. p. 72; Genesis 6. v. 5 In the Bible
set forth by order of his Majesty an. Dom 1612. Pererius l. in Genesis dis* 4. and
5. Valen. in 1. 2. dis. 6. q* 12. (...) del Rio in his gl^^^. litter^. up* on
this place. Phil. 2. 2^*


24. M. Whitaker first marches into the field and makes a great flourish with
that sentence of Moses, The malice of men was much on the earth, and all the
cogitation of their heart was bent to evil at alltymes. Or according to the
Protestant translation, every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
^uill continually. But the edge of this argument has been already taken off by
Pererius, Valentia, Martinus del Rio, and diverse others of the Catholic part:
who soundly teach, that it is the common phrase of Scripture, to speak that of
all in general, which appertains only to the greatest number. As when S.
Paul said: All seek the things, that are their own, and not the things which
are Jesus Christ's. Wheas it is certain, he and the rest of the Apostles
sincerely labored for the honor of God, and unfeignedly sought the glory of
Christ. So in this present, after that general proposition, All the cogitation
of their heart was bent to evil: God excepteth Noe in the same place saying:
Noe was a just and perfect man in his generation. Whereby it is clear that the
precedent speech does not mean that no man absolutely can think well, but that
then they commonly did think evil. Genesis 69. The He. brew word Tamim signifies
he was compleately furnished with all perfection. Fulke in c. 1. Io. sect. 5.
Ephesians. 2. Romans 9. Fulke in c. 2. Luc. sect. 3. Aug quaest. ad Simpl. l. 1. q. 2.
^o. 4. Whit. l. ^. cont. Dureum p. 71. 79. Io^. ^. 15. White. ^0. digres. 42.
f. 288. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 4. 13.
Secondly, it is evident that Moses spoke not there of the wickedness of men
in all ages, but only of those impious who lived before the deluge, and provoked
God to d^owne the world with that universal flood, which euinceth not, as M.
Whitaker would have it, that man lost liberty to the duties of faith, when God
stirs him up to think upon them.

25. Next unto D. Whithaker comes forth D. Fulke and gives his onset in
this manner: Faith is not of him that wills; nor of him that runs; but is
the gift of God. It is God (says S. Augustine) who works in you both to
will, and to work according to his good will. Again in the same place: God
brings to pass that we be willing. To the same purpose M. Whitaker a ^aileth
us again, with the like saying out of S. Ambrose, with another out of S.
Bernard, with two or three out of Scripture. To the same effect our Savior
Christ says, Without me you can do nothing. Upon which words M. White frames
this Dilemma: Free will has of it self either some strength though small, or
none at all. If any; then Christ said not true, Without me ye can do nothing.
If none; then where is Free- will, and the cooperation there of with Gods
grace? etc.

26. I answer ( M. White) to this your horned argument; Freewill of it self
has no strength at all to work our conversion without God: and yet with his
help it has: Therefore he that said: We are not sufficient to think any
thing of our selves, as of our selves; said also: I can do all things in him
that strengthens me. The eye for example in darkness cannot see, with the
benefit of light it can. The earth of it self brings forth no Corn, unless
it be both watered with rain, and quickened with ripening seed. The
understanding of man, albeit in heaven, cannot according to true Divinity,
reach of it self to the sight of God, or behold the infinite beauty of his
incomprehensible majesty: but elenated, strengthened and endowed with the ^^ght
of Glory, it is enabled to enjoy the happy fruition and ^^ght of his
countenance. So man's will of it self unable to do any good, being in wardly
enlightened, confirmed, and quickened by the seed of Gods supernall grace,
has force and ability to cooperate with him, and bring forth the fruits of
piety and works of salvation.

27, Likewise to M. Fulkes allegations; Faith (I grant) is the gift of God: It
is not of him that runs, but of Fulke vbi supra. Whitaker loco citato. 1.
Cor. 2. v. 14. ad Phil. 2.
God, who has mercy on us. He makes us willing to embrace it, he, as M.
Whitaker argues out of S. Paul, teaches us to understand the things of God,
by him the will and deed is wrought in us, but not without the concurrence of
our Free Will: especially it being a vital act, which cannot be produced but
by a lively and vital faculty. Also I confess, that without God we can do
nothing: We can not speak; we cannot move; we cannot live: yet with Act. 17.
ver. 28.
his general concourse we speak; we move, and live: In ipso viuimus, mouemur,
and sumus. So without the special help of Gods grace, we can neither
perform, nor as much as think any work of piety, with it we can, and do
atchieue many virtuous deeds. His Grace destroys not, but perfiteth, awaketh,
cherishes and reuiueth the liberty of our will. For which cause S. Augustine
says: Aug. tom. 3. de spir. and litt. c. 30. Aug. tom. 7. de pecca. mer* and
remis. l. 2. c. 18.
Do we euacuate Free Will by Grace? God forbid. But we rather establish it.
Likewise: We ought not to so defend Grace, that we may seem to take away
Free Will: (as the Manichies and our Protestants do) nor so maintain
Free Will, that we be judged through proud impiety, ungrateful to Gods Grace,
as the Pelagians were; but we ought to join both together, and give the
pre-eminence in every action to Gods Grace.

28. After this sort we read the same actions which in way of our conversion
are ascribed unto God, to be attributed also unto man; To God King David
prayed: Psalm. 50. 12. Ezech. 18. 31. 1. Cor. 12. v. 6 Phil. 2. 12. Psalm. 84. 5.
Eccies. 17. 22. Psalm. 118. 59. Psalm. 118. 38. Psalm 118. 112. White 40. disgres.
42. fol. 282. 1. Cor. 4. 7.
Create a clean heart in me o God: and renew a right spirit in my bowels. To
man Ezechiel said: Make to your selnes a new heart, and a new spirit. Of God S.
Paul writes: All in things he does work: of Man; with sear and trembling
work your salvation. To God the Royal Prophet cries out: Convert us o God
our Savior. To man King Solomon says, Return unto our Lord and forsake thy
sins. And of himself King David writes: I have converted and turned my
steps to thy Commandments. To God he prays: Incline o Lord my heart unto
thy laws: And of himself he witnesses: I have inclined my heart to keep thy
Laws.

29. But if this be true (says M. White) when the Apostle demands: who has
separated thee? what have thou, which thou have not received? I may answer: I
have separated my self, by doing that which was in my self to do. No Sir, we
can not make any such reply, because we being fast asleep in the lethargy of
sin, it is God only who first stirs, awaketh, and reuiueth us; it is he, who
after cooperateth and concurreth with us; it is he, who supporteth and
strengthens us; he finally, who accomplisheth and puts in executional our
blessed desires. Therefore from him we receive, and to him as the original
fountain, we ascribe whatsoever good there is in us. In so much as there is no
work ordained to the attaining of everlasting life, to which we affirm not
the grace of God many ways necessary.

30. First it is necessary for God to move, inspire and apply our thoughts to
the good intended, which the Deuines Psalm. 58. 11. Romans 8. 16. Psalm. 69. v. 1.
ad Romans 8. 26. Ibid. 28,
call his exciting or preventing Grace, whereof King David spoke: Misericordia
eius prae^eniet me: His mercy shall go before me. And S. Paul: It is not of
the willer, nor of the runner, but of God that shows mercy. Secondly, it is
necessary that God assist and help us, voluntarily embracing his holy
inspirations; this is called his aiding or concomitant Grace, whereby he
accompanies and cooperateth with us, when we yeald to his calling the free
assent of our will. This King David implored saying: Incline unto my aid o
God: ^ Lord make have to help me. Of this S. Paul speaks: The spirit helps
our infirmity. Again: To them that love God, all things cooperate unto good.
And this together with the former is sou^dly proved and fitly explained by S.
John in the Apocalips: I stand at the door and knock. If any man shall hear
my voice, and open the gate, I will enter into him etc. To stand and knock at
the door of our hearts is the office of Gods preventing, exciting, or
illuminating Grace; to open the door is both the work of man and work of God.
Man's it is, in giving his free consent, and concurring to the opening of his
heart: Gods, in that he supporteth, works, and helps him also to open
Apoca. 3. 20.
the same by his cooperating Grace.

31. To these, many add a third Grace distinct from the former, which they
call a Subsequent, or following Grace mentioned by King David: His mercy also
will follow me; by S. Psalm. 22. 26. August. in Enchi. c. 32. Fulg^n. l. 1. ad
Monim^m c. 9. Conc. Trid. ses. 6. 26.
Augustine, Fulgentius, and by the general Council of Trent; The divine
virtue or influence of grace, derived from Christ our head, goes before,
accompanies, and follows all our good works. The prerogative of this last
Grace is to affoard opportunity of executing the good we intended before; which
is a great benefit, by reason that thereby our desires are longer continued,
more inflamed, perfitted, and increased. These three Graces are necessary for
every one, be he just, be he sinner, to the due accomplishment of pious,
virtuous, and supernatural works. The first, God is said to work, In us,
without us: that is, without our free and deliberate consent. The second, In
us, with us: because he cooperateth and works with us, freely consenting to
his heavenly motions. The third, In us, by us: to wit, putting by us, as his
free-working instruments, our holy purposes in execution.

32. Thus then I may conclude against M. Fulke and all our Protestants with the
same words, which S. Augustine upon vide Aug. l. de gra. and l. arb. c. 16. and
^ 17. and Vasqui^ in 1. 1. Disput. 185. c. 6. Aug. l. de gra. and l. arb. c. 9.
Aug. de natu. and gra. c. 33.
the like occasions used against the Manichies: Not because the Apostle says;
It is God that works in you both to will and perform, must we think he
takes away Free Will. For if it were so, then would not he a little before
have willed them to work their own salvation with fear and trembling. For
when they be commanded to work, their Free Will is called upon: but, with
trembling and fear is added, least by attributing their well-doing to
themselves, they might be proud of their good deeds, as though they were of
themselves. And in another place: We take not away the liberty of the will, but
we preach the grace of God. And whom do these Graces profit, but him that
wills, and him that humbly wills? Nothim that presumes and boasts of the
forces of his will, as though that alone auailed to the perfection of Justice.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
THE XXVI. CONTROVERSY, WHEREIN Is taught, that the Faithful by the help of
Gods grace do some works so perfect and intierly good, as they truly please the
divine Maieysty: against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot.
CHAP. I. Abbot. ^ 4. sect. 4 4 f. 580. Whitaker. in his answer to the 8.
reason of M. Camp. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraum, Fulke in c. 7. ad Romans

THERE be three false principles or tottering grounds among the articles of
Protestants credulity, whereon they build the impossibility of keeping Gods
co^mandments, which I must first raze to the ground, before I begin to
establish the possibility (if not facility) we have by Gods Grace, to observe
them. The first is, that we can do nothing, entierly and perfectly good which
may either please God or fulfill his law. The second is, that all the actions
and thoughts of the just, are stained with sin, and every sin little or
great, wittingly or unwittingly done, is a breach of the law. The third, that
not only our consent to evil motions which invade our minds, Abbot in his
defense c. 4. sect. 10. fol. 559.
but the very invasions and prouocations themselves, which vnvoluntarily
assault us, are true preuarications and formal transgressions. Hence our
Ghospellers deduce, that seeing every action we perform, is defiled with the
blemish of sin, we are so far from observing, that we violate the law in
whatsoever we do.

2. From such detestable and hellish premises, I do not wonder so damnable a
conclusion is inferred: for to commence with the first point: Is it not
injurious to the unspeakable goodness of God, for him to entreat, to command,
Malac. 3. v. 4. Philip. 4. v. 18. 1. Petr. 2. v. 5. 1. Pet. 2. v. 4. August.
^le decal. and conuen. 10. Plagarum cum illo c. 7. 4 Reg. 20. v. 3. 4. Reg. 12.
v. 2. Ibidem c. 15. v. ^ 4. Reg. 22 v. 2. 4. Reg. 23. v. 32. 4. Reg. 14. v. 24.
to affoard us his help, to perform good works in this frail and weak
estate, and yet not to be pleased with our working of the^? Is it not repugnant
to sacred Writ which commends some holy men as perfect and grateful to God,
mentions some works acceptable to him, and yet to deny this approved verity?
The Prophet Malachy says: The sacrifice of Judah, and Jerusalem shall please
our Lord. S. Paul calls almesdeedes bestowed on him in prison: An odor of
sweetness, an acceptable sacrifice pleasing God. S. Peter exhorts us: to offer
spiritual hosts acceptable to God; commends the incorruptibility of a quiet
and modest spirit, which is rich in the sight of God: Rich not before men,
says S. Augustine, but before God, and where God sees, there rich. Ezechias
warned by our Lord to prepare himself to death, began thus to implore his
merey: I beseech thee, o Lord, remember I pray thee how I have walked before
thee in truth, and in a perfect heart, and have done that which is liked before
thee. And least you should judge he might be mistaken, hear what God himself
avouches of some singular men. Of King Ioas: Ioas did right before our Lord
all the days that Ioyada the Priest taught him. Of Azarias: And he did that
which was liked before our Lord, The same of Josias: He did that which was
liked before our Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his father: he
declined not to the right hand, nor to the left. The quite contrary the holy
Ghost affirms of Ioachaz. Of Jeroboam: And he did that which was evil before
our Lord. Of Achaz King of Judah: He did not that which was pleasing in the
sight of the Lord 4. Reg. 16. v. 2.
his God, as David his Father. Which comparisons refell M. Abbots, and his
fellows distinction of mere imputative righteousness. For as Achaz, and
Jeroboam, did not only evil by imputation of wickedness, but that which was in
Fulke loc^ citat. inc. 13. ad Romans sect. 1. in c. 3. ep. 1. Ioa^. sect. 6.
Abbot c. 4. sect. 44. f. 579. and sect. 49. f. 602. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers.
Duraeum. pa. 702. Genesis 6. v. 9 Chrysostom. hom. 23. in Genesis Ambr. l. de Noe and Arc.
c. 4. Hier. trad. haebr. in Genesis and Greg. l. 5. moral. and 36 in 3. Job. Gen
7. v. 1. Genesis 17. v. 1. 1. Cor. 2^ v. 6. Matt. 19. v. 21. Item. Matt. 5. v. 48.
it self evil and displeasing to God: so Ioas, Azarias, and King David
performed not only that which was right, and good by imputatio^, but what was
truly in itself, through the benefit of grace, right and acceptable in his
sight.

3. Yea, says Fulke and the rest again, they did that which was good and
right, yet imperfectly, rawly, weakly. For so long as we live here, charity
is never perfect in us as it ought to be, neither can any perfect good work be
effected by us. But it has pleased the holy Ghost to meet with this evasion
too in tearming some actions, some men also, perfect in this life: Noe was a
just and perfect man in his generation, where the hebrew word Tamim, derived
from the verb Tamam, signifies the height and fullnes of perfection: in so
much as S. Chrysostom writes of him, That he was perfect in every virtue,
which was requisite for him to have. S. Ambrose says: He was praised not by
the nobility of his birth, but by the merit of his justice and perfection. The
same in effect has S. Hierome, and S. Gregory. Likewise, that this might not
be glozed by the enemy of his perfection, and justice in the estimation of men,
God witnesses of him in the next Chapter: I have seen thee just in my sight
in this generation. Behold in his sight, not in the sight of men alone. Again,
to Abraham our Lord said: Walk before me and be perfect. S. Paul: We speak
wisdom among the perfect. Our savior: If thou will be perfect, sell the
things that thou have etc. which things he might sell and attain to perfection
if he would. Likewise, be you perfect as also your heavenly father is perfect.
Here he exhorts us not to weak and raw, but to such admirable perfection as
in some measure or degree is likened and resembled to the vnmachable perfection
of God himself. Moreover of Patience in particular we read: Let Patience have
a perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire, failing in nothing. Of
faith: He (Abraham) was not weakened in faith: in the promise also of God he
staggered not by distrust, but was strengthened in faith most fully knowing. Of
Iac. ^. v. 4. Romans 4. v. 19. 20. 21. 1. Joan. 2. v. 5. Ibid. c. 4. v. 11.
Charity, whereof you have the rash verdict of Protestants that it can never be
perfect, will you now hear the judgment of S. John: He that keeps his word
(to wit the comma^dment of our Lord) in him in very deed the Charity of God is
perfected: If we love one another, God abides in us, and his Charity in us is
perfected. Will you hear the sentence of Christ: Greater love then this no man
has, that a man yield his life for his friends. But this has been
acomplished by innumerable Martyrs Joan. 15. v. 13.
of our Roman Church: they then have arrived to the highest pich or degree of
Charity. After this sort S. Augustine teaches, that not only the Charity of
Christ, but the Charity also August. tract. 5. and. 6. in 1. Ioa^. c. 3. Item
l. de perf. just. tom. 3. ex sent. sent 311. despir. and lit. c. 5. and vlt. l.
de doct. Chri. cap. 39. l. 1. de pec. mer 23. and remis. c. Hiero. l. 2. comm.
in lament. Ierem. haec de Hier. Cent. 4. c. 10. col. 1250.
of S. Steven, the charity of S. Paul was perfect in this life, accordingly in
his book of the perfection of Justice, and else where very often. But most
perspicuously S. Hierom: He is truly and not in part perfect, who disgesteth in
the wilderness the discomfort of solitude, and in the Covent or Monastery, the
infirmities of the brethren with equal magnanimity. Which sentence because the
Madgeburgian Protestants, could not with any dawbing besmeare, but that the
beauty thereof would discover it self: they sprinkle it with the aspersion of
an vn^itting, or bastardly kind of speech, and so cassiere it among other of
his errors. But these reproachful censures of such an eminently learned Saint
rebound back with disgrace of the censurers, honor of the censured, and our
acknowledged triumph, with which I go on to establish it further with a
Theological proof.

4. It is a strong grounded opinion among Deuines, that the actual and
supernatural love of some fervent and zealous persons here upon earth,
exceeds in essential perfection the burning charity of sundry inferior
Saints in heaven, whose Charity notwithstanding Protestants grant to be
perfect: for as the habitual grace and Charity of such as have exercised many
acts of love, often received the sacraments, and augmented their inward habit,
surpasses the grace and renouation of Baptism, which infants dying before the
use of reason have only obtained. So their actual charity which is often
answerable to the habitual (and by the help and supply of Gods special
concurrence may sometime be greater) surmounteth also the actual love of young
children, who now rejoice and triumph in the Court of bliss: such was the love
of our B. Lady, of S. John Baptist, S. Peter and S. Paul.

5. To this Argument of the Schoolmen, I find no reply in any of our Reformers
writings; but to the aforesaid passages of Scripture they commonly answer,
that Whitaker: in his answer to the 8. reason of M. Campi^ fol. 251. VVher in
are the marginall nots out of his reply so Duraeus
the works of the faithful are perfect and pleasing to God by acceptance:
They please him (quoth Whitaker) as if they were entiere and pure, because he
looks upon our persons, and he does not make search into the worth, and merit
of the work. Verily in this later clause you say most truly, he makes not
search into the worth and merit of your works, whch you denounce to have no
merit in them, which you proclayme to be mingled with the corruption of sin,
yet your persons (perdy) because you are Protestants, are so amiable in the
eyes of that supreme Monarch, that the things you do, delight and content him,
as entiere and pure, howsoever they be in themselves impure. And whereas the
Publicans humility, Mary Magdelens tears, the Chananeans faith, S. Peter's
sorrow endeared them to Act. c. 10* v. 35.
God, whereas all other good persons are accepted to him by reason of their
works, He that fears God, and works justice, is acceptable unto him: only
Protestants are such darlings, as their works are not regarded by reason of
their persons. He that said to Abraham: Because thou have done Genesis 21. v. 16.
and 17. Sophon. 1. v. 12.
this things, and have not spared etc. I will bless thee, blesses them
without reference to their doings: He that searches Jerusalem with lamps,
that is, diligently sifteth his holiest Saints, makes no such narrow scrutiny
into his Protetestant favorites: he with whom there is no acception of
persons, accepts the persons of Protestants without any exception. Go you and
vaunt of this extraordinary favor, and pass ye without search or
examination, to your peculiar heaven. God grant that we and our works being
weighed in the balance of Gods just trial, be not found too light, as
Baltassars were, or failing in any duty Abbot c. 4. sect. 45. August. de spir.
and lit c. 35. Aug. de temp. sermon. 49. Hier. l. 1. aduers. Pe^ag. and l. 3. de
Fulg. l. 1. ad Mon. Orig. ad Romans c. 6.
we are bound to accomplish. Against which M. Abbot declameth as a thing
impossible, because S. Augustine tells us: That there is no example of
perfect righteousness among men: That this is the perfection of man to find
himself not to be perfect. To whom he also adds the authorityes of S.
Hierome, of Origin, calling our righteousness in this life imperfect, wanting of
perfection, and an image or shadow of virtue. Likewise of the Apostles tearming
himself according to S. Augustine, imperfect, a trauailler to perfection, not
as one that was come unto it. Thus he, not unlike the Stoickes, whom S.
Hierome, and S. Augustine reprehend for their doting phrenzy, in cauilling,
that he who profits in wisdom cannot be said to have any wisdom until he
come to be perfect therein.

6. But as concerning the matter in hand, I briefly reply with our Angelical
Doctor S. Thomas, and with August. co^t. ^. ep Pelag. l. 3. 6. 7. Augu. de
spir. and lit. c. 36. Hier. l. ^. cont. Pela. Aug. ep. 26. S. Thom. q. 24. art
8. Ba^nes, Lor. and ^lij in eum articul.
all other Deuines commenting upon him: That there is a threefold degree of
perfection. The first is of them who are so firmly rooted in charity, as they
detest all things contrary and repugnant to the law of God, that is, al
mortal and deadly crimes, by which charity is extinguished* this degree all
the just who are in the favor of God attain unto. The second, is that which
excludes not only every grievous sin, but as much as our humane frailty with
Gods grace can do, every little imperfection, every superfluous care, let, or
impediment, which diuerteth our minds, or withdraws our hearts from the love
of sovereign goodness: to this not all the just, but some religious, and
zealous persons, by continual mortification, and abnegation of themselves have
also arrived. The third is, perpetually without intermission, withal the
forces and powers of our soul, to be actually carried away with the
supernatural streams of love. This only is proper to the Saints in heaven,
and not axacted by God of any mortal creature, besieged with the infirmityes
of flesh and blood: in respect of this our justice on earth, yea the justice
and perfection of S. Paul is termed imperfect, it is an image or shadow of
virtues, it may be sometimes touched with the spots of uncleanness, and therefore
of this Philip. 3. v. 12. 1. Joan. 1. v. 5.
only the Apostle avouched: Not that now I have received, or now am perfect,
yet in regard of the former two degrees, he arrived to perfection, and was
already perfect, even by the phrase of holy Scripture, which speaking of the
first degree says, He that keeps his word, in him in very deed the Charity
of God is perfected. Of the second it is also written: If Matthew. 19. v. 21.
thou will be perfect, go sell the things that thou have, and come, and follow
me. By these degrees therefore of perfection, all the objections may be easily
warded, which our adversaries bring either out of Scriptures, or Fathers: as
when they affirm our Justice to be imperfect, defiled, with the touch of
impurity, they speak of the first degree, soyled with the dust of wordly
cares, and too often distayned with venial defaults. When they exhort us to
greater perfection, that is, not to the common of all the just, but to that
singular, of the mortifyed and fervent persons; finally when they teach, that
we can never be perfect in this life: it is true, in the last acceptance of
the word, according to the third degree here specifyed. Which triple division
of perfection keeps the adversary at such a bay as he knows not whither to
turn him, how to escape, or what to mutter against it.

THE XXVII. CONTROVERSY, WHEREIN Our good works are acquitted from the spots
of sin: against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot.
CHAP. I.
THIS calumniation is every where so rife and frequent amongst Protestant
writers, as M. Abbot in his defense c. 4. sect. 44. 45. 46. Whitaker. in his an
swear to the ^. reason of M. Camp. f. 250. in the translation whereunto is
added in brief marginal notes the summ^ etc.
Abbot spends many Sections to attach his own pains and endeauours justly,
all other men's good works wrongfully, yea perniciously with the guilty stayne
of sin: and M. Whitaker undertaking the patronage and approbation of that
drunken sentence of Luthers, All good actions be sins: if God be severe in
judgment, they are damnable sins: If he be favorable, they ^e but small
ones, auoweth: Luther said this, and he said it truly: for in every action of a
man though never so excellent, there is some fault which may wholly mar the
action and make it odious to God, if that which is done be weighed in the
balance of divine justice.

2. But if Luther said truly, then as Duraeus most pithily argues against M.
Whitaker, the Apostle S. Paul said not truly: If thou take a wife thou sinnest
not: the^ S. Peter said not truly: Doing these things, you shall not sin at
any time. Whitaker* ibid. fol. 251. 1. Cor. 7. v. 28. 2. 2. Pet. 1. verse 10. 1.
Joan. 3. v. 8. 1 Joan. ^. v. 9. 1. Cor. 3. v. ^1. Matthew. 6. v. 22. Luc. 11. v.
36. August* l. 2. qq. Euang. c. 15. Maldon. in c. 11. Luc. Matthew. 5. v. 17.
S. John said not truly: For this appeared the son of God, that he might
dissolve the works of the Devil. If there be no work which is not devilish
and sinful, he said not truly: Every one that is borne of God commits not
sin. Neither did S. Paul well to compare good works to silver, gould, and
precious stones, nor did the Prophets, and Apostles well to exhort us to good
works, Christ did not well, as Cardinal Bellarmin prosecuteth the argument,
saying: If the eye be simple, thy whole body shall be lightsome, and: If then thy
whole body be lightsome, having no part of darkness, it shall be lightsome wholly,
and as a bright candle it shall lighten thee. Where by the eye S. Augustine,
and others understand the intention of man. By the whole body, Maldonate
expounds all his facultyes, by the whole absolutely, of which it is also
said, the whole shall be lightsome, he interprets, all his human actions, which
proceed from the powers and faculties of the soul. All these says Christ
flowing from the just, and leuelled by a right intention, to a good end and
object, are so bright as they inlighten the whole man, so pure and unspotted as
they have no part of darkness, no blemish of sin to destaine them. For which
cause he calls them in another place light: So let your light shine before
men etc. Matthew. 5. v. 17.


3. Lastly if Luther said truly, God himself said not truly, writing of Job:
In all these things Job sinned not with his lips, neither spoke he any foolish
thing against God. And in the next Chapter, he calls him A right man, fearing
God, Job. c. 1. v. 22. Job. 2. v. 3.
departing from evil, and retaining innocence. Whereby it is evident, that Job
in all his troubles committed no sin, neither in thought, word, nor deed: not
in word, because he sinned not, with his lips; not in deed, because he departed
from evil; not in thought, because he still retained innocence in his heart.
And if we follow the Hebrew Text, all this may be gathered out of the former
words of the first Chapter. For the Hebrew adds not, with his lips, but
without restriction absolutely reads, Job sinned not, or as our Protestants
translate: In all this did not Job sin. Which Origin and the Grecians,
according to Pineda refer, to his Origin in his comme^tary upon Job. Pineda
in ^um loc. Nihil peccauit Job coram Domino. Psalm. 16. v. 3. Psalm. 7. v. 9. 1.
Tim. ^. v. 17. 18. Matt. 5. v. 17.
cogitations, to wit, that he entertained no evil thought, or cogitation
against God, but judged well of his goodness: and the 70. Interpreters subscribe
hereunto, who read, in all these things which happened unto him, Io^ sinned not
at all, in the sight of our Lord. The like King David affirmed of himself:
Thou o Lord have tried me in fire, and there was no iniquity found in me.
Therefore albeit he otherwise offended, yet at that time he was clean from
sin, as also when he said: Judge me o Lord, according to my justice, and
according to my innocence. Moreover some works of the just are pronounced by
the holy Ghost to be good: God gives us all things abundantly to enjoy, to do
well, to become rich in good works. That they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. And yet they could not be good, nor
commendable in Gods sight, much less pleasing sacrifices to him, as in the
precedent discourse has been showed, if they be defiled with sin.

4. M. Abbot answers: Therefore good works being touched, and infected with
the contagion of sin, before they can please God, must have some means to
take away the guilt, and imputation of the sin etc. which Christ does,
perfuming them with the sweet Abbot c. 4 sect. 44. fol. 578. and 579*
incense of his Obedience. But how does Christ take it away? By abolishing, or
not imputing the contagion? By not imputing says Abbot, but thus he takes
away, according to them, the filth of adultery, of murder, of sacrilege, and
all heinous crimes from the believing Protestant. And are those sinful
works thereby made grateful hosts, and acceptable sacrifices pleasing unto
God? No, says he again: Our good deeds are not sinful works. Are they
not? What is that guilt then of contagious sin which must be taken away,
before they can please God? If they be not sinful, no contagion of sin is
to be pardoned by not imputing: if they be sinful, then your sinful acts
inherently in themselves sinful, by not imputing the guilt of contagion,
become grateful, pleasing and acceptable unto God. Neither can M. Abbot any
way cuade by his frequent, and worm-eaten answer, that the action we do is not
sinful, because it is in substance a good Ibid. ^7^.
work, and the fruit of the good spirit of God, and the default and
imperfection is only an accident to the work. Nor Whitaker, who to the same
purpose replyeth in his answer to Duraeus: VVhitk ^ in his answer to Duraeus
l. 8. page 698.
We mean not that good works are sins, but that they have some sin mixed
with them. For it follows not, that silver is dross, because it has some
dross mingled with it. Seeing our dispute is not here of the physical
substance, which in every action even of murder, theft, and the like, is
transcendentally good, or in genere Entis, to use the Philosophers terms: but
of the moral bounty or deformity of a work, which if it be tainted with the
mixture of any evil, how accidenttally soever, it cannot be good, since it is
true which Dionysius teaches: Good arises from an entiere cause, evil from
every defect. So that Whitakers example, which Abbot also alleges Dionys. de
divine. nomin. c. 4. par. 4. Bonum ex vna and tota causa; malum ex multis
particularibu^ que proficiscitur defectibus.
of gold or silver mingled with dross, is nothing to the purpose, because
there be two material substances really distinct: here we question of one
moral act, which admits no distinction: there, although one metal be
mingled with the other, yet by several veins, in several places they are so
incorporated, as the silver is not dross or dross silver; here the same act
flowing from the same will, aimed at the same end, must be both good and bad,
pure and defiled, silver and dross, which is impossible. For as it inuolueth
contradiction, that one and the same assent of understanding should be at the
same time, both true and false, in the agreement of all Philosophers and
Deuines: so likewise it implies, that one, and the same act of the will
should be jointly at the same moment good and evil, laudable and vituperiall,
pleasing and displeasing unto God. Wherefore if every action of it own nature
be evil, no work of ours can be in substance good, as M. Abbot would have it;
none excellent, as Whitaker pretends; but the most excellent must needs in
it self be wholly marred, wholly odious unto God, wholly and substantially
naught, howsoever by outward acceptance it may seem beautiful and fair. Not
so, say they, for our good works are not wholly evil, not hateful, not
sins, but infected (quoth M. Abbot) with the contagion of sin: We say not
(quoth Whitaker) to marry a wife is sin, Abbot and Whitaker. in the places
cyted above.
but that they, who marry wives intermixe some sin in that good action. But
you say that, that intermixed sin may wholly mar the action, and make it
odious to God, if that which is done be weighed in the balance of divine
justice: Therefore you say that the action of it self is wholly evil, wholly
marred, altogether odious unto God, and hateful of his own nature, unless you
believe that an action weighed in the balance of divine justice, becomes
thereby worse, more odious, and abominable then of it self it is, and that
our supreme and highest Judge, who justly condemns the wickedness of man,
makes it more wicked by the severity of his judgment.

5. Moreover, from whence creeps this spot of sin into that good and
lawful action of marriage? Not from the will of taking a wife: for that is
laudable and no sin, according to the Apostle, not from the substance of the
act, for that M. Abbot also allows to be good, not from any other accidental
circumstance of end, time, place, or person: for I suppose they be all guided
by the rule of reason. How then is sin intermixed in the good action of
marriage? By the same act, which inseparably draws the stayne of corruption
with it, or by some other adjoined? The desire of taking a wife for a good end
in such as may lawfully marry, is free from all sin,
as by a wicked intention to which it is ordained, if by the same, one and the
same action is both good and evil, a sin and no sin, agreeable to reason
and disagreable, consonant and dissonant to the will of God, the often refuted
and vnauoyded implicancy, which you incur. If by some other act or vicious
intent, either this intention is principal, and the cause of marriage, as to
marry, the easier to contriue the murder of his wife, or some other, then the
action of marriage is not good, but impious, wicked, and detestable: or it is a
secondary intent, and follows the desire of marriage, and so it cannot
vitiate the former good desire, nor be termed a sin intermixed therewith:
which albeit obstinate and ignorant adversaries can hardly be drawn to
confess, yet will I make it so clear, as they shall not be able to deny. Let
us take for example the act of loving God, or dying for his sake; what mixture
has it, or slyme of evil? any stayn that arises from the object beloved, or
will which loves it? Not from the object, for that is infinite goodness without
all spot or blemish, therefore no blemish can be intermixed with that act, as
it tends to so pure an object: nor from the will of loving it, for no fear
of excess, no danger of impurity, can possibly flow from desiring to love the
fountain it self, and main sea of purity: not from the mudd of distraction,
not from the scumme of vain glory, not from the froath of pride, which
sometime may accompany that heavenly love; for as it is impossible the act of
love, should be an act of distraction, vanity, pride, or any other then love,
so it is impossible the staynes of those sinful actions, should be
intermixed in the act it self of love. Does it proceed from some other fleshly
motion, or rebellious inclination? But the The corrupt motions of the flesh
infect not the work e of the spirit.
motions of the flesh, do not a whit defile the operations of the spirit, they
are distinct and several actions, and these without consent, do not partake of
their infection. What is the spot then of uncleanness, what is the muddy water
this crystal river of love, has drawn from our foul attainted nature? Is
it nothing else then the defect, and want of greater perfection, which might be
in that act? But thus the love of many Saints, and Angels, in heaven, should
be stained with impurity, because none of the inferior or lower orders arrive
to the burning flames, or love of the highest. Thus the sinful spots should
not grow from any casual and accidental necessity, but from the substance it
self of the act, and make the act of love as it is substantially less
perfect, so substa^tially evil, substantially naught; both which M. Abbot
notwithstanding stoutly gainesayeth.

6. Besides, these spots which destayne our good works, what be they? sins
you grant, but what sins? venial or mortal? Venial you utterly reject, in
so much Whitaker. cont. ^ q. 6. c. 3. fol. 582. 583.
as M. Whitaker says, that they who allow them, do not only euert a true, but
endeavor to set up a false fundamental point. Mortal then they are, and
deadly crimes (howsoever you seek to extenuate them with diminitiue words)
they be transgressions of the precepts, preuarications of the law of God, or
Nature; for every deadly sin is a breach of the Law. Then I pose you, whether
these transgressions be actions distinct from the good works which they
defile, or not distinct? Say they be distinct, and you cannot say they be spots
intermixed with our good actions; you cannot say our pious works are
besprinkled with them, seeing their moral bonity is good and commendable,
divided both in nature, object, quality, and action, from the deformity of
these transgressions. Say they be not distinct, but that the same work which
is good, is spotted with deadly trespasses; then all good works, be the never
so excellent are deadly sins, al formal breaches and transgressions of the
law. From whence that manifestly follows with which many heertofore have
rightly attached, and endited your Synagogue: That every one is bouud to avoid
all good works, under pain of damnation. Secondly, Protestants are bound to
eschew all good works because they are damnable crimes by the force of their
doctrine*
it follows, that M. Abbot has wronged his Reader, and abused Doctor Bishop
in disgracing his Syllogism concerning this matter, as consisting of four
terms, whereas it consists only of three. For a work to be a mortal sin,
and stained with mortal sin, is one and the same term. How beit least he
should cavil with me, as he has done with him, I will frame my argument in
the same mood and figure he himself requires, thus:

No mortal sin is to be done under pain ofda^nation.

But all good works are mortal sins.

Therefore, no good work is to be done under pain of damnation.

M. Abbot denies the Minor proposition, and answers: Though good works have
some aspersion or touch of our Abbot c. 4. sect. 46.
corruption, yet do not thereby become sins. But I prove the contrary: for
either that aspersion is a deadly offense morally separable from the good
action, as with our infirmity in this life it is acheiued; or altogether
inseparable: if morally separable, we may sometime exercise good works, pure,
and unspotted without that sinful aspersion: if altogether inseparable, the
action which is done, stained (as you to soften the fault daintily speak) with
the touch of corruption, defiled, as I demonstrate, with the contagion of
deadly guilt, must needs be a mortal and deadly crime. For if the actions of
stealing, killing, and many others (which may be done sometime without default,
as by fools or madmen) are notwithstanding, always grievous, and horrible
offenses, when to their positive Entity, or Physical substance, which is good,
and to which God himself concurreth, any mortal deformity, or deadly
infection is adjoined, by what foreign circumstance or casual accident soever
it be: how much more those actions which can never be wrought, without mortal,
foul, and deadly default (as all our good works according to Protestants) how
much more are they mortal, foul, and deadly trespasses?

7. In fine D. Whitaker, D. Abbot, and all my adsaryes Abbot in his defense. c.
4. etc. 2. Field in his 3. book of the Church c. 26. Whitaker. l. 8. aduer.
Duraum.
acknowledge that our good works sprinkled with the spot of impurity, have not
all things necessary under sin, to satisfy the law, but by reason of our
weakness and infirmity swerve, and decline from the fullnes thereof. Secondly
they acknowledge, that all swaruings, all declinings from the full prescript of
the law, are of their own nature damnable and mortal crimes: Therefore by
their own acknowledgment all our good works are heinous and damnable sins.
But all men are obliged under forfeite of salvation, to fly and detest all
grievous sins, therefore all men are obliged by this hellish doctrine to fly
and detest al good works. Yea every one is bound to avoid the very duties
themselves he is bound to do. For we al bound to perform our duties, in
observing the laws and co^mandments of the Decalogue: but every duty we
accomplish is weak, raw, and defective, every defective and imperfect duty, a
deuiation, Abbot c. 4 sect. 46. fol. 588.
and falling away from the perfection of the law, every falling away, every
deuiation a mortal sin, every mortal sin we are bound to avoid, therefore
we are bound to avoid every duty, which we are bound to perform. M. Abbot,
again denies my consequence, because the VVbitak. and Abbot vbi supra.
sin is not employed in the duty, but arises by casual and accidental
necessity, from the condition of the man. I perceive the dint of this weapon
pricketh you to the quick, it draws blood, and forces you to give ground at
every blow. First, all our actions were sins if severely scanned, then our
good works are not sinful, but sin is intermixed in them. And Abbot in
his defense c. 4. sect. 43. and 44. Fulke. in c. 1. Luc. sect. 7. and. in 14.
Joan. sect. 1. Whitaker. l. 8. aduers. Duraeum.
are they now neither sins, nor sinful, nor is any sin employed in our
duty? Well, I am glad to see you recant, so it be sincerely done, and from your
heart. For if sin be not infolded in this duty, then the duty no doubt is
conformable to the law, it satisfyeth the tie and obligation thereof,
whereinsoeuer it binds under the penalty of any blamable default; yea (quoth
he, Fulke, and Whitaker with him) it does so inded, yet imperfectly, rawly, in
part only. Answer directly for shame. Is that raw, and imperfect duty, such
as it fulfilleth the law, so far forth as it obliges under sin, or no? What
say you? Are you mute? dare you not speak? The^ judgment passes against you,
that either it fulfilleth not the obligation, and sin is inuolued in the
duty, and that so deeply, as the dutiful action is of it own nature
(according to you) a true deuiation and breach of the Commandment: or it
satisfies the whole ba^d of the law, and so it is co^taminated with no touch
of sin, in respect of that obligation: It is a pure, good and undefiled
action, it is the full accomplishment of whatsoever the law in that kind
exacted: the only sentence we expect from your mouth. Again, though sin be
not employed in the duty, yet the duty in their fantastical judgment, is
stained, with the sin; but every action which is stained with sin, is
necessarily sinful, Basil. sermon. 2 de Bap^ ^. 7. and 8. Chrysostom or the author
upon the imperfect work of 8. Matthew. S Thom. 1. 2. q. 18. art. 4 ad ^. and q
19. art 7. ad 3.
whence soever the sin proceeds, as S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Thomas,
with all the Schoolmen conformably teach. For as that which is endewed with
whitenes must needs be white, from what cause soever the whitenes comes,
whether from the natural propriety and condition of the thing, as in a Swan;
or from the outward act and industry of man, as in a white-limed wall. So if
the duty we perform be polluted with sin, our duty is sinful from whence
soever the sin arises, whether from the inward heart or outward object,
casual necessity, or accidental condition of man.

8. I may weary my self, in skirmishing so long with such feeble adversaries,
and wounding them thus in so many places. Therefore I retire, inflicting for a
farewell, this last and deadly stroke in true Syllogisticall Dionys de divine.
nom. c. 4. par. 4. Greg. Niss. hom. 2. in Cant. and orat. cated c. 5. Basil.
bom. 9. ^oan. Damas. l. 2. de fi^e c. 4. Aug. l. 2. de lib arbr. c. vlt. and l.
12 de ciuit. ^ 1 3. and 7. Fuig de fide ad Peter. c. 21. Auselm. o. per. de
praese. and praed. c. ^.
manner.

Every action, every duty, which is deficient and bereaved either of due
conversion to God, conformity to reason, or of such moral rectitude, as by
precept binding under mortal sin ought to be in it, is a mortal crime, and
true preuarication of the Law. But every action, every duty we acheiue, is
(according to Protestants) deficient, and bereaved of that conversion,
rectitude, or conformity, as by precept binding under mortal sin ought to be
in it. Therefore every action, every duty we accomplish is (according to them)
a deadly crime, a true b^each and preuarication of the law.
The Mayor proposition, is the ruled definition of sin agreed upon by the
best Deuines, who either affi me it to be a privation of good, with S.
Dionysius Areopagita, S. Gregory Nissen, S. Basil, and S. John Damascene; o^an
alienation, an auersion from the law of God, with S. Augustine, and Fulgen us;
or a want, absence, and defect of rectitude, with S. Anselme; or a desertion, a
straying from virtue, with S. Basil again, and Nicetus; or lastly, a
deflection, a deuiation from the square of Basil in co^stit. Mon. Nicet. in
orat. 40. Nazian. q. insanct. Baptism. ^. Thom ^. 2. q. 71. art. 1. and ^. and
^. con. Gent. c. 7.
reason, or supreme rule of all actions, with S. Thomas, and the whole troop
of his followers.

9. The Minor, that our duty is deficient, bereaved of the good, failing of
that rectitude, or perfection of virtue, which ought to be in it, is auowed by
our Adversaries, when they contend, that it is not answerable, and
correspondent to the whole task, or amercement the Law exacteth under the fine
of sin, or forfeiture of disobedience, therefore the forementioned conclusion
rightly inferred from these two premises, is undeniable. And whereas some think
to get away with their loose reply, that although the duties they perform, be
in themselves breaches of the law, yet those breaches are pardoned, Another
objection vnanswe^ed*
not imputed to the elect; these men, by seeking to get out, lap themselves
faster in their own inextricabe ne^s: for no sin is to be attempted, no
breach of the law can be lawfully incurred, that God may after pardon, and
forgive the fault, that he may not impute the transgression of his law. Murder
is pardoned, Adultery is not imputed in their conceit to the believing
Protestant; and may they therefore be committed, because they shall be forgiven?
O malicious presumption! O presumptuous malice! For bear then, ye Sectaryes,
forbear your duetyes to God, your alleagiance to your Prince, forbear your
raw and imperfect observations of al divine, and human laws, or else revoke your
calumnyes, abjure your heresies, that all virtuous deeds are bespotted with the
staynes of vice.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, IN WHICH The same is warranted by the Fathers: the
objections answered: and the vnuoluntary motions of Concupiscence discharged of
sin.
FOUR notable things are delivered by the Doctors of the Church, to show the
falsity of the former calumniation. First, they avouch our good Hier. l. ^.
aduers. Pelag. Augu. de spir. and lit. c. vlti. Greg. l. 2. moral. c. 8.
works to be free from the spots of defilement, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, and S. Bernard in the places here quoted in the margent. Secondly
they affirm them to iustfy us before God by true increase, and augmentation of
inherent justice, to which purpose I have alleged many in the controversy of
justification by works. Thirdly they inculcate, that some heroical Bern. l.
de praecep. and dispens.
acts are so pure, and acceptable to God, as they purge and cleanse us from al
dregs, from all remaynes of former defaults, yea they are so worthy and
meritorious, as they do not only purchase an increase of grace in this life,
but a great crown of glory in the next, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian,
Origin, and S. Cyprian affirm of the dignity of Martyrdom, whose sentences are
set down in the question of merit. Fourthly, they teach, that not only the
works of some holy men, but that they also themselves Hier. l ^3. cont. Pela.
August. de pec. mer. and remis. l. 2 c. 6. Ambr. de na. and gra c. 3. In eodem
l. c. 67. Orig. l. 1. in Job. Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 78. Lact. l. 6. cap. 25.
Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 192. In eodem. l. c 25. Theod. q 19. in Gen Cent. 5 c. 10.
col. 1008. Hier. l. 4. comm. in Ezech. Cent. 4. ^. 10. col. 1249.
may before a time innocent and clean from all impurity: We teach, that a man
may if he will, not sin etc. S. Hierome: A man may if he will, be without
sin aided by God. S. Augustine (which he strengthens by the authority of S.
Ambrose) affirming him truly to impugn them who say a man cannot be without
sin in this life. And in the same book: Sin may be avoided, but by his
help who cannot be deceived. Thus Origin affirms, that holy Job, and his
children were pure and spotles from the fault of transgression, in so much, as
the Magdeburgian Protestants reprehend him for it, saying: Naughtily does he
attribute so much innocence to Jobs children, as Adam and Eve had in Paradise:
naughtily also does he ascribe unto Job, that he was naked, and deuoyd of
sin, of impietyes, of all unlawfulness. Likewise: that he neither sinned in
his cogitations, nor in the conferences of his soul, or affairs of his heart.
Besides, in Lactantius they tax this sentence of his: If any one be purified
from all spot of sin, let him not think he may abstain from the work of
largition, or giving alms, because he has no sins to wash away. And in the
same book (I proceed with their own words) vnfittingly does he say, That one
may be acceptable unto God, and be free from all blemish, let him always
implore the mercy of our Lord etc. In Theodoret they reprove, and place among
his errors: that he affirmed Paul therefore not to be hurt of the viper,
because he was without sin. In S. Hierome they distaste this: Our soul as
long as it abides in her infancy, wants sin. So that Origin, Lactantius,
Theodoret, and S. Hierome are by our Adversaries own confession wholly with us
in this point of faith.

2. Notwithstanding, against these ancient Fathers Isa. 64. v. 6.
they oppose on their side the Ancient of Days, even God himself speaking by
the Prophet Isay: All we are become as one unclean, and all our justices as
the cloth of a menstrued woman. Therefore unless we think our selves better
then Abbot c. 4. sect 3. Orig. ad Romans c. 3. Hier. in. Isa. c. 64. Aug, soli^o.
c 28. Bernar. ser. 1. in fest. omn. sanct. de verb. Isa. ser. 5. in dedic.
Eccles. ser. 5. Aluarez a Medina in eum loc.
our forefathers, all good works (say they) are stained with iniquity: which
M. Abbot contenaunceth with the like sayings of Origin, S. Hierome, S.
Augustine, and S. Bernard. I answer first with S. Hierome, upon that place of
Isay, that there he deploreth the desolation, and captivity of the Jews in
behalf of those sinners, for whose offenses they were so miserably afflicted,
and in their person utters those words not in his own. Or in respect of the
just and holy men that then flourished amongst them. Secondly, I answer, that
the Prophet speaks not there, as Aluarez a Medina well notes, of all the
works of the foresaid offenders in general, but of their sacrifices,
Holocaustes, Kalends, and other external solemnities, by which they falsely
deemed themselves clean and sanctified in the sight of God; these their
justices he pronounced to be like a menstruous and defiled cloth, because they
consisted only in the pomp of outward ceremony, without the sincerity of
inward worship: after which manner God said by the mouth of the same Prophet:
Offer sacrifice no Isa. c. 1. v. 13. and 14.
more in vain, Incense is abomination unto me; the new Moon, and the
Sabbath, and other festiuities I will not abide; your assemblies are wicked; my
soul hates your Kalends, and your solemnities. Thirdly, I answer, that al
our justices, al our pious works, albeit good and holy, considered by
themselves, yet compared and paralelled with the unmatchable purity and holiness
of God, are truly termed unclean, and defiled according to the accustomed
phrase of holy Scripture which calls things in themselves great, in
comparison of him little, or nothing: All nations as if they were not, so are
Isa. 40. v. 17.
they before him, and they are reputed of him as nothing. Things in themselves
fair and glittering, foul and unclean contemplated by him: Behold the Moon
also does not shine, and Job. 25. v. 5. and 6.
the stars are not clean in his sight; how much more man, rottenesse and the
son of a man, a worm? Things most white and beautiful, filthy and loathsome
matched with him: If I be wasbed as it were with snow waters, and my hands
shall shine, as immaculate, yet shall thou dippe me in filth, and my garments
shall abhor me, that is, as S. Gregory commenteth, Although I be Greg. l. 9.
mor. c. 19.
filled with the groans of heavenly compunction, although I be exercised by
the study of upright operation, yet in thy cleanesse I see I am not clean.

3. For this cause the Royal Prophet how innocent Psalm. 141.
soever, might cry out and say: Enter not o Lord into judgment with thy
servant, because no living creature shallbe justified in thy sight, which
sentence Abbot urging against us, exaggerateth Abbot c. 4. sect. 47. fol. 590.
thus: David says it, a Prophet says it, a man after Gods own heart says it.
And what if a Saint in heaven, what if a Cherubim should say it, might he not
truly say it, measuring his righteousness, with the infinite sanctity and
holiness Greg in c. 4. Job. Hilar. Hieron. Arnobius and Euthi. in eundem psalm.
Aug l. adu Orosium c. 10. Aug. l. de perfect. iustie. Hier. ep ad Ctesiphou.
Greg. in eun. psalm. Aug. in eun. psalm. Job. 4. v. 28. Caietan. Eugub. and
Vatablus in eun. loc. Symmach.
of God? For as S. Gregory writes: Human justice compared with divine, is
injustice, because a lantern in darkness is seen to give light, but placed in
the sun beams, it is obscured and darkened. And thus S. Hilary, S. Hierome,
Arnobius, and Euthimius expound that place of the Psalm: neither does S.
Augustine dissent from them, saying: By whose participation they are just, by
comparison with him they are not just. Another exposition is of the same S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, and S. Gregory upon that Psalm, that the Prophet
uttered the former speech, in respect of venial sins, with which the most
just, and holy men are often infected, and which God strictly examineth, and
severely punishes. The third interpretation is of S. Augustine also upon this
Psalm: That no man can be justified of himself before the face of God, but
the justice he has he receaueth from him. So Caietan, Eugubinus, and Vatalbus
expound those words of Job: In his Angels he found prauity, or as Symmachus
reads, vanity, because they of themselves had no goodness, no verity, no
essence, or being, but participated all from the soueraygne bounty of God.
According to these three last expositions, we satisfy all the ambiguous, and
obscure sayings our adversaries oppose against us, even that of S. Bernard,
which they vainly boast to be unanswerable: Shall not our justice, if it be
strictly Bern in fest. omn. sanct. s^r. 1. Abbot e. 4. sect. 3. fol. 393. Bern
ser. 5. de verb. Isa. Aug. l. 9. confess. c. 13. Idem ep. 29.
judged be found unjust and scant? For unjust it is, meted with the justice,
which is wholly infinite, scant in comparison of that. Likewise when he says:
That our justice is right, but not pure etc. for how can it be pure justice,
where fault as yet cannot be wanting, he denies it to be pure: he says, fault
cannot be wanting, because it is most commonly conjoined with venial defaults,
which although they hinder not the true nature and perfection of justice, yet
they darken the luster and brightness thereof, and are liable to the severity of
Gods heavy punishment. Whereupon S. Augustine: Woe be to the laudable life of a
man, if it be examined without mercy. To the other passage of this renowned
Doctor, where he affirms, most perfect charity which cannot be increased, is
to be found in no man in this life, we grant it to be true. This clause which
follows: And as long as it may be increased that which is less then it
tought to be, is of vice, of which vice it proceeds that there is no man who
does good, and does not sin, is to be understood not of formal vice or
faulty sin, but of that which is an infirmity, weakness and defect of nature,
from whence it grows, that there is no man who does always good, and never
sins, at least venially sometime. Thus S. Augustine interprets August.
ibid.
himself a little before: saying: Who therefore is without some vice, that is,
without some fomite, or as it were root of sin? After which manner I have
showed above in the second Chapter of Concupiscence, that not only he, but
Vlpianus, Aug. in l. de perfect. iusti^. c. 15.
Pliny, and Cicero use the name vitium, vice, for any defect, either in nature
or act. In the same sense S. Augustine takes the word, peccatum in his book
of the perfection of justice where he has these words: It is a sin when
either that Charity is not, which ought to be, or less then it ought to be.
Otherwise August de spir. and lit. c. vlt.
he would have crossed and contradicted what he avouched before in his book de
spiritu and litera: That if our love of God in this life, be not so great as is
due to his full and perfect knowledge, it is not culpae deputandum, to be
imputed to any fault. By sin then in the former place S. Augustine means a
defect only or falling from the brimme of perfection, yet no culpable sin. So
also many profane writers use the Plautus in Baceb. Si vnam peccauisses
syllabam. Tull. 2. Tusc. Quod in eo ipso peccet cuius profitetur scientiam. 1.
Joan. 1. v. 8. Iac. 3. v. 3. August. tract. 1. epist. Joan. and l. de not. and
gra. a. c. 36, and 38.
word peccare to sin, for erring and doing amiss in any act or faculty; as
Plautus says: If thou had failed in one syllable: and Tully: If a Grammarian
shall speak rudely, or he that would be counted a Musitia^, sing out of tune,
he is the more to be blamed, quod in eo ipso peccet, that he erreth or
commits a banger in the thing it self, whereof he professes the skill. To
Origin, to S. Hierome, and to the rest of S. Augustine, and S. Bernard which
Protestants object, I need not frame any particular reply. The three last
general answers to the Texts of Scripture, sweep all the dust away, which they
deceiptfully gather out of these, or any other of the Fathers writings.

4. Lastly it is objected: If we shall say that we have no sin, we seduce our
selves, and the truth is not in us. Likewise: In many things we offend all. I
answer both these places are understood of venial sins, as S. Augustine
expounds them, which often creep into the purest actions we do, and from
which we are seldom, or never wholly free, yet they distayne not the purity of
our virtuous actions, they are not intermingled with the moral bonity thereof,
but extrinsecally accompany it, abating the clear beams of our soul, without
defyling the pure action whose adherents they are; an assertion manifest
amongst Deuines, August. ep. 29. and 50. l. de virg. cap. 48. 49. l. 4. cont.
2. ep. Pelag. c. 10. Bonau. 3. distinct 3. part. dub. 1.
which Protestants conceauing not, run into diverse, and those pernicious
absurdityes. Secondly S. John is interpreted also by S. Augustine of the fomite
of sin, which every man has, how perfect soever he be; yet he does not mean
that, that fomite is properly sin, but materially, or the effect or cause of
sin: which interpretation of S. John's words, S. Bonauenture imbraceth, and
adds a third exposition, that S. John does not teach no man to be at any time
without sin, but that no man can say, to wit, assuredly affirm without
revelation, that he has no sin, wherein Lyranus, and Hugo Cardinalis agree
with him, but Caietam understands S. John, of no sin, neither actually
committed, nor originally contracted heertofore. This no man (the Virgin Mary
only excepted, as has been else where declared) can avouch without seduction
of his heart, without he make God a liar, who sent his beloved Son into the
world, to cleanse us from our sins.

5. I proceed therefore to the third Caluinian dotage, that all first motions
or prouocations to evil, are truly sins, albeit we vanquish them, which I
have here refuted in the Controversy, and second Chapter of Original sin,
and somewhat touched in the Controversy of Free Will, where I have showed that
S. Augustine accounts it a mere madness, and such a barbarical phrensy,
Seneca. l. de mor. Aug. tom. 7. l. de na* and gra. ^. 67.
that man assaulted with temptations should sin against his will, as he
says, the very Poets, sheepheards, learned, and unlearned, yea all the world
does witness it to be false. Seneca a heathen could write: Away with all excuse,
no man sins against his will. And, It deserves no praise not to do, which
do thou caust not. But S. Augustine again shall decide this matter, with a
sentence able to seal up the mouths of Protestant Ministers, and quiet the
hearts of all faithful Christians. Whatsoever cause (quoth he) there be of the
will impelling it to offend, if it cannot be resisted, it is yielded unto Idem
tom. 4. in expos. quarun. propos. prop. 17. Tom. 7. cont. Pela, l. 2. circa.
finem. Chry. cited by S. John Damas. q. 2. phrall, c. 27. Eccles. 5. v. 2. and.
c. 18. v. 30.
without sin: but if it may, let it not be yielded unto, and there shall be no
sinnne committed. What, does it perchance deceive a man unawares? Let him
therefore be wary, that he may not be deceived: or is the deceit so great, as
it cannot be avoided? If it be so, the sins therefore are none: for who does
sin in that which can by no means be escaped? Likewise, not in the evil
desire it self, but in our consent do we sin. Moreover: In as much as it
appertains unto us, without sin we might be always until this evil (of
Concupiscence) were healed, if we should never consent unto it, to evil. But
in such things in which if not mortally, yet venially we are overcome of it,
rebelling in those, we contract that, for which we may daily say, forgive us
our trespasses. S. Chrysostom holds with him in most express and apparent
terms.

6. But our Sectaryes with one voice oppose the words of the Law, Non
concupisces, thou shall not covet, Which forbids nor the consent only (say
they) but every Rom 6. v. 12. Theod in. eum loc. Chrysostom. in eum loc. Aug. in
psalm. 118. conc. 3. de nuptijs and concup. l. 1. c. 17. and in exp. ep. ad.
Gal. c. 5. Greg. 14. moral. c. 9. Aug. in expos. ep. ad Gal. c. 5. and l. con.
sul. Pel. c. 3. and 5. and. l 1 de nupt. and concup. c. 23. Exodus 20. v 17. In
bebrew for non concupisces, it is lotachmod.
act, every motion of concupiscence. I answer, the Holy Ghost has other where
explayned the meaning of that precept in Ecclesiasticus: Follow not thy
strenght, the concupiscence of thy heart; go not after thy concupiscences. By S.
Paul: Let not sin raygne in your mortal body, that you obey they
concupiscences thereof. He does not say, as Theodoret, and S. Chrysostom
observe, let it not exercise tyranny, but let it not reign, because it cannot
raygne and have free dominion, unless we will accept, and voluntarily be thrall
unto it. He does not forbid it to be, nor the having of those desires, as S.
Augustine, and S. Gregory note, expounding if of the fomit, for that is
impossible, as long as the flesh warreth against the spirit: but he forbideth
it to rule, or overcome by drawing us into subjection, he forbids our
following, or obeying the desires thereof. For he sins not in whom sin
does not raygne, according to the forenamed S. Augustine. Likewise:
Concupiscence it self is now no sin in the regenerate, when consent is not
yielded unto it, to unlawful works. And if any go about to cavil with S.
Augustine, the hebrew word used in Exodus, cuteth off all occasion of
cauillation. For there instead of concupisces, it is tachmod, derived from
chamadh, which does not signify to have the disease of concupiscence, but
properly to desire or covet with the heart: and because he does not so who
valiantly resists or wrastleth against it, therefore S. Paul accounted the
vnuoluntary appetite thereof no appetite or desire of his, saying: But now not
I, work it any more, that is, not I willingly, not deliberatly, not as an
humane act, in so much as it cannot be reckoned any coveting of mine. But if he
did not covet, he observed Romans 7. v. 17. Joseph l. 22. antiq. c. ^1. Matthew. 5.
v. 23. and. 29.
the law of not coveting, albeit he felt the motions of concupiscence in his
flesh against his will, which were not forbidden by the word tachmod, but the
free and voluntary only: yea some of the Jews, Josephus being witness, were so
far of from imagining any surreptions or natural passions to be forbidden,
as they tanght the mere internal thoghts, although deliberate, not to be
comprehended in the prohibitions of nor stealing, coveting etc. whose erour our
Savior corrected, pronouncing the Chrysostom. ho. 12. in Matt. Hieron. ad. Eustoch.
Cyril. l. 3. contra Iul. Basil. de co^stit. Mona. c. 2. Greg. Niss. l. de. 8.
beatic. Aug. l. 1. cont. 2. ep Pela. c. 10. 13. and 6. contra Iul. c. 11. l. 2.
de pecca. mer c. 4. 33. and 34. Ambr. l. ^* offic. c. 2 Pros. l. 2. de vit.
con. templ. 3. and l. 3. c. 4. Cypr. l. de morta. Aug. l. 2. cont. Pela. cap. 8.
voluntary desires of concupiscence to be forbidden. See S. Chrysostom, S.
Hierome, Cyrill, Basil, Gregory Nissen, Augustine, Ambrose, and Prosper thus
interpreting that precept of the decalogue.

7. Finally, some object S. Cyprian: The mind of man besieged, and on every
side entrenched with the infestation or anoyance of the Devil, hardly
withstandeth, hardly resists every one: If covetousness be cast down, lechery
ryseth up: if lechery be kept back, ambition rusheth in: if ambition be
suppressed, angerfre^t^th, Pride swells, drunknes allureth etc. which I
cannot ward off better, then our renowned champion S. Augustine has done,
saying: God forbid we shouldiudge S. Cyprian either covetous, because he
wrastled with covetousness, or unchaste because he fought with unchastity, or
subject to anger because he strove with wrath, or ambitious because with
ambition, or fleshly because with fleshly sins, or a lover of this world,
because he encountreth with wordly allurements, or lecherous because with
lechery, or proud bebecause with pride, or drunken because with drunkenesse, or
envious because he warred with envy. Nay the truth is he was none of the^ al,
because he did manfully resist these evil motions, partly coming from
original condition, partly from use and custom. That which S. Augustine here
infers of the assault of S. Cyprian, we may conclude of every carnal
suggestion, or vicious inticement, that it begets no sin, as long as we
fight against it, and have not any lyking thereof.

THE XXVIII: CONTROVERSY, ESTABLIHSETH The possibility of keeping Gods Law:
against Doctor Whitaker, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Abbot
CHAP. I.
WHEN we teach that the Commandments of God, may by the help of his grace be
observed upon earth, we do not mean that they may be perfectly fullfilled
according to the whole end, and intent of the Law; nor that our duty should be
so entiere and complete, as nothing can be added to the full perfection thereof
nor do we speak of the universal observation of all precepts all the whole
days of our life, for that is rare, and granted but to few; nor yet of the
perfect fullfilling of any of them, any long time without some venial sins,
or small imperfections, for this is an extraordinary prerogative, and special
favor among all the children of Adam communicated only to our Blessed Lady: But
we defend it possible, if not easy, by Gods grace to fulfill the substance,
and satisfy the whole obligation of the Law, as far forth as at any time it
binds us under the penalty of Fulke in c. 8. ad Romans sect. 1. Abbot c. 4.
Whitaker. cont. 2. q. ^, c. 3. fol. 580. Deutr. 30. v. 11. 12.
sin. This D. Fulke, this D. Whitaker, this D. Abbot with other Protestants
deny, and Whitaker dubbeth as a point fundamental, and this is that which we
vphould against them. First, by that of Deutronomy: This commandment that I
command thee this day, is not above thee, nor so far of, nor situated in
heaven, that thou may say, which of us is able to ascend unto heaven to bring
it unto us, that we may hear, and fulfill it in work etc. but the word is
very near thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart to do it. These two later members
wipe away our Protestants exposition, interpreting this place of the mere
knowledge, not of the observation of the law, because God speaks there of
fullfilling and doing it in work. Romans 10. v. 6. August de na. and gra. c. 69.
and q. 54 in Deuteron. Theod. q. 38. in Deuteron. Romans 8. v.
Yet if by reason of S. Paul, who allegorically only, not literally applies
that sentence to Christ, they gloze it at least to be understood of the
Evangelical doctrine of Faith, then we also insist, that if the precept of
faith in substance supernatural, may be observed, how much more the natural
commandments of the Decalogue, of which S. Augustine, and Theodoret expound
that of Deuteronomy.

2. Secondly the Apostle says: That which was impossible to the law in that it
was weakened by the flesh, God sending his, Son in the similititude of the
flesh of sin, even of sin damned sin in the flesh, that the justification
of the law might be fullfilled in us, who waike not according to the flesh, but
according to the spirit: Therefore they that are regenerated in Christ, in
whom the spirit of God dwells, who walk in newnes of life, do truly satisfy
and fulfill the law of God. They Fulk in. 8. ad Romans sect. 1. Abbot c. 4.
sect. 38. and 43.
do it (quoth Fulke, and Abbot) by the supply or imputation of Christ's
righteousness imputed unto them and made theirs, not by ability given them to
keep it. But this guilefull commentary has been heertofore discarded in the
Controversy of Inherent Justice. And here S. Paul flatly auerreth the coming
of Christ to have been, that the justification of the law might be fulfilled
in us; in us, whose earthly shape and similitude he took; in us, in whose
flesh he damned and abolished sin: for in his own he never extinguished any,
because it was never touched with the least aspersion. Therefore he cannot be
expounded of the obedience performed by Christ in his own person, but of that
which we atcheiue in ours, whom he cleanses from vice, and adorneth with
grace: that the justification of the law might be fulfilled in us, quickened by
his spirit, which in flesh weakened and infeebled by sin, was otherwise
without grace impossible to be kept. Likewise Christ's righteousness, according
to Protestants is communicated unto them by faith only; but the Apostle here
writes of a justification obtained by working, and going forward in newnes of
life, by walking not according to the flesh, but according to the spivit: then
the causall preposition, for, which ensues, the comparison between them that
pursue their fleshly appetits, and such as are swayed with the desires of the
spirit, the correspondence and agreement with this other Text, Not the hears
of the law are just with God, but the doers of the law Romans 2. v. 13.
shall be justified, inuincibly prove that the Apostle speaks of the
justification purchased by the doing and keeping of the law in our own
persons, and not of that which by Augu. de spir. and lit. c. 26.
your almighty-vaine belief is imputed unto you. And so S. Augustine: When it
is said (quoth he) the doers of the law shall he justified, what other things
is said, then the just shall be justified? For the doers of the law verily are
just. Again: Fulfill Aug. in psalm. 32.
the law which thy Lord thy God came not to break, but to fulfill, for thou
shall fulfill that by love, (...) are thou could not. And a little after: Our
Lord will affoard his sweetness, and our earth August: ep. 144. ad Anast. Idem
de spir. and lit. c. 30.
will yield ber fruit, that by charity ye may fulfill which by fear was hard
to accomplish. In another place: The law teaching, and commanding that which
without grace could not be performed, discovered unto man his infimity, that
infirmity discovered might seek out a Savior, from whom the will healed
might be able to do, which infirm it could not do. The law therefore leads
unto faith, faith impetrateth a more copious spirit, the spirit diffuseth
Charity, Charity fullfilleth the law.

3. Thirdly Christ pronounces: May yoke is sweet, and Matt. 11. v. 30. 1.
Joan. 5. v. 3.
my burden light. S. Joan: This is the law of God, that we keep his
commandments, and his commandments are not heavy. To whom are they not heavy?
To them to whom our Redeemer spoke: Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of
me, Matt. c. 11. v. 29.
because I am meek and humble, and you shall find rest to your souls: To them
whom S. John taught how to overcome the world; but these men were environed
with humane infirmityes, therefore men compassed with the frailty of our flesh,
which M. Abbot gaine-sayth, may by the succor of Abbot c. 4. sect. 43.
Christ and assistance of his grace, take up the yoke of Gods commandments,
easily bear them, and sweetly observe them. Fourthly our Savior said to him
who desired to learn the way of salvation: If thou will enter into life, keep
the commandments. Is it possible then to enter into everlasting Matthew. 19. v.
17.
life? Yes. And not by this means which Christ proposed? No. No? Conceive you
so hardly of the blessed Redeemer, and lover of our souls, as to avouch, that
he who came to teach the way of truth, who never counsailled the captious
Pharisyes his deadly foes to run any uncouth, false, or straying path, did now
persuade this Religious Marc. 10. v. 21. Basil. hom. cont dinites auaros.
Chrysostom. and Euthim. in eum locu^. Calu. in Harm. in c. 19. Matt. Marc. 10. Luc.
18. Psalm. 118. v. 31. v. 55. 51. 168.
young man, whom he loved, who unfeignedly sought, as S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, and Euthymius think, his eternal weal, to an erroneous and
impossible course of of atteyning bliss? Did he say unto him, hoc fac and
viues, do this and thou shall live, which although he would, he could not do,
or if he did, might not purchase life thereby? For such is the impious answer
which Calvin, and his followers return to this heavenly admonition, or precept
of Christ; forcing his meaning quite contrary to his words. Fifthly King David
avouches of himself: I have ran the way of thy commandments: I have kept thy
law: I have not declined from thy testimonies: I have kept thy commandments and
testimonies. And that you might be assured he said true, the holy Ghost adds
his seal, and subscription thereunto: David did that which was right in the
sight of God, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of
his life, except only the matter of Vrias the 3. Reg. 15. v. 5. 3. Reg. 14. v.
8. 4. Reg. 18. Luc. 1. v. ^.
Hethi^e. Again: He was not like my servant David, who kept my Commandments.
Of Ezechias he witnesses the same. Of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Saint Luke
records: They were both just before God, walking in all the commandments, and
iustifications of our Lord without blame. Scan I pray these four things.
First, that they walked not in any one only, but in all the commandments.
Secondly that they were iustifications which made them just. Thirdly before
God. Fourhly, without blame, viz. without any vicious defect, or culpable
imperfection, which might either stayne the splendor of their justice, or
hinder their full and complete observation of the law, which God required at
their hands.

4. Lastly the keeping of the commandments is the sole mark, and true
cognizance of a believing Christian: Joan. 14. v. 15. v. 21. ^. Joan. 2. v. 3.
and. 4.
If you love me, keep my commandments: He that has my commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me. And: In this we know that we have known
him, if we observe his commandments: He that says he knows him, and keeps
not his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Wherefore if
Protestants cannot observe the Commandments, they are not Abbot c. 4. sect. 43.
fol. 566. and 568. VVbitak. l. 8 aduers. Duraeum. Fulke in c. 1. Luc. sect. 7.
and Joan. 14. sect. 1. Perkins in the 4. cha. of bis reform. Cath.
lovers, nor knowers of God, or if they challenge his love and boast of his
knowledge, not fullfilling his law, they are liars, blasphemers, and the truth
is not in them. Their Ministers stinged with this sharp censure, begin to
startle and persuade their fauourits, that they keep the law correspondently to
the proportion of their love and knowledge, that is, haltingly, weakly,
imperfectly, as their love is halting, their knowledge imperfect. Are these the
new Apostles, divine lightened Reformers, who sit in the sunshine of their
Gospel, and rise to illuminate the world with their radiant beams? And do
they confess their beams of truth to be dimmed with clouds, their flames of
love frozen with cold, with such misty clouds, with such nipping frost, as
violate the precept of knowing the commandment of loving God? For as their raw
and imperfect observations (which has been demonstrated before in the
precedent Controversy) are of their own nature, true breaches of the law; so
their lame knowledge, their imperfect love is a transgression of the precept of
love, a preuarication of the commandment of belief, which is the supernatural
knowledge of God, whereof S. John speaks. But if they violate the precept of
faith as often as they believe, with what conscience can they exercise an act
of belief, who are charged never to infringe the will of God? With what heart
can they judge that precept imposed, when neither in this life, nor in the next
(for then faith cease, and vanishes away) it can be ever accomplished? With
what tongue can they brag of true belief (for this is commanded) whereas
theirs transgresses the commandment of God? With that false stringed tongue,
with that hollow heart, with that seared conscience, with which they presume to
auerre, that the Father of heaven does esteem and account their breaches
observations, their violations accomplishments of what Isa. 5. v. ^0
he commands, forcing him to under go for the love of their persons, that
heavy curse he threatens to others: Woe be unto you that call evil good, and
good evil, esteeming darkness light, and light darkness, accounting bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter.

5. Yet on the other side, if abhorring these blasphemies, they dare pronounce
their knowledge, or belief such, as it fulfilleth the precept of faith, as far
as it ought: thence we argue, that they may likewise observe the precept Romans
13. v. 10.
of charity, as far forth as they ought, and by consequence wholly observe and
fulfill the law. For Charity is the fulness of the law, the sum or knot of
perfection, on which the Council. Arausic. c. vlti. Hilar. in Psalm. 118
whole law and Prophets depend. Hence it is defined in the second Arausican
Council: That all the Christened, having received grace by Baptism, Christ
ayding and cooperating, may, and ought if they will diligently labor, to
fulfill all things which belong to salvation. S. Hilary saity; It is not hard
if the will be prompt to obey the precept of our Lord. S. Hierome: No man
doubts of this, but that God has commanded things possible. S. Augustine:
Neither Hier. l. 3. cont. Pela. Aug. ser. 61. and 191. de tempo. Aug. lib. de
nature. and gratia cap. 43. Cent. 2. 4. col. 58. Author respon. ad quaest. 130.
Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 61. Ibidem col. 61. Obedientiam legalem re^atis omnino
possi bilem esse magno errore iudicauit. Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 78. Orig. hom. ^.
super Exodus Videtur asseuerare, quod baptizati per omnia possint legem implere.
Cypr. ser. de Baps. Christ.
God who is just can command things impossible, nor condenme man who is pious,
for that which he could not avoid. And again. Things impossible God
commands not, but by commanding warns thee, both to do what thou art able,
and to ask what thou art not able, and he helps thee that thou may be
able. Yet because Protestants will strain their wits to bow these sayings to
some crooked sense, I will stand to the judgment of such as their own fellow
Protestans furnish me withal, and whom they judge to hold with us without
exception.

6. For the Century-writers affime, that the author of Replies extant among
the works or Justin, with full mouth breaks into these words: What is all
the justice of the law? to love God more then himself, and his neighbor as
himself, which truly is not impossible to men that are willing. Of Clemens
Alexandrinus, master to Origin, they avouch: He with great error judged the
legal obedience to be altogether possible to the regenerate. Then passing to
the three hundred years of Christ thus they deliver their general verdict of
the Fathers of that age, They held concerning the law very exhorbitant
opinions, as Tertullian in his book against the Jews disputes, that the
Saints in the old testament, as Noe, Abraham, Melchisedech, and others were
just by the justice of the natural law. Hence with the like error (I use the
Centurists phrase) Origin here and there inculcateth many things of the
possibility of the law, as in his eight homily upon Exodus, where expounding
the Decalogue, he seems to asseuere that the baptized may according to all
things fulfill the law. The same, says the Author of homilyes upon the
Canticle, The divine word is not misshapen or without order, neither does it
command things impossible. And Cyprian, because, says he, we know that which
is to be done, and can do that which we know, thou conimandest me, o Lord that
I love thee; this both I can, and ought to do. Hitherto the Centurists
producing witnesses against themselves.

THE SECOND CHAPTER; IN WHICH The possibility of keeping the Law is maintained,
by other reasons: and objections answered.
FIRST it were no less then tyranny to punish men everlastingly for not
keeping the Commandments, if it be not in their power by Gods help to Basil.
Orat in illud Attend tibi. Chrysostom. ho. 8 de poenio Aug. tom. 7. denat. and
great. c. 6^. Hier. ep. ad Damas. de expos. Symboli.
keep them. Therefore to quit the sovereign goodness from this merciles
cruelty, the Fathers uniformly define: That it is a wicked thing to teach the
Precepts of the spirit cannot be observed. S. Basil: Accuse not God, he has
not commanded things impossible. S. Chrysostom: We steadfastly believe God to
be just and good, not able to command things impossible; hence we are
admonished what we ought to do in things easy, what to ask in things hard and
difficile. S. Augustine, and S. Hierome accurseth their blasphemy who teach any
impossible things to be imposed by God unto man. Which argument has been
handled heertofore in the Co^trouersy of Free will, where the Adversaries
cauils theretunto are rejected. The like impiety it were in God to cooperate
with us in such special manner, to affoard his heavenly grace, his
supernatural aid to the keeping of his Commandments, if we transgress and
sin in keeping of them. For as our August. de pec. mer. and remis l. 2. c. 5.
great Doctor S. Augustine teaches: To commit sin, we are not aided of God;
but to do good things, or wholly fulfill the precept of justice, we cannot,
unless we be aided by God. Mark here that by the aid of God we may not in
part, but wholly fulfill the precept, and that in fullfilling it we do not
sin, because thereunto we could not be helped by God. To which my adversaries
cannot shape their worne-out, and thrid-bare reply, That our observation, our
love of God Abb cap. 4. sect. 44.
for example, is no sin, but a good deed by acceptance. For as I have often
answered, God cannot accept that for good which is in it self naught and
sinful, but it is good in the Abbot ibid. sol. 579.
original of grace from whence it proceeds. Explane your self a little
better, whether you mean it is perfectly or imperfectly good? Grant
perfectly, and you go on our side: yield only imperfectly, and you stand at the
stay you were before: perhaps you imagine that it springs perfect from the
fountain of grace, and after receaueth a blemish from the weakness of flesh?
You imagine amiss: for the same individual and moral act which once is
enriched with the dowry of perfection, cannot be after impouerished with any
baseness of vice. Or, is it partly good as it is wrought by grace, and partly
evil, as it runs through the conduct of depraved nature? No such matter:
the thing contradicts it self, as has been often signified, neither is
nature the conduct or pipe, but true cause of the act, in which there is not
any part good, assignable to grace, distinct from that which is ascribed to
man: but the entiere action perfect, or less perfect, is wholly assigned to
man's freewill, wholly thereunto aided by grace: as the characters which the
scholar frames by the Masters guiding of his hand, are not severally drawn
fayrely by one, and rudely by the other, but the same fair or deformed, rude
or well fashioned, are wholly from both. Which forces M. Abbot from that
incongruous shift: We Abbot cap. 4. sect. 44. fol. 579.
by our corruption do disgrace that, which proceeds holy and pure from God.
In like manner he is ferretted out of his other berry-hole: That the action is
good in the will, and endeavor of Abbot ibid.
the person, by whom it is done. For the will is weak, the endeavor mean, the
person clothed with human corruption, who if he may will, and endeavor that
which is good, then some good may proceed from a fleshly man, perfect and
entiere, free from all spot and blemish or else the will and intendment is no
better then the work: and Whitaker. in his answer to the 8. reason of M. Camp.
VVhitah. l. 8. aduers. Duraum. Abbot cap. 4. sect. 44. fol. 578
this assignement of goodness which you make to the will, is a mere show or
treachery to cloak the badnes of your cause.

2. Lastly, you say (although you place it not in order last) that the duty we
observe is in substance good. Well, I am contented with this (but see you
recant not) for here I have, that the substance at least of loving God, the
substance of every observation of the law, which we achieue, is perfect, and
entiere, able to satisfy the will of God, able to make us acceptable unto him.
Yes say they: If he favorably look upon it, and impute not the fault: but if
he Abbot. c. 4. sect. 47. fol. 596.
should strictly and narrowly deal with us, he should have just cause of
rejecting us in the doing thereof. Forbear these ifs, and ands, and come to
the point. Is the substance of the action done entierely, good in it self, or
no? abstracting from the favor or dislike of God, whose indulgence, or
severity Whitaker. in his answer to the 8. reason of M. Campia^.
being extrinsecall, does not make the substance of the work better or worse?
It is not so good, as it may endure the try all of the precise, and perfect
rule of righteousness and truth. This is not the question, but whether it may
stand with satisfaction of his law? It cannot stand with it in such full
complete, and absolute manner, as that nothing at all may be added thereunto,
Neither is that the thing demanded: who ever dealt with such slippery
companions? Must I still put you to the torture, to draw out the truth? My
question is, whether the substance of the act satisfyeth the obligation of the
law? Let us here what you say to this. They answer as heertofore: It is short
of that which the law requires, it cannot be such Whitaker. in his answer to
the 8. reason of M. C^mplan. and lib. 8. aduer. Duraeu^ Abbot cap. 4. fol. 60^
as it ought to be: as long as the flesh lusts against the spirit, there can
be no such entiere good in us. Always a man does less then he ought to do. I
thought you would flinch from your word: but I pursue you also flying. The act
then of loving God is substantially short of that the law requires,
substantially less then it ought to be, and not only less of that which ought
to be, by persuasion or counsel, but by precept binding to more, under pain
of moral sin; therefore the substance of this lesser act, is not morally
good, but mortally defectuous, substantially faulty, a deadly sin, and true
transgression of the law, to which God cooperating must needs cooperate in
particular manner to the accomplishment of sin, and Protestants are bound to
surcease from loving, praying, or endeavoring to perform those mortal
crimes, and bound to perform them, because God commands them, as I further
demonstrate by this dilemma. Either God commands the complete and perfect
fullfilling of his law, which Protestants teach, no man in this life can ever
atcheiue, and so his unspeakable mercy degenerateth into tyranny, exacting a
tribute which we cannot pay, condemning us for a fault which we cannot possibly
eschew; or he commands us to discharge our duties, according to our weak and
limping manner, and then our uttermost endeauours satisfy his law, although
they be lame and imperfect. If not? If our best endeauours transgress his
will, if they be wanting of the duty we ought to perform, and he command that
defectuous duty; thus he himself commands a transgression, commands a
sin, and man by doing Gods will is bound to sin. From which M. Abbot cannot
Abbo^ cap. 4. sect. 46. fol. ^88.
excuse him by saying: It is the duty only he is bound to, and not to the
sin. For if the duty be unavoidably linked with the sinful transgression,
whosoever commands the duty, commands the transgression, and whosoever is
obliged to accomplish the one, is necessarily obliged to incur the other.
Neither is this fallacia accidentis, or any sophistical cauillation, as he
would bleare the eyes of the simple, producing to that effect these two
examples against Doctor Abbot. ibi.
Bishop: A lame man is bound by law to come to the Church, he cannot come to
the Church, but he must halt, therefore he is bound by law to halt. M. Bishop
is bound to pay a man twenty pounds, but he cannot tell the money without
soyling his fingers, therefore he is bound to soil his fingers. So he, writing
at random: for i^ there were no other pace amongst men, nor other means to
repair to Church but only by halting, all those who were bound by law to go to
the Church, should be bound by law to halt to the Church, and whosoever was
willed to go should in this case be willed to halt, if, I say, there were no
other gate at all then halting: now in the opinion of Protestants there is no
means of fulfilling the law of God here upon earth, but defectuous lame, and
sinful, therefore whosoever is tied to that sinful fufilling, (...) also
tied and obliged to sin, and whosoever commands it, commands sin.

3. His second example is more extrauagant, for no Calvin in Antido. Conc.
Trisess. ^. c. 12
precept of the Decalogue can be observed: The least (says Calvin) is a burden
more heavy then Aetna. No action of keeping can be done without breach, and yet
some money may be counted without soyling of fingers. I verily think many
poor Artizans, many stude^ts also may receive their rents without much
soyling: howbeit the ample revenues of great Lordships may stayne the^ somewhat
more; yet these staynes and defilements arise not immediately from the action of
counting or local motion of the fingers, but from the money defilant and coin
which is soyled: cleanse that, and your fingers will be clean. But dare you
say in like manner, that the impurity of our duties, the spots of our actions
are drawn from the things prescribed and commanded by God, from his spotted
laws and defiled constitutions? I cannnot judge you guilty of so wicked a
saying.

4. Secondly either English Protestants hold with Calvin, that all and every
commandment is impossible to be kept, or some particular only. Not ever one,
for I Calvin loc. citato.
consulte the consciences of your own Sectaries, whether some of your Judges
have not been free from murder, and bearing false witness against their
neighbors; whether some of your grave Matrons have not been faithful to
their husbands, not defiled neither in thought, nor deed with the crime of
adultery; whether some Protestants children have not been obedient to their
parents, some Protestants subjects loyal to their Prince? I for my part what
soever the Caluinists libell to the contrary, unfeignedly judge, that diverse
among them have fully observed at least for a time some of these precepts: then
every commandment is not impossible for some space to be kept. The precept of
not coveting may be kept.
But some perchance be. Which are they? The two hardest in your opinion are,
thou shall not covet; and thou shall love God withal thy heart etc. Of the
former it has been already proved, that it forbids not the vnuoluntary
motions, but the free consent, which we may refrain; as some Protestants no
doubt, at some time or other, check and subdue their desires of adultery, of
revenge, of coveting their neighbors goods, their lives etc. For it is an
infamy too reproachful that all their women should be adultresses, all their
men and aged children reuengers of their wrongs, spillers of blood, purloyners
of the goods of others, either Protestants themselves observe some of the
commandme^ts
in heart or deed, as often as any such evil motion arises, or tentation is
suggested unto them. Again to affirm the first motions which invade us
against our will, to be breaches of the precept, daunteth the courage of
Christ's valiant soldiers, it frustrateth the intent of Gods commandment. For
why does he command us not to covet but that we may fulfill his will in not
coveting? Why do we fight against the motions of Concupiscence, but that we may
not transgress his law, yiedling to them? Which suppose it be, will we nill
we, by their assaults transgressed, we strive in vain to keep of the received
foyles, or prevent the wounds already inflicted. This precept then we may keep
as often as we bridle our in ordinate suggestions, and suppress the
inticements which provoke us to evil. The Co^maundment of loving God may be
also observed.


5. The other also whereby we are commanded to love God withal our hearts, with all our forces etc. may be fulfilled if we understand it aright, of the
appretiatiue love of true friendship therein exacted, not of intensiue or
affectionate love (as the Deuines speak) that is, we ought to esteem and
prize God for his own infinite goodness before all things in the world,
abandon al earthly riches, profits and emolumentes when occasion is offered
rather then him, we ought to make him the only scope and final end of all our
desires: yet we are not charged to love him with all the degrees of intention
which may be, for that can never be showed, nor to love him with such
perfection, as to embrace voluntary poverty or perpetual chastity for his
sake, these are only counsayled not commanded by the force of that precept:
neither are we tied so to settle our hearts upon him, as not to affect any
other thing conducible to our estate, or profitable for the maintenance of our
lives, but only not to affect any thing contrary and repugnant to his service,
which we may easily do by the help of his grace, and wholly thereby discharge
our bond in fullfilling that sweet and comfortable Psalm. 118. v. to v 58. v.
145. v. 68
law, as king David discharged it, when he testified of himself: With my whole
heart have I sought after thee; I besought thy face with all my heart: I have
cried in my whole heart: I in all my heart will search thy commmandments. Howbeit
he busied also Judith. ^. 17. 2. Reg. 5. v. 1^.
himself in the affairs of the common wealth, and was often distracted with
temporal cares; And the priests and people prayed God with all their heart:
although they were sometime interrupted with other cogitations: All Israel is
said 4. Reg. 23. v. 25.
to follow Absalom with all their heart, albeyt they managed some other affairs
(no doubt) and affected some other thing besides him. Of Josias God himself
witnesses, There was no king before him like to him, that returned to our Lord
in all his heart, and in all his soul, and in all his power, according to the
law of Moses, neither after him did there arise the like to him.

6. In fine, Protestants observe the precept of Faith; by which they are
likewise commanded to believe withal their heart: If thou believe with all thy
heart, thou may: Act. 8. v. 3^.
notwithstanding they give humane credit to many other authentical histories,
or probable reports, without hinderance thereof, so they may accomplish the
commandment of loving God, with all the powers of their soul, when this love
ouerswayeth the love of all other things, when they make him the principal
object of their heart, and sum of their desires, when they neither embrace nor
execute any thing oppofite, or disagreable with his frendiship, which diverse
have, and every one may by the prerogative of Grace atteyne unto. Thirdly S.
Paul professes, I can all things in him that strengthens me, therefore he
could by the strenght of grace fulfill the commaundments, or else you derogate
both from the authority of the Apostle who affirms it, and from the power of
grace by virtue whereof he many accomplish whatsoever. Moreover Philip. 4. v.
13.
God makes this promise unto us: I will put my spirit in the midst of you,
and I will make that you walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and
do them. Christ testifies the performance: I have manifested thy name to the
men whom thou Ezech. 36. v. 27.
gave me etc. and they have kept thy word. Yet notwithstanding, the
possibility S. Paul speaks of, notwithstanding the promise of God the Father,
notwithstanding the accomplishment the Son mentions, do they breath upon
Ioh. 17. v. 6
the earth, and vaunt of Christianity, who depose against them that never any
fulfilled the law? That it is not possible for man to accomplish it?

7. Thus much for the mayntenance of our doctrine. Now to the objections of
adversaries. First they urge out S. Paul; Cursed be every one that abides not
in all things that be Gal. 3. v. 10.
written in the book of the law to do them. But no man can observe every jot
of the law without some little or venial default, therefore he is obnoxious to
that damnable curse. Iac. 2. v. 10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offends but in one, is made
guilty of all. Truly they have framed an excellent Argument to prove
themselves accursed, who freely confess they cannot keep any one precept of
the law, much less the whole. But we to whom the co^mandments by Gods Hier.
Ep. ad P^efiph. 1. Job. 3. v. 6. and 9.
grace are possible according to S. Hierome; we, who by the seed of God
dwelling in us do not sin, but arrive to the full accomplishment of the law,
and of all things written and contained therein; we I say, are free from that
malediction, for venial sins do not in that sense break or violate the law.
neither does S. Paul pronounce that curse of them, (as appears by the plain
text of Deuteronomy, whence he recites those words) but of mortal and deadly
crimes, of Idolatry, incest, murder etc. which are indeed grievous breaches,
and tra^nsgressions of the Law. Therefore Deu^. 17^ v. 26.
he that observes the rest and commits any one of those, is liable to the
curse of the law, he is made guilty, as S. James witnesses, of the whole, not
that he who steals should be guilty of adultery, or he who is an adulterer,
is therein a murderer, or that he who tra^sgresseth one commandment shall be as
severely punished and tormented in hell, as if he had broken al, but the sense
is, that he who offe^deth in one, either incurreth the wrath and indignation of
God the universal author and enacter of them al, or ca^ have no more Aug. ep.
26
hope of obtaining salvation then if he were guilty of al; or that he sins
as S. Augustine interprets, against the general and great commandment of love
and Charity, the sum, the band, the plenitude and perfection of them all: for
the breaking of the band is the dissoluing of the whole.

8. I answer again, that S. Paul's argument here alleged infers the
possibility of keeping the law for which we dispute, he reasons to this
effect: Whosoever will be justified by the works of the law, must fulfill the
whole task of the law: But without faith in Christ no man can by the force of
nature undergo, or do the whole task of the Law: Therefore without faith,
through the strength of nature, no man can be justified by the works of the
law. Hence he infers, Christ has delivers us from the eurse of the law,
he does not mean as Protestants falsify him, that he has discharged us from
the observation of the law, as from a thing impossible; but that he inspireth
faith and affords grace from the Storehouse of of his merits, whereby we may
keep the law, and so eschewthe malediction, or curse of transgression which
the delinquentes incur.

9. Secondly it is opposed, Now therefore why tempt you God, to put a yoke
upon the necks of the disciples, which neither our Fathers, nor we have been
able to bear? I answer, that S. Act. 15. v. 10.
Peter there calls not the observation of the decalogue, but the ceremonial
law of the Jews, a yoke insupportable, because it was very hard and
difficult, as S. Thomas S. Thom. in 2. did. 28. q. 1. at. 4. ad 3. Lyran. in.
bunolocu^ Rab. Moy. 3. duct. dub. cap. 56. 57. Abulen. in c. 1. Ruth. q. 24.
Ios. 11. v. 15.
and Lyranus note, to be fulfilled. For all their precepts were, as Rabby
Moses, and Abulensis recount them, 600. or there about, amongst which were
218. that were affirmative, and 365. negative commandments; then the
obligation of them was strictly and punctually to be observed. the
transgression capital and punished with all severity, yet King David, Zachary,
Elizabeth, Moses, Iosue, etc. fulfilled them: for of Iosue the Scripture
gives testimony: He accomplished all things; he omitted not of all the
commandementes, not so much as one word which our Lord had commanded Moses.
Now Christ has exempted us from that combersome yoke, from that Burden (as S.
Augustine calls it) of innumerable Ceremonies (yet not, which Libertines
pretend. from the Aug. con. 2. epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 4.
observation of the decalogue) and in liew of them imposes a light carriage,
Aug. ser. 9. de verb. Domini.
not pressing us down with weighty load, but lifting us up, as it were with
wings: A preceps of love which is not heavy.

10. Furthermore a slanderous report is spread against us touching the
division of the Decalogue (which I think not amiss here to insinuate, as it
were by the way) that we leave out one of the commaundments, the second as
Protestants count it, of not worshipping graven Idols: but this is a mere
cavil, for we divide the decalogue with S. Augustine, branching the first
Table into three precepts which instruct us in our duty to God, the second
Table into seaue^ appertayning to our neighbor, Aug. de perfect. iustit. c 15.
Sarcinam subleuante^ vice pennaru^. Aug. de not. and gra. c. 43. and 69. Aug.
q. 71. in Exodus
and we prove this division to be most consonant unto reason, because the
internal desire of theft, as mainly differs from the desire of adultery, as
the external acts vary amongst themselves in their specificall natures.
Wherefore as it pleased God severally to forbid the outward acts: so we
distinguish the inward consentes into several commandments, making two of the
last, which Protestants combine in one, and uniting the first upon far better
grounds, then they distinguish it. For seeing he that draws the pourtraiture,
or makes the similitude of any creature, to the end to adore it, makes to
himself a straung God, another God besides the living God of heaven, which is
forbidden in the first words of the first commandment, all the prohibitions
appertayning thereunto, as thou shall not make to thee a graven thing: Thou
shall not adore etc. are but members and explications of the same precept, and
so ought not to be divided from the first: This is the cause why in our
Catechismes, where a brief summary or abridgement of the comandements is
contracted, we omit these declarations of the first, as likewise of other
precepts for breuities sake, and not because they prohibit our adoration of
images. For we allow every member, word, and syllabe of the whole to consist
there with as has bin heretofore expounded.

11. Finally they object S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and S. Thomas affirming the
precept of loving God to apperteyne Augu. de spir. and lit. c. vltim. and in l.
de pers. iustit. Bern. sermon. so. in Cant. S. Thom. 3. 2. 444. art. 6.
to the life to come, and that it cannot be perfectly accomplished in this
life, which S. Augustine also teaches of that other commandment, Thou shall
not covet. I answer, hey avouch both impossible to be kept, in the anagogicall
meaning of those precepts for which they were enacted, that is according to
the end or supereminent perfection as S. Augustine writes, or deyned by God,
which is that extirpating by little and little all evil inclinations, we may
perpetually without intermission, be inflamed with the love of unspeakable
goodness: this is the mark at which those precepts aim, this is the goal unto
which we must run, and cannot here arrive unto it: yet they confess that
these, and al other commandments taken in their literal Bern. sermon. 50. in
Cant Abbot. cap. 4. sect. 43. full. 572. Bernar. in l. de praec. and dispens. c.
15. August de. spir. and lit. c. 35. Aug. com. 3. de spirit. and lit. c. 5.
item. l. 6. cont. lulia^. c. 5.
sense may be perfectly accomplished, according to the substantial fullfilling
of them, and satisfaction of the whole bond they oblige us unto. Therefore S.
Bernard: By commanding things impossible unto us he has not made us
preuaricators or trespassers (as M. Abbot englisheth it) but humbled us;
impossible he calls the^ in respect of the unmatchable intended purity, which
admits not the least mixture of uncleanness: possible notwithstanding and easy
he accounts the^ to such as have tried the sweet yoke of Christ. Impossible
in respect of the end proposed; possible and easy by Gods grace in regard of
the obligation exacted; aiming at that we increase in humility, crying for help
to be discharged of the infirmities with which we are clogged: performing this,
we become not trespassers or preuaricators, but doers and keepers of the law.
In respect of that, there is no example of perfect righteousness among men. S.
Augustine: In regard of this we cannot deny (quoth he) the perfection of
Justice to be possible even in this life. And, Grace does now also perfectly
renew man altogether from al sins; in respect of that: all the commandments
are esteemed as kept, when whatsoever is not done is pardoned, vz. Gabr.
Vasquez in 1. 2. disp. 212. c. 2. Stapleton. l. 6. de perfe. iustit. c. 23.
August. de spir. and lit. cap. 36. August. de pec. mer. and remis. l. 2. c. ^.
what soever is not done according to some little precept or small circumstance
binding only under venial sin. In regard of this, the whole law is fulfilled,
nothing is to be pardoned in respect of transgressing the commandment, because
that which is wanting is not to be accounted a breach thereof. And so I end with
this my S. Augustine, who never makes end of impugning our adversaries.
Neither does God command any impossible thing to man, neither is there any
thing impossible to God for to help and assist him, to the performance of that
which he commands, and by this, man may if he will, be without sin, aided by
God.

THE XXIX. CONTROVERSY DEFENDS God, from being Author of sin: against
Doctor Fulke, and his Companions.
CHAP. I.
BECAUSE some modern Protestants deem both themselves and their gospellers
maliciously wronged with the false imputation of this detestable Heresy, I
will set down the words of a chief Ringleader amongst English Reformers, that
you may apparently Aug. in enchir. cap. 100. and. l. de corr. and gra. cap. 10.
Full. in cap. 6. Matthew. sect. 6. 4. 3. ad Ro^. in sect.
see I challenge them no further then their own writings gives me just cause
of combat, in defense of his Goodness who never would have permitted these or
any other evils as S. Augustine teaches, unless he could from them draw forth
some good. M. Fulke commenting upon those words: Lead us not into temptation,
says: The text is plain, lead us not, whereby is proved not only a
permission, but an action of God in the^ that are lead into temptation.
Likewise all sin is manifestly against the will of God revealed in his word,
although nothing come to pass contrary to the determination and secret will of
God etc. it is not against his secret will that there is sin. God works not
as an evil author of sin, but as a just judge etc. Calvin often Calvin l.
1. instit. cap. ^8.. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and l. ^. cap. 4. l. 3. cap. 23.. 4.
and. 7. Fulke in c. 9. ad Romans sect. 1 ibid sect. 2. and. sect. 7. In. cap. 28.
Act. sect. 2.
affirms that sin proceeds from Gods direction, purpose, counsel,
commandment; that he draws, moves, boweth, and necessitateth thereunto.
Then Fulke adds, that God reprobateth whom he will etc. not upon the
foresight of any demerits. And, the reprobate have their will free, but from
coaction; for to sin it is thrall and slave: Moreover, Gods election and
reprobation depends no more of man's will, then the form which the potter
gives to the clay, depends upon the will of the clay, which it has not. In
another place: The execation of the Jews is to be attributed to themselves,
that obstinately refused to see, and to God who justly punished them with that
blindness, that they could not see. Many heresies are here inuolued, which I
will particulerly unfold, manifesting withal our Catholic doctrine.

2. First it is the heresy of Simon Magus, of Marcion, of Vinc. Lyr. co^tra
pro. haer. nou. cap. 34. Iren. l. c. 20. Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 19. Aug. ber. 46.
Florinus, and the Manichies, that God is the author of sin. It is true,
that God concurreth to the meteriall entity or act of sin, although not any
way at all to the formality of sin, to the deformity of the fault. For these
merely proceed from the defectuous operation of man's free will, not from Gods
general influence; which S. Thomas exemplifieth and declares by the virtue of
the soul in man, or moving power which enableth the Cripple S. Tho. 2. 2. q.
79. ars. 2. in corpore. Sap. 11. v. 25. Sapien. 14. v. 9. Haba. 1. v. 13. Ier.
19. c. 5.
to stir and move up and down, yet it causes not him to move lamely or
haltingly, but that wholly arises from the defect of his limbs: hence it is,
that God can never be said to be the willer or worker of sin, much less to
purpose or intend it. For the scripture teaches that, he hates noting of that
which he does. And yet of sin and the sinner it delivers, The impious is
odious to God and his impiety. Thine eyes are clean from seeing evil, and
thou can not look toward iniquity. They have built the high places of
Baalim etc. which I commanded not, nor have spoken of, neither have they
ascended into my heart: Thou art not a God that wilt iniquity: Thou hate all
who work iniquity: God is no tempter of evil, he tempts no man. All this
our Sectaries will admit, but how? that he tempts no Ier. 19. v. 9*
man, wills not iniquity as an evil author, but as a righteous Judge: God
works not (quoth Fulke) as an evil author of sin, but as a just judge:
The same one thing, says Calvin, but not for the same one cause, not for the
same purpose, or end. Psalm. 5. v. 5. ibid. v. 7. Iac. 1. v. 13. Fulke in c. 11.
ad Row. sect. 5. Calvin. l. 1. instit. cap. 18.. 4. and l. 2. c. 4.. 21 ad Romans
3. v. 8. Aug. in Enchirid c. 22.


3. God, I wis, is much beholding unto you, whom after you have coupled with
the Devil in determining and causing sin, you excuse his, and condemn the
others intention: but how will you excuse S. Paul, who forbids evil to be
done that good may come thereby: else a man might lawfully steal to relieve the
poor, or forswear himself to save another soul, which the whole Church of
God utterly condemns, because that which is in it self naught and evil, as
sin is, cannot be vested with any good circumstance, to become thereby honest
and good; for so S. Augustine teaches, that a lie cannot therefore be at any
time commended, because we lie sometimes for the safety of others. It is then a
sin, but venial etc. And to the like purpose Tully says. It is no excuse of
sin, if in thy friends behalf thou sin: although the obligation of
friendship, and purpose of pleasuring a friend be good. Therefore you cannot
justify Cicero lib. de Amicit.
Gods intention supposing he actually cooperateth unto sin. Or let us yield
you may, let it be, he works not as an evil author of sin, but as a just
Judge: Let it be, his counsel, his end, his purpose be holy and good, yet
thence we have that Fulke in c. 11 ad Romans sect. 5. Calvin lo. citato.
he is author and worker of sin etc. For he must of necessity be author of
that which he determines, purposes and effectually works. Cease then those
ourcries, those exclamations of yours, That we belie, we slander your
professors in appeaching them of making God the author of sin, for we never
attached them in those terms, That Ecclesias. 49. v. 25.
he should be the author or worker of sin with a sinful intention, or
mischieous purpose. Of this diabolical phrase neither Marcion, nor Simon
Magus, nor Florinus was ever accused, the enemy knows how to cover his
poisoned cup with more pleasant spices, he teaches you to guild your Creatours
intention, that you may grant his fact for which you are condemned. A fact so
repugnant Plat. dial. 2. de repub.
to infinite Goodness, as not only the wiseman auerreth, inspired by the holy
Ghost, All the works of our Lord are exceeceeding good, but Plato by the glimse
of natural light, God only is to be called the cause of good things, but of
evil things it Mercurius Trismeg. in Poem ^. cap. vlt. S. Basil. hom. 2, in
exam. and bom. 9. Quod Deus non fit author malorum. Tertul. lib. 2. contra Mar.
cap. 14. S. Grego. l. 19. mora. c. 31. Dion. cap. 4. de diui. nom. Aug. cap.
105. Amb. l. exam. cap. 8.
becomes us to seek out another cause besides God. And Mercurius
Trismegistus: From God the maker, no unclean, no evil thing can proceed. Our
Catholic writers ancient and modern more closely pursue and urge the same,
S. Basil, Tertullian, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory: Neither is there in God (says
S. Dionyse) nor from God any evil. Iniquity (says S. Augustine) which most
upright or inflexible Verity reproves, he knows how to condemn, not how to
do. Malice (says S. Ambrose) rises from our selves, not from God our creator
etc. he desires it should be rooted out of the minds of all men, how can he
the^ engender it?

4. For it were a very preposterous, if not tyrannical course to punish in
others that which himself by the^ performs. An impotent and deceiptfull
proceeding to intend justice, and accomplish wickedness, as Protetestantes
feign their God to do, who aiming at virtue, works vice, proposing truth
venteth heresies; either because he cannot fashion his work answerable to his
purpose which is impotency: or purposes one thing and works another which is
deceit: or will have the same formal work which is of it own nature evil,
sinful, and eternally punished in others, to be good, holy, laudable, as
achieued by him, which is no less then inhumanity and fiercenes in any other
then a Caluinian God. Because our true and sovereign God, who is essentially
good, yea goodness it self, if it were possible for him upon any project never
so holy, to purpose or desire evil, yet that intended evil he could not do
being essentially opposite and repugnant to his nature. The good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, nor the tree of life the blossoms of death: No
contrary (says S. Basil) can be engendered by his contrary. For neither Matt. 7.
is life wont to breed death, nor darcknes affoard beginning to light, nor does
sickness cause health. And S. Gregory Nissen: The good Basil. hom. 2. in hexa.
Gregor. Ni^^e^. hom. 2. in Eccl.
man out of the abundance of his heart utters not evil things, but such as
are agreeable and convenient to his nature, how much more does the fountain of
goodness dispense from his natural bosom nothing that is evil? It is
impossible from the wellspring of purity, any mudde of uncleanness; from the
splendor of the sun, any mo^e of darcknes; from the center of rectitude, any
line of obliquity; from the only rule and square of all actions, any detorted
work oraction should be drawn, to how good a purpose or holy an end soever it
be directed; yet this proceeds not from any imbecility or weakness, but from
the power it self and omnipotency Ambr. l. c. Ep. ep. 37.
of God, in so much as we may avouch with S. Ambrose: This impossible thing is
no sign of infirmity, but of virtue, power and Majesty. Likewise S. Augustine:
God is omnipotent etc. Aug. li. ^. de symb. ad catechu. c. ^
how many things can he not do, yet he is omnipotent: and therefore he is
omnipotent, because he cannot accomplish these things. For if he could die, he
were not omnipotent, if he could lie, if be deceived, if d^ unjustly he were
not omnipotent, because if this were in him he were not worthy to be
omnipotent. Which reason conuinceth also, that he cannot as a righteous Judge,
or for any good purpose, lie, deceive, do evil, or work any sin: For if his
purpose and intent be good, why does he not contriue and execute it by some
good, virtuous and honest means? Is it becaause he will not, cannot, or
thinks not of it? choose which you will: For one of them must needs be the
cause. Will he not? It is want of goodness. Can he not? It is want of power and
omnipotency. Thinks he not of it? It argues ignorance and inconsideration.
Plato l. 2. derepub.
To which effect it is recorded in Plato, That man may have some profitable
inducement to lie, because he cannot otherwise compass his designed plots, but
nothing can move God thereunto. For nothing can he approve, which he cannot
effectuate by the best means he lists. Fie then on these pernicious and
hellish dotages, that God is the causer of heresies, the contriuer of sin. Fie
on them that think God yoke-mate with the devil in the accomplishment of
sin, to atchieue his holy designs.

5. The second herefie, by part interla^ded in the former, partly expressed in
other passages, is: that even as the divine piety of his own accord
predestinateth some to glory: so he reprobateth others from all eternity,
purposly intending their damnation. Fulk: Gods election and Fulk in c. 9. ad
Romans sect 21. ibid. sect. 5.
reprobation is most free of his own will, not upon the foresight of the
merits of either of them. Then Pharao was a vessel of wrath ordained to
destruction, his reprobation was for the glory of God, and antecedently
intended and appointed to that end. Calvin: Calvin l. 3. cap. 12.. 5. ibid cap.
23. 4. 7. 8, 9. Decretum quide^ horribile fa^eor.
To some, eternal life, and to some, eternal damnation is fore-appoynted. He
likewise affirms that Adam and his posterity fell by by Gods decree: which
he confesses to be an horrible decree, yet, ordained by God. Gods election I
let pass because it tends to good, it requires not the preuision of works,
but for reprobation, which is the deputation of man (the only image, and
similitude of God upon earth) to eternal punishment, for this to be done
without any foresight, absolute or conditional of his demerits; and being
done, that man has not power to escape, or free will to avoid the sins
which lead him head-longe to destruction, is more then Barbarian, more then
Neronia^ cruelty: because every punishment justly taxed, presupposes an
offense; but both men, and Angels in that priority considered, are free from
all offense, free from ill desert: therefore to preordain those harmles, and
noble creatures to everlasting torments, which of necessity they must
incur, before the preuision of any misdeed, is such wild, savage, and
outrageous Caluinisme, as I know not whether it has ever sound liking in the
thoughts of any, but some heretical, and Fulkish Caluinists. Certain it is,
that the Predestinats were long since condemned for the like assertions; and
one Godescalcus a monk of Rhemes, at a Synod of Magunce a city in Germany.
See Fr^doard. lib. 3. c. 13. Serraen. l. 1. rerum Mogunt; c. 33. Baron. an.
Domini 400. and 818. Conc. Araufic. c. 25. Ezech. 18. v. 32. etc. 33. v. 11.
osee 13. v. 9. Sap. 1. v. 13. 2. Pet. 3. v. 9. Aug. lib. 6. Hypogno. Chrysos.
hom. 3. in Genes. hom. de interdict. arboris ad Ada^ quae habetur post hom. in
Genes. Eulgent. li. ad Monim. Prosper in lib. respons. ad Ga^loru^ capitula sub
(...) in ^^nt. super cap. 7.
Yea the Arausican Council anathematizeth both them, and our adversaries in
these words* We do not only believe any to be predestinate to evil by divine
power; but if there be any who will believe so great an evil, with all
detestation we pronounce them accursed.

6. The Prophets and Apostles cry out, I will not the death of him that dies,
said our Lord god: I will not the death of the impious, but that he convert
from his way and live. Perdition is thine o Israel, only in me is thy help.
God made not death, neither does he rejoice in the perdition of the living.
Our Lord is not willing that any perish. By which sentences of holy writ, it
is most evident, that the reprobation, and destruction of no creature, is
absolutely, and antecedently intended by God, but only consequently, and
co^ditionally, presupposing their obstinacy in sin, and final impenitence:
which he from all eternity foreseeing deputeth them accordingly to their
deserved punishment. God (says S. Augustine) punishes the reprobate, because
he foreknew what they would do, but created them not to be punished. S.
Chrysostom: For this end he framed every creature and fashioned us: not that
we perish, nor to torment us with punishments, but to save us. And els-where;
It is manifest that God would not have Adam sin, who before his fall did
fense, and arm him. Adam could have obeyed, which he would not, because he
chose rather to yield to the diuill. S. Fulgentius: Because God by
foreknowledge saw the sins of men, he dictated the sentence of
predestination. S. Prosper. The grace of God did not forsake the reprobate,
before they foresooke him; and because he foresaw they would so do, by
voluntary defection, therefore he enrolled them not in the catalogue of the
predestinate. Otherwise, irreuocably to purpose man's endless pains, before
the fore sight of his default, in that necessary, and unavoidable manner, as
Protestants teach, is as far beyond the immanity, and barbarousnes of other
tyrants, as eternal death exceeds temporal; or the pains of hell surmon^
the torments inslicted upon earth. Neither is this immanity any thing lessened,
whether that slavery, or thraldom, whereby the reprobate are enchayned to
mischeife, comes from the corruption of sin, (as Fulke holds) Fulk in ca.
11. Math. sect. 1. Calvin. lib. 3. institut. cap. 23. 8.
or from the decree of reprobation, which is the will of God necessarily
inferring the things decreed, as Calvin also auerreth; nor yet is that cruelty
lessened, by the slime of original infection, from whence you convey this
necessary slavery. First, because that takes not place in the devils who were
reprobate not withstanding in the like sort with men: Secondly, because you
teach, reprobation to have been decreed before the preuision of original sin:
Thirdly, for that you deprive the reprobate of freewill, in respect of all
other actual sins, for which they are (supposing that absurdity) without all
right, and equity, eternally tormented.

7. Moreover, this infamous doctrine makes almighty God not only cruel, and
barbarous; but wicked also, and unjust: For S. Augustine speaking of the
infected Aug. epist. 106. ad Paulinum.
mass, or corrupted lump of humane nature out of which he delivered some,
leaving others, says: If that mass were so between both, that as it meriteth
no good, so it deserves no evil; not without cause should it seem iniquity,
that vessels of dishonor should Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim. cap. 21.
be framed of it. S. Fulgentius co^formably says: If when man was created of
God, he was so in his present work good, that in his predestination he should
be evil, without doubt he was to be evil by the work of God, by whom he was
predestined to sin: whereupon he infers that God should have in himself
the orige^ of iniquity, he should be author of evil, his justice should become
just: with other like Atheismes, with which our Reformers are Ibid. c. 22.
incombred, although they give out, that God does so, to manifest his power,
glory, and almightines; because if the means be ill, the end cannot be good;
or if it could, it implies contradiction, his power should achieue any thing
which crosses his mercy, and impayreth his justice; he cannot decree that to
the glory of his name, which derogateth from any other attribute, or perfection
of his nature. Then what glory can redound to God by that ignominious act of
abandoning his creatures, without their desert? Or what mercy on the other side
by decreeing ma^s fall into sin, that he might after raise him up? What mercy
by making him miserable, to the intent he may have mercy on him? For he that is
sincerely merciful (according to S. Augustine) had rather there were nothing
for him to pity etc. then to wish men wretched, to the intent he might pity
them. Aug. l. 3. Conf. cap. 2


8. Again, if God determined to create the reprobate, to proclayme his power,
as he does the elect, the show the riches of his mercy, both originally flowing
from his Echlus in Chrysopasso praedest. cent. 3 nu. 52. Psalm. 144. v. 9.
Eccles. 15. v. 22.
will, and purpose, it must needs ensue, as learned Eckius notably disputes,
that there should be many more chosen to bliss, then abandoned to damnation;
because god is more prone to mercy, then to justice, to do good then to
procure evil: Our Lord is sweet to all, and his mercies or commiserations are
over all his works: he desires not a multitude of faythlesse, and
unprofitable children. Therefore the huge host of the reprobate, surpassing by
so many degrees the small number of the elect, proceed not from his merciful
will, but from their own way ward, and rechelesse disposition in which he
foreseeth they will finally persist, and depart this life.

9. Besides these detestable errors which attend on the aforsaid phrensy of our
Sectaries, there is yet another reason a priori, why God can not reject and
cast away any, Romans 9.
in such sort as they affirm: because reprobatio^ is as act of hatred, as the
Apostle does insinuate; but God of himself cannot hate his own works,
unless they be defiled Aug. lib. 1 ad Simply. 9. 9. 2.
with sin. God (as S. Augustine Writes) hated not Esau a man, but Esau a
sinner, that is, he hated him not in that priority, in which he ordained to
creeate him a reasonable man, but in that after-sight, in which he foresaw the
contamination of his sin. Thou (says the Wiseman unto Sap. 10. 25
God) love all things that are, and hate nothing of those which thou have
made; for thou did not ordayn, or make any thing, hating it. Yea, he
himself does not only love whatsoever he has made, but ingendreth in all
creatures the like love to their of spring: he teaches the Tiger to fight, the
Lion to prey, all beasts and birds to venture their lives in defense of their
young ones. What savage mind then, can think him so savage, as to hate, and
destroy the works of his own hands, without any cause, or default of theirs?
Beza in tract. theolog. is meruailously perplexed with this argument: and after
much a do rather blasphemeth then answers it.
What? does the author of nature so much degenerate from the course of nature,
as not to bear to his own, the affection he begets in all creatures to
their offspring? Do you think that he does communicate the perfection of love
which he has not? or by communicating it to others loses it himself? both
ways you detract from Gods infinite goodness. Do you think he naturally loves
that, which he eternally hates? or cherishes as his own, what he abandoneth
as none of his? Both ways you approve a contradiction in God.

13. Lastly, if God hate the reprobate, and determine their ruin before they
be seen to be evil, whence should that art of hatred arise? Not from the person
hated, for he (we suppose) deserves it not: nor yet from God; he is incapable
of any such act; he is the Ocean of charity, and wel-spring of love: Deus
Charitas est, God is charity, he is ^. Joan. 4. 8.
love it self. Therefore as no clowd of error can arise from the prime origin
of truth; no sparcke of folly from the Oracle of wisdom; so no stream of
hatred can flow from the fountain of love. Hate then his creatures God
cannot, by any act of hatred which should be in himself; but only by reason of
the hateful object he discovers in them, he does so punish, and abandon
them, as men are wont to do the things which they hate. Thus that infinite
goodness, that sea of love, hates, and reprobateth such as he foreseeth by the
determination of their will Fulgen. l. 1. ad Monim.
justly to deserve it; otherwise he cannot possibly exercise any hatred, or
decree of damnation against them: according to this of S. Fulgentius. It is
well known, that the wrath Aug. l. 3. in Julian. c. 18.
of God cannot be avouched, but where man's iniquity is believed to have gone
before. And the like of S Augustine: God is good, God is just, he may deliver
some without good deserts, because he is good; he can damn no man without
evil deserts, because he is just. The reason is, because to deliver his elect,
is an act of mercy, which presupposes, and has for her proper object Misery,
wherein al mankind was enwrapped by original sin: but to condemn, or depute
to punishment, is an act of justice, which must needs argue a fault in him Fulk
in c. 13 Matthew. sect. 2.
that is punished, because as S. Augustine says, God is not A revenger, before
man be a sinner. Therefore we conclude that he may predestinate us independently
of our merits, but he cannot reprobate any without the preuision of their
demerits.

11. The third heresy is, that God purposely intends, Fulk in^ ca. 6. Math.
sect. 5. in c. 1. ad Romans sect. 10. in cap. 11. ad Romans sect. 5.
not only the eternal damnation of the wretched, but their very obduration,
blindness, final irrepentance, and other enormous crimes, by which they are
plunged into that hopeless calamity. God hardens (quoth Fulke) the wicked
not as an evil author, but as a righteous judge, not by bare permission or
suffering, but by withdrawing, and withholding his grace, and delivering them
into their ownelust, or into the deceit of Satan. In which delivery, he
grants an action of God, as his words both here and elsewhere import; not
only to the meteriall entity (whereunto we also confess Gods general
concourse) but to that formal obduration, or precise formality of contempt and
hardness, to which we only allow his sufferance or bare permission, or else why
does he always exclude this permission of ours? or seek to excuse God, that
he concurreth as a righteous judge, unless he meant that God actually concurreth
as a righteous judge, to the same specificall degree of willful resistance, or
malicious purpose of abiding in sin, to which man cooperateth as an evil
actor, else to what end deuiseth he that distinction, that sin is against Gods
revealed will, not against his secret will, unless he speak of formal sin?
for the material entity is not against his revealed will, but only the formal
obduration, or culpable blindness; therefore he supposes that God sends the
spirit of error, and gives the wicked over to a reprobate sense, by special
concourse, to the very malice it self of their sinful obstinacy.

12. It is also a principle of M. Fulkes, that God appoynteth, before hand not
only the end, but also the means by which men come to that end: but the means
of damnation Fulk in cap. 27. Act. sect. 3.
are final impenitencie, and other foregoing sins; therefore they in his
devilish opinion are preordeined by God. To which effect writes of certain
Jews, who refused to embrace the faith of Christ, forthat, they neither would,
nor could be willing (to believe) because they were reprobate: Fulk in cap.
Joan. sect. (...).
making reprobation, and consequently Almighty God, the cause of their
infidelity, wilful peruersitie, and abode in sin. For whosoever captiueth
others without their default, in such a bewitching thraldom, as they
necessarily sin, and cannot avoid the bondage of sin; must needs be the
author, and cause of their sins: but thus does God with the reprobate; he
according to Fulke, before any desert foreseen of theirs, before he sees the
propension, inclination, or any concurrence at al of their will, ordeineth them
to destruction by his immutable counsel which cannot be repealed: then
supposing that unchangeable will, and ordinance irreuersible, they have not
left them any power to repent, or grace to believe, but they are unavoidably
chayned to the fetters of Prosper in respons. ad obiec. 11.
vice, unavoidably carried from vice to vice; therefore God (O most execrable
Conclusion which necessarily follows out of these our Sectaries premises)
God, I say (though I fear to say it) is the cause, and only cause of Note that
it is al cne Whether God enforce, or necessitate men to sin in repect of
making him author of sin.
all their incestes, murders, and other abominable vices.

13. Against which I only oppose that excellent answer of S. Prosper. If to
the devil it should be objected that he were the author, he the prouoker to
such villains; he might I ween acquit himself in some sort of that calumny,
and euince their own will to be worker of those mischiefs. For though he were
delighted with the fury of the delinquents, yet would he prove, that he *
enforced them not to sin. With what folly then, or with what madness is that
referred to the appointment of God; which cannot be wholly ascribed to the
devil? Who in the detestable acts of offenders, is to be thought the egger on
of allurenients, not the causer of their wills? Therefore God predestined none
of those businesses to be done; nor the soul that will live wickedly and
beastly, did he prepare or provide so to live. Thus S. Prosper you see how
dissonant from M. Fulke: yet Fulke was not the first broker of these atheismes;
for look what he writes in this kind, he coppied Calvin. l. 3. instit c. 23.
sect. 4. and 8.
out of the original of Caluins Institutions, where Calvin says, It is not
meet etc. to assign the preparing to destruction, to any other thing, then to
the secret counsel of God. The whole band of the wicked cannot comeyne, nor
endeavor, nor do any mischief, but so far as God permits, but so far as he
commands. Then discoursing of Gods concurrence unto Calu. l. 8. instit. c.
17.. 11.
sin he has these words. I speak not here of Gods universal moving, whereby
as all creatures are sustained, so from thence they take their effectual power
of doing any thing. I speak only of that especial doing which appears in
every special act. In another place: If the blindness, and mades of Achab, be
the judgment of God, then the devise of bare sufferance is in vain. A little
after Calu. l. 2. Instit. c. 4. and. 2. Calu. l. 1. Inst c. 18.. 1.
auouching, That God blinds the eyes of men, strikes them with giddines,
makes them drunk with the spirit of drowsines, casts them into madness, and
hardneth their hearts; he immediately adds: These things also many do referr
to sufferance, as if forsaking the reprobate, he suffered them to be blinded by
Satan, but that solution is too fond. Lastly he concludes: Now I have showed
plainly enough that God is the author of all those things, Calu. in the same
place.. 2* Calu. l. 1. Inst. c. 18.. 3.
which these judges would have to happen only by his idle sufferance. You read
his words, you discover no doubt the rancour of his heart, who disgorgeth such
hatred against his creators goodness: which he labors, to excuse in the same
fashion as Fulke is wont: that God does all this as a righteous judge, justly
punishing the wicked with their ungracious blindness.

14. But the Justice of his person, the purity of his intention, as I have
already proved can no way acquit him, if his fact be wholly the same with the
evil actors. Greg. Nyssen. l. 7. philos. c. 1.
For it is not lawful (says S. Gregoric Nissen) to ascribe unto God, actions
dishonest, and unjust: because the iniquity, and faultines of sin must
needs attend those sinful actions which the impeccable Piety according to our
adversaries purposes, commands, and freely executes, not by any general,
but by a particular, and special influence; not by bare permission, but by
actual concurrence to the very naughty deeds and works of miscreants.
Therefore Castalio another principal protestant (singularly praised by Humfred.
de rat. interpret. l. 1. page 26. Castal. in l. aduer. Calu. de praedest.
Doctor Humfrey) so much detesteth those diabolical phre^sies of Fulke, and
Calvin, as he affirms them to frame the Idol of a false God, directly
opposite to our true, and sovereign God. Peruse his words: The false God (to
wit Caluins Idol) is slow to merc), prone to anger, who has created the
greatest part of men to destruction, and has predestined them, not only to
damnation, but also to the cause of damnation; therefore he has decreed from
all eternity, and he will have it so, and brings to pass that they
necessarily sin. So that neither theftes, nor murders, nor adulteries are
committed but by his constraint and impulsion. For he suggesteth unto men
evil, and dishonest affections, not only by permission, sed efficaciter, but
effectually (that is, by forcing such affections upon them) and does harden
them in such sort, that when they do evil, they do rather the work of God,
then their own; he makes God a liar. So that now not the devil, but the God
of Calvin is the father of lies; howbeyt that God which the holy Scriptures
describe, is altogether contrary to this God of Calvin etc. And a little
after. For the true God came to destroy the work of that Caluinian God: and
these two Gods as they are by nature repugnant one to the other, so they beget,
and bring forth children of contrary dispositions; that is to say, the vide
literas Senate. Bern ad minist. etc. 1555.
God of Calvin, children without mercy, proud etc. Hitherto Castalio a famous
Sacramentarie. For this cause the Protestant Magistrates of Berna strictly
prohibited the preaching of that Caluinian and damnable doctrine throughout
their Territories, and forbad their people by penal statutes to read any such
of his books as contained that matter.

15. Besides Calvin does not only attribute unto God the lewd actions of the
wicked, but the very deformity of their faults, the malice of their hearts,
and pernicious project of their intentions. For to these, we only assign the
Permission of God, yet he acknowledges him author of al those things which we
say, fall out merely by his sufferance. Therefore in them he has his hand as
deeply as the very actors themselves. Yea he accounts the bare sufferance of
God in these cases, vain and idle: But who, unless he were more mischievous
then Satan, would ever hold it a vanity Aug. l. 12. de ciuit. dei c. 7. Aug.
ep. 105. and tract. 53 in Joan. Idem. l. de pred. and great. and l. de gra. and
llb. arb. c. 23
and idleness not to concur to sin? For sin has no efficient, but a
deficient cause, as S. Augustine well notes, neither is it any action, but a
defection. Then the same renowned Doctor expressly teaches, that God does not
harde^ by imparting malice, but by not affoarding mercy. And so God blinds,
so he hardneth, by forsaking, not by ayding. God (quoth he) is said to indurate
him whom he will not mollify; to deceive whom he suffers to be seduced; to
blind whom he will not illuminate; to repel whom he will not call. When you
hear, I the Lord deceived that Prophet, and, whom he will he hardens;
consider his deserts whom he suffered so to be hardened, and seduced. Aug. ep.
89. q. 2. Chrysostom. in cap. 1. ad Roman. Damascen. l. 4. c. 20. de fid. ortho.
dox.
And interpreting that place. Lead us not into temptation: Suffer us not
(says he) by for saking, to be lead into temptation. S. Chrysostom: he
delivered into a reprobate sense, is nothing else but he permitted. S. John
Damascene: It is the manner of holy scripture to call the permissio^ of God his
act. Behold the solutio^ which Calvin styles so idle and fond a devise. Not
only the fathers, the scriptures themselves do free almighty God, and
attribute unto man his obstinacy, and blindness, as, Let no man say, when he is
tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God is not a tempter of evils, and he
tempts no man. Gentiles have given Iac. l. 1. 13. Epes. 4. v. 19. To. 2. v. 4.
up themselves to wantonness. The benignity of God brings thee to penance,
but according to thy hardness, and impenitent heart, thou heapest to thy self
wrath. God exhorts us not to obdurate our hearts: This day if ye shall hear
the voice of our Lord, harden not your hearts. Why do you harden your hearts,
as Egypt and Psalm. 49. ^. 1. Reg. 6 6.
Pharao hardened their heart? But of this more hereafter in the answer to our
adversaries chief objections.

16. The fourth heresy lapped in the wrincles of the Calvin. l. 2. institut. c.
3 sect. 10.
two last before mentioned is, that God has not a will to save all, neither
does he give to every man sufficient grace for his salvation. An heresy plainly
repugnant to these places of Scripture, God will all men to be saved, and come
to the knowledge of truth. Our Lord is not willing that any perish, but that al
return to penance, to which end he uses these general 1. ad Timoth. 2. 4.
2. Pet. 3. 9. Ezechiel. 33. Proverb. 1. 22. and 23. Matt. 11. 2. 8. Cassian.
collat. 13. c. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 1. al Ephesios. Aug. l. 1. de Genesis cont.
Manich. c. 3. and in psalm. 45. Cyprian. l. 3. ep. 8. ad Fidum. Prosper l. 2. de
vocat. gent. c. 16.
exhortations to all sinners. Convert, convert ye from your most evil ways,
and why will ye dye O house of Israel? O children how long do you love infamy
etc. turn ye at my correption. Come ye to me all that labor etc. that is,
all that are burdened with any kind of sin (as Cassianus excellently
interprets it) which apparently shows that God has a true antecedent
primacy, and conditional will, whereby he desires the salvation of all, both
men, and Angels: gives them also grace, to which if they cooperate, as they
should, he is ready to procure their future happiness, and have an effectual
will to save them. God (says S. Chrysostom) does much desire, and covet the
salvation of us, of those men also, whom for sin he damneth. S. Augustine:
All men if they will, may believe, may turn from the love of visible and
temporal things, and keep the commandments; because that light (to wit the
grace of God) illuminateth every man that comes into this world. Likewise, he
provides aqually for all. God (says S. Cyprian) as he accepts no person, so
no age, for as much as to the attaining of heavenly grace, he yeldeth himself,
with euen-ballanced equality, a like to all. And S. Prosper: Gods help by
innumerable means either hidden, or manifest, is affoarded unto all: and that
many refuse it, it is attributed to their own fault.

17. The fifth heresy not distinctly uttered, but perniciously inuolued in the
precedent, is that which derogateth from the universality of Christ's death and
passion. For as God, in Protestants opinion, will not have all men saved: so
Christ according (...) them, dyed not for all, but only for his elect. We, by
the warrant of holy scripture, constantly teach, that how be it every one does
not truly, and effectually participate the benefit of Christ's death; yet that
he offered a sufficient ransone for the full redemption of mankind, by which he
pacified the wrath of his eternal Father, and obtained whatsoever helps were
necessary in his behalf for the remission of their sins, and perfect
reconciliation unto him. Therefore the Apostle calls him the Savior of al
men, especially of the faithful. Of all men, disbursing a price sufficient to
defray the whole debt of sin, especially of the faithful, because they 1.
Tim. 4. 10.
are effectually also ransomed, and saved thereby. Likewise There is one God,
one also mediator of God and men, Man Christ Jesus who gave himself a
redemption for all. Moreover: Christ died 1. Tim. 2. 5.
for all. And lastly, he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the whole worlds. S. Irenaeus: Our Lord has restored us
into freindship by his incarnation, being made the 2. Cor. 5. 15. 1. Joan 2. 2.
Iron. lib. 5. c. 17. Ambros. ser. 8. in Psalm. 118.
mediator of God, and men, propitiating truly his Father for all. Which S.
Ambrose most perspicuously auerreth. The earth is full of the mercy of our
Lord, because to all men is given remission of sins. Upon all, the Sun is
commanded to rise, and this Sun indeed arises daily upon all: but that
mystical Sun of Justice arose unto all, came for all, suffered for all, and
rose again for all: and if any man believe not in Christ, be defraudeth
himself of the general benefit: as if a man shutting the window exclude the
beams of the Sun: the Sun did not therefore not rise unto all, because he
defrauded himself of the heat thereof; but as much as pertayneth to the Sun,
he keeps his prerogative, it is the imprudent man's fault Aug. tract 92. in
Io^^.
to debarr himself the comfort of the common light. S. Augustine: Christ shed
his blood for the remission of all men's sins, and so died for the salvation
of all. S. Prosper: We have labored to prove that Prosper. l. 2. de vocat.
gent. c. vlt.
the grace of God is at hand, or ready for all, with equal providence truly,
and general goodness; but by diverse means, and unequal measure, because
either hiddenly or manifestly, he is (as the Apostle says) the Savior of all
men, and chiefly of the faithful etc. For affirming that he is the Savior of
all men; he has approved the goodness of God to be general over all sorts of
men, but adding ^. ad Tim.
especially of the faithful, he shows that there is some part of mankind,
which by merit of faith inspired by God is, by special benefits promoted to
high, and eternal salvation.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, IN WHICH Some other Heresies are comprehended, and our
Sectaries chief objections fully answered.
THE Sixth Heresy clearly avouched by Fulk in ca. 9. ad Romans sect. 2. in cap.
Joan. sect. 3. in 9. ad Romans sect. 7. in cap. 27. Act. sect. 3. in cap. 12 Joan
sect. 3. Aug. lib. 1. de lib. ar^. c. 1. Idem lib. 6. contra Fortunat. Manich.
disput. 1. Idem lib. ver. relig. c. 14.
M. Fulke, is, the denial of free will in the Reprobate, saying: The reprobate
have their will free, but from coaction; to sin it is thrall, and slave:
bound to sin, and not free: Pharao had his will free from constraint, but yet
slave to sin. Whence it follows, that the Protestants God is not only
tyrannical in punishing without default, and unjust in causing the impenitency
of the faithful (as has bin showed before), but so wicked also, as he only
perpetrateth sin, not the sinners themselves. Not they; because, we sin
not, as S. Augustine teaches, but by freewil. Likewise. He that is forced by
necessity to do any thing, does not sin. And then: Man consented by his will
to the persuasion of the perverse Angel: For if he had done it by necessity,
he had not bin guilty of sin: but the reprobate are bouud by necessity to the
thraldom of sin, therefore they commit no sin at all. Secondly no man is
faulty by doing that, which is not in his power to shun, or decline. For, who
(says the same S. Augustine) offends Aug. lib. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 18.
in that, which can by no means be avoided? but the reprobate, according to
you, cannot avoid the slavery of sin, nor any way decline, alter, or resist
the decree of Gods reprobation, so absolutely enacted by him, as it depends
no more of man's will, then the form which the potter gives to the clay
depends upon the will of the clay, which it has not: Therefore they are
unblameably carried by the necessity of sin, and consequently do not sin;
but your sinful God is the sole worker of sin, who only concurreth freely to
sin; (as the potter is the sole cause that the vessel is framed crooked or
straight.) For when two causes cooperate to the same effect, one necessary,
another free; (a mad man, for example, with a man in his right wits) sin is
never attributed to the cause which necessarily, but only to that which freely
works; not to the mad, and crazed, but to the sound, and perfect man.

2. So in this present, because the reprobate necessarily offend, and God only
moves, persuadeth, freely and actiuely contriueth both the evil intention,
and self deformity of sin, to him alone, and to no other is the guilt to be
imputed: especially he being (as you maintain) the principal agent, and they
his instruments in atchieuing wickedness: which if you rightly believed in the
true God of heaven, were so great an impiety as hell it self cannot breath
forth a greater. Neither need I allege places of scripture they are so
infinite, or other testimonies, the light of reason is manifest, and clear,
that our sovereign God cannot sin. And that the reprobate in general have
their wills free from the thraldom of sin, the very laws, and commandments
of God and man, the rewards, and punishments of all common wealths; the threats
and persuasions so often proposed unto them in holy Scripture, do abundantly
witness; as I have else where largly demonstrated. Therefore I here pass the^
over with this saying of S. Augustine, who discoursing of those reprobate who
refused to come to the heavenly supper Aug. li. 83. qq. q. 63.
prepared for them, says: Those that would not come, ought not to attribute it
to any other but only to themselves: Exodus 8. 2.
because, vt venirent v^cati, erat in libera voluntate: being called, it was in
their freewill to come. The scripture likewise Exodus 9. 1. and 2.
speaking of Pharao in particular, declares his absolute freedom, saying:
dismiss my people etc. but if thou will not. Exodus 10. 3. and 4.
And in the next chapter: dismiss my people to sacrifice unto me, and if thou
refuse, and hold them. And again: til when will thou not be subject unto me?
Dismiss my people, but if thou resist, and wilt not etc. Wherefore unless a
man will be as obstinate as Pharao was, he must needs grant, that his will
was free, Aug. lib. de praed. and gr. cap. 15.
and not necessarily deteyned in the captivity of sin, else as Origin urges,
why does god blame him saying; but thou, because thou will not dismiss my
people, behold I will strike all the first borne in Egypt? And S. Augustine
expressly teaches, that he was not thrall to sin, but that he did freely of
his own accord rebel against the hand of God, comparing him thus with
Nabuchodonozor: Touching their nature, they were both men, touching their
dignity, both Kings, touching their cause, both deteyned the captiued people of
God, touching their punishment, both with chastisements were benignly
admonished: what therefore made their ends so different, but that one feeling
the hand of God, groaned, and lamented with the remembrance of his own
iniquity; the other warred with his freewill, against the merciful truth of
God.

3. The seventh heresy auerreth that the liberty of freewill Fulk. in ca. 8.
ad Romans sect. 8.
is not only captive in the reprobate, but abolished also in Gods elect: for
these be Fulkes own words. The eternal predestination of God excludes the
merits of man, and the power of his will, thereby to attain to eternal life.
But S. Thomas S. Thom. 1. p. q. 23. ^rt. 2.
our Angelical Doctor teaches that predestination puts nothing in the
predestinate, nor any way alters the faculty of his will: for it is nothing
else according to him, and all other Deuines, but the eternal purpose, and
decree, whereby God ordeineth, and directs some by supernatural means to the
attayning of everlasting bliss: which he sweet^ly brings to pass, not by
any physical motion, or necessary determination, but by certain moral
inspirations, callings, and persuasions etc. setting before them such forcible
reasons, and motives so effectual, in time, and p^lace so fit, with such
apparent show of honest, profitable, and delightsome good, as he mildly draws
them without any let, or hinderance to the liberty of their will, leaving it to
work with the same connaturall choice, and indifferency, as if there were no
such decree, or purpose at all: otherwise how are the elect counsayled,
exhorted, encouraged, and commanded in holy writ to purchase their heavenly
bliss? How is the kingdom of heaven proposed as a crown, as a goal, as a
reward to be won, bought and gained by their labors, if they have no power
to gain it? How are they honored, and praised who valiantly strive in this
behalf, they blamed and rebuked who are idle, and lazy, unless they have free
power to work, and attain their salvation? But of ma^s freedom even in things
supernatural, I have said enough in the 24. and 25. Controuersyes. Now I
follow on my way.

4. From those latter heads of heresy, other hereti^call Fulk in ca. 8. ad Romans
sect. 9. Calvin l ^. institut.. 7. 28. 29. 43. and l. 4 in. s^it. cap. ^7. 2.
Fox Act* and Mon^. Tom. 2. where h^ re^itethand approves these words of
Tindaii^
positions take their beginning, to wit, that the elect, do what they will,
cannot possibly be damned, nor the reprobate be saved: that they can never
utterly loose the favor of God; nor these truly enjoy it. For thus says
Fulke; Every christian man which is endued with faith, and hope, may and ought
to be infallibly assured that he is justified, and shall be saved. Calvin: Let
all the faithful be bold safely to assure themselves, that they can no more
fail of the kingdom of heaven, into which Christ is already entered, then
Christ himself. Fox also: We have as much right to heaven as Christ has, we
cannot be damned, unless Christ be damned; nor can Christ be saved, unless we
he saved. But as touching the reprobate, they according to Fulke are
antecedently ordained to destruction, by Gods immutable counsel, they are
necessarily tied to the slavery of sin; they cannot repent, or believe,
therefore they have no power at all to gain their salvation, or 2. Timoth. 2.
20.
purchase the favor of God. A most pernicions, and damnable assertion clean
cross to the saying of the Apostle; In a great house there are not only
vessels of gold, and silver, but of wood, and earth; and some truly unto
honor, and some unto contumely: if any therefore shall cleanse himself from
these, he shall be a vessel for honor sanctified, and profitable for our Lord,
prepared for every good work. Therefore the reprobate which are vessels of
wrath, and contumely, may purge themselves, and become vessels of honor,
vessels of election. Then, Cain Genesis 4. 6.
was a reprobate, yet he might have returned if he would into the state of
grace, and favor of the highest, as appears by the expostulation God used
unto him. Why art thou angry, and why is thy countenance fallen? By the
condition he proposes: If thou do well. By the promise he makes, shall thou
not receive again? By the commination, or threat he adds: but if thou do
ill, shall not thy sin forthwith be present? Esau was a reprobate, and yet S.
Augustine Aug. l. ^. ad Simplic. q. 2.
says of him: Esau was not willing, and runned not, but if he had bin willing,
and had runned, he had arrived at the goal by the help of God; who also by
calling would have given him to will, and to run, if contemning his vocation,
he had not become reprobate. Judas was (...) reprobate. Origin notwithstanding
Orig. l. 8. in ep. ad Romans Chrysostom. hom. 16. in cap. 9. ad Romans Chrysostom. hom
4 de la^d. Paul. ad fin. Council. Ar^usican. ^ap. 25.
writes of him that it was in his power if he would to have equalled in
sanctity S. Peter and S. John. Pharao was a reprobate, of whom S. Chrysostom
auerreth, that God did what lay in him to save him, who if he were not saved
the whole fault was his own. He also teaches, that every one, if he
endeavor, may arrive to the holiness, and perfection of S. Paul. To which
effect, it is defined by the Arausican Council, that all the baptized, Christ,
ayding, and cooperating with them, are able, if they will labor faithfully,
and ought to fulfill the things that appeartaine to salvation.

5. In like manner^, that the Predestinate may forfeit their salvation, loose
their grace, and be damned, we need not seek any other proof; then the
testimonies of holy Writ. For S. Paul an elect, witnesses of his own person.
I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude, least perhapes, when I have
preached to others my self become a reprobate. 1. Cor. 9. 27. Sap. 4. 11.
Eccles. c. 31. 10. Apocalypse. 3. 11. 2. Pet. 1. 10. Whitaker. cont. 2. q. 6.
cap. 3. Fulk in c. 6. ad Roman. sect. 2. and 5.
Of another it is testified, he was taken away least malice might change his
understanding, and fiction begiule his soul: therefore he might have bin
altered, and deceived, if he had not bin prevented by God. Of a third it is
said: He could have transgressed, and transgressed not, have done evil, and
did not. (...). John in the Apocalypse exhorts the predestinate to perscuere
constant, least they be frustrated of their hope, Behold I come quickly, hold
that thou have, that no man receive thy crown. And S. Peter: Wherefore my
brethren rather endeavor, that by 'good works you may make sure your vocation,
and election. But these things have bin sufficiently proved heertofore in the
24. and 25. controversies.

6. The eight heresy falsely supposes that Predestination, according to the
whole chain, and lincke of every effect which follows thereon, is altogether
of God: in so much as neither our justification, salvation, nor any execution
of his will in this kind depends of the sacraments of the Church, or of our
good Works as their isntrumental, or meritorious causes, but of Gods election
(as Whitaker auerreth) of his promises, and Christ's merits. And Fulke: Neither
Baptism, nor any works of Christian religion cause justification; but Baptism
is a seal, good works fruits thereof. Again: the Elect work willingly to
their salvation; etc. but they do not thereby deserve their salvation; for
salvation depends upon their election. Howbeit, the holy ghost in his sacred
Word directly teaches, that by Baptism, and other Sacraments, we are truly
Marc. vlt. v. 16.
saved, Tit. 3. 5.
regenerate, Ioa. 3. 5.
newborn, Tit. 3. 7.
justified, 1. Corin. 10. 17.
incorporated to Christ, Joan. 6. 56.
made one with him, and he with us. That by Act. 8. 18.
the^we receive the holy Ghost, Act. 2. 38.
obtain remission of our sins, 2. ad Tim. 1. 6.
inhere^t grace, Joan. 3. 5.
entrance to the kingdom of heaven, and Tit. 3. 7. Aug. in ps. 7^.
are made heirs of everlasting life: Therefore they are true causes of our
justice, and instruments of our salvation. To which Saint Augustine
subscribeth, setting down the difference betwixt the sacraments of the old
law, and of the new in these words. Some sacraments there are that give
salvation, others that promise a Savior. The Sacraments of the new Testament
give salvation; the sacraments of the old Testament Gregor. l. 6. c. 3. in
prim. Regum.
promised a Savior. And S. Gregory: Outwardly we receive the sacraments, that
we may be inwardly replenished with the grace of the holy ghost.

7. Likewise the execution of Gods predestination is often furthered, and
effected by the prayers of Saints, or other holy men upon earth, as S.
Augustine testifies. If Stephen had not prayed, the Church had not enjoyed
Paul. Besides: Perchance there are some here predestinate, to be granted by
our prayers. Moreover he exhorts us to correct all sorts of Aug. ser. 1. de
sanct. Aug. de bon. perf. 2. Timoth. 2. 10. 1. Timoth. 4. v. vlt. 2. Pet. 1.
10. 1. Corinthians. 9. There should be noe iudgenunt at all ( says S. Augustine) if
men sinned by the will of God. Aug. tom. 7. ad artic. sibi falso impositos.
artic. 10.
sinners, because correction is a mean that the predestinate may obtain their
designed glory. The same is also taught by S. Gregory, Prosper, and others, and
is grounded on these words of Scripture. I sustain all things for the elect,
that they also may obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus with
heavenly glory. For this doing thou shall save thy self, and others. By good
works make sure your vocation, and election. So run, that you may comprehend.
Therefore by running we do comprehend, by running we win the goal of eternal
felicity. Or if we do not, if salvation depends of gods election, and not of
our good endeauous, damnation depends in like sort of his reprobation, and
not of our misdeeds; the doom pronounced by God against the accursed in the
latter day, is not for their sins, as the causes of their perdition, but the
true cause thereof is the will of God, his eternalll will which in Protestants
conceit undeservedly rejects and abandoneth them. Let the Scriptures the^ be
false, the general judgment perverse, the books of conscience brought forth
in vain, their evidences rejected, the sentence of our judge reuersed, and
called back by you, as not delivering the right cause of man's eternal
torments; in brief, let heaven, and earth fail, and your phrensies only take
place.

8. The ninth heresy which springs from that bastard Fulk in ca. 3. ad Romans
sect. 4.
root of making God the author of man's destruction, sets abroach the
contrary wills which M. Fulke assigns to God, to wit his revealed, and secret
will. For either he supposes they are two distinct wills allowing that
sacrilegious disunion and diuorcement of affection in our true sovereign God,
which Tullie disalloweth as the root Tull. l. 2. de not. Deorum.
of dissension even in his false and heathenish Gods; and as he distinguishes
his will, so he must divide the unity of his nature, he must needs confess one
God abhorring sins, the other approving them with the viperous Manichees. Or
does he mean there is but one will, which as revealed detesteth sin, as
secret and hidden likes well of it, then let him tell me how he likes or
decrees those things with his secret purpose, which he has openly forbidden
by his law? Calvin l. ^ inst. c. 8. ^.
A demand which so straggered Calvin, as he replieth; We conceive not how God,
in diverse manner, wills, and wills not one self thing. I believe indeed
he could not conceive it, nor can any wit conceive that which is vnco^ceauable:
viz. that the same immutable and simple will should strive with it self, or
faigne to forbid which it consaileth and decrees. For concerning the will of
God revealed in his word, which is as you define, manifestly against sin,
either there is a true will in him correspondent thereunto, and so he inwardly
hates which he outwardly prohibiteth, or else he faigneth, dissembleth, or at
least equiuocateth with us in his revealed will. Equivocation I think you
allow not in God, who so passionately censure it in his oppressed servants:
dissimulation ought much less to be ascribed unto him, whose truth is always
constant and fidelity inviolable. But howsoever, you make sin discordant from
the revealed will, as long as you affirm it agreeable to the determination and
secret will of God, which is his inward immutable and substantial will, you
cause sin it self to be no sin which implies contradiction, and that
Protestants may lawfully without offense, perpetrate thefts, murders,
adulteries, and all kind of sins. For the will of God is the inerrable square
and supreme rule of all actions: Therefore whosoever leuelleth his thoughts, and
deeds according to his will, cannot stray or decline into fault or error: But
every protestant by committing sin conformeth himself to the determination
and secret will of God: no Protestant then S. Thomas. 1. 2. q. 19. art. 9. and
10. Durand. l. 1. distinct. 48. q. 2.
swarueth from his duty, or offends his Majesty by incurring theftes,
murders, adulteries, or any other sins. If they answer, that sin is
against his revealed will, and therefore they offend, although it be not
against his secret will: That answer fitteth not their purpose. For Gods true,
secret, and substantial will, intimated unto them, is the right pattern, by
which all actions must be drawn. Wherefore if sin be fashioned, and squared
to that, it must needs be straight, regular, or according to rule; and
consequently no sin, no offense to God. For this cause Abraham sinned not in
offering to sacrifice his son; nor Genesis 22. Exodus 11. Osee. 1.
the people of Israel spoiling the Egyptians; nor Osee the Prophet, taking a
wife of fornications, and begetting children of fornications; nay they all
pleased God herein, because they directed their actions according to the level
of his secret and hidden will, made known unto them in those particular cases,
although they did against his general revealed will in forbidding murder,
thefts, and fornication. Wherefore if Protestants by sinning follow the
direction of Gods determination, if they do nothing against his secret will,
they cannot be guilty of fault, albeit they transgress his revealed will, which
is only an outward token or sign of his will.

9. Nevertheless I prove, that sin accords also with his will revealed
unto Protestants: For they pretend to know, that the secret will of God
determines, and purposes sin, that it is not against sin. But how Fulke
in the place above cited.
do they know this will to be such? It is secret, they cannot pierce unto it by
themselves. God must disclose it, he must reveal unto it by them. That
revelation, whatsoever it be, by which he manifests this mystery, is his
revealed will, which being the faithful messenger, proposer, and interpreter
of his secret, sin is not against it: Therefore in them, it is neither
against his secret, nor revealed will. Nor by that Atheistical Sophisme any
sin, but a regular and laudable action. Contrariwise, when God dissuadeth,
prohibiteth, and condemns sin, either he does it in earnest, or in jest. If
in earnest, he secretly disliketh that which he forbids, and so sin is
also repugnant to his secret will, repugnant to his determination, and hidden
counsels: if in jest, his dissuasions are but mockeries, his threats buggs to
terrify babes, his judgments not to be feared. Then trudge on in your sinful
courses, embrace the liberty of your Epicurean gospel, wallow freely in the
mudd of Vice, join hand with Atheists, there is no God to punish your
iniquities.

10. The adversary by this time surfetteth with the glott of his blasphemous
heresies: let us now view the daynty morsells which gorged him so full; They
were Romans 9. 18. Romans 1. 26. Exodus 7. 8. and 9. Ioa. 12. 40. Proverb. 16. 4.
Rom 9. 17. Ephesians. 3. 11.
these heavenly viands of holy Scriptures venomed with the corruption of some
Marcion, or Manichean sause. viz. That God has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he does indurate. God has delivered them into passions of
ignominy; our Lord has hardened the heart of Pharao; he has blinded their
eyes, and indurated their heart, that they may not see. He made al things for
himself, even the wicked man unto the evil day. To this purpose have I raised
thee, that in thee I may show my power. He works all things, according to the
counsel of his will. I answer; Those former things God is said to do, first
by sufferance, and permission, because foreseeing the event of their malice,
Vasques in 1 part. to. 1 dis^ut. 55 cap. 10. Exodus 8. 15.
he hinders it not, but leaves them to their own unnatural desires.
Secondly by subtraction of Grace, which sometime he justly takes from them upon
their desert. Thirdly by working miracles, preaching the truth, or achieuing
some other good by which they take occasion to grudge, murmur, rage, and
peruersly withstand his holy will: whereupon it is written of Pharao, that Ibid
p. 32. ca. 9. v. 7. and 35.
he indurated his own heart himself. And in the same chapter verse. 32. where
the latin reads, Pharao's heart was hardened, the Hebrew says, Pharao
hardened his heart this time also, so in the 9. chapter verse. 7 the Hebrew
reads Pharaos heart hardened it self. Again verse. 35. he hardened his own
heart; he and his servants. Of others S. Paul says, they have given up
themselves to impudicity; which because they actually effected, the like, as
Calvin misinferreth, cannot thereby be concluded of God. For that which with
verity of faith according to S. Augustins rule may not be ascribed Aug. de
doct. Chri* l, 3. cap 10. Aug. l. 13. de trin. ca. 12. Tertul. l. aduer. Her.
mog. Fulgen l. 1. ad Monim ^. 13. Epipha^. haeres. 66. Rupert. in c. 9. Exodus
Chrysostom. hom. 16. in c. 9. ad To. (Tulit multa cum lenitate volens ipsum ad
paeniten^iam adducere etc. qui fi seruatus minim^ fuit, rei totius culpa ab
illius animo accidit.) Rupertus in eum locu^ Exodus
unto him, ought to be expounded some other way. Therefore he himself
interprets the foresaid sentences, by way of permission, saying: The manner
by which man is delivered up into the power of the Devil, ought not so to be
understood, as if God did it, or commanded it to be done, but that he has
permitted it only, yet justly. So Tertullian calls God, not the doer, but the
permitter, or sufferer of evil. And Fulgentius: No man justly sins,
although God justly permits him to sin. Epiphaniu^s and Rupertus use the
same distinction, whom I join to the rest, that you may abhor the impudency
of Calvin, who so often carpeth at this ancient and long approved solution,
wherein I bewray both his and other heretics hatred toward God. For where
they read in holy writ any mystery which redoundeth to the honor of his name,
they cloud, or extenuate it with metaphorical constructions, as the Real
Presence in the Sacrament, the remission of sins, and inward justice of our
souls. Where they discover any sentences, which may seem to darken the beams
of his glory, they stick fast to the letter, and eagerly press the rigor of
the words: as here when he is said to ^arden, to blind, to give men over to a
reprobate sense. Far otherwise all devout, and faithful Interpreters of Gods
word. Otherwise S. Chrysostom, who teaches that God sustained Pharao with
much patience, willing to reduce him unto penance. For if he had not desired
this, he would not have showed so much lenity. Otherwise Rupertus, who
commenting upon this very allegation of Pharao (to this purpose I have raised
or set thee up) expounds it not with our Sectaries, of his creation, but of
his advancement to his Kingdom, permittendo videlicet, non agendo, as much to
say, by permitting, not by doing. Otherwise Theodoret reciting diverse mutations
of Pharaos will, how sometimes he would dismiss Israel, other times he would
Theod. 9. 17 in Exodum
not, all these (says he) Moses recorded to teach us, that neither Pharao was
of perverse nature, neither did our Lord God make his mind hard and rebellious;
for he that now inclines to this part, now to that, plainly shows freewill
of the mind.

11. Concerning the latter wounds objected against us, that God made al things
for himself, even the wicked man to the evil day. To this purpose have I
raised thee etc. they are spoken not of the chief and principal purpose for
mostly intended as the cause of his creation, but of the event, or afterend
Fulgent. l. 1. ad Mon.
to which he was consequently appointed foreseeing his iniquity. For, although
God be not the author (as S. Fulgentius says) yet he is the ordeyner, and
disposer of evil wills; so far forth as he cease not to work good of evil.
Which he received of his master S. Augustine: Of so great wisdom and power is
God, that al things which seem contrary to his will, make toward those issues
Aug. li. 22. de ciu. Dei cap. 1.
or ends, which he himself both good, and just foreknew. After this manner God
inclines the hearts of all obstinate sinners, either to exercise his servants
or make known his patience, or to give a greater luster to virtue by her
contrary vice. After this manner not unlike to the provident, and skillfull
work man who turns that, to some base, which he cannot fashion to a more
noble use: so God conuerteth the peruersenes of the impious to manifest his
justice, whom without prejudice to their liberty, he cannot win to partake
of his mercy. Lastly after this manner, he works all things according to the
counsel of his will, because whatsoever is done good by himself, or bad by
others, he directs to the scope of his holy designs: or rather because all
things which he does (for sins which he does not, are no things, but mere
defects, and priuations) are Hierom. in ^om super hunc ^o^^m.
full of wisdom, counsel, freedom, and providence. So S. Hierome
interprets this place saying: God works all things according to the
counsel of his will, not that all things which be done are accomplished by
the will and counsel of God (else sins might be imputed to God) but because
al things which he does by counsel and will, he does, because for both they
are full of the wisdom, and power of him that does them. Where now was Calvin
l. 3 I^stit. cap. ^3.. 4. and 7. and lib. de aeterna Dei praedest. fol. 916.
Chrysostom. hom. de interdict arb. ad Ada^ quae habetur post hom. in Genes.
Calvin sup. 8. Pros. lib. 2. de vo. cat. gen^. cap. 1. 12. Calvin lib. Instit.
c. 17 and 18. lib. 2. c. 4. l. 3. c. 23. Augu. tract. 53. in Joan. Fulk in cap.
6. Mat. sect. 6 Aug. ep. 8^ q. 2. Fulk in cap. 12. Joan. sect. ^. Aug. tract.
3^. in Joan. Con. Vale^t. cap. 2.
Caluins judgment, or Fulkes wits, whiles perusing the Fathers, they
discovered not these expositions? But what marvel though they marked not their
Comments who so ouerth wartly cross their very words and meaning? For compare
a little the sayings of these men with those of the Fathers.

12. Calvin: By gods predestination Adam fell; he both knowing, and so
ordeyning. S. Chrysostom: It is manifest that God would not have Adam sin;
who before his fall did fense, and arm him. Calvin: Man falls, the
providence of God so appoynting. S. Prosper: The ruin of no man is disposed by
divine ordination. Calvin: God wills, commands, and inforceth to sin. S.
Augustine: God neither forces, commands, nor wills sin. Fulk: The text
is plain, Lead us not into temptation: whereby is proved not only a permission,
but an action of Gods in them that are lead into temptation. S. Augustine: Lead
us not into temptation: that is, Suffer us not by forsaking, to be lead into
temptation. Fulke: Gods election and reprobation is most free, of his own
will, not upon the foresight of the merits of either of them. S. Fulgentius:
Because God by foreknowledge saw the sins of men, he dictated the sentence of
predestination. Fulke speaking of some incredulous: The neither would nor could
be willing (to believe) because they were reprobate. S. Augustine: If any man
ask why they could not believe: I answer roundly, because they would not. And
the Valentine Council defines, that the reprobate are not punished, because
they could not, but because they would not be good. By these and diverse other
oppositions you may see, how contrary the new inventions of Protestants are to
the doctrine of the Church. You have read how repugnant to the Scriptures, how
reproachful, and derogatory from the passion of Christ. You have read what
atheismes, what execrations, what sacriledges they conteyne against God
himself, against his infinite love.

13. Let me therefore entreat every sober Christian, who is touched with the
zeal of his creators honor to abandon those books farced with such
impieties, to infernal flames: to detest those Ghospellers who make Calvin l.
^. Instit. c. 4.. 2. Idem ergo facinus Deo, sathanae, homini assignari videmus
no^ esse absurdu^ Deus clauu^ tenet. Calvin l. 1. c. 18. 6. 1. Calvin. lib. 1.
Instit. c. 17.. 11 and cap. 18. lit 2. cap. 4. lib. 3. c. 23.
God to hate undeservedly the works of his hands; who link his divine Majesty
(I dread to report it) in the same lease with sinners; who give him the stern
to direct, and command their naughty proiects, whiles they as Oar-men row at
his pleasure; who faigne him to pursue, and intend their sinful ruin, in
giving them over to a reprobate sense. And thou, O bound less piety, O
immeasureable bounty, to whose unstained breast no thought of sin, or
cogitation ascends: thou who never permittest any evil, but to turn it unto
good; never omittest any good, which may be strayned out of evil; strain I
beseech thee out of the evil weeds of my dear Countrymen, the good of their
conversion: turn their stubborn hearts, bend their froward wills to love, and
embrace thee, the center of joy, and seat of true repose; that they may at
length believe, and confess with us how far thy merciful heart, and sacred
will has ever bin from working their obduration, or contriuing their blindness:
who with long patience expectest, with great lenity sustainest, with sweet
calling often inuitest, with many tears and groans of thy beloved son
earnestly intreatest both them, and all rebellious sinners to return unto thee.

THE XXX. CONTROVERSY, IN WHICH The Merit of Good Works is supported: Against
Doctor Abbot, and Doctor Fulke.
CHAP. I.
GREAT is the slander, and intolerable the reproach, with which our opponents
as in many other, so likewise Abot in his defense c. 4 and 5. Fulk and al other
Protestants.
in this controversy are wont to vprayd us. viz. That we pull down the merits
of Christ to up our own: debase his honor, to glory in the dignity of our
own deserts: that we make our own works of themselves worthy of reward,
grateful of themselves, and pleasing to God. Whereas we never affoard them any
such privilege, as they are derived from our veins of earth, but as they take
hea^, and are conveyed from the springes of heaven. For we hold three things
necessary to eleuate and advance them to the excellency of merit, all flowing
from the celestial and deified streams of our Redeemers blood. The first is,
that no work of man can truly merit, or deserve reward, unless being wrought
with aid from above, it also proceed from inherent grace, from the spirit of
adoption inhabitant in our souls. The second is, that God adioyne the seal of
his promise, and oblige himself to remunerate the work. For although it be
not dignified by the virtue of his promise, or benign acceptatio^, as some
conceive, but by the prerogative of Grace from whence it springs: yet his
promise is requisite, that he be engaged to recompense our labors, who cannot
be otherwise indebted to his creatures. The third is, that all meritorious
deeds be freely and sincerely done; freely from the necessity or violence of
compulsion, sincerely from the nakedness of sinister intention. These things
presupposed we consta^tly mainteyne with the thrice holy and Ecumenical
Council Council. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 16.
of Trent, against M. Fulke, D. Abbot, and all the Sectaries of our time, a
true worthiness and dignity in all such actions as shall be accompanied, graced,
and enobled with the three forementioned conditions; not that these conditions
enhaunce them to the perfect value and Arithmatical equality with the promised
reward which in rigor of justice one shilling (for example) has with another,
or the corn sold in the market has with the common taxed price thereof, but
that they infuse virtuall equality and due proportion thereunto, as the seed
sowed in the ground has vertuall proportion to the statelines of the tree, and
accidental qualities are sufficient and equivalent dispositions to the
introduction of a substantial form. Such equivalent proportion, or dignity of
merit the holy Scriptures and Fathers acknowledge in our works achieued by the
help, and inspiration of the holy Ghost, as Apoc. 3. v. 4. Sap. 3. v. 5. ad
Coloss. 1. v. 12. 2. ad These. 1. v. 11.
appears first by these places of holy Writ, where our good deeds and
patient sufferinges are expressly said to be worthy of God, worthily to
deserve the fruition of his sight, as: They shall walk with me in whites,
because they are worthy: God has tempted them, and found them worthy of
himself: Giving thanks to God and the Father, who has made us worthy unto
the part of the lot of the Saints in the light: We pray always Fulk in ca. 1.
2. ad These. sect. 1. Fulk in Ep. 2. ad These. c. 1. sect. 1. I^ c. 1. ad
Coloss. sect. 3. Abbot in his defense c. 5. sect. 7. 8. and 14.
for you, that our God make you worthy of his vocation: so in the ancient
Protestant translation it is, That our God would make you worthy; which error
escaped them, as Fulke acknowledges saying: I confess it is an imperfection
in our translations: Therefore it is since corrected in the renewed Bible by his
Majesty to bolster the evasion, by which M. Fulke, D. Abbot and their fellows
seek to delude the former textes. Their evasion is, That we be counted worthy
through Gods free acceptance by grace, and imputation of Christ's justice. Not
of the merit of our constancy.

2. But neither will the words bear that violent raking, nor God endure so
great a wrong, that he should account those worthy, call them worthy who have
no worthiness in them. Then S. Paul there writes of the Thessalonians, who were
counted worthy by true belief and imputation of Christ's worthiness long
before: Therefore it had been lost labor for him always to pray for that
which they had obtained, and could not, by Protestants Sophismes, ever loose,
or be further perfected and enriched therewith. It was the increase of inherent
Godliness and holy conversation for which he offered his prayers, that profiting
herein from day to day, they might be made Ad Heb. 1^. v. 16. Primas. in e^m
locum.
worthy of the creation and society of Saints, to which they were called, as
many other Textes evidently persuade which ascribe unto our works the dignity
it self, and worthiness of merit. S. Paul to the Hebrews: Beneficence, and
communication do not forget: For with such hosts God is promerited. So
Primasius scholar to S. Augustine: By such sacrifices, Chrysosto^, Oecumen.
Theophil. and Erasm. in eum locu^
and gifts of alms, Deus promeretur adipisci, God is promerited, or
vouchsafed to be gained: The greek has, (...), God is well pleased: The
Syriake, scaphar, pulchrescit, that is, God waxes fair, he becomes more
amiable, loving, and favorable unto them. S. Chrysostom, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, and Erasmus read, God is pacified, and reconciled by means of
these works, which could not be, unless they had some thing in them that
procured his favor. In Genesis also, where our Translation has in latin and
English, I am inferior Genesis 32. v. 10. Ecclesiast. ^6. v. 15. Matt. v. ^2.
Matthew. 20. v. ^. Ier. 31. v. 16. Romans 2. v. 6. ad Corinth. 3. v. 8. Apoc. 22.
v. 12. Abbot in his defense c. 5. sect. 14 fol. 686. Fulk in ca. 3. 1. ad
Corinth. sect. 2. In ^p. 4. 2. ad Tim. sect. 4. in c. 25. Matthew. sect. 6.
to all thy mercyes: in the Chaldeake, it is; My merits are less then all thy
mercies which thou have showed to thy servant. And in Ecclesiasticus, All mercy
shall make a place to every man according to the merits of his works. And
although the Greek has only (...), according to his works, yet that
imports the same with the Latin, as I shall show hereafter, and the
Scripture witnesses in those places, where eternal life prepared to good
works is entitled merces, a reward or hire, which must needs be correspondent
to merit or desert: Be glad and rejoice, because your reward is very great in
heaven: Call the workmen, and pray them their hire: Let thy voice cease from
weeping, and thine eyes from tears, because there is a reward for thy work:
God renders or gives reward to the just according to their works, according
to their own labors.

3. Our adversaries make answer to these and the like arguments. First, that
heaven is called a Crown, a reward secundum quid, and in a respect simply and
absolutely, it is only a gift, because it is given according to grace,
according to mercy, not according to desert or merit. But we reply, that
although the original from whence it proceeds, be grace and mercy, yet that
grace being communicated upon this solemn bargain, covenant, or promise of
rewarding our works performed, and dignified therewith, it must of necessity
include a dignity in them: For every reward has an absolute, and intrinsecall
2. ad Tim* 4. Matt. 20. v. 4. and v. 13. and 14. Aug lib. de sa^ct. virg. c.
26. Hie. l. con. Iou. Chrysostom. Theophil. and Euthim. in eum locu^
reference to some proportion of worthiness or merit. Here is a true and
absolute reward, therefore a true and absolute merit. For which cause the
reward is termed a Crown, not only of grace, but a Crown of Justice, due unto
us by a certain right of title of justice: Friend I do thee no wrong etc. Take
that is thine and go. Where he speaks of the day-penny, by which S.
Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Euthymius understand
the Kingdom of heaven, and yet he styles it his, to wit, his by covenant, his
by justice, and not only by gift: upon the same ground S. Paul calls God a
just judge, in rewarding our works: God is not unjust to forget your works.
2. Tim. 4. ad Heb. 6. 10. Fulk. in c. 4. 2. ad Tim. sect. 4. Abbot in his
defense ^. 5* sect 1. 4.


4. The second Answer which D. Fulke, D. Abbot, and the residue of their
fraternity return hereunto, is, That the reward is due by covenant, and so a
debt in respect of Gods promise not of our desert: Likewise. God renders
heaven (say they) as a just judge, not to the merit, and worthiness of our
works, but to the merit and worthiness of Christ imputed by faith, unto us.
These be the guilty shifts they devise to entaile all upon Christ, and upon
Gods promise, which he by those means most bountifully vouchsafes to
communicate unto us. For although it be true, that the divine promise and
Christ's Justice be necessary to enable us to merit, yet they are not the
chiefest things which God regards in rewarding our works. For the Promise
is the same, the Imputation the same equally made and attributed unto all; but
the Remuneration is diverse, in equally assigned, more, or less correspondent
to the slacknes, Matthew. 1^. v. 27. ^. ad Cor. 3. v. 8. ad Gal. 6. v 7. ^.
Ibidem v. 9
or industry of our labors. The Son of man will render to every one
according to his works: Every man shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor: What things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap: For
he that sows in his flesh, of the flesh shall reap corruption, but he that
sows in the spirit, shall reap life everlasting. So that the seed, the
price, and proper cause of everlasting life, is not only faith, nor the promise
of God, or merits of Christ alone; but also our good deeds of piety and
devotion, which here we sow upon earth. For the Apostle goes forward in the
same Apoc. 22. v. 12. Fulk. in ^. ad Cor. 3. sect. 2. Calvin 3. instit. cap.
18.. ^. and 7.
place: Doing good, let us not fail, for in due time we shall reap not
failing: Therefore whiles we have time let us work good to all: Behold I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to his
works. Fulke reading this phrase so often repeated in holy Scripture,
grants: that every one receaueth the crown of glory, according to his
works, according to his labor, yet not according to the merit of his labor;
which others more plainly explicating allow it given to our works, as signs
of our faith, not as causes meritorious of the same. But the latin text of
Ecclesiasticus, has that very word, according to the merit of our works,
Eccles. 16* v. ^^.
which necessarily implies a meritorious cause. Besides holy Writ affirms,
That we receive the crown of bliss, as the reward, wages, and hire of our
labors, therefore according to the merit of our labors. For hire, wages, and
reward, have mutual correspondence and inseparable connection with merit, in so
much as heaven ^. ad Cor. 9. v. 24. M^^^. 11. v. ^2. Matt. 13. v. 45. Aug. in
Psalm. 93. prope finem Basil in hom. quam scripfit in initium. Proverb. Clem.
A^^. in paraen^^.
is proposed unto us as a goal, or price, to be won by running, as a
Kingdom invaded by force, as an inestimable gemme prized at the rate of our
best endeavors, as a treasure to be bought by the value, worthiness, or
condignity of our works, the true meritorious and moral causes thereof. In
the race, all run indeed, but one receaueth the price: So run that you may
obtain. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it
away. Again, The Kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant-man seeking good
pearls, and having sound one precious pearl etc. sold all that he had and
bought it. S. Augustine: Everlasting life, and rest is salable and bought by
tribulations for Christ. S. Basil: We are negotiators or merchantes who trace
the Evangelical path, purchasing the possession of heaven by the works of the
commundements: Let it not repent you to have labored, it is lawful for you,
if you will, to buy most precious salvation, with a proper treasure, by
charity, and faith, which truly is a just price.

5. Moreover I demonstrate it irrefragably in this Syllogisticall manner.

When soever such proportion is kept in recompensing the labors we achieue, as
to greater labors greater crowns, to lesser, lesser rewards are alloted. The^
the crowns and rewards are given in respect of the works done, not as signs
and conditions, but truly according to the merit of our labors, as causes of
the rewards. But this proportion is observed by our Sovereign Judge in
remunerating the good deeds of the Just which flow from his grace. Therefore
he rewards them, not as signs, but as causes of our heavenly bliss,
according to the worthiness of their merit.
The mayor is clear, for what other then the dignity of the work does God
regard, in ballancing the measure of them? The worthiness of Christ's merits
imputed by faith: that is not our own labor, not the things we do in our
body, for which we must receive either good or evil, as the Apostle writes:
that does not dignify one above another, but equally (as has been said) is
referred to al. The promise which God makes unto us? If God had his eye
leuelled at that alone, it were as much broken in a little as in a greater, as
faithfully kept in reco^pensing a small, as in a weighty matter. Therein he
looks not to the greatness of our endeauours, but to the fidelity of his own
word; in fulfilling whereof, the equality of recompensation, the proportion of
works, the repayment of service, the reward of labors, cannot be, as the
Scriptures so often insinuate, the principal marks aimed at by God. Further,
our virtues are rewarded as worthy of their hire, but the promise of God
begets not any worthiness or dignity in our works, more then of themselves
belong unto them. For as our Schoolmen teach: He that shall Gab. Vasq. in 1.
2. tom. 2. disp. 214 cap. 5. and others ibid. in q. 114. D. Tho.
promise a Lordship or Dukedom, in behalf of some mean service, or piece of
money of small value; does not thereby enhaunce the price of the coin, or
estimate of his obsequious service; but the estate which is given in lieu of
that plighted faith, although it require the performance of the service, or
payment of the money, as conditions necessary to oblige him that promised; yet
it does as much exceed the rate of the one, and desert of the other, as if no
promise had been, no covenant made at all. Moreover the Deuines prove, that
if God should threaten to punish with eternal pain an officious lie, or
other, light offense, that sin should not mount thereby to the heynousnes of
a mortal crime, nor be worthy of more punishment, then of his own nature it
deserves: wherefore, if the commination and threatening of greater torments,
then sins of themselves require, does not augment the guiltines of their
default, or change a small sin into the enormity of a greater: neither can
the promise of abundant remuneration increase the dignity of our works, to
which it is promised; nor the remuneration it self be called a reward, weighed
forth, as S. Gregory Greg. Na. orat in san. Bap. extrema.
Nazianzen affirms, in the just and even balance of God, nor equally
imparted according to our labors, as the Holy Ghost often pronounces; but a
free gift, liberally given, through the gratefulnes and fidelity of the giver,
unless besides the promise, some worthiness, or value, in our works be
acknowledged; to which an agreeable reward be correspondently assigned.

6. The Minor, that God observes due proportion in 2. ad Cor. 9. v. 6. Clem.
Alex. l. 4. strom Matthew. 10. v. 4.
recompensing our service, more or less, conformably to the diligence or
slacknes thereof, is also manifest by the sundry textes already quoted, That
every one shall receive according to his own labor: And by this of Saint
Paul, He that sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap, and he that sows
in blessings, of blessings also shall reap. Which Clemens Alexandrinus also
gathers out of these words of S. Matthew: He that receaueth a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a Prophet; and he that receaueth
a just man, in the name of a just man, shall receive the rewards of a just man:
both receive rewards, yet not both the same, but several, and unequal,
according to the several sanctity of their persons, and inequality of their
merits, whom they receive. Hence the conclusion of my Syllogism without
check or control, is ineuitably inferred: That seeing Almighty God portioneth
forth a greater, or lesser share of glory answerable to the greatness, or
slendernes of our works, as the hire, wages, or reward of them; he truly
remunerateth our pious endeauours, not as sequells of faith, not as mere gifts
of grace, but as precedent causes, or condign deserts of eternal life. Which
when our adversaries gainsay, they make our sovereign God an accept our of
persons, and not a just and upright judge: quit contrary to these texts of holy
writ. (2. ad Timoth. 4. v. 8. ad Romans 2. v. 11. 1. Pet. 1. v. 17. Act. 10. v.
34.) For acception of persons is a vice, directly opposite to distributive
justice; as when a Judge bestows a reward where there is no precedent merit:
or when he gives a more large reward, then the dignity of the merit in any
sort deserves. But God truly recompenseth the labors of his servants, and
recompenseth them with due proportion of greater and lesser reward: therefore
he either presupposes in the^ the diversity of merits; or he violateth Aug.
ep. 46. ad Valent.
the laws of distributive justice. In so much as S. Augustin^ might well say:
If there be no merits, how shall God judge the world. For take away them, and
take away Justice, take away judgment, take away that article of our Creed,
that Christ shall come to judge the quick, and the dead.

7. Another Argument or Enthymeme I frame in this sort, The sins and evil
works of the reprobate, are not eternally punished, either because they are
signs of their infidelity, or by reason of Gods commination, and threats
which he promulgateth of punishing them with everlasting torments: But for that
they be of themselves the true cause of damnation, merit Gods wrath, be
injurious, and offensive to his infinite goodness: Therefore the virtuous acts
and good deeds of the elect, which flow from the streams of heavenly grace
are not only recompensed as fruits of faith, or in regard of Gods promise made
to reward them, but because they be true and proper causes thereof, because
they be pleasing and acceptable in his sight, and do deservedly purchase and
merit his favor. The consequence is inferred out of the words of Christ, who
attributes after the same manner, and with the same causall propositions, the
crown of heaven to the pious works of the just, as he does the punishment of
hell to the hard and unmerciful hearts of sinners saying, Come ye blessed of
my Father, possess ye the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of
the world: For I was an hungered, and you gave me to drink etc. Get you away
from me you cursed etc. I was an hungered, and you gave me not to eat, I was a
thirst, and you gave me not to drink. For this cause the Apostle Matthew. 25. v.
34. v. 41. 1. Cor. 4. v. 17. Tertult. l. de r^sur. carnis c. 40 in Scorp. cap.
13. Aug. ep. 105. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
auerreth the sufferances of his life to win, or cause faluation. Our
Tribulation which presently is momentary and light, works above measure
exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us, where for works our
Protestants corruptly translated heretofore prepares, albeit they have since
corrected it, because it is in Greek (...), that is potently, or forcibly
works. In liew whereof Tertullian reads perficiet in nobis, shall perfect
and accomplish in us an eternal weight of glory, yet not physically, as the
efficient, but morally as the meritorious cause, which wins and purchases
the laurel of be atitude, as sins procure the bane of endless misery.
Whereupon S. Augustine: Even as death is rendered for astipend to the merit of
sin, so is everlasting life, as a stipend to the merit of justice. And S.
Chrysostom, By good works we deserve heaven, as by evil hell.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, IN WHICH The same is strengthened by other reasons and
authorities: and the Objections satisfied.
THE third Argument to support the merit of works, is drawn from those places
of Scripture, which testify the singular value and prerogative of Almesdeeds,
Tob. 1^. v. 9. and Eccles. 3. v. 33. Prou. 25. v. 27. Pro. 16. v. 6. Dan. 4. v.
24.
that it delivers from death, purges sins, makes us find merit and life
everlasting: Give alms and behold all things are clean unto you: By mercy and
faith sins are purged. By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed. Redeem thou
thy sins with alms, and thy iniquities with the mercies of the poor: which
place by the Protestants former, and by their later translation set forth by
commandment of his Majesty, is thus adulterated, Break of thy sins by
righteousness. For although the Hebrew, or rather Chaldeack word Peruk of Perak
the root, signifies sometime to break in pieces, to divide, to rend in
sunder, and also to redeem, yet never properly to break off, or cease to do,
covering by righteousness, as our sectaries wrest it, not extinguishing by alms
deeds, as the Verb inforceth, the remaynes of sin. But albeit the Chaldeake
word had been ambiguous, as in no indifferent man's judgment it is in that
place, yet the Latin word Redime, redeem, at least the Greek (...) (which
has no other native signification, then ransom or redeem thy sins) should
have taken all doubt and ambiguity away, had those Protestant translations
syncerely followed the original fountains as they pretend.

2. The fourth and last reason is insinuated in holy writ, in these very
textes, which commend some virtuous, and heroical acts, as better in
themselves, and more grateful unto God then others, although both the faith be
equal and inhabitant grace by which they are wrought. 1. Cor. 7. v. 38. ^bidem
v. 39. and 40. Matt. 19^ v. ^1.
For so S. Paul says, He that joins his virgin in matrimony does well, and
he that joins not, does better. Likewise speaking of the widow, Let her
marry to whom she will only in our Lord, but more blessed shall she be if she
so remain. In like manner to distribute all our goods to the poor and follow
Christ, is of it self more perfect, then to enjoy the riches of the world, and
bestow them in his service: If thou will be perfect go and sell the things
that thou have, and give Ioa^. 15. v. 13
to the poor etc. To sacrifice our lives in testimony of our faith, is more
precious in the eyes of God, then to relieve the poor with a cup of cold
water, Greater love then this no man has, that a man yield his life for his
friends. In so much as there is some value, some worthiness in the act of
Martyrdom, which is not in almesdeeds, some dignity in voluntary poverty which
is not in rich liberality, some excellency of merit in virginity, beyond the
degree, or holiness of wedlock, wherein least our adversaries should wrangle,
that they are more excellent and worthy, only as they are signs of greater
faith, both our Savior and the Apostle speak absolutely, without any
condition of greater or lesser prerogative of faith. Therefore the things
considered in themselves are better, more gr^tefull and meritorious, all other
circumstances being equally weighed. For as conditional assertions cannot be
absolutely In conc. Mediolan. Ambros. Epist. 81. Ambr. ibid. ep. 8 c. Aug sermon.
143. de te^p. (Diuersa specits claritatis quia diuersa su^t merita charitatis.)
Centur. 5. c. 4. col. 518. Aug. l. 3. de peccat. meritis. Contur. c. 4 4. col.
301. Amb. l. 2. ad Marcel. Cent. 3. 4. col. 86. Orig l. 10. ep. ad Romans Cent.
4. c. 4. Col. 192. Cbrom. in concion. de Beat. Cent. 4. c. 10 col. 1250. Ierom
aduer. Iou. Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 86. Tertul l. de Ieiunio. Cent. 2. c. 4 col. 64.
understood, no more can absolute and irrestreyned be expounded conditionally,
unless we pervert the ten our of Gods sacred laws, and shake the whole fabrike
of divine oracles in pieces. Whereupon very religiously S. Ambrose, Bassian,
and other Bishops without any condition of more fervent faith absolutely
avouch; Marriage is good by which the posterity of Irumane succession is
propagated, but Virginity is better whereby the inheritance is gotten of our
celestial Kingdom, and the succession is found out of heavenly merits. Also
the same S. Ambrose with Bassian, and the rest a little before: It is a wild
and rusticall howling to awaite or look for no favor of virginity, no
preferme^t of chastity, to be willing promiscuously to confound all things, to
abrogate the degrees of diverse merits, and bring in a certain poverty of
celestial remunerations. S. Augustine: You see that clarity is promised to the
bodies of Saints, and a various luster of clarity for the various merits of
charity. But of him, S. Ambrose, Origin, Chromatius, S. Hierome, Tertullian and
S. Ignatius the Apostles Scholar, I allege no other then the words of the
Centuristes. It is apparent (say they) that Augustine was of this mind, that
Virgins devoted to sanctimony have more merit with God then the faithful
married folks. For because Iouinian thought the contrary that they have no
more merit, this he reprehended in him. Ambrose to insolently pronounces of
the merit of virgins. Origin makes virginity a work of perfection. Chromatius
extolleth voluntary Poverty, and says, that by the merit thereof the riches
of the heavenly Kingdom are obtained. Hierome de striving too much for
Virginity, is somewhat unjust, or adverse to marriage. Tertullian attributes
merit to Fasting. It appears out of the Epistles of Ignatius, that men even
then (in the next age after Christ) began too studiously to love and reverence
the state of Virginity.

3. Concerning the pre-eminence and merit of Martyrdom they record the like:
howbeit M. Doctor Field with his wonted procacity outfacingly deposes; The
Century writers reprove not the Fathers for any such error as the Papists do
maynteyne touching the force of martyrdom etc. Touching the merit,
satisfaction, and expiation of sins which they fancy to be in the blood of
martyrs, of which impiety the Father Ignatius in ep. ad Antioch. ad Her^. ad
Tarsen. Field in his 3. book. c. 21. fol. 1. ^. Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 64. Clem.
in stro^. Igna. in ep. ad Smir. ad Antioch. and Polycar*
never thought. Deal once sincerely M. Field, I pray belie us not, gaynesay
not that which is evident in the Centuristes. We allow not any merit,
satisfaction, or expiation of sins in the blood of Martyrs, but in the noble
resolution of their mind, and in the heroical act of sheeding their blood. And
of this the Century-writers so undoubtedly control the ancient Fathers, as
he is past all shame who goes about to deny it. I will produce their sayings,
and refer them to the judgment of any not ouerpartiall sectary. First
chronicling the unfitting speeches (as they term them, because they fit not
their errors) with which the doctors of the first two hundred years garnish
the resplendent crown of Martyrdom, thus they write. They (the Fathers of the
next age after Christ) began to think too honorably of Martyrdom, in so
much as they attribute unto it a certain expiation of sins. For Clemens
expressly says; Martyrdom is a cleansing, or expurgation of ossences with
glory: and Ignatius in diverse of his Epistles speaks very daungerously of the
merit of Martyrdom. Then proceeding Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 85. Tertul in.
Scorpiaco. and in Apologia, and in lib. de anima. Origin. Homil. 7. in lud.
Cypr. l. 2. epist. 6.
to the Fathers of the third hundred years, to Tertullian, Origin, and S.
Cyprian. All the Doctors (say they) of this age, extol Martyrdom beyond
measure. For Tertullian does almost equal it with Baptism. Filth, or dregs
(says he) are washed away by Baptism, but spots are made white with
Martyrdom. And i^n his Apology: Who, when it comes to pass, does not long to
suffer, that he may purchase the grace of God, that he may obtain all pardon
from him, by the satisfaction or recompense of his blood: for to this work all
sins are forgiven. And in his book of the soul, If thou die for God, thy
blood is the whole key of Paradise. But Origin much more insolently then
Tertullian, prefers Martyrdom before Baptism, and holds us to be made
more pure by that, then by Baptism. Likewise that by Baptism, sins passed
are scowred forth, but by Martyrdom future are killed: he says, that Devils
cannot appeach the souls of Martyrs, for so much as they are rinsed in their
own liquour, clarified in their death, washed in their blood. Cyprian also
affirms immortality to be gained by the blood of Martyrs. And in his book of
exhortation to Martyrdom, he aduenturously teaches Martyrdom to be a
Baptism, greater in favor, more subly me in power, in honor more precious
then the Baptism of regeneration. In the Baptism of water the remission of
sins is received, in that of blood the Laurel of virtues. Hitherto the
Centurists word by word, who if they reprove not the Fathers for the same
error which we maintain, if they assign not to the excellency of martyrdom
out of the Fathers writings, Merit, Recompense, Satisfaction, Expiation,
Purging, Cleansing, forgiveness of sins, clarity, whitenes, immortality,
glory, the laurel of virtues, the key of Paradise, which opens the gates of
heaven; then let M. Feildes shameless wantones in denying, be accounted
hereafter well advised sobernes, in excusing these things.

4. Other Protestant writers although they treat not of Martyrdom in
particular, yet of merit in particular they accuse the ancient Church.
Bullinger avouches: Bulling* upon the Apoca. ser. 87. fol. 270. Humfrey Ies.
part. 2. page 530. Bell in his down fall. page 61.
The doctrine of merit, satisfaction, and justification of works did
incontinently after the Apostles time lay their first foundation. Doctor
Humfrey: It may not be denied, but that Irenaeus, Clement and others have in
their writings the opinions of freewill and merit of works. Doctor Whitgift:
Almost all the Bishops of the Greek Church and Latin also for the most part
were spotted with doctrins of freewil, of merit, of invocation of Saints etc.
Some wra^gler may cavil, as Bell the Apostata does, that the merit which the
primitive Church allowed, is not the same which we defend, but the merit of
impetration only, as though merit were not a thing quite different from
impetration. 1. The beggar does impetrate, he does not merit his alms. The
hired servant meriteth, he does not impetrate his wages. 2. Merit arises from
the worthiness of desert, impetration from the earnestnes only of request. 3.
That is grounded in some title of justice, or claim of right, this in mere
prayers and supplications, directly excluding the right of claim. 4. That has
intrinsecall reference to a due reward or payment, presupposing a dignity. in
the work, this to a liberal gift without any respect to the value of the
work: wherefore seeing S. Gregory Naziazen says, that for good works we may
exact reward, not as grace, but as a plain debt, seeing the rest auow with
Nazian. ora. 3. in hap.
him that we deserve heaven, as the stipend or crown of our works, they
cannot be wrested to be understood of impetration, but of true and proper
merit, or else the Magdeburgian Protestants with their english Colleagues were
to blame, in reprehending the Fathers for that kind of merit, which for
impetration no doubt they would never have done.

5. Nevertheless it is objected, that eternal life is the free ad Romans 6. v.
23. 1. Io. 5. v. ^1. Abbot in his defense c. 5. very often.
gift of God, imparted by grace, bestowed upon us of mercy: That it is proposed
in scripture under the condition of an inheritance, which befalls to children
without their deserts. I grant all this, yet I find that as it is affirmed to
be given by grace, so also to be gotten by violence: as it is called a free
gift, so a price or reward: as a goal of mercy, so a crown of justice: as an
inheritance belonging to children, so a payment, hire or wages purchased by
workmen, deserved of laborers. Aug. ep. 105. de correp. and gra. c. 13. in
en^h. c. 107. and lib. arb. c. 8. and 9.
Therefore we ought not so to adhere to one text, or manner of speech that we
defeat the force of the others, as Protestants are accustomed, but we must
allot to every one the life, and vigor of their native signification. We allow
therefore that our happy life, is a free gift, given by grace, bestowed of
mercy, in regard of the benefit of reconciliation, or first justice most
freely and mercifully communicated unto us, yet being justified, encouraged to
work, and promised to be accordingly rewarded, it Aug. tra. 3. in euang Joan.
(...) debitu^ flagitatiam debitum exigit.)
is then not only a gift, but a true price, recompense, or payment due unto us
by divine conuenant, or bargain. In which sort S. Augustine often interprets
the former savings, and teaches, that euerlaging bliss, is a reward to
justice, a grace and favor unto man, that is, a grace to man, endewed only
with his natural qualities, a reward to him renewed, justified, and diligently
laboring with Gods assistance, a grace to the infidel, a debt to the
faithful, a grace to Saul a blasphemer, a debt to him a believer, as the same
S. Augustine in another place largely declares; adjoining these words; Hearken
how Paul asks a debt, or a^ due, who first received grace, not due etc. There
remains to me a crown of justice: now he craves a debt, now he exacteth a
debt. So heaven is our inheritance as we are the adopted children of God and
coheires of Christ, our Crown as we fight and conquer the assaults of the
devil, our hire wages, and day-peny also as we are workers, and collabourers
with Christ in the vineyard of his Father. For albeit terrene and worldly
patrimonies are by succession without labor or desert often deuolued to
unworthy inheritours, to ungracious children, sometime rashly without judgment,
even against the will of their parents, yet our Basil. he. ^^. i^ Hexametr.
Tua aliqua ex part^ est gratia, quare merito ingredi^ris coronatus pronounciere
nihil indignus qui mercedem insumptae operae deo repignora^t ^ecipias.
heavenly inheritance is never granted (infantes only excepted) but to such as
deserve it, to such dutiful and obedient children, as by their labors,
merits, and virtuous demeanor, are made worthy of that celestial Kingdom.

6. All which is clearly testified, and profoundly taught; by that grave
learned and ancient doctor of the greek Church S. Basil the great. Grace,
says he, is thine after some sort, by which thou shall deservedly enter
crowned. For if thy creator had given thee all before hand, by what favor
should the gates of the heavenly kingdom be opened unto thee meriting nothing?
But now something he has bestowed, some thing he has left to be accomplished,
that when thou have in thy self brought it to perfection, thou may be
pronounced no whit unworthy, to receive the reward of thy employed labor, God
redeeming his pledge. As many words, so many evidences does he bring to
witness for us: for grace is not so free a gift, but that it is some way ours.
To wit, by our working and cooperation with it. 2. We are nothing unworthy, but
we deservedly enter crowned into our most happy inheritance. 3. God gives not
all, but leaves some thing for us to be done, helped by his grace. 4. When we
have persued that in our selves, we receive the reward, not of Gods promise,
not of Christ's merits, no^ of our says only, but of our employed labor and
pains. 5. The reward of glory, is not a mere donatiue, but a just redemption,
by with God redeemeth his formerly pledged, and engaged grace. Nothing can be
spoken more excellently, nothing written more vnanswerablely for our
adversaries conviction, if convicted they would yeald. ad Romans 8. v. 18. M.
Abbot c. 5. sect. 9. fol. 6^7. 668. Aug. l d^ gra and lib. arbit. c. 7.


7. But M. Abbot ashamed to yield, obiecteth again out of S. Paul: The
afflictions of this time are not worthy of the glory to come that shall be
revealed upon us. Then he alleges the like sayings of many Fathers, to
prove that our tribulations merit not the glory of heaven. I answer, they have
not any merit in themselves, according to their natural value, worthy of the
guerdon prepared for us: After which manner S. Augustine, S. Basil, S. Gregory,
S. Bernard, and the rest, exclude the recompense of our merits. S. Augustine
expressly says, God crowns not thy merits but as his gifts. Howbeit the
Apostle discourses of our tribulations, as they are sprinkled with grace, and
proceed from the justified, yet does not say, as Protestants corruptly
translate, they are not worthy of the glory, but, are not condign to the glory
to come that shall be revealed in us, that is, they have no condign equality,
because our passions are momentary, our felicity eternal; these small,
tolerable and measured forth according to our weakness, that infinitely great,
immense, and heaped up beyond all measure, and so of no account in comparison
of it, as a moment is nothing paralelled with eternity: yet if they had not
some true proportion of merit, the Apostle would not say, as he plainly does,
that our tribulation which presently is momentay, and light, works above
measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us. The short and temporal
2. ad Corin. 4. v. ^7.
pleasures, which the reprobate take in sinning, are not comparable to the
everlasting torments they endure in hell, yet they truly merit and deserve
their damnation. The very heroical and most excellent actions of our Savior
Christ, his bitter passions were not equal to the pre-eminence of glory he
receaueth in heaven, and yet no Protestant will deny them to have been of
infinite merit* both to himself and us, because of the dignity of his person;
Therefore notwithstanding our afflictions, neither in length of time, nor
extremity of pain, be answerable to the excessive joys reserved for us: yet
they be truly meritorious of themselves, by reason of the worthy streams of
grace, and divine dignity of supernatural life from whence they flow. For this
cause it is true which M. Abbot diligently observes out of the Fathers: That
God vouchsafes to give us above our merits. Above them Abbot in his defense
c. 5. sect. 13. fol. 683. Abbot in* the same place and fol. 669. Fulge^. ad
Mon. l. ^. Bern. in aununt. sect. 1. Bernard l. de gra. and lib. arbit.
propefine^. Fulgen. in prol. lib. ad Mon. Read quod promifisti, quia fecimus
quod iussisti. Aug. ser. 16. de ver. Apost. Aug. l. ^. Confess. c. 9. in fine.
we grant in magnificence of payment, yet according to them also in some
proportion of reward, as the Emperor liberally dispenses by the rules of
distributive justice the spoils taken in war, unto his soldiers,
answerable to the exployts of every man, yet above the rate of their deserts.
But he insisteth further partly out of S. Fulgentius, and partly out of S.
Bernard, That Gods reward does so incomparably exceed all the merit, and work
of man, a^ that eternal life is not due thereunto by right, neither should God
do any wrong if he did not give it; Which is easily solued, that it is not due
unto us by absolute right, independent of all precedent mercy and grace, or
that God should do any such wrong, as in rigor of mere justice, without
regard to any favor or promise of his, he should be absolutely bound to
recompense our labors. This right in exacting this wrong, or injury in not
repaying, those Fathers deny, but never that right which is grounded also in
mercy. For of that S. Bernard flatly pronounces; S. Paul does confidently
exact the promise; the promise truly of mercy, but not of justice to be
fullfilled. And S. Fulgentius: God of his benignity vouchsafes to make
himself a debtour: A debtour (says S. Augustine) he is made unto us etc. to
whom we may say repay that which thou have promised, because we have done that
which thou have commanded. Likewise: Thou vouchsafest, o Lord because thy mercy
shines for ever, by thy promises to become a de^tour to them, to whom thou
forguiest all their debtes.

8. Their last objection or cavil rather, is, That our merits are
prejudicial, and injurious unto Christ, a decrease of the full tide of his
abundant merits. As though it were a lessening to the Sun, that the stars
shine with his borrowed light: A wrong to the fountain that sundry pipes are
filled with his streams: An injury to the tree that all her branches be
laden with fruit. Our Savior says: In Joan. 1^ 9. v. 8. Brentius in Apol.
conf^ss witem. c. de contri.
this my Father is glorified, that you bring very much fruit. Is the Father
glorified by the plenty of our fruitful and virtuous deeds, and is not Christ
honored by the accrue of our merits? I am content to stand to the judgment
of a Protestant, of that most grave and learned Father Brentius* so he is
styled by M. Jewel) who inueigheth against us not for extenuating, but for
magnifying hereby too much the virtue of Christ, and of his passion: To
attribute (says he) unto Christ, that, not only he by his death had deserved
the expiation of our sins, but also has imparted that merit to our good
works, this is to assign much more to Christ, then either he acknowledges,
or the thing it self can suffer: and it is contumely not only to detract from
the glory due to any thing but also to ascribe too M. William Reynolds in his
refutation of M. whi. Reprehens. fol 94. 95. Andr. ^ri^ de Eccles. lib. 4. c.
12.
much praise and glory to it etc. Notwithstanding M. William Reynolds our
famous Champion, dexterously conuinceth by the verdicte of Andreas Frisius
another zealous Protestant, That we neither dishonor, nor magnify too much our
Redeemers merits, but keep the current of golden mediocrity, not bending to
the right hand, nor to the left. Thus Frisius writes. Although Christ take not
away all infirmity from such as be regenerate, and renewing them by his spirit,
and planting in them virtues of new life, and imparting to them merit and his
justice, most truly and with singular fruit he is said to live in them. And by
this means the glory of Christ is not obscured, but clarified: the Cross of
Christ is not euacuated but made more copious, the price of the blood shed for
us is not diminished, but increased. So he, manifestly demonstrating these two
remarkable things. First that our meritorious works do not blemish or
extenuate, but add greater renown, and luster unto the merits of Christ.
Secondly that the worthiness of our merits, spring not from the old roo^es of
nature, but from the new plants of virtue, grafted in us by the spirit of
adoption, we receive from God; which new spirit, that it should bring forth
seeds of merit is so consonant unto reason, as no judicious person can speak
against it. For if the vital breath, or soul of man, infused into this lump
of humane flesh, causes beauty, motion; speech, and other actions of natural
life; if the moral habit or root of virtue, works and produces acts of
morality correspondent thereunto; if the purchased habites of Philosophy,
Theology, and the like, beget new Philosophical and Theological discourses,
new acts, new propositions; what should hinder the divine habit and
supernatural fountain of grace, from achieuing divine and supernatural works
meritorious of new grace, meritorious of glory, worthy of God, worthy of the
reward he bestows upon them, supposing always his promise, by which he
obliges himself to be a debtour unto us. Hereupon the grace which is given is
called our regeneration, or new birth, because it aduanceth us to a new state
of life by which we are enabled to bring forth new and supernatural actions,
which could not be Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. c. 6.
wrought out of the forge of nature. As S. Augustine most clearly testifies in
these words. When grace is given, then begin also our good merits, by the
means of that grace; for if grace be taken away, man does presently fall
headlong by his own freewill: therefore when a man begins to have good
merits, he ought not to attribute them unto himself but to God, to whom it is
said in the psalm: O Lord be my helper, and do not forsake me.

8. And thus, seeing the store of our meritorious deeds is honorable unto
Christ, glorious unto God, and profitable to our selves, give me leave to seal
up this Treatise ^. ad Cor. ^5. v. 58. Bernard. ser. in illaverba, Ecce nos
reliquimusomnia.
with that exhortation of the Apostle: Therefore my beloved brethren, be
stable, and immovable, abounding in the works of our Lord, always knowing
that your labor is not vain in our Lord: but so precious in his sight, as
every hour spent, every work accomplished in his favor, he remunerateth with
the guerdon of incomparable felicity. For as no hair of your head, so no
moment of time shall perish (says S. Bernard.) But more elegantly S. Ambrose
and venerable Bede by those words ( a hair of your head shall not perish)
understand, Amb. in prolo. l. 2. de sp. sanc. Beda. l. 6. in Luc.
that not only the noble exploytes of Saints, but that their least thoughts,
and cogitations, shall be scored up by our just Judge, and be copiously rewarded
in the day of retribution: For what does it auile me (says S. Ambrose) if God
keep an account of all my hairs? But this redoundeth to my profit, if he a
watchful witness of my works, bestows upon them the remuneration of eternal
glory. With what care then, and solicitude, with what diligence and alacrity,
should we endeavor to treasure up great plenty of virtues, now whilst the
tide serves, and harvest lasts; ^ow when short labors may purchase
perpetual crowns, repentant tears everlasting joys, voluntary alms riches
of immortality: Now when every good thought meriteth a Kingdom, every moment
may gain Eternity.

Laus Deo, and immaculatae semper V. M.
The end of the sixth Book.
An Advertisement.
GENTLE Reader, whereas M. D. Bilson has printed his book Of Christian
Subjection, both in quarto, and in octauo; these are to advertise thee, that
most commonly I do cite that in quarto: as also the other of M. Whitaker de
Scriptura and Ecclesia, as they were printed, before they were have compiled
together in one volume; for that the quotations of page and leaf do otherwise
disagree.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing, to be corrected. In the second Part.
PAGE 4. line 31. There, read These page 15. l. 19. hindered, only. read
hindered only. page 24. l. 4. and us therein. and us; therein. page 35. l. 2
Some. So. page 36. l. 35 cannot, but cannot page 49. l. 12. this his page 58. l.
36. anuquity. iniquity. page 61. l. 13. It is Is it. page 63 l. 19. thereby
whereby. page 65. l. 6. of. to. Ibid. l. 14. Is it. It is. Ibid. l. penult. a
holy one. only one page 71. l. 8. Or. Of. page 95. l. 22. what, was. Ibid. l
29. of. or. page 99. l. 23. enterfeite. interfeire. Ibid. l. 24. from-forth page
11^. l. 7. cover. covet page 112. l. 23. that passage) read that passage, by
the works the faith was consionmate) page 124. l. 31. check. choke. page 126.
l. 19. or stay read stay of Faith page 144. l. 6. Salamanca. of Salamanca.
page ^52. l. 12. manifest. manifests. page 162. l. 17. this promise* this
^rouiso page 167 l. 7. before. aforesaid. page 176. l. 1. never si. never sin.
Ibid l. 12. election elect. page ^97 l. 34. the thing. the ^inge. page 205. l.
^3. to so. so to. Ibid. l 34. all in things* all in all things. page 224. l.
1. we all. we are all. page 233. l. 3^. of it, rebel^ing of it rebelling. page
234 l. ^ if it page 242 l 23. or Justin* of Iustn page 250. l. 19. many. may page
262. l ^8 (...). unjust. page 263. l. 24. as act. an act. page 267. l. 9.
contain. cont^^ue. page 270 l. 11. antecedent primacy, read antecedent,
primary, etc. page 28. l. 7. wounds. words. page 284. l. 1 for both forsooth.
page 288. l. 14. raking. racking. Ibid. l. 25. creation. vocation. page 289. l.
20. in a respect simply. read in a respect, simply etc. Ibid l. 12 of title.
or title. page 290. l. 9. guilty. guily. page 255 l. 3. his life. this life.
page 296 l. 6. merit. mercy. page ^04 l. 5. of themselves. of them. Ibid. l. 25.
exacting. this. read exacting, this etc. page 305. l. 27. and renewing yet
renewing. page 307. l. 6. auise. avail.

Other less faults, especially in pointing, by reason of the obscure Copy,
and absence of the (...), the Reader himself will easily observe, and
courtecusly correct as he reads*


