A SERMON PREACHED IN St MARY'S Church in Oxford, March xxiv. MDCX. at the
solemnizing of the happy inauguration of our gracious sovereign KING JAMES.

WHEREIN IS PROVED THAT KINGS DO hold their kingdoms immediately from God.

By SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD D. of Divinity Fellow of Corpus Christi College.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE, LORD
BISHOP OF LONDON.
KIng Solomon, one of wisdoms offspring, (Right Reverend Father) has said,
All rivers go into the Sea. Some think they do it to do their homage, and
pay tribute to that place, from whence they received their beginning. May this
little Sermon imitate those rivers, it is all it cares for. It had beginning
from your Lordship, when the fourth time you worthily bore the highest office
in our University. For your request (even then a command to me) gave it
being. It now returns as homager and tributarie to your Lordship, and is glad
that it sees the light through your favorable countenance. God almighty
enlarge his graces upon your Lordship, and fill you with his strength, that the
Church of Christ here long enjoying you, may rejoice to see the pride of many
her enemies through you abated. From my study in Corpus Christi College.
September. 9. 1611.

Your Lordships, in all duty and service to be commanded, SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD.

Psalm. 21. Ver. 6. Thou have set him as blessings for ever.


A King takes upon him his Subjects person, to sing an (...), a victoriall
song, a gratulatorie song, a song of thankesgiving for the manifold blessings
derived from heaven by the King upon the Subject. This King was David: his
Subjects the people of Israel: his Song this Psalm: the Blessings perpetual.

Job, for his seven sons, when their feasting days were, did early Job. 1.5.
every day offer seven Holocaustes, so many burnt offerings; for he thought,
It may be, that my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts: and
might not David for his subjects offer up his sacrifices, Hos. 14.3.
vitulos labiorum, the sacrifices of praise and thankesgiving upon the like
thought? It may be that my people have sinned through their unthankfulness
against God. God through my government has plentifully powered upon my people
his blessings: it may be, that now waxen fat, they regard him not to give him
thanks; therefore will I for them offer unto him the sacrifice of praise.

That Sacrifice was this Psalm. A psalm to be understood not only of the
civil Magistrate, as some affirm; nor only of Christ, as others; but of the
civil Magistrate, with reference to Christ. David was a type of Christ, and
his kingdom of Christ's kingdom; his victories were but Praeludia, as
preambles or forerunners of Christ's victories. Therefore speaking of David,
we must ever have an eye to Christ. And, as this people here acknowledges for
their temporal estate, that the safety of their king, was their safety, and
common joy; so must it be acknowledged by us, that upon the victories of our
head Christ, and his exaltation, depends our spiritual welfare. Christ's
victories over sin, death, and hell, are our victories, and have freed us
from the curse of the Law; his resurrection is a cause of ours; his exaltation
is our joy.

This Psalm thus understood (of David with reference to Christ, yet primarilie
of David) has 2. general parts. One is (...), an Enumeration of those many
blessings, wherewith God had blessed David; and this part is continued for the
first seven verses.

The other is (...); a confession, or acknowledgement of the power of God,
whereby he dissipateth, and brings to naught the counsels of the wicked. Let
the wicked assisted with all the powers of hell, band themselves together to
do harm to the Lords anointed; they shall find that there is a God, Psalm.
144.10.
Qui dat salutem regibus, That gives deliverance unto kings, and rescueth
David his servant from the hurtful and cruel sword. The right hand of the
Lord shall find them out, and make them like a fiery oven in the time of his
anger. This confession of David's people beginning at the eighth verse, is
concluded with an Epiphoneme in the 13. Be thou exalted, O Lord in thy
strength, so will we sing and praise thy power.

Return we to the Enumeration of the blessings wherewith God had blessed
David; and we shall behold the king Deuteronomy. 33.23
filled with blessings from the Lord. He was filled with joy of heart for the
strength and salvation of God, verse. 1. Whatsoever his heart could wish, or
lips request, that was granted him, v. 2. He was prevented with liberal
blessings, v. 3. A crown of pure Gold was set upon his head, v. eod. Life was
given him, a long life, v. 4. Glory, dignity, and honor in despite of his
foes, were heaped on him, v. 5. He was appointed for blessings unto his
people, v. 6. and was made glad with the joy of the countenance of the Lord,
eod. And why was David thus filled with blessings from the Lord? Was it for any
merit of his own? No. The 7 verse will tell us why it was. It was for the sure
trust and confidence he had in God and his mercies. Because the king trusts
in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most high, he shall not slide.

Out of this abundance of blessings, first settled upon K. David's head, and
thence like Aarons Psalm. 133.2.
ointment descending, and sending forth sweet odoures of peace and prosperity
to the lowest of his people, much might be brought to fit this days
Solemnity. This day has God given us opportunity of meeting now the eighth
time to celebrate it, to the glory of his holy name, to the honor of our
religious Sovereign, and to the comfort of his loiall subjects. To which
purpose out of David's store of blessings, I have made choice of that which is
in the former part of the sixth verse, Thou have set him as blessings for ever.

The words you may call David's exaltation. I observe in them 4. Circumstances.
The 1. is the author of this exaltation; God. The 2. the exaltation it self;
David appointed king over Israel. The 3. the end of the exaltation; Blessings
to his people. The 4. the continuance of the blessings; For ever.

Thou have set him as blessings for ever.] Thou; there is the author. Have set
him; there is the exaltation. As blessings; there is the end. For ever; there
is the continuance.

I will with all the speed I may, pass through these circumstances, that I
may speak somewhat to the general doctrine issuing hence; namely, that kings
hold their kingdoms immediately from God. Whereof when I shall have made some
use, it will be time to conclude. Till then I commend my self to God his
gracious assistance, and your Christian patience.

Thou have set him as blessings for ever. The first circumstance is the author
of David's exaltation. The author is God called in the first verse of this Psalm
by his honourablest title, Jehovah, God! Excedit supereminentia divinitatis
vsitati eloquij facultatem, says S. Austin de Trinitate, lib. 7. ca. 4. The
supereminency of the Deity passes man's utterance; and therefore it is
immediately added, Melius cogitatur quam dicitur; we can better think then
speak of God. Yet when we consult with our deepest thoughts, we come short of
apprehending that incomprehensible Majesty. That of S. Lib. de patris and
filij unitate, if that book be S. Hilaries.
Hilarie is as true as vulgar, Certe hoc est Deus, quod and cum dicitur, non
potest dici; cum aestimatur, non potest aestimari; cum comparatur, non potest
comparari; cum definitur, ipse sua definitione crescit. Out of doubt, whosoever
shall go about to search into the secrets and essence of the will of God,
Prove. 25.28.
opprimetur a gloria, and fear and shame shall be his covering.

To such curious searchers, who to get themselves a name above their
neighbors, will seem to be Gods cou^sellours, I commend the wise advise of
Sirachs son, c. 3. ver. 22. Seek not out the things that are too hard for
thee, neither search the things rashly, which are too mighty for thee; but what
God has commanded thee, think upon that with reverence, and be not curious in
many of his works; for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the
things that are secret. Such curiosity may further be suppressed by that of
Elihu, Job. 36.26. Behold, God is excellent, and we know him not: and by that
of Jeremy, cap. 32.19. as the vulgar Latin makes him speak,
Incomprehensibilis cogitatu, our thoughts comprehend him not: and by that of S.
Paul, Romans 11.33. (...); his ways are past finding out.

Wherefore that we be not illicite curiosi, more curious then meet is,
abstain we from searching into such secrets as God has reserved unto
himself; yet that we be not damnabiliter ingrati, as S. De vocation. Gentium
lib. 1. c. 7.
Amhrose speaks, condemned for ingratitude, let us use our best diligence to
understand what God has revealed of himself. For howsoever the secret things
belong to the Lord our God, yet the things revealed belong unto us and our
children for ever. Witness the word of Truth, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

It is revealed of God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, who is Chemnit. Loc.
Theol. part. 1. cap. 3. page 62.
unus atque trinus, as S. Austin styles him, unus natura, trinus in personis, a
Trinity in Unity, and a Unity in Trinity; that he is a Deuteronomy. 10.17
God of Gods, and Lord of Lords; a God most Ecclus. 43.29
wonderful, very Deuteronomy 10.17
great, mighty, and terrible; a God that Ecclus. 43.31.
cannot be expressed by word, nor conceaved by thought; August. Soli loq. cap.
24.
of whom all the Angels in heaven do stand in fear, whom all Dominations and
Thrones do adore, at whose presence all powers do shake. A God in greatness
infinite, in goodness Sovereign, in wisdom wonderful, in power almighty,
in counsels terrible, in judgments righteous, in cogitations secret, in works
holy, in mercy rich, in promise true, always the same; eternal, everlasting,
immortal, unchangeable. Thus have ye the author of David's exaltation. The
exaltation it self follows.

Thou have set him blessings for ever. The Greek books have, (...), or,
(...), Thou will give him a blessing. So has S. Hierome, so has S. Austin.
Such superemine^t lights of the Church cannot want their followers. But I may
not forsake the fountain. The Hebrew words do thus sound, Thou will put him,
or, thou have put him (for the Enallage or interchange of those tenses is very
familiar to that holy tongue) Thou have put him blessings. Posuisti eum
benedictiones. Supply the Ellipsis of the Preposition, and it will be, Posuisti
eum in benedictiones. And what is that?

Some do expound it by the contrary, Poni, Dari, Esse in maledictionem, may be
said of one who is become so odious, Moller. in Ps. 21.
and execrable, ut nomen eius serviat imprecationibus, and diris, as if when
you wish the extremity of evil to another, you should say, God do to him as
he has done to such a one. I need not allege Homers (...), nor any
imprecations of the Poet against his Ibis, for instance. In volumine libri, in
the sacred volumes we have an example. The phrase we have Ierem. 24.9. where
concerning Zedechiah, king of Judah, and his Princes, thus says the Lord, Dabo
eos, I will give them for a terrible plague to all the kingdoms of the earth,
and for a reproach, and for a proverb, and for a common talk, and in
maledictionem, for a curse. I will give them for a curse. This is explicated,
cap. 29.22. where thus says the Lord of hoasts, the God of Israel; They of the
captivity of Judah that are in Babel, shall take up this curse, and say; The
Lord make thee like Zedechiah, and like Ahab, whom the king of Babel burnt in
the fire.

If this be the meaning of Poni, Dari, or, Esse in maledictionem, by the law of
Contraries we may determine what it is Poni, Dari, or, Esse in benedictionem.
Poni, Dari, Esse in benedictionem, may be said of one who is so happy, so
prosperous, Moller.
ut sub nomine eius vota concipiantur, as if when you would wish all good to
your friend, you should say, so God do to thee as he has done to such a one.
So did Isaac say to Jacob, Genesis 28.4. God all sufficient bless thee, make thee
to increase, multiply thee, and give thee the blessing of Abraham. God give
thee the blessing of Abraham; as he blessed Abraham, so bless he thee.
According to this exposition, these words, Posuisti eum in benedictiones, do
carry this sense, that such was the happy and prosperous estate of king David,
ut sub nomine eius vota concipiantur, as if praying for our King, we should
say, God give unto him the blessings of David.

A second exposition follows; Poni, Dari, Esse in benedictionem, may be said
of one, who is full and abounds with so great plenty of all good things,
that God may seem to have been willing to pour out at once all his
beneficence upon him. Turn your eyes which way you will, and behold that man,
you shall see nothing but as it were a mirror of Gods bounty very liberally
powered out. To this sense it is said of Christ his flock, Ezech. 34.26. I will
set them as a blessing eve^ round about my mountain. Pona^ eas benedictionem:
the abstract is put for the co^crete. I will set them as a blessing, that is, I
will make the^ blessed. Esai 39.24. it is said of Israel, that it shall be a
blessing; In paraph. in Psalm. 20.
and there the Abstract is for the Concrete. It is Iansenius his observation,
Israel erit benedictio, id est, erit benedictus, vel benedictione plenus: which
construction of his well sorteth with the verse following, v. 25. where it is
further added of the same Israel, The Lord of hoasts shall bless it, saying,
Blessed be my people. According to this exposition, these words, Posuisti eum
benedictiones, do carry this sense; God has so appointed David, that he may
be perpetually blessed, both in respect of God who endoweth him with
immortality, and also in respect of men, of whom he shall for ever be
praised.

There is a third exposition; Poni, Dari, or, Esse in benedicti^nem, may be
said of one, who is blessed not only in him self, but is made also a blessing
unto others, by whom others also are blessed, and so account themselves. To
this sense God says unto Abraham Genesis 12.2. Thou shall be a blessing; that
is, thou shall be not only blessed thy self, but by thee shall others also be
blessed: for so it follows, v. 3 I will bless them that bless thee, and in
thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. According to this exposition,
those words, Posuisti eum benedictiones, do carry this sense; God took David
from a poor and mean estate, from a sheepheards life, from following ewes
great with young, Psalm. 78.70.71. and exalted him to be king over Israel, and
placed him in that throne for this end, that he might be for blessings to
Israel his people. The end then of David's exaltation, is blessings to his
people, and it was my third circumstance.

Thou have put him blessings] Blessings, not (...), as the 70 have it, nor
Benedictionem as the vulgar, a Blessing, but (...) blessings, in the plural
number, to note the wonderful abundance of Gods graces bestowed upon the
people through the king. The blessings bestowed upon Israel through David, may
be reduced to three heads; one is the worship of God reinstituted in its
purity. 2. Deliverance from foreign enemies. 3. The restitution of judgment
and justice. The worship of God was reinstituted in its purity when David
brought the ark of the Lord from the house of Obed-edom the Gittite, into the
city of David, 2. Sam. 6.12.

The deliverance from foreign enemies was wrought when David smote Aram, 2.
Sam. 8.12.
and Moab, and the children of Ammon, and Edom, and the Philistines, and
Amalec, and Hadadezer the son of Rehob king of Zobah, and took from out
their hand the bridle of bondage, 2, Sam. 8.1.

That judgment and justice were restored by him, its not obscurely delivered,
2. Sam. 8.15. where it is said that David reigned over all Israel, and
executed judgment and justice to all his people. In these three heads
consists the office of a good and godly King. Give such a King, a King that
shall promote the worship of God according to the word of truth; that shall be
victorious over all his enemies, that shall maintain his subjects through
judgment and justice, in peace and tranquillity: Give such a king (such a king
you enjoy) and he shall be a parallel for our David here, and may as well be
said Poni a Deo in benedictiones, to be placed by God in his throne for this
end, that he may be for blessings to us his people; and that (...) for ever,
which is the continuance of the end, and my last circumstance.

Thou have set him blessings for ever. (...). In the Ark of Noah it is rendered
aeternitati, or, in aeternum; in the 70 (...); in the vulgar Latin, in seculum
seculi, for ever. Some take it to signify for a long season, as Psalm. 18.50.
Great deliverances god gives unto his king, Wilcox in Ps. 21.6.
and shows mercy to his anointed, even to David, and to his seed for ever.
For ever, that is, faith an expositour, for a long time, if you refer the words
to David and his posterity; but if you refer them to Christ, and those that
appertain to him, then it is put for all eternity. So here, Thou have set him
blessings for ever: understand these words to be spoken of Christ, and, For
ever, is, For all eternity: understand them to be spoken of David, and, For
ever, is, For a long season. I have hitherto expounded these words as they are
appliable to David; and accordingly do take this last word (...), For ever.

David was a Deo positus in benedictiones: he was set for blessings unto his
people. Blessings temporal and spiritual: temporal, as deliverance from
foreign enemies, and the execution of judgment and justice for the peace, and
quiet of his people: and spiritual, as the reestablishing of the true worship
of God, whereby his people might become Citizens of the Saints and of the
household of God. Ephesians. 1.19.
In respect of the former, For ever, is for a long season, for David's life
time, which was David's Ever; ever, whilst he swaied the scepter of Israel. In
respect of the latter, For ever, is for all eternity; for spiritual blessings
continue after this life; (...) even for ever.

Thus have I past over my four circumstances; the Author of David's exaltation,
which was God; the exaltation it self, David placed in the throne of Israel;
the end of his exaltation, that he might be for blessings to his people; and
the continuance of this end, For ever.

Was God the author of David's exaltation? Did he appoint him to be king over
Israel? Hence then arises this doctrine which before I promised to speak
unto, Kings do hold their kingdoms immediately from God.

A truth so immovably grounded upon the word of truth, that it is strange it
should be controverted. The proofs of scripture that do concern it, are
either general or particular.

A general proof we have Romans 13. In the first verse it is said, (...), The
powers that be, are ordained of God. Therefore the power of a king; of whom it
is twice said, ver. 5. that he is (...), Gods minister; gods lieuetenant, for
thy wealth if thou do well; for vengeance, if ill. The like proof may be taken
from Daniel 2.21. where not only the taking away of kings, but also the setting
of them up, is avowed to be gods own work. The voice of wisdom cries
alowd, Prove. 8.15, 16. By me kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by me
Princes rule and the nobles, and all the judges of the earth. These proofs
were general.

The particular do consist in God his immediate designement of diverse unto
kingdoms. Of Saul, 1. Sam. 10.1. Samuel took a viale of oil, and powered it
upon Saul's head, and kissed him, and said; Has not the Lord anointed thee to
be governor over his inheritance? Of Hazael, and Iehu, 1. Kings, 19.15, 16.
The Lord said unto Elias; Go anoint Hazael king over Aram, and Iehu the son
of Nimshi shall thou anoint king over Israel. Of Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 2.37. O
king, says Daniel, thou art a king of kings; for the God of heaven has given
thee a kingdom. Of Solomon, 2. Chron. 8.9. The Queen of Sheba says unto him,
Blessed be the Lord thy God which loved thee to set thee on his throne as king.
And to omit others, of David in my text, of whom it is also specially said, 1.
Chron. 28.4. That God did choose him, and delighted in him to make him king
over Israel: and ver. 3. Psalm. 21. that the Lord did set a crown of pure gold
upon his head. These proofs general or particular, standing upon so
sovereign authority, as Gods word is of, do make good my propounded doctrine,
namely, that kings do hold their kingdoms immediately from God. Whereto I doubt
not but I have your full assent.

What need then is there of any further insisting upon this point? Surely
none; were there not a generation of men, bearing in their foreheads the stamp
of Christians, that cannot brook any proof taken out of Scripture for the
maintenance of any doctrine that may distaste the bishop of Rome, or want his
allowance. Tell such that by scripture it is plain that kings hold their
kingdoms immediately from God; their reply will be; what tell you us of
scripture? Set aside the authority of the Church, the authority of the Pope, and
we take scripture to be no better the^ a Colloqium Wormat. apud Lubbert. de
princip. lib. 1. cap 5.
doubtful, uncertain, and leaden rule; then a Colloq. Ratisbon. Rungqu 2.
matter of debate; then a Colloq. Wormat. vbi supra.
book of discord; then a poor Hosius de expresso Dei verbo.
kind of element; then a Pighius co^trov. 3. de Ecclesia.
du^b judge; then Ludov. Canon. Lateran.
dead ink; then Eckius.
inken divinity; then a Pighius Hierar. l. 3. c. 3.
nose of wax; then Hosius, Gretser. etc.
Aesops fables. Impious wretches: had they not wiped all shame from their
faces, they would never have laid such load of disgraces upon Gods holy word.
Their Cardinal Hosius stays not here; he proceeds a degree farther. He
coins a distinction of scripture, as it is used by themselves, whom they call
Catholics, and as by us, whom they call Heretics. His words are in the end of
his third book against Brentius his Prolegomena. The scripture, quomodo
profertur a Catholicis, verbum est Dei; quomodo profertur ab haereticis, verbum
est diaboli: as it is alleged by us, so must it be forsooth the word of the
Devil; but as by them, so only shall it be the word of God.

Upon this ground and distinction of theirs, I doubt not but that blasphemous
Apodix. 1. These. 8. p. 131
Dorhoff, has made an alteration in the beginning of our Creed, and in steed
of, Credo in Deum, patrem omnipotentem, creatorem coeli and terrae, has
substituted, Credo in Diabolum, carnificem, orcipotentem, corruptorem coeli and
terrae. For if scripture alleged by us, be verbum Diaboli, what is our
belief? What our religion?

You see of what validity proofs drawn by us from holy Scriptures for the
confutation of any popish point, are in the estimation of some Papists. They
hold us for Heretics; and consequently the sense of scripture which we bring,
to be no sense of scripture.

Hence is it that the Author of the short Narration, how Henry the IV. (late)
king of France and Navarre, sent his Ambassadors to Pope Clement the VIII. for
absolution from his heresy, tells us, that though some do mainetaine the king
to hold his kingdom immediately from God, yet that at Rome this is accounted a
very ridiculous matter. It is evident to be so by Cardinal Bellarmin, who in
his first book de Romano Pontifice, cap. 7. parag. Postremo, distinguishing
between secular and ecclesiastical sovereignty, affirms that the
Ecclesiastical is a solo Deo, and de iure divino, from God alone, and by the
law of God; but the secular is from man's institution, and de iure gentium, by
the law of nations. If we mark the antithesis, and opposition between the
law of God and the law of nations, as also between the soveraigneties
Ecclesiastical, and secular, we must needs acknowledge it for Bellarmines
opinion, that kings hold not their kingdoms immediately from God. This his
opinion is more clearly set down in his book de Clericis, cap. 28. parag. Ad
confirmationem. His express words there are; Regna non sunt de iure divino,
sed de iure gentium, and proinde mutabilia sunt. Kingdoms are not by Gods law,
but by the law of nations, and therefore are changeable; whereupon depends
his treasonable doctrine delivered in his fifth book de Romans Pontif. cap. 8.
where among other things, Parag. Praeterea, he affirms, that not only
Princeps Episcoporum, the Pope, but Episcopus quilibet, every Bishop, though
but the Popes vassal, may use temporal power over kings; and enforce them to
make laws, yea and for some causes depose them too, as appears by the
precedents of that chapter. But this and other like proditorious assertions
there, and elsewhere broached, and defended by Bellarmine, and others of that
faction upon this ground, That kings do not hold their kingdoms immediately
from God, I now let pass.

The immediate dependencie of kings, and their kingdoms upon God (howsoever at
Rome it be ridiculously entertained) has already bin prooved, and warranted
sufficiently to such as do believe the scriptures. Unbeleevers I much heed
not. Yet if any will that the authority of the ancient fathers be produced, let
such know that Ad utilitate^ gentiliu^ terrenum regnu^ positum est a Deo, sed
non a diabolo, etc.
Irenaeus in his 5. book aduersus haereses, and Christianus nullius est
hostis, nedu^ Imperatoris; quem scien a Deo suo co^stitui, necesse est ut and
ipsu^ diligat and revercatur, and honoret, and salvum velit cum toto Romano
Imperio quousque seculum stabit. -- Colimus ergo and Imperatorem sic, quomodo
and nobis licet and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est,
a Deo consecutum, and solo Deo minorem. Hoc and ipse volet. Sic enim omnibus
major est, dum solo vero deo minor est. Et Apologet. cont. gent. cap. 30.
Sciunt [Imperatores] quis illia dederit imperium, sciunt qua homines, quis and
animam. Sentiunt enim Deum esse solum, in cujus solius potestate sunt, a quo
sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes and super omnes deos. Quid-ni? Cum
super omnes homines qui ubique vivunt, and mortuis antistant.
Tertullian in the 2. cap. of his book to Scapula, and Super Imperatorem non
[est] nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem.
Optatus in his 3. book against Parmenian, and S. Laesus est [Imperator] qui
non habet parem ullum super terram, summitas and caput omnium super terram
hominum.
Chrysostom in 2. Hom. ad Pop. Antioch. and S. Ambrose in his Cap. 4. Qui
tenentur legibus, audent suum negare peccatum, dedignantur rogare indulgentiam,
quam perebat [Rex David] qui nullis legibus tenebatur humanis. and ibid. cap.
10. Rex utique erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur, quia liberi sunt reges a
vinculis delictorum. Neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus tuti imperij
potestate. Homini ergo non peccavit cui non tenebatur obnoxious.
Apolo. of David, and S. Deus igitur ille faelicitatis author and dator, quia
solus est verus Deus; ipse dat regna terrena and bonis and malis, etc.
Austin in his 4. book de Civ. D. cap. 33. and Pope Lib. 2. cap. 100. indict.
11. Mauritio Augusto; Ego vero haec Dominis meis loquens, quid sum nisi pulvis
and vermis. Sed tame^ quia contra autorem omnium Deum hanc intendere
constitutionem sentio, Dominis tacere non possum. Ad hoc enim potestas super
omnes homines Dominorum meorum pietati coelitus data est, ut qui bona appetunt
adjuventur, etc.
Gregory the first in an epistle of his to Mauritius the Emperor, do all
stand very effectually for the imperial authority of kings immediately derived
from God.

How this point has been mainetained for these last 500 years by Venericus
Vercellensis in his book de unitate Ecclesiae conservanda; by the Leodienses
in their epistle against Paschalis the second; by Parrhisius in his treatise de
potestate regia and papali; by Babenbergius, by Dantes, by Cusanus, by
Theodoricus de Niem, by Franciscus de Zabarellis, and others, they, who have
perused that profitable volume set out by Simon Schardius concerning Imperial
Jurisdiction, authority, and praeeminence, cannot but see. And how it is in
this our age vpholden against all gainesayers, not only here a line and there a
line, but book upon book published by the now-Mirrour of kings, by our
Bishops, and by others (eminent for their learning) as well within this land,
as without, shall make it well known to the children that are yet unborn: who
in their day (moved by the same evidence of Gods word, whereby we are moved)
shall join their assent to ours, and teach their children also, that Kings do
hold their kingdoms immediately from God. You have my doctrine.

It may serve to check that man of sin who intrudes himself into Gods right,
and takes upon him the Sovereigntie over all kings and people; and claims
absolute and uncontrollable authority, to give and to take away (imperia,
regna, principatus, and quicquid habere mortales possunt) to give and to take
away empires, kingdoms, principalities, and whatsoever mortal men can
possess or have. This was the express challenge of Pope Gregory the 7. in his
execration against the Emperor Henry the 4. as it is set down by Platina in
that Popes life. Were his successors less arrogant? I suppose not. See but
the Bull of Pope Alexander the Sixth, containing his donation of the west Indies
to Ferdinandus king of Castle and Leon, and to Isabella his Queen: we de
nostra mera liberalitate, of our mere liberality, and of the fullness of our
Apostolical power, do give unto you, your heirs, and successors, kings of
Castle, and Leon for ever, all Islands and firm lands detected or to be
detected from one hundred leagues beyond the Acores toward the west and south,
together with all their dominions, cities, castles, places, farms, rightes,
jurisdictions, appurtenances whatsoever. This was a largess so transcendent
for the vanity thereof, that (as Hist. Nov. orb. l. 3. c. 3. p. 281.
Benzo writes) an infidel king Attabaliba, king of Peru could by the eye of
reason discover it, and give it this censure, Pontificem insigniter fatuum, and
impudentem esse, eo facile prodi, quod aliena tam liberalit^r largiatur: that
the Pope was passing foolish and impudent, so liberally to give that which was
none of his own. A like vanity did Sanctius brother to the king of Spain,
and elect General for the war against the Saracens of Egypt, tax in
another Bishop of Rome, as De rob. Memorand. lib. 2 tract. 3. c. 22.
Petrarch affirms. The bishop of Rome caused it to be proclaimed in his
consistory; that he bestowed the kingdom of Egypt upon Sanctius. Sanctius
understanding by his interpreter this favor, for requital commanded that the
Pope should by and by be proclaimed Great Caliph of Baldach. So perfumed he
the son of pride with his own smoke; for he knew full well that the Pope
could no more make him a King, then he could the Pope a Caliph. But Popes, and
Popish Divines, and Canonists, and all Clawbackes of that See, maintaining that
the Pope has even iure divino, by the law of God, so large and fair a
patrimony, as is the Monarchy, and Soveraigntie over the whole world, in all
causes, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, they all stand convicted of falsehood
through the truth of this sacred doctrine; Kings do hold their kingdoms
immediately from God.

Immediately from God? Let then the honor be Gods; and let our hearts be
powered out to give due thanks to him for placing over us our Gracious King,
King JAMES: of whom we may as truly say as the Israelites did of their David,
(...). Thou have set him blessings for ever. Aged Leontius Bishop of Antioch
(as it is recorded by Sozomen Eccles. hist. lib. 3. c. In versione
Christophorsoni, and Grynaei, cap. 19.
20.) pointing to his gray and white hairs, said unto some that were present
with him, (...) when this snow is melted, much mire will follow: he meant
sedition and trouble. But God has done better by us. The white snowie hairs
of our late aged Sovereign were in her full time dissolved. But God his
wonderful providence, contrary to the desires and expectation of many, so
ordered matters then, that no trouble followed. The Lord left us not as sheep
without a shepherd. Numantius ad Scipione^ apud Plutarc. Apophtheg. Romans
(...); we are the same sheep still to be lead forth to the waters of comfort,
though there be another shepherd. The Lord did set King JAMES to be unto us
blessings for ever: blessings temporal and spiritual. Temporal; for through
him we are delivered from all fear of foreign enemies, and judgment, and
justice are executed to us for the quiet of us all. And spiritual; for the
worship of God is every where within his dominions promoted according to the
word of truth. And this blessing is (...), for ever: for hereby are we fitted
to that eternal inheritance in the highest heavens. I will not now make a
panegyricke to extol his Majesty for his Clemency, Equity, Bounty, Piety,
Learning, Theory, and other kingly parts: the time forbids me, and bids me to
conclude. My conclusion shall be no other, the^ a prayer for his Majesty, that
God would be pleased to give him vitam longam, regnum prosperum, prolem
foelicem, vitam aeternam, a long life, a prosperous reign, a happy progeny in
this world, and in the world to come life eternal.

Holy Lord, stablish the good work, that thou have wrought in him: visit him
as thou did Moses in the bush, Joshua in the battle, Gedeon in the field,
Samuel in the temple. Be thou unto him in his counsel wisdom, and in all his
ways his rock, his fortress, his deliverer, his God, his strength, that the
hand of violence, of rebellion, of treason touch him not. So shall we under his
government lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty:
wherein when we shall have finished our race with co^fide^ce we look to be
delivered from this bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God; at what time our vile bodies shall be changed, and shall be
fashioned like unto the glorious body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Even so be it blessed Father, for the same Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with
thee in the unity of the holy Spirit be ascribed all praise and power, might
and majesty, dignity, and dominion for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

