Orders for the redress of abuse in diet, by her Majesty's express pleasure,
and absolute commandment, to be observed in the time of this scarsitie and
dearth, both by the Ministers, and others of the Laitic of this Realm, within
this dioces of Norwich.
IN primis, every minister shall read and say public prayers, according to
the book of common prayer, in every several parish church, and chapel, on
all Weddensdayes and Fridayes, orderly and devoutly, at due and convenient
times.

2 Item, all such Ministers as have any benefices, shall reside on their
liuinges, keep hospitality there, relieve their neighbors: and such as have
pluralities, shall do the like by their Farmers, and such others as rent their
liuinges at their hands.

3 Item, all and every the Ministers within this Dioces, shall recommend the
orders by her Majesty commanded unto the people, in their several charges,
carefully to be observed.

4 Item, they shall in their sermons, and exhortations, earnestly and pithily
exhort and stir up every of their parishners to fervent prayer, both public
and private, to abstinencie, fasting and true humiliation, and to forbear all
excess in diet.

5 Item, they shall exhort, and move all and every their parishioners, to
relieve the poor and needy, by good housekeeping, by setting them on work,
and by other deeds of alms, and brotherly compassion.

6 Item, they shall exhort and move all and every their parishioners, to have
patience in this time of scarsitie, and not to give ear to mutinies, and
discontented persons, or the persuasions of idle brains, who swerve or repine
from the humble duties of good subjects, to the further oftence of God, and
discontenting of her Majesty, that has so tender a care of their welfare.

7 Item, the parishioners within this Dioces shall orderly, soberly, devoutly
and diligently, frequent their several parish Church, or chapel on all
Weddensdaies, and Fridaies, to hear public prayers, there read according to
the book of common prayer of this realm.

8 Item, all and every person such as be of better ability, shall use a
greater moderation in their diet then heretofore they have done.

9 Item, none of what degree soever he or she be, shall suffer any flesh to
be dressed or eaten in their houses, on such days as by law stand already
prohibited, except that those persons by reason of infirmity, be lawfully
thereunto licensed.

10 Item, on Fridayes, and other days now already by law appointed, for
fasting days, no suppers at all shall be by them provided, or taken either for
themselves or household.

11 Item, all and every person being not let by grievous sickness, shall
abstain from suppers, altogether on each Weddensdayes at night.

12 Item, the collectors for the poor in every parish, shall be diligent to make
the collection carefully for their reliese: and the same shall be increased, in
respect of this present want, by those who be of good ability, and reasonably
bestowed sor the succor of the most distressed.

13 Item, no persons which have housholdes shall for sparing, discharge any of
their households, to shift for themselves: or soiourne from their usual
habitation themselves.

14 Item, whatsoever is sorborne from any meal, or meals: by abstinencie or
sparing of any superfluous diet or fare, shall be especially by the vealthier
sort charitably converted to the (...) of the poor and needy, so as not^^e
may be taken thereof according to her majesty's expectation.

15 Item, no person shall under color of these orders, forsake their own
parish church in time of prayer, and assemble themselves, as some heretofore
of their own heads offensiuely have attempted, under color of general
fastes, and repair to other churches.

16 Item, all and every the said Ministers and Churchwardens, in every parish,
or other charitable discreet men by them to be appointed and nominated, shall
carry a watchful eye unto al Innes, Tauernes, and victualling houses, how both
the keepers of them, with their household, and all their guestes and resorters
to their houses, do observe these here Majesty's commandementes.

17 Item, the Ministers and Churchwardens shall monthly make a true and just
^ertificate to the Lord Bishop of the Dioces, containing as well the names of
disobedient delinquentes in any the premises, as of those well disposed
persons, who have had a duetifull regard to her Majesty's commandment,
touching a charitable compassion for the relief of the poor, as is prescribed.

Will: Norwicen:


