A MATHEMATICAL APENDIX, CONTAINING MANY PROPOSITIONS AND CONclusions
mathematical: with necessary observations both for Mariners at Sea, and for
Cherographers and Surueyors of Land;

TOGETHER WITH AN EASY perspectiue mechanical way, to Delineat Sun dyalls
upon any Wall or Plane given, be it direct, inclyning, declyning, or reclyning,
from the Horizon, or Meridian, in any Region or Place of known Latitude.

With other things pleasant and profitable for the weal public, not
heretofore extant in our vulgar: Partly colllected out of Foreigne modern
writers, and partly invented and practiced by the Author.

Written by R. N. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
in Fleet-strtet, (...) ^^^duit, 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLER GOOD LORD AND MAster, Sir EDWARD SEYMOVR
Knight, Baron Beauchamp, Earl of Hertford, and his Majesty's Liuetenant within
the Counties of Somerset, and Wiltess, and the City and County of Bristoll.
RIght honorable, since amongst the rudest Creatures (even the brute beasts
deuoide of Reason) Ingratitude, that foul Monster, is not once to be found:
how hateful then the very remembrance thereof ought to be unto humane
Creatures; but especially to those that profess Christianity (in whom it
has pleased the sovereign Creator of all things, to make his chief
Storehouse of all Reason in these Terrestiall parts) so much as to purpose,
much more in action to prove ungrateful to any; but chiefly to those from
whom especial favors have proceeded: who is it that will not absolutely
censure? Wherefore (my honorable good Lord) because I would not seem more then
brute, although J acknowledge my ability cannot extend unto the moytie of my
desire: yet like the poor man, who (wanting better wherewith to express his
loyal affection) presented the mighty Prince Alexander the great, with a cup
of cool water: so offer I this small (and therefore unworthy) present, unto
your honorable acceptance: my bounden duty ever challenging greater, does
nevertheless encourage me to begin with this little. Humbly praying your
Lordship to shroud these my first fruits under the wings of your honorable
patronage, against the envious storms of Zoilus, and his Crittick associates;
who are always more ready to carpe and find fault with others, then any way
able to do the like themselves. Herein promising to my self that the more
learned in the Mathematics, (who I confess had been much fitter to have
handled this subject then my self) and those that desire the benefit of
knowledge in the common wealth (for which, I protest, I chiefly undertook
this work, in regard that scant any thing herein contained; is yet extant in
our vulgar tongue) will if not embrace, yet at the least not utterly reject and
contemn this my travail. The acceptance of the more learned and better sort I
assume to my self, having ever noted such to favor the desire of good studies:
And of those that love the common good I much presume, judging them by my
self; having ever borne especial affection to such, as have showed their
willing endeauours to profit the public weal with their best means. And so
praying almighty God to bless your Lordship and my good Lady your honorable
Countess, with long life, and all happy increase of honor and prosperity in
this world, and in the world to come eternal felicity, I rest always

Your honors most humble and faithful servant, ROBERT NORTON.

THe Longitude (gentle Reader) for which this present Treatise was chiefly
composed) is defined to be the shortest distance that can possibly be taken
upon the Globe of the Earth between two Meridians propounded, beginning to
reckon the same (from west to East) at the Meridian of the Island Coruo, which
our latest writers for diverse good reasons account for the first Meridian: To
find the longitude, is by some means to search how many degrees the Meridian
of the place, where you make observation, is distant from some one Meridian
given. The knowledge whereof being so necessary as that the Geographers and
Nauigators cannot with exactness perform what (in their Arts) necessity
requires, without the same: Therefore have many worthy men taken great pains,
and with all ingeniousnes labored to supply that defect, with the most exquisite
means they could devise for the readiest finding thereof; who have set down
many Propositions to that effect, and both learnedly and ingeniously left unto
posterity such tokens of their love to the public good, as may justly
challenge to merit infinite memory and commendation. As Ptolome, by the time
of an Eclipse in two several places being known, to find the longitude.
Appian, the true places of the Moon and a fixed Star being given, to find
the Longitude. Others by the Angle, that a fixed Star makes at the moment of
time she enters into the first minute of Cancer or Capricornus, and the
difference of time wherein such an angle appears, to find the Longitude. Some
with portable watches, the true hour of sundry places being given, to find
the Longitude. The time being given, and the way of the Ship, to find the
Longitude. The point of the Compass and the way of the ship given, to find the
longitude. The Latitude, and the way the ship makes, to find the Longitude,
etc. All which are found to be subjected unto inauoydable errors, or else
clogged with such difficulties, or want of expedient execution; as that they
cannot absolutely be concluded for perfect apt means to find the Longitude
at Sea: the want of which, is the greatest imperfection in the Art of
Nauigatio^. Take here in good part (friendly Reader) these few propositions,
not heretofore written in this our vulgar, co^taining partly collections which
from sundry Authors in other Languages I have sought out, and augmented or
abreuiated for thy better use; and partly practiced observations, which (time
and opportunity permitting) my self have experienced both on Sea and Land.
Requesting, that with the friendly eye of Judgment, thou would consider
them well, before thou divulge any unadvised censure against them: Not doubting
but every one that shall deign a due perusing hereof may find some thing worthy
his bestowed labor. And so, graying excuse if I seem to omit any necessary
point in the premises (which I might soon do, in regard I much striued to
avoid prolixity) do heartily wish thee thy lawful desire, and my self
present to expound any thing that seems herin difficil; referring my labor to
your courteous favors ^end.

ROBERT NORTON.

A Table containing the conten's of the Propositions of this Book.
Proposition. 1.

How to find the Longitudes of places, by the daily declination of the Sun.

2 How to find the Longitude by Arches of great Circles, which pass by the
Centres of the fixed Stars, and Planets that yield no sensible paralax or
difference of Aspect.

A Corollarie upon the same, showing to perform the same more exquisitely, by
comparing the Planets one with an other.

Another Corollary upon the same Consequence, to find the Longitude, by
comparing the Sun and Moon being nigh Conjunction, and their Paralaxis
abstracted.

3 A Comet, or the Moon appearing, how to find the paralax or difference of
aspect thereof, two several ways; and thereby how far it is from the Center
or Circumference of the Earth.

4 The Paralax and distance from the Earth given, to find what Angle it will
make in the Center of the Earth with any other Star that has no Paralax.

5 To find the Longitude by a Comet, or the Moon, appearing; and the
difference of time from one Meridian to another, by comparing it with a fixed
Star.

A Corollarie upon the same, showing more evident accomplishment thereof, by
comparing it with the true moving of one of the Planets.

6 A Star m Heaven propounded, to find the Longitude without the difference
of Time.

7 How to find the Longitude and Latitude of any place at once, without the
difference of time, by observation of the Celestial Luminaries.

8 How to find the Longitude at all times from moment to moment, Mechanically:
And withal to describe all the places of note in a Region or Country, on a Map
or platte, according to their several distances and situations exactlie. With
the use of the Protractor.

A Corollary upon the same, applying it to the Survey and platting of Land.

Another Corollary upon the same Consequence, expressing a Mechanical means
to find the Longitude at Sea at all times, and to keep a perfect Trauerse, for
a whole voyage.

An Annotaion, showing an artificial devise how the Master or Pylot, at Sea,
may much more exactly make observation of the Celestial Luminaries with any
Instrument, then the ordinary manner can possibly admit, by reason of the
heauing and setting of the Ship.

The making of the Cosmodelite, an excellent Instrument for many Mathematical
conclusions: As for the Longitude of places, to take any Altitude, Latitude, or
distance in sight, for Survey and platting of Land, to make Sun dialls, etc.
invented by the Author.

How by the Cosmodelite to delineate a Sun dial on any plane given, with great
facility, and without arithmeticall calculation.

Master Robert Smith his invention to delineat a Sun dial otherwise.

The making of an artificial engine, whereby with any strength given (be it
never so little) to eleuate and lift up any ponderous weight assigned.

Brief Expositions of the Geometrical and Aftronomicall terms mentioned in
this Treatise.

Finis Tabulae.
The first Proposition. How to find the Longitudes of places, by the daily
Declination of the Sun.
THe Sun continually declyning from the Equator, according to the several
points of the Ecliptic wherein he properly moves, sometimes toward the
South (being in the Meridionall signs), and sometimes toward the North Pole
(being in the Septentrionall:) making his greatest declination on either side
to be 23. degrees and 28. or thereabouts, does, from the noone of one day unto
the noone of the next day, so sensibly vary his declination on any one
Meridian, as that you may easily find how much he declyneth from Meridian to
Meridian, on all the Meridians that may be imagined upon the face of the whole
earth. As for example, if from the noone of this day until the same moment to
morrow, he shall be found to vary one minute of a degree in his declination
upon one same Meridian: imagining then 60. several Meridians on the Earth,
equally distant one from another; it is most certain that he will make from
one of those Meridians unto the next 1/60 part of a minute (which is a second
difference of declination: and so consequently more or less, as the same shall
happen to be beyond or short of the said Meridian. Wherefore if you divide 360.
the degrees of the Equator, by 60. the number of the supposed Meridians, you
shall find the Quotient to produce 6. degrees, the difference of the Longitude
which one of them shall be from the next. This may be observed from day to day
at all times of the year, be it that the Sun have greater or less
declination then the said minute, under the assigned Meridian: which collected
into a Table will be a ready means for to find the Longitude of any unknown
Meridian. The practice to find the Longitude (the Table being made) is thus:
Having exactly observed the declination of the Sun (by some perfect
Mathematical Instrument) for the hour of Noone, then enter the said Table,
seeking there the declination set down for that day: which being found, the
difference of the declination will show you under what Meridian you observe and
are, with the difference of Longitude: which difference being added or
subducted (as reason will direct) to or from the former given Meridian, will
yield the sought unknown Longitude.

Note that the Table may be enlarged, not only to thirds and fowerths, but
unto tenths: which will be much better for the more exact expressing of his
slow declination. And thus you may find the Longitude by the daily
declination of the Sun.

The second Proposition. How to find the Longitudes by Arches of great Circles,
which pass by the Centres of the fixed Stars, and such of the Planets as
yield no sensible paralax or difference of aspect.
FOrasmuch as great Circles, which pass by the Centres of all the Stars, do
express in their Arches the several distances of all the Planets and fixed
Stars, (considered by two and two): And for that the Planets in their proper
mouings do ouergoe the Stars of the Firmament; It must necessarily follow, that
their said distances do continually vary, (either more or less) and the Angles
also subtending them. Wherefore, if by Astronomicall Tables you obtain the
true place of one of the Planets (having no Paralax) and compare the same with
one of the fixed Stars given, be it Septe^trionall or Meridional; seeking for
every day, hour, and minute, what Angles the same Planet shall make with the
said fixed Star, and of such Angles to make a Table; it will be an Artificial
preparatiue to the finding of the Longitudes of places with facility. For all
the Inhabitants of the Earth (according to Ptolomy) being in the Center of the
world in respect of the fixed Stars and higher Planets, it is certain that
all such Stars and Planets will appear to them all to vary their angles
continually; but chiefly when the Planet shall be direct: and that those
Planets, which move most swiftly, do yield more evidently such variation
then the slower. and. The Table being prepared: when you desire to find an
unknown Longitude, Observe exactly by Instrument, what Angle the same Planet
makes with the said Star, for which the said Table was made: which had,
seek then in your said Table for the Angle calculated for that moment of time,
in which you make your observation: and the difference of the Angles will give
you the difference of the Longitude (if any be) between the place of
observation sought, and the place given, for which the table was made.

Corollary. I.
Then it follows, that by the same means, and with more evident variation of
Angles, we may find the Longitudes, by comparing the said Planets one with
another to find their Angles, especially one being direct, and the other
Retrograde: and so to make like Tables of their proper moouings.

Corollarie. II.
Likewise if you take the continual true moouings of the Sun and Moon,
during the space of three, or four days, before and after their conjunction,
and so find their true angles: and observe the Angle (by instrument) exactly,
which they for one same moment, do make in the eye of the obseruour, you shall
find the observed Angle greater then the Angle calculated, by their paralaxis:
which being also known and subducted, the difference of the remaining angle
(from the Angle calculated), is the difference of the Longitudes, from one
Meridian to the other.

The third Proposition. A Comet, or the Moon appearing, to find the Paralax or
difference of aspect thereof, and thereby the distance of the same above the
Center or Circumference of the Earth.
Wh^^ Par^^^^ is.
THe Paralax or difference of Aspect (according to the Astronomers) is an angle,
made of the concurrence of the visual line, directly respecting a Celestial
luminary; and of the line of the true moving; which proceeds from the Center
of the Earth, passing by the Center of the same Luminarie, unto the Firmament;
The semidiametre of the Earth, being the sole efficient cause of such Angles.
Neither do such angles happen to every of the celestial Luminaries, save only
to such as are nearest unto the Earth, as the and; and amongst them also, those
which are nearest, have most sensible paralax, or difference of Aspect: as the
figure following does plainly demonstrate.

diagram

wherein A represents the Center of the Earth, A B the Semidiametre, A F the
vertical line, D the farthest or more remote Luminarie, yielding smallest
paralax, A E the line of his true place in the firmament, K the nearest
Luminary, yielding greatest Paralax, A I the line of the true place thereof, B
G the visuall line, the Obseruor being in B. Whereby it appears, that the
Angle E D G, or his vertical B D A, being the Paralax of the more remote
Luminary, is less then the angle I K G, or his vertical B K A, the Paralax of
the nearer Luminary: both which Paralaxes, are caused by the se^sible quantity
of the Semidiametre of the Earth, being compared with their Orbs.

How to find the quantity of the Paralax.

To find the quantity of the Paralax of the Moon, or Comet, for any hour or
Meridian given, during the appearance thereof above the Horizon: you shall with
the Cosmodelite (the Circle thereof being inclyned according to the inclination
of the Equator) take two several Observations (having some space of time
between): at each of which, seeing the said Comet or Moon through the sights
of the Index, you must carefully note the degrees intersered therewith, in the
Limb of the said Circle. Then comparing the quantity of the arch contained
between the two points (at the several observations) intersected in the said
Limb, with the arch answering to the space of time between the two
observations (being reduced into degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial) and
the lesser arch subtracted from the greater, the remaynder is the Paralax or
difference of aspect sought. Although some perhaps will say here, that the
Planets, by reason of their excentricities and proper mouings, do unequally
move, in respect of the Primum Mobile: which although I confess, yet I say,
that in the space of time, spent in the said Observation, the same is so
insensibly small, as that it were absurd to make any scruple thereof.

Another way to find the Paralax.

First seek, out of the Astronomicall Tables or otherwise, the true place, in
the Zodiac, of the Luminary you will observe, for the time and Meridian
assigned; then examine the true place of some known fixed star, or one of the
Superior Planets, (appearing at that time above the Horizon given): thereby
obtaining the Angle, subtending the Arch of the Distance from one of those
Luminaryes to the other: Then take the visuall distance (by some exact
Mathematical Instrument) between the said two Luminaries: which had, and
compared with the former so calculated, the difference is the Paralax of the
said lower Planet or Luminary, for that instant. The like may be performed by
the Sun, at his rising or setting, being near the Horizon, and having some
Planet or notable fixed Star nigh unto him. And here you may note, that the
Paralax is always greater, near the Horizon, then being more elevated: As
also that the superior Planets and scant yield any sensible Paralax, by reason
of the small quantity of the Earths semidiametre, in respect of their Orbs.

To find the distance of any Comet or Planet above the Earth.

The distance of any Comet or Planet above the Earth, is found by the Doctrine
of Tryangles; viz, two angles and one side being given, to find the other
angle, and the other two sides. Herein the two angles given are these; The one,
the Paralax found: the other, the Altitude above the Horizon taken by
Instrument, being added to 90: The side given, is the Semidiametre of the
Earth. For the better explanation hereof, behold the figure following: diagram
Wherein, the Paralax or angle EDG, contains 8. degrees. The angle DBH is the
altitude found, containing 31. degrees: which being added to 90, make 121.
degrees, the second angle: Now these two angles added together, make 129: which
soloducted from 180 (the degrees of two right angles, always equal to the
three angles of any Tryangle) the remaynder is 51, the degrees of the third
angle sought, represented here by the angle BAD.

Then to find the two unknown sides (by any two of those angles, and one of
the sides known) because every one is not capable of the Rules given by the
learned Astronomers, who have written hereof, I will here set down an easy
means (as it were Mechanical) to be understood and practiced with facility,
as follows: Having any Circle exactly diagram divided into 360. degrees, or
even parts, thereby to find, readily, the angle subtending every Arche: or
contrariwise, to find any arch subtending any angle given; First draw an
infinite line, which may represent the side given, as the line AB; and set your
Compasses (opened to the Semidiametre of the Circle) upon A the upper end of
the same line, and draw an arch (with the other foot) of such greatness, as
may cross the said line, as the arch FC does at F; then open your Compasses,
unto so many degrees of the lymbe of your said Circle, as one of your given
angles conteyneth: as, according to the former example, to 121. degrees, and
set one foot of your Compass so opened, in the intersected point F, and
extend the said quantity in the said arch, which will fall at C. Then draw a
strait line from the Center of the arch A, to the said point C: and that line
will represent a second side of the Tryangle desired. Then again, for the
third side, you are to work in all things as before: as, first to open your
Compasses unto your divided Circles Semidiametre, and set one foot upon one of
the sides already described, and draw an arch that may intersect the said side
toward the already described angle: as, upon the side AC, on C, set the
Compasses, and draw the arch GD, which intersecteth the side AC at the point A:
and then opening the Compasses, to so many degrees of the divided Circle, as
the other angle given conteyneth, viz. 8. degrees, carrying the same to the
point A of the line AC, and express the same in the arch AD. which will fall
in E. Then draw a strait line from C, the Center of the last described arch,
unto the said point E: which being continued, will cut the line AB in the point
K; and both give you the third Angle AKC containing 51 degrees, and also at
once represent unto you, all the angles and sides proportionallie of the
Tryangle, made by the Center of the Earth, the Celestial Luminary, and the
Center of the Eye of the Obseruatour; each respecting other, with strayte lines.

Then to find how far the said Luminarie is distant from the Earth (having
described the proportional Tryangle aforesaid) and having the measure of one
of the sides thereof given, viz, the Semidiametre of the Earth AK, which
according to most writers is 3436 4\11 miles, which measure I find to be 6.
times and a half, contained in the side KC, and therefore conclude the same to
be distant from the Center of the Earth, 21477 2/11 miles; and from the surface
of the Earth, 18041 1/11 miles. Thus much is sufficient, for the finding of the
Paralax, and distance of any Celestial body (having Paralax) from the Center
or superficies of the Earth.

The fourth Proposition. The Paralax, and distance of any Star from the Earth,
given, to find the true angle it will make in the Center of the Earth, with any
Star that yields no Paralax.
Having taken the Paralax, and so consequently (as in the precedent) the
distance thereof from the Center or the Earth, and observed the visuall angle
by Instrument, which such a star shall make, with any known star, that yields
no Paralax; you shall describe, on a clean Paper, or Slate, an Angle equal to
the visuall angle so found: then draw a small Circle, representing the Globe of
the Earth: and describe one Arch, concentrick with the same Circle, and so many
Semidiametres without the same, as the said Star or luminarie (yielding
Paralax) is distant from the Earth; and one other Arch as much further distant
again without that, or more or less, as you please: which last described Arch
shall represent unto you, part of the Firmament or Heaven of fixed stars.
Then draw a strait line from the Center, unto the said outmost arch: and let
the place, where the same line intersecteth the middle Arch, be the place of
the star, yielding Paralax: then express the distance between the two
stars, with an angle in such a part of the circumference of the small circle,
as the said angle, being parted in two with an obscure line, the same line may
fall in the point of the angle, and make a square angle with the Semidiametre
of the small Circle: Then the visuall lines, and the lines of the true places
of the said stars, being extended to the utmost arch; and a strait line
drawn from the intersecting point (which the line of the true place of the
Star that yields Paralax, makes) in the utmost arch, unto the point of the
visuall Angle in the Circumference of the small Circle, it is certain, that
that line, and the visuall line, which respects the fixed star (or star
yielding no Paralax) will (by this means) frame an angle in the Circumference
of the small Circle (representing the Earth) equal to the angle, which the
said two stars made, at the instant of observation, in the Center of the Earth.

The fifth Proposition. To find the Longitude of any place, by a Comet, or the
Moon, appearing, and the difference of time from one Meridian to another.
FIrst the Obseruators, who may see the Moon or Comet, at one instant, above
their several Horizons, must subduct the difference of Aspect, or Paralax, by
the doctrine precedent, and so find the true place thereof, in the Firmament.
Then observing, from Moment to Moment, what change of Angles it shall make,
with a fixed Star given, in the Center of the Earth, as in the preceding
Proposition is taught: let them confer the computation of time, in which they
found them to agree by equal angles, with the observations of one another: so
will the difference of time, being reduced into degrees and minutes, express
the difference of the Longitudes of their several Meridians. The reason hereof
is the roundnesse of the Earth, causing the different rising and setting of the
Sun, unto the Inhabitants of the East, from those of the West. If then you
make an exact Table of the true angles, which the Moon or Comet will from time
to time make with a fixed Star given, under one certain Meridian known; and
observe the same angle, under another Meridian: It cannot but happen at a time
of the night, differing from the former, by hours, minutes, or both: which,
being as is aforesaid reduced, will yield your desired effect. Thus much, for
the finding of the Longitude, by the difference of time of the happening angles.

Corollarie.
Then it follows, that if you collect the proper moouings of all the other
Planets (out of Astronomicall Tables) and compare their true moouings, with the
true moving of the Moon or Comet appearing, you shall find more speedy
change of angles, the^ by comparing them with fixed stars; by reason of the
swifter motions of the Planets, then of the fixed Stars.

The sixth Proposition. A Star in heaven propounded, to find the Longitudes of
places, without the difference of time.
FOr performance of this proposition, the representation of Meridionall planes
only is necessarily required: wherefore, for your better understanding hereof,
it will be here requisite to acquaint you, with some of the delineations and
uses of the Cosmodelite (an Instrument, in this Book, hereafter described):
which (by reason of the several bendings of the Ears and Semicircle thereof)
is very apt for the true representation as of any other Circle or Plane, that
is, or can be imagined in the Heavens, so also of the Meridians and Meridional
Planes. For, having declyned the Instrument by the Ears thereof, until the
line of 6. be parallel to the Axis of the world, the extremes thereof
directly respecting the Poles of the world; and then causing the great Circle
to move circularly, upon the Center of the Semicircle; you shall perceive the
same Circle and the Plane thereof (in that motion) to represent so many
Meridians, and Meridionall Planes, as can be imagined in the world. Therefore,
if you first abstract the Paralax of the Moon or Star; and then extract, out
of Astronomicall Tables (being calculated for a Meridian given) what angle the
same will make, with some of the other Planets or fixed Stars, with which the
said Star or Moon shall culminate, or at once come to the assigned Meridian;
And shall also carefully observe, till you find (by the great Circle and Index
of the Cosmodelite) that they agree in angle, with the angle calculated for
them: Then shall the number of the degrees (contained between the Fiduciall
line, which intersecteth the Semicircle, and the end next to the same
Semicircle) show the true number of degrees (and thereby, the distance) between
the Meridian for which the Calculation of the Table was made, and the Meridian
of observation: which number of degrees is the true difference of their
Longitudes, etc. So, having the Longitude of the one, that of the other can not
be unknown. Thus may the Longitude be found, by the Moon or a Comet, and some
other Star, given, without the difference of time.

The Seventh Proposition. How to find the Longitude and Latitude, at once, by
the Celestial bodies, without observing the difference of time.
FOrasmuch as many Obseruors, both on Land and Sea, may, at one instant time,
see certain of the Planets in one same Constitution and position to respect one
an other, being compared one to one, or one of them with a fixed Star: If
therefore every one of them do observe the said stars (by the great Circles
of several Cosmodelites inclyned according to the inclynation of the several
planes, which they will at one time be seen to make, to the eyes of the
several obseruators, on their several Horizons, it is certain, that each of
them shall find the Inclination of the great Circle of his Cosmodelite
(representing the plane of the two Stars) to differ from the inclination of
all the rest, whether they be situate under diverse Paralelles, or diverse
Meridians. And then every of them applying, on a Globe, the particular angle,
which his inclination made with the vertical line of his Horizon, it will be
presently found what Longitude and Latitude their several places have; and
consequently, the proportional distances from one place of observation, to
another.

The Eighth Proposition. How to find the Longitude Mechanically, and to
describe all the notable places in a Region or Country, on a Map or Plat,
according to their true situations and distances one from another.
TO perform this Proposition, there must be first provided a kind of
Horse-litter (like to the figure following) having one wheel, of such
greatness, as (the horses trauayling, with the same) it may lightly trample
on the face of the Earth, and easily turn about, always answering, in his
motion, the swiftness or slownesse of the horses pasing. This wheel must also
move or turn about other wheels, so framed, as that with an Index, it may
(after the ordinary manner of common watches) express when the said great
wheel (so trampling) shall have justly measured a certain number of pases,
pearches, or furlongs, and their parts; in such sort, as that the Obseruator
(in the Hoslitter) may readily find at any time by the same, how many pases,
pearches, or furlongs, the said Horselitter shall have passed over. There must
be also a perfect Marine Compass, or else a large magneticall Needle and Fly,
hanged in the same manner, with circles of brass which I hold better and more
exact, by reason it is not so ponderous, upon the point of the Pin; and
therefore must of necessity be more quick and ready to show the true respective
point. All which, being fitly placed in the said Litter, and he being seated
therein; when the horses begin to make way, let him note in his Maryne Compass
justly, upon what point of the Compass or parts, they make their direct
coutse: Or if he shall use the Needle and Fly before mentioned, then let him
observe what point, or degree, the South point of the Needle shall cut (in the
Lymbe of the said Fly), until he come to the next turning or angle; which
must be diligently set down in a paper or Table, at every angle, together
with the number of Pases, Pearches, or Furlongs found (from one angle to the
next) by the said Index: always distinguishing each angle, with the measured
Quantity between that and the last before, with several characters or
Alphabeticall notes; to avoid the mistaking of them, one for another. Thus
much carefully performed, and the notes of the several direct courses from
Angle to angle, with the measured quantity between each angle exactly set down;
there is no more to be don abroad, but he may then, in his chair at home,
draw with a protractor (divided in all points answerable to the divisions of the
Marine Compass, or to the Fly under the Needle) by the notes aforenamed, the
whole way, with every angle or turning, and all things and places of note, as
Rivers, houses, gates, paths, styles, trees, and such like, by or through which
the said Litter passed.

diagram

diagram

The practice and use of the Protractor follows.
Having the notes of the true distance from Angle to Angle, and how they bear
and are situate one from another, draw on the Parchement or paper, whereon the
Plat shall be drawn, certain obscure strait lyned Paralelles over the whole
face thereof; each, two inches or thereabouts, distant one from an other. Then
begin at such a place, as that the Parchement or Paper may each way be able to
receive the whole description (which reason will show), and place the
Protractor (by means of the divisions engraued on the ends of the long square
thereof) upon, or parallel to, one of the descrybed obscure pararelles: then
seek in the Lymbe for the point of the Compass, or degree, by which the
second Angle is noted to bear or be situate from the first: there make a prick,
and draw an infinite obsceure line, from the Center of the Protractor, through
the said prick; Then open a pair of Compasses, to the proportion of a Scale
(answerable to the distance noted, from the first Angle to the second) and set
one foot in the point, where the Center of the Protractor was, and with the
other foot (the Compasses unaltered) note a prick in the said obscure line;
which will there represent the true place, distance and situation, of the
second angle from the first. Then, placing the Center of the Protractor upon
the last described prick, do in all things as before, both for the point of the
Compass or degree, and for the distance also, and consequently the like for
all the other angles, until they be all described in the same, according to
their true distance, situations, ways, and turnings, and by which the
Horselitter passed, and for which the said notes were so taken. Note, that if
there should be between any two of the angles some small crookedness or
bending, the form thereof may be well represented on rue paper of notes, the
same being present to the Obseruators eye. Likewise if there be any House,
Gate, style, tree, or any other thing fit to be noted; the Obseruator, making
remembrances in his said notes, may easily with his Protractor make description
of them, answerable to their situations and distances. Then, having the true
Longitude and Latitude of any one place described in the said Plot or Map,
it cannot be but the Longitudes and Latitudes of all other places therein will
offer them selves, by reason of their known situations and distances. Thus
have you the means to find the Longitudes mechanicallie: and how to make a
Map or Chart of any Region, Country, Shiere, and all the places of note
within them, very exactlie.

The form of the Horselitter.



It will be also necessary to place a scale of the same proportional even
^arts, were they miles, Furlongs or pases, by which you made your said Plot or
Map, in the most convenient spare place: and if you will also, a Fly containing
the points of the Compass duly situate will not be impertinent.

A Corollary.
Then it follows by the same reason, using only a Chayne-lyne of 2.3. or 4.
perch length, in the stead of the Horselitter, to measure the distances
between the several angles, and an Instrumente with sights (as the
Cosmodelite herein mentioned, or such (...) a perfect: Magneticall needle, to
expresie (upon a Fly placed underneath the same) the degrees or points of the
Compass intersected when the said sights shall be directed unto or respect
the several angles, euerally; with which and the quantity of pearches,
contained between the several angles distinctly noted, and the same then
protracted in all points according to the formen instructions, you may truly
describe any field, Manor, Park, forest wood, or Fortification, in a Chart,
Map or Plat, very exactly.

Corollarie. II.
Likewise to find the Longitude of any place at Sea, mechanically; there may be
an engine made and joined to the side of the Ship, having a wheel finned (like
the wheel of a water mil) and hanged in a Cha^nel (made of boards) with Circles
like the marine Compass, to the end it may always hang level in the said
Channel, and so move by means of the water passing through the same; it being
both at the entry and issue narrow, and wide in the midst to withstand the
billows and waves, which would otherwise hinder the proportional turning of
the said wheel: which may also with an Index in the manner of that of the
Horselitter, express how much the Ship shall have made way, from the time of
setting forth, alteration of the course, or from watch to watch: which together
with true notes of the several courses by what point of the C^opasse the Ship
has performed her way, and in all things (in this practice) imitating the
fore-taught operations for the Hoslitter, the true description of the course
and quantity of Leagues, with the angles and turnings, that such a Ship shall
make, fr^o time to time in a whole voyage, shall by these means be truly set
forth and kept, in the manner of a Trauerse. And at any time applying the same
on the Sea Chard or plat, the Longitude and Latitude of any place in the same
will be presently found, together with the true place where the same Ship for
that time is, or was at any time in the whole voyage; and how far distant
from any Haven, Island, Sands, Rocks, or dangers described in the said Map or
Seacard.

Annotatio. How the Master or Pylot at Sea may, with any Instrument, much more
exactly observe the Celestial luminaries, then the ordinary manner can admit.
I Cannot here omit, though in digressing manner, to set down a means written
by an excellent French Author, (from whom I confess I gathered many flowers
to decorate this small posie,) whereby the Seame^ may, notwithstanding the
heauing and setting of the Ship, with much more exactness observe, with their
Instrument, the Sun, Stars and any Celestial Luminary, then their ordinary
and usual manner can permit, For by mine own practice I continually found it
almost impossible (in a calm excepted) to make any exact observation, by
reason of the violent shaking of the body, caused by the continual agitation
of the Ship. First then in some convenient place in the Ship, there must be
two small p^^^es of Timber, of 4. feet a piece in length, set upright 4. or 5.
feet distant one from another, to support, at the upper ends of them, two
great Iron circles hanged like the brass circles of the marine Compass:
within which Circles there may be a seat and Table so placed, as that the
Obseruor (being entered therein) may hang steady and leauel, although the Ship
it self do heave and set, and shall be able thereby more perfectly to observe
any Celestial Luminary with exactness. And the whole frame may be so made,
that it may be taken asunder, and set up and down at pleasure, to avoid
inco^brance.

The making of the Cosmodelite, an excellent Instrument for many Mathematical
practices in Astronomy, Geometry, and Cosmography, viz, for the finding of the
Longitude of any place; To take any Altitude Latitude or distance within the
Angle of sight; To make a Map or Plat of any Country, Manor, field,
fortification or Town; To delineate Sun dialls upon all planes given, with
great facility, invented by the Author.
WHether you will have your instrument of Brass or fine grained Wood, you
must frame a Circle of five or six Inches Diametre at the least, within the
Lymbe of which, you may describe and engraue certain Circles one within
another, (for several uses): one of which Circles shall be divided into 360.
equal parts or degr^^s, which shall serve for astronomicall and (...)
^eometricall observations; another of the said circles shall be divided into
24. equal parts, (and each of them again into subdiuisions, as halves and
quarters) which shall both serve of it self for an Equinoctial Dial, being
inclyned to the inclination of the Equator; and also most readily to delineate
all Sun Dialls, Murall and Horizontall, as in the Proposition preceding is
fully taught. Then shall you make an Index of the length of the whole Circles
Diametre, whose fiduciall line may serve for each several inscribed Circle,
and crect a sight near unto each end thereof. Then also make a Semicircle
about three inches Diametre, leaving some part more then a Semicircle above the
Diametre thereof, both for the better joining the same under the Circle, which
must be done directly under one o^ the Diametres, and for the better scope to
eleua^^ or embase the same; The lymbe of which Se^^circle you shall divide into
180. equal parts or degrees, viz, each Quadrant into 90. There must be also a
piece of the same substance so framed, as that the Semicircle may, as between
two Cheeks or supporters, move up and down to any inclination, upon a pin
which must pass through the Center of the Semicircle and heads of the said
Cheeks or supporters, and must have at the smaller end a Nut and screw to lock
the same at pleasure; and the said Cheeks must have a fiduciall edge, to note
in the Lymbe of the Semicircle the elevation and inclination of the great
C^^^e, when occasion shall require. Furthermore the lower end of the Cheeks
must be joined to the staff (which must support the whole) as the two feet
of a pair of Compasses, or rather as the legs of the Sector or Circumferental
Scale are joined together, with three round planes to make one joint head: the
two outmost of those planes we will call Ears, and do differ only from the head
of a Sector in a pin which is to pass through the Center carrying a double
Index at one end thereof, and the other end must be fitted to a screw nut, to
lock the same fast when you please: also the middle part of the same pin must
be square; yet round toward each end, fitted to the three holes in the Ce^tre
of the three round planes, the hole of the middle plane being square to the
end, when the Instrument is inclyned; that then this ^quare hole may, by reason
of the squarenesse of the ^iddle of the Pin, carry the said double Index with
it proportionally Circular upon that ear whereon it mooues: whose Lymbe, being
likewise divided into degrees, will express there the true quantity of such
inclination. And it is also very necessary to place, on the Center of the great
Circle and Index thereof (after the usual manner) a box with a perfect
Magneticall needle therein, and a fly fixed in the bottom, exactly divided into
degrees and Rombes, having the variation of the compass for the place of
observation always noted therein. Thus is the Cosmodelite fitly prepared ^o
perform your expectation in any Mathematical observation. The figures of each
part, before mentioned, follow here demonstrated.

diagram

The great Circle is A, the Index thereof C, and the sights for the same Index
K K: the Semicircle is B, which is to be joined directly under the Diametre L
M. The piece with two Cheeks is E, the upper pin and screw thereof, I: the
lower end of the same piece, being the middle plane with a square hole at the
Center, D; the other two planes joined to the Staff F: the pin for the same
and the screwes thereof are G and H: the box with a Magnetical needle P, to be
placed on the Center and Index. All which joined together is represented by the
figure at N.

Here could I further add two other necessary parts unto the said
Instrument: one whereof, for ^^e making of a Cherographicall description, on a
^^^p or Plat, of all the angles in sight, at one sole sta^^^^. The other, by two
several stations, (without ^^ng the respecting lines by degrees, points of
(...) Compass, or parts of either; and without the (...) of Protractor, or any
arithmeticall notations) ^^eally to describe on the said Instrument all the
notable places, which at these two stations were to be seen: according to
their true distances and situations, each from other. All which and many other,
if I shall find these acceptable, I will hereafter either generally publish, or
particularly explane to any true well willer of these practice. Also I might
here apply the use of this Instrument to measure all visuall distances within
the Angle of sight, and how to carry a Rolling trench under Ground directly
unto any place appointed to be undermined with infinite other necessary
conclusions: But because the most of them have been already taught how to be
performed by other instruments (not so general as this) I therefore presume,
the ingenious practiser will with so much ease apply them hereunto as it might
seem superfluous for me here to iterate the same.

How by the help of the Cosmodelite to delineate a Sun Dial, on any Plane
given, with great facility and without the use of Arithmetic.
PLace the Cosmodelite so upon his foot, as that it may be near unto the
Plane or wall whereon you desire to draw your Sun Dial, being se^ so directly
upright, by the help of a Plummet (...) otherwise, that the planes of the
Ears thereof be (...) perpendicular to the Horizon: that done, lock fa^^ the
said Ears with the screw and nut. Then by the Magneticall needle or
otherwise, place the line of 12 (in the Instruments great Circle) directly in
the Meridian line of that place: and (by the Semicircle and degrees thereof)
embase the North part of the same great Circle, so many degrees as the North
part of the Aequinoctiall is embased under the Horizon, and so shall the plane
of the great Circle be found to be in the true plane of the Equator of the
world, which it here represents. Thus all parts of the Cosmodelite being
fast locked, it is readily prepared to delineate a Sun Dial on any plane,
against which it is placed as above said. To practice this Proposition you
shall first (the Cosmodelite placed according to the former directions) fasten
in the Center of the great Circle, a thread of 5. or six foot in length, and
erect the same perpendicular to the plane of the same great Circle; extending
it so far, as it may intersect the given Plane, and therein note a point or
prick; which prick shall be both a Ce^tre to the hour lines, and also the
point from which the Style or Ostens^r for the same Dial must proceed: and
the same line, so erected, does also well demonstrate unto you the very
fiduciall edge of the Ostensor or style: These things performed, you have now
no more to do for the setting ^^rth of the hour pricks in the said Plane, but
to (...) the said three^ strait, upon each of the hour ^es engraued on the
Instrument, and to extend ^^e same forth so far, at each time, as it may touch
and make so many seu^rall pricks as there will fall hour lines (in that manner)
on the said Plane: as for such hours whereon the thread being applied, and
infinitely extended, will not yet any where intersect the said Plane, it is
certain that those hours cannot be found on that Plane, by the shadow of the
Sun. All the pricks being so set down, on the Plane, that will fall thereon;
you must then draw a strait line from the first described prick, to each of
the other pricks, and those shall be the hour lines, for the same Dial,
truly described. Then an Ostensor or Style having his fiducial edge and being
placed according to the former instruction, and the figures for each hour set
down at the end of each of them, to distinguish them one from another: you
shall so have descrybed an exact Sun Dyall, Perspectiuelie. Note that if, in
the erecting of the thread perpendicular to the plane of the great Circle, it
happen to be parallel to the plane (on which you have described your Sun
dyall as aforesaid) and so will no where intersect the same plane; Then must
the Ostensor or Style be also parallel, and of such distance from the plane
given as the perpendicular erected thread extended is. Thus may you by the
help of the Cosmodelite delineate a Sun Dial, Direct, Inclyning, Declyning,
or Reclyning, on any Plane, or H^rizon given.

Master Robert Smyth his intention to delineate a Sun Dialll on any Plane in
any one Parallel given, with a Instrument of slight charge.
FIrst draw a Quadrant, and divide the Arch thereof into 90. equal parts or
degrees, and extend a strait line from the Center or square angle of the same,
unto the degree in the arch answering the Latitude of the parallel given;
prolonlonging the same line, beyond the Arch or lymbe, some 6. or 8. inches, or
more or less at pleasure. Also extend the Base line of the Quadrant as far
as you think fit (for the bigness of your instrument) and at the end of the
same line erect a perpendicular which may intersect the first extended line. So
shall the said perpendicular, the Base, and the line drawn by the degree of
Latitude, describe unto you a rectangled Tryangle. Then draw a Circle (whose
Dyametre may be about half the length of the Base line of the Tryangle
aforesaid) and divide the Circumference of the said circle into 24. equal
parts: in the Center of which Circle you shall fix a thread of 4. or 5. feet
in length: The said Tryangle and Circle being then cut out of some thin board
of fine grained wood, and the circle let on, upon the side of the Tryangle
which subtendeth the square angle, so far as that the center of the circle
may touch or exactlie join to the said line, and the plane of the circle stand
square to the said ^yne, and the divisions being distinguished Arithmetically
from 12. to 12. as appears in the figure following: The said Instrument is
ready to perform the promised effect in manner following.

diagram

The use and practice of the said Instrument.

Place and fasten your Tryangle upon or near unto the Plane on which you
purpose to draw the Sundiall, in such manner as that the side E F may be
perpendicular unto the Horizon, and the line E A directly in the Meridian line
of the place: so shall the line A F be found to represent the Axis of the
world; and the circles circumference to be exactly in the Plane of the
Aequinoctiall. Then have you no more to do, but apply the thread on so many of
the 24. divisions severally, as, being infinitely extended, it note in the
plane given, so many touch points as there can be hours found by the Suns
shadow upon the said plane: And drawing strait lines from the point in the
plane, (which the line A F of the Tryangle respects) unto each of the said
touch points, such lines shall be the true hour lines to express the exact
hour of the day, by the shadow of an Ostensor or Style; which must be placed
to carry the true form of the said line A F of the same Tryangle upon the said
plane given: Applying also the Arithmeticall characters, corresponde^t to those
of the circle, upon the hour lines severally, you shall so have delineated a
perfect Sundiall upon the Plane given.

The making of an artificial Engine, whereby with a small strength given, you
may lift up any ponderous weight assigned
WHen Hieron (King of Sicilia) had builded a a Ship of such admirable
greatness (to present unto Ptolome, King of Egypt) as that all the inahbitants
of Syracusia, were not able by any means they could practice, to launch it
into the water: Archimedes, that excellent Mathematician, caused this engine to
be framed; whereby the King himself, did with one hand lift up the said
mighty vessel from the Earth, and set it into the Sea: which although many,
as well Historiographers, as others, have in their works mentioned; yet none
have hitherto set down the perfect framing thereof, save only the learned
Besson; who ha^^ thus left it unto posterity. The Tripaston (for so (...)
names it) may be composed, of as many wheel and screwes (to turn those
wheels) as you wi^^ but of four of each at the least. The first screw must
have a handle to turn about like the handle of a handmyll or grynding stone;
and so fitted, as being turned round, it may also turn the first wheel, by
means of the oblique swellings of the same screw, falling between the Teeth
or Cogs of the said first wheel: which Teeth must be so many in number as may
be proportional to the strength you would multiply by the same. The Axletree
of the first wheel must have upon the same a second screw, which may in like
manner, and proportion, turn a second wheel, and that second a third; which
third a fowerth, and so infinitely at pleasure. Now if the first screw (by the
handle) be turned about 20. times, to the turning of the first wheel once: I
affirm that the said first wheel will lift up as much poyse or burden, as
the strength of 20. men will extend unto, having a cord fastened to the same,
and to the Axletree of the said first wheel, and a man to turn about the
first screw by the handle thereof. The second wheel having the like proportion
in motion to the first as the first has to the handle, I conclude that the
second wheel will in like sort raise up 20 times 20 men's strength, which is
400 men's strength. The third wheel 20 times 400 men's strength, which is 8000.
The fowerth 20 times 8000 which is 160000 men's strength, and so forth
infinitely; A thing which to many will seem incredible: but who so will duly
put the same in practice shall find it fully able to perform the promised
effect: whereby it appears that it was not without reason, that Archimedes
affirmed that he could move the whole Globe of the Earth out of her place, if
he had any firm place in the Air, that could support his said Engine; and
thereupon made this Problem, Datum pondus datis veribus mouere. But here may
some make question, if the slowenesse of this Engine cannot by some Artificial
means be hastened: to which I answer it may, by taking away one or two of the
last wheels screwes and Axis, and in their places so use common Pullies,
whereof Vitruuius writes in his tenth book and third Chapter: which Pappus in
his Annotations upon the Mechanics of Archimedes affirms to have also
infinite force, with great celerity. Thus much may suffice for the framing of
this Engine, whose benefit may be extended to infinite necessary uses: Only I
will here demonstrate in the figure following the form of the said Screwes and
wheels.

diagram diagram

Brief Expositions of the Geometrical and Astronomicall terms mentioned in
this Treatise.
A line is a length without breadth or deepnesse. Line
A Superficies or Surface has only length and breadth without deepenesse.
Surface
A plane is equally flat, contained within lines, Plane
and does not bulk out or shrink in at any place: and is said to be
represented, when a like figure has an absolute like situation and
constitution. An Angle is the concourse of two or more several lines in one
same point: Angle
And is given when the degrees of the subtending arch thereof is known. A
right or square angle, Right angle
is when two lines fall square one upon another, making all the angles framed
thereby equal. A Sharp or acute angle, Sharp angle
is any angle that is less then a square angle. A Blunt or Obtuse angle, Blunt
angle
is any angle that is greater then a right or square angle. A Triangle is a
Figure of three Corners or angles: Triangle
And is given, when the quantity of all the Angles and sides are known. A
Circle is a round Figure, Circle
made by the turning of a line upon a point fixed. The Circumference of a
Circle is the outmost edge or lymbe of the Circle, Circumference
being in all places equidistant from the aforesaid fixed point. Any part of a
Circumfere^ce is an Arch; An arch is given, Arch
when the degrees contained therein are known. The Center is a point in the
midst of a Circle, Center
Globe, or Sphere. The dyametre of a Circle is the longest strait line that
can be drawn within a Circle, Diametre
and it passes through the Center from side to side: Semidiametre
The half thereof is the Semidiametre. A great Circle is that which divides
the world into two equal parts. Great
Circle
The edge or Lymbe thereof containing 360. equal parts or degrees. Degree
A Degree is therefore 1/360 part of a Circle. The Equator or Aequinoctiall is
a great Circle, Equinoctial.
girding the world in the midst between the two Poles. The Zodiac is a great
Circle broad and slopewise situate, Zodiac
bearing the 12 Signs. In the midst of which Circle is a line called the
Ecliptic, Ecliptic
from which the Sun never swarueth. The Meridian is a great Circle passing
through the Zenith and Poles of the world, Meridian
being always permanent, though the Sphere be moved. The Horizon is a great
Circle, Horizon
dividing the world (according to sense) into 2 equal parts; viz, the Superior
seen, or Diurnall Hemisphere; and the inferior unseen, or Nocturnall
Hemisphere. Azimuthes, Azimuthes
or Circles vertical, are great Circles, and pass through the Zenith
intersecting the Horizon with right angles. Almicanterathes or Circles of
altitude, Almicantares.
are Circles parallel to the Horizon: and are greatest, being nearest the
Horizon; and least, being nearest the Zenith. The Axis, or axletree of the
world, Axletree
is a line supposed to pass through the Center of the Earth: the extremes or
ends of which line are the Poles of the world: viz, the North end the Pole
artick, and the South end the aniartick. There is North Latitude, and South
Latitude of places: Latitude of places.
For all places between the Equinoctial and the North pole have North Latitude;
and between the Equinoctial and the South Pole have South Latitude. The
Longitude of the Earth is as the Circuit of the Equator in the Heavens.
Longitude of places.
And is divided into 360 even parts or degrees. Any two places, being less
then 180 degrees distant, have one same Longitude, if they be under one same
Meridian; Otherwise they have different Longitude. Any two places having like
Latitude (being both North, or both South Latitude) are in one same Parallel.
The vertical point or Zenith is a point in Heaven directly over our heads,
Zenith.
and is the Center or Pole of the Horizon. The Oposite point is the Nadire
(...) Nadir.
The Paralax, or difference of Asp^^^ (...) a Comet Planet or other Luminary,
Paralax.
is the angle (...) intersection of the Line of the true Place (...) place
thereof reckoned in the Firmament.
FINIS.
Faults escaped, in the original Copy, it self.
Page 10. in the line of the figure A C write G at the upper end of the arch D,
and at the star * write Q. And page 11. line 10, for, as the arch E C does at
E, read as the arch B C does at B; and in l. 15 for point E read point B; and
l. 26 for side A C on C, read A Q on Q: And 1. 27, for side A C at the point
A, read side A Q at the point D. And page 12. l. 1 for the point A of the line
A C, read the point G of the line A Q, And l. 2 for arch A D which will fall
in E, read arch G D which will fall in D; l. 3 for from C read from Q. l. 4.
for point E read point D, l. 6 for angle A K C read A K Q.


