A PRAYER FOR THE PROSPEROVS PROCEEDINGS AND GOOD success of the Earl of
Essex and his companies, in their present expedition in Ireland against Tyrone
and his adherents, Rebels there.

Fit to be used of all loyal subjects, as well in that Country, as in England.

By John Norden.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Edward Allde. 1599.

A motive to the prayer.
GOd the high guide of all godly attempts, and the beholder of all the devises
of man, requires of all men obedience to his will, and prayer for his aid,
without which, man's endeavors are but as seed sown on the sand, and as a
foundation laid upon the waters. And therefore such as undertake so high and
weighty a business as the business of war, must found it on the fear of
God and wade in it under his power in prayer for his presence and aid. For so
did Hezekiah against the king of Ashur, 2. King. 19. and prevailed, and
Jehosophat being endaungered with enemies, 2. Cron. 18. 31. prayed and was
preserved. God no doubt is so well pleased with this exercise of prayer,
zealously and faithfully performed, as he is won so to regard the causes of
his children, that although they have deserved the foil by their sins, he
will yet give them the victory in his mercies. The Israelites prevailed while
Moses prayed, and fell before the enemy when he was mute. In many places it
appears how needful a thing prayer is, not only of them that are in the
danger of the battle, but of such also as are secure at home in their houses,
who if they neglect the cause of God and their country, God will hold them
not only unprofitable droanes, but reprobates: and will give them the dregs
of their neighbors dangers to drink, and will not afford them the least
shelter of his defending power in their deepest perils. For if he in general
terms command us to pray at all times one for another: as Jam. 5. 16. much
more in the time of danger and war, especially for the cause of Gods
anointed, and state of our country, 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2. Let no man therefore
think that it conscerneth not him to pray for the good of such as the Prince
has appointed, for the restoration of the peace of Gods Church, and quiet of
our Realm, by the suppressing of the violence, and quenching of the fury of
that bloody Tyrone, and his rebellious adherents in Ireland: for God is a
jealous God, and holds no man guiltless that makes no conscience of his
brothers dangers. And such is the regard which he has of his own glory and
his providence for the preservation of his children, that he will not admit
any attempt, be it in our own eyes never so lawful, to be taken in hand
without him, without whom all things and means are vain. Our own power, and
providence, and counsel, and multitudes of men, and munition, and money, and
what else soever we use for defending our selves, or offending the enemy, are
all as clouds in the air of our own vain conceits, that will vanish with
the wind of his displeasure, without any deawe of good success to comfort our
country. To pray for them that fight for us, is the least duty, and an easy
service: yet it prevails much if it be fervent. And if we seem cold in
that, wherein can we be zealous for our country? if careless of it, how can we
say we love our own lives, liberty, lands, wives, or children? when all these
are subject also to sudden subuertion, without God that preserves them unto
us, and us in himself. Therefore as God has his eye of mercy fixed on his
destressed people, to deliver them, and his eye of judgment upon the
rebellious to confound them: So let every man make this general cause his own
private case. And for the preventing of future peril, bear a part with them
that in our behalfes are employed in this service abroad: let us pray for them
at home, while they encounter the enemy abroad: Let us I say, pray for them,
that God will prosper them, and that we may prosper by their blessed success.

PSALM. 7. 16. His mischief shall return upon his own bead, and his cruelty
shall fall upon his own pate.
The Prayer.
OH Father full of power King of all Majesty and glory, the absolute worker of
all things even as thou will; Be pleased in mercy to be present with thy
servants, whom thou have appointed to go forth against the enemies of the
peace of thy children in the Realm of Ireland. And as thou art a continual
most diligent beholder of all the actons of men good and evil, showing thy
self a patient God, even toward thine enemies, suffering them to fill up a
great measure of outrage, violence, and blood, before thou take up the sword of
revenge against them: and yet at the length, when in their own conceits they
seem most strong, and not to be vanquished, even then thou liftest up thy
devouring sword, and consumest them. So dear father be thou pleased to be a
guide, a guard and a buckler unto thy servant, whom thou have chosen to go
against that bloody enemy Tyrone, who thirsting for and shedding the blood, of
many of thy people, endeavors all rebellions mischiefs, to cast off the
yoke of obedience both to thy word, and to shine anointed, to the great
peril of thy Church, which by his outrageous wickedness, stands in danger
of greater troubles, which violence of his (good father) and the dangers by
him and his adherents complotted, cannot be stopped or prevented by man without
thee.

See therefore and behold their malice, and let thy power weaken their power,
who else will boast themselves against thee,and say their own power has
gotten themselves the victory, and that by their own policies, they are
become Lords of thine heritage. Oh take part therefore with thy servants, and
suppress these rebels: then shall thy praise be increased, thy mercy and
power shall be seen, and thy name shall be for ever glorified. And though
(dear father) our sins do make us unworthy of this great benefit, yet for
thine own names sake deal mercifully, in giving good success unto their
proceedings, that in thy name have undertaken this work of reducing that
Realm to Christian obedience. And the more the enemy seems to swell either
in fury or pride: weaken him so much the more oh Lord, and give him sorrow
for his vain hope. Let nothing that he takes in hand against thy people
prevail, but let it appear by his fall, how thou laughest his vain attempts
to scorn. And let him know good father, that he strives against thee and
against thine appointed in vain. Manifest thine anger against his devises, by
frustrating his desires. Break his enterprises, and bring his inventions as
coals enkindled upon his own pate. Let him either truly convert, or be
suddenly confounded. And dear Father, be unto that thy servant the Earl of
Essex, and his associates, as thou wast unto Moses, Iosuah, Gedion, David, and
the rest that have fought under thy protection. Be unto him and his companies a
Father to comfort them, a Captain to conduct them, and their God to preserve
them. Let their armies march under the shelter of thy wings, make strong their
arms to the battle, and teach their fingers to fight. Frame their hearts to
fear thee, and not to faint at their enemies power, give them thy light to
follow thee, and let them ever be preserved by thee, let nothing necessary be
wanting unto them, but bless them in all things. Give them wisdom from above,
wherein they may use and dispose thy means in their service rightly. And in an
absolute godly desire, to bring their cause to a prosperous end. Moreover most
merciful Father, bless the shipping, which are employed in this action, and
all other tending to the good of thy church, make their Governors prudent and
valiant, the winds prosperous, and the success to thy glory: That we thy
children, tasting the sweet benefit of peace, both there and here at home, may
give glory unto thy name, and in more godly zeal study to serve thee in our
callings, and endeavor more effectually to plant thy sacred word in those
parts, to the increase of thy Church, and comfort of all the members of the
same. Amen.

O Lord increase our faith.
ER


