Spiritus est Uicarius Christi in terra.

The poor man's Garden, wherein are flowers of the Scriptures, and Doctors,
very necessary and profitable for the simple and ignorant people to read:
truly collected and diligently gathered together, by John Northbrooke,
Minister and Preacher of the word of God.

The song of songs, made by Solomon. cap. 2. ver. 12 The flowers appear in
the earth, the time of the singyng of the birds is come, and the voice of the
Turtle is heard in our land.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens Injunctions.

At London.

Printed by John Kingston for W. Williamson, dwelling in Powles Churchyard, at
the sign of the white Horse.

Anno. 1571.

To the right reverend father in God, William, by the merciful providence of
God, through Jesus Christ, Bishop of Excester, Jhon Northbrooke wishes all
health and godliness long to continue, with the increase of virtue, and zeal
in religion.
COnsidering with my self (right reverend father in God) the dangerous
practices of the Papists, in these our days: who are ever redyer to put men
in doubt, then to establishe them in the true Christian faith: more apt to
bring them to desperation, then to true consolation by faith in Christ: more
diligent to move them to believe man, then God: antechrist then Christ: the
Pope, then the Scriptures: to trust to our own works then his merits: the
massing sacrifice then, Christ's oblation: popish pardons then free
forgiveness in Christ: to honor a wafer cake for Christ, geuyng to the
creature that is due unto the Creator, making more of Sacraments, then the
nature of Sacraments require: not using them, but abusing them: not referring
nor applying them, but adoring them, turnyng religion into superstion: faith
into opinion: and the true serving of God into idolatry: having under the
visour of their vowed chastity, adultery: under the cloak of professed
poverty, all the goods of the temporaltie: under the title of being dead unto
the world, they ruled the world: under the keys to hang under their girdle,
they brought all estates into the gulf of ignorance, whereout comes all
heresies and errors, (says S. Augustine) and yet as saint Paul says,
habentes speciem pietatis, Aug. de ciuit. dei. lib. 22. cap. 22. Psalm. 119.
sed vim eius abnegantes. Whereby they may abuse the simple peoples
judgments, that they in no wise may know or understand (through their
hypocrisy) Gods holy word, which lights our feet: stays our goinges:
orders our minds: governs our bodies: directs all our works and
affairs: teaching us what we ought to do, and what we ought not to do, without
which word, neither king can reign, lord nor magistrate rule: nor subject
truly obey, as they ought to do: nor yet order well those things that are
committed to their charge. And for that the simple ignorant people are carried
so easily away, with the only sound and voice of the Papists, by the names of
the ancient Fathers and Doctors, from the true religion of Christ Jesus, made
me to enterprise and take in hand, (although of all others most unmeet) this
rude and simple work: and the rather for that those that daily cry out that
this religion is a new religion, which was never allowed by the holy and
Canonical scriptures: fathers, and counsels, that we now preach and maintain
in these our days. Whose mouths, to stop and stay their cryinges out (if it
may be) I have here gathered (reverend Father) together, certain places of
holy Scriptures, Fathers, and Counsels, (as concerning the principal points
of relgion) wherein the simple and ignorant may plainly, and clearly see, as
it were in a glass, what side holds of Christ most truly: who preaches
Christ most faithfully: whose religion is best allowed by the Scriptures:
confirmed by the Martyrs* maintained and taught by the Fathers, the Papists or
the Protestants: wherein they shall easily perceive and understand, that our
religion is the old, true and catholic religion. And that the Papists
religion (which our late Louanistes, and Hardonians so stoutely mainteyne) is
but a new start up, and devised religion, (clean contrary and against the
word of God: godly Fathers, and good counsels) by certain whoremaisters,
Coniurers, Sorcerers, Traitors, Bastardes and Sodomites, Popes of Rome, with
others. And although it is to be lamented to see the corrupt nature of man, who
is given, not to believe Christ, without the ancthoritie and witness of man,
(who may rather therefore be called Patrologie then Theology) yet for that God
has given such light unto men, to be as witnesses of his truth, I have here
put down, first the Scriptures, the number of every verse: and then follows
the consent of the Fathers, Counsels: yea, even the Papists own doctors,
decrees, and sentences, even to the very lowest degrees of the Popes champions,
Master D. Harding, whereby all men may see that Baalams Asses of Rome, speak
truth many times, although against their wylles. There are in deed many
notable learned men (as your Lordship well knows) which have gathered certain
books of common places in the Latin tongue: but that is to the ignorant that
understands it not, as the kernel within the shell to a little weak child.
Wherefore, I have by earnest request made by certain of my friends (whom well
I ^oulde not deny) taken this labor in hand: only for Gods honor and
glories sake, and helpyng forward of my poor brethren, and countrymen, to
the knowledge of Gods truth in religion, that have been, and daily are abused
by the Papists, with the names and titles of Fathers, and Counsels, to
minister them weapons out of the Scriptures, and Doctors, wherewith they may
beat down their enemies, whenever they shall seem to open their mouth
against Gods true religion, noweset forth and taught of all the godly
Bishops and Preachers. In this work (reverend Father) I have not corrupted
the Doctors words willingly: but simply and plainly set them down, as I
read and find them in their own books: rather showing my self homely and
plain according to my skyll, then by overmuch finenesse above my reach, to
dissent from the mind of the Scriptures and Fathers.

Now what thing should I devise to pleasure your Lordship better: and that
which agrees so well with your estate and calling, to be a Father in Christ
his Church, then the manifestation of the holy Scriptures and Fathers, which
fully allow and mainteyne the religion now set forth, which always (as I
have understood) you have sought: and of all true professors thereof, you
have been a lover and defendour. Therefore I do here present, and dedicate this
simple work (of the poor man's Garden) unto your Lordship, taking your name
for a patron and defendour against the bityng furies of snuffyng detractours:
and momishe affections of bityng zoilous persons, and heretical papists, who
daily do envy al good and godly doings and exercises. And also to declare my
hearty good will toward you, and the natural love I bear to my native
countrymen of Devonshire. Most humbly beseeching your Lordship therefore, to
take this poor and small rude labor of mine in good part, and accept my good
meaning herein, which tends to the only glory of God: advancement of his
kingdom, profit of my said countrymen, and to the overthrow of all Gods
enemies the Papists, which have kept the people in darkness palpable, in
horrors infinite, and in fear miserable, beseeching the Lord God, that if the
greatness of fear will not incite them, yet the hope of salvation may alure
them from their wickedness, to his glory, and their own salvation, through
Jesus Christ. And that in the mean time, your Lordship with all other godly
preachers and teachers, may reprove sin and popery sharply: preach Christ
sweetly: impugn errors pithily: and to persuade to good life earnestly. Thus
I leave, any further troublyng you with my rude and homely style and phrase of
writing, beseching God to bless, keep, and maintain you in his fear:
enriching you with all good blessings: and always governing you in all your
affairs and doings, by his holy spirit, unto the end, and in the end.

Your Lordships to use in the Lord, John Northbrooke, preacher.

Augustine in his. 7. Epistle. I confess my self to be one of that number
which write in profiting, and profit by writing.
To the Christian reader, grace, peace, and health in Christ.
GOD in the beginning when he created the earth, gave virtue to the same, to
bring forth every herb of the field, that might bear seed in him self,
after his own kind, without gardening, digging, sowing, plantyng, weedyng, or
any other travail of man. But after that man had transgressed, the earth
received the curse due to man's offense, that is, to bring forth thorns and
thistles: and as man was defiled, and could yield forth no good fruit,
except he were delued by Gods spirit, and the seed of Gods word sown into
him, which by the influence of the same spirit, might bud out the leaves,
stalks, and blossoms of grace, which ripeth in time of it self, so the earth
then remained to man as a thing tillable, out of the which by continual
eradication of weeds, and by digging and deluing the ground, plantyng and
sowyng of good and commodious herbs and fruits, he might receive unto him
self by continual travail and labor in the sweat of his face, things
necessary for his comfort and bodily sustentation. Hence grows it also that
now unto this day, men, the terrestrial heirs of Adam, dig, delue, plowe,
hedge, ditche, ear, sow, threshe, cull, weed, plant, set, graft, proine and
such like, upon the face of this travail some ground, in the which as the
preacher says, when man has labored what he may, Quid vtilitatis est homini,
de vniuerso labor suo, quo laborat sub sole? What profit has man more of all
the labor wherewith he weerieth him self, under the Sun, but sorrow and
care, and nothing without pains and grief. Also Euripides says to every man:
(...). That is, if thou which art borne mortal, do think thy self to live
without labors and unquietness, thou art a fool: and what could of a Pagan be
I pray you more wisely spoken, or divinely? The plowman reapeth not till he
have daunced after the Plowshare, holdyng fast the handle, pochyng in mire, up
to the calfe of the leg, he filles not his hands with the ears, till he
have parched and well koned them, with sustainyng the bitter blows of the
pearcyng Hail, beatyng with bityng showers and frost by vehemence of the
Northest wind. He filles not his belly with bread, before he have well wet
his back with Snow and Rain. No man drinks wine before the Grapes be
planted, no man eats pure fruict before he have grafted, the Merchant
receives not his gain without great fears, perils, and adventures by Sea, by
land, by night and day, and that not without many unknown and great
losses. No man has the pleasure of a wholesome Garde^t without great labor to
obtain good seeds, great diligence in sowyng* the setting, and no less sore
travail in weedyng the gorunde, so that fina^ce well male here conclude of
man's estate upon this earth. Omnis commoditas sua f^rt incommodita secum. That
is, every commodity brings his discommodities with him, no gain without
pain, no joy without noye, no honor without labor, no meede without need,
wherein yet man is daiely taught to remember, that these are badges,
monumentes, and memorials of his fall, and his sin, the cause of all these
infirmities, which he was free from before his transgression.

Yet notwithstanding, all men are not so mindful of their first fall, or else
of their present labors, that either they do bewail their misery, or seek to
employe their labors aright: For where the only end of Adams travail is,
that he may eat, that is, that he may gather comfort, and relief in his
necessity: Many are so forgetful of their miseries, that the study of their
whole life, is only employed to satis^ie their vain pleasure, and so man's
life, which should be as a f^uictfull Garden, is altogether become a barren
wilderness, which at the least, though it be void of good fruictes, yet is it
full stuffed with baggage, B^yers and Brambles, and all ouergrowen with Brakes
and most unprofitable weeds.

But God, whose wisdom surpasses man's foolishenes, has provided a sufficient
salve for every sore, and a remedy for man's untowardness, and knowing the
nature of the disease, has also planted simples of his grace, Whereof he
makes medicines to heal the great sore of man's corruption. For as a good
physician is well grounded in the nature of Herbs and Plants, whereof are
made salues and remedies for the diseases of the body, and is never destitute
either of a good Garden, well replenished with all manner wholesome herbs, or
else of a trusty learned Apothecarie to provide the same: So God does never
leave his ordinary means unoccupied and unprovided, whereby the Ulcers and
Blai^es of man's corrupt mind, may be cured and healed, which he practices
by many and sundry means, and by many and sundry instruments, as rightly
making his gracious gifts to spring out of the well tilled ground of his
childrens mortified affections, as the earth does da^elie bring forth all
manner of herbs, not only to man's great admiration, but also to his singular
comfort: Which are of such operation and subtle virtue, that many cull
them, and take great care to have them growing in their Gardens, not only for
their excellent and orient colors, fragrant and odoriferous smelles, which
much repelleth the filthiness of the air, and reuiueth the dulled and
distempered senses of man: But also for the great benefit, that men do find
by the abundance of wholesome herbs, and flowers, in preseruyng of their
bodyly health. For which end and purpose, I would wish that all Gardens were
made, and not so much sumptuousnes bestowed in waste, only for the vain
delight of the eye, but also to the great increase of much vain expenses and
wasted money, whereby neither the bestowers thereof are the healthier, neither
any profit or corporal vti^ obtained, except the seeing of the orderly
growyng of Knottes and Bor^ purge out diseases by the delight of the eye and
pleasure of the affection. I speak neither against any honorable or
worshipful man's pleasure or prosperity, which is made for the increase and
preservation of health, but against vain and superfluous gardening. Gardens
are wholesome, healthful, and commodious for two causes. First, for the air
sake, for where many kind of sweet herbs, grow together, there must of
necessity be an excellent composition of air, whereby the senses of man are
both helped and rele^ued. Secondly for medicine sake, because, of herbs are
made the most excellent medicines, salues, and emplaisters for the expulsing
of all manner diseases and infections of the body. But notwithstanding the
commodity be great, yet for the most part it is private, for commonly those
that make fair Gardens, they do so enclose them with huge walls, and high
pales, that none has the fruit of them but them selves, and in the richer men's
Gardens, the more seldom do poor men reap any pleasure by them. But herein
I must, as I have good occasion, commend the labor of this spiritual
Gardener, our dear and painful brother, John Northbrooke, whose Garden is
not only painefullie purged and cleansed of all weeds, but well furnished
with all manner of most excellent hearbe^ and flowers, that may serve to the
comfort of the spiritual senses of the faithful, and for the curing of all
diseases of the mind and conscience infected with the corruption, either of
the foul black air of ignorance, or pestiferous sayings and decrees of
false doctrine and heresy.

Which spiritual Garden, after that with great labor and study he had
brought about to finishe, having taken great pains no doubt, in gettyng out of
many Gardens, the most excellent Slippes, Seeds and Plants, and after that he
had brought to pass, that no good herb was wanting, that might any thing
profit or benefit such as are desirous of their souls health. He neither has
walled it about with great Brick walls, nor hedged it about with quick
thorns, neither paled it in, whereby it might seem that he bestowed this cost
for himself, and this pains only for his own commodity, as the manner of the
world is to do: he has franckly and freely, with all the commodites thereof,
left it open to all manner of men: nay, more then so, that he has made it a
common Garden, he has only planted it, and given it to the poor, it is a
common Garden for the poor, you may be bold to call it the poor man's
Garden, out of which notwithstanding, both rich and poor, mai^ gather and
receive, not a poor* but a very fertile and rich commodity. And none that
shall have occasion to walk in it, but he shall have great cause to praise God
for the commodity that shall come to the faithful by the pain and travail
of this godly and vigelant Pastor and Minister of Gods Church, John
Northbrooke, whose soundness of doctrine, modesty, integrity of life, and
upright conversation, shines, not only in this his labor, to the example of
all the rest of Gods Ministers, but is also very apparent in his manners, and
whosoever of parcialitie, purpose, or self affection, does or shall go about
to say or maintain the contrary, others that should hear it, knowing our
godly brother, and faithful Minister of the Church, John Northbrooke (who is
a man not unknown, but by face well acquainted) shall and may justly accuse
such of no small injury done to the Church and Ministers of Christ, especially
in these perilous times, where the good name of a faithful Minister (walk he
never so uprightly) is not so easily preserved and kept, as mischieuously
stolen and purloyned from him, by the envious and spiteful Papists, and
Newters, which are with Lyn^es eyes, and Tygre^ teeth bent against Gods truth
and Ministers: one of whom having once lost his good name, hardlye it is that
ever it may or can generallye be bought or purchased again, and that made
Isocrates to say, Let it be more care unto thee that thou may leave an
honest report unto thy children, then great riches, for riches be mortal, but a
good name is immortal, and through hunger, goods may be gotten: but a good
repor^ is never redeemed with money. Also, riches fall to wicked men, but the
glory of a good name, can not happen except to passing good men only, and
surely truly it is said of him, for as the world now goes, a man were
better not to live, then to ^ue among the wicked scornful, with an undeserved
infamy, but blessed be God, that the force of slander can not so prevail,
that it can utterly deface open known virtue, at the least, if the Tygre b^e,
it can not kill, as Demosthenes says, Slander, a little while does confirm
the opinion of the hearers, but in process of time, nothing is more feeble
then it is. But what good reader, and my dear brethren and fellow Ministers,
should I waste much time in commendation of him, whose Christian conversation
does not only commend it self, but does inuiolably defend it self against
the fiery darts of slander. I will let pass to speak any more of the
person, I will speak of his painful travail, godly zeal, and faithful
affection to Gods Church, and for the help of the memory of his fellow
Ministers, does show, and plainly set forth in this his most christian and
godly work, so profitable to all, and unprofitable to none, that every man
shall find great assistaunce in having it, and much damage in wanting it: For
if I shall speak of the worthiness of it, it is so worthy, as never any
thing in my judgment, in our time, in our barbarous rude tongue, of an
English man's compilyng, and of no greater volume, well waying the richness of
the matter, has been printed a worthier. This work is not in vain called the
poor man's Garden, for it is a rich bed of all sweet flowers, that is, a
brief collection and vnifourme consent of fragrant sweet smelling Scriptures,
and fruitful agreement of the soundest judgment of the Doctors, which have
on the Scriptures builded long ago their faith and true religion, now gathered
together for the profit of the ignorant and ^oubtfull, and for the
confirmation of such as do believe and are persuaded in the truth. The sick
infected papisticall conscience, reading this with judgment and charitable
humility, shall no doubt feel the operation of the nature of truth and
present health approaching. The Anabaptist, the Pelagian, and the Arian hither
resorting, may gather amongst these leaves, medecines of health. God grant
them not to despise it: for they are diseased to everlasting death, excep^
speedy repentance and confession of the truth. All such a^ are infected with
any false opinion, here may be healed, and no doubt, it is not hurtful even
to the wholest: that is, to the most sound and stablest in faith. The poor
plowman may, having this little book often to study upon, easily learn in
the plain mother tongue, not only to give a sound reason of his own faith,
which as well apperteyneth to the Carter and Plowman, as to the Doctor and
Bachiler of Divinity: but hereout he may also arm him self with truth,
that all the subtle Sophistry of the divine and sorbonistes Papists, shall
neither make him doubt or be offended at the truth. Finally, none that loves
Jesus Christ the son, and surest points of his doctrine: namely, of faith
in the Gospel, but he will be far in love with this Garden: but above all,
my brethren of the Ministry, to Whom God has not given the gift of tongues,
this is to you no small benefit, for whose sakes chiefly the aucthour has
taken this pain. God grant that no less advantage may come to every member
of the Church of God by the same (gentle reader) then the present work it
self does show was sought and desired of the writer, which may yet encourage
him to take more pains, and stir up all the rest of able Ministers to set
forth their talentes, to increase, for the profit of the Church of Christ as
he has done. The Harvest is great, God send painful laborers into the
feelde, and their labors diligently employed, God give increase, that it may
fructify in his faithful peoples hearts, and yield forth fruit mightily,
that on every part Christ may be glorified, with his heavenly father, and the
holy ghost, world without end,

Amen.
From my house at Hackney, this. 11. of Sept. 1571. Thine in the Lord Jesus,
Thomas Knel. Iu.

The poor man's Garden.
The first Chapter.
Of Predestination, and Reprobation.
I Will harden Pharaos heart, and multiply ^odus. 7. ^. 3.
my miracles, and wonders in the land of Egypt.

I will show mercy, to whom I Chap. 33. 19.
will show mercy, and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion.

The Lord has made all things Prouer. 16. 4.
for his own sake: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.

Behold, before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee, Jeremiah. 1. 5.
and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee
to be a Prophet unto the nations.

Enter in at the streicte gate, for it is the wide gate, and Matthew. 7. 13*
broad way, that leads to destruction, and many there be, which go in
thereat.

Because the gate is streicte, and the way narrow, that 14.
leads unto life: and few there be that find it.

And then I will profess to them, I never knew you: depart 23.
from me, ye that work iniquity. Chap. 20. 16.


Many are called, but few are chosen. Luke. 10. 20.


In this rejoice not, that spirits are subdued unto you: but rather rejoice,
because your names are written in the book of life. Math. 24. 22.


But for the electes sake, those days shall be shortened. Chap. 25. 34.


Come ye blessed of my father: inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world.

Therefore could they not believe, because that Esa^as says Iho^. 12, 39.
again.

He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that 40.
they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and
should be converted, and I should heal them.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained Chapit. 15. 16.
you, that ye go and bring forth, that your fruicte remain.

I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them, Chapite. 17. 9.
which thou haste given me: for they are thine.

Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them 12.
is lost, but the child of perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled.

And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified Acts. 13. 48.
the word of the Lord, and as many as were predestined unto eternal life,
believed.

Those which he knew before, he also predestined, to be Roma. 8. 29.
made like to the Image of his son, that he might be the first borne among
many brethren.

Moreover, whom he has predestined, them also he called, 30.
and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also
he glorified.

For ere the children were borne, and when they had neither Chapter. 9. 11.
dooen good, nor evil (that the purpose of God might remain, according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls).

It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. 12.


As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. 13.


What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with 14.
God? God forbid.

O man, what art thou that pleadest against God? shall the 20.
thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

Has not the Potter power of the claye, to make of the 21.
same lompe, one vessel to honor, and an other unto dishonor.

What if God would show his wrath, and to make his power 22.
known, suffered with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction.

And that he might declare the riches of his glory, upon the 23.
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory.

What then? Israel has not obtained that he sought, but Chapit. 11. 7.
the election has obtained it, and the rest has been hardeined.

As it is written: God has given them the spirit of slomber: 8.
eyes that they should not see: and ears that they should not hear, unto this
day.

Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and bow 10.
down their backs always.

We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the i. Corin. 2. 7.
hid wisdom, which God has determiued before the world unto glory.

He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the Ephesians. 1. 4.
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

Who has predestined us, to be adopted through Jesus 5. a.
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

In whom also we are chosen, when we were predestinate, n. b.
according to the purpose of him, which works all things after the
counsel of his own will.

We are his workmanship erected in Christ Jesus, unto Chapit. 2. 10.
good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.

Who has saved us, and called us, with an holy calling, ii. Timo. 1. 9.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and grace,
which was given to us through Jesus Christ before the world was.

The foundation of God remains sure, and has the seal, Chapite. 2. 19.
the Lord knows who are his, and let every one that calls on the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity.

Notwithstanding, in a great house are not only vessels 20.
of gold, and silver, but also of wood, and of earth, and some for honor,
and some for dishonor.

Elect, according to the foreknowledge of GOD the father, i. Peter. 1. 2.
unto sanctification of the spirit, through obedience, and sprinkelyng of the
blood of Jesus Christ, grace, and peace be multiplied.

A stone to stomble at, and a rock of offense, even to them, Chapter. 2. ^.
which stomble at the word being disobediente, unto the which thing they
were ordained.

Wherefore brethren give rather diligence, to make your 2. Peter. 1. 10.
calling and election sure, for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

They went from us, but they were not of us: for if they had ^. Ihon. 2. 1^.
been of us, they would have continued with us: but this comes to pass that
it might appear, that they are not of us.

All that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him (meaning Reu^lati. 13.
the beast) whose names are not written in the book of the lamb, which was
slain from the beginning of the world.

The consent of the fathers, and doctors.
THose whom he foreknewe, and predestined, to Origene in his first book upon
the Romans.
be made to the Image of the soonnes of God, evidently, and manifestly
appears, that those which God knew before, should be such as he would
conform himself in Christ's passions, those shall be conformed, and made like
to the Image of his glory, that he has predestined.

If Esau and Jacob, which was not yet borne, nor had done ^erom in the 10.
question of Hebdia^, the. 4* Tome.
good, nor evil, that their might deserve, or else, offend God, that their
election, and reprobatio^ was, not in respect of their deservings, but that
the will of the choser and refuser might be manifested and showed, what shall
we say therefore, is God unrighteous? According to the example in the which
he spoke to Moises, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy: Sith it is
thus, as he says: we must grant, that God does what so ever he will. And
without any merits, and works, he does either predestinate, and elect: Or
else condemn some. Therefore, it is not in the will of the runner, but in the
mercy of God. But specially in that same scripture that is, where the same God
speaks to Pharao, for this purpose have I stirred thee up, that I may
declare my power upon thee, and that my name may be showed in all the earth.

Sith it is thus, that for his own sake, he shows mercy unto Israel, and
hardeineth Pharao, therefore in vain does he seek the cause, why he does not
make us good: or why he does make us evil, when it is in his own power and
will, without good or ill works: either to chose or elect any, especially,
when this frail weakness of our wills, cannot resist it. The heat of the
Sun is one, and yet by his power, he susteineth and hardens, loses and
binds, some things, it melts wax, it hardens the claie, and yet the
heat is not diverse in nature. So is the goodness and mercy of God: The
vessels of wrath, which are apt to death and destruction (that is) the
people of Israel he does harden. And the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared to glory, does call them (that is) us.

They which do assign, attribute, and ascribe the election Ambrose in his.
i. book. xi. Chapter of the calling of the Genules.
of God, unto the meritcs of men, are wiser then it behooves.

All those of the which we now speak, before their use of understanding,
before their freewill, the regenerate, passes to life, and others not
regenerate, passes to destruction. In the 5. chapter of the same book.


It is a thing to be wondered at, or rather, that we should be astonished at,
that election does adopte such, as abdication or reiection does reprove. In
his second book and, 7. chapter.


This only difference is between, Grace, and predestination: predestination is
a preparation to grace, but grace is the Augustine in his x. book of the
predestinaon of saincte^*
very gift it self. Therefore, this that he says, not of works, least
any manne should boaste himself, for, we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, is grace, but that, that follows, which God
prepared before hand, that we should walk in them, is predestination: which
cannot be without a foreknowledge, although the foreknowledge may be without
predestination, for by predestination God knew before hand the things that
he himself would do.

Wherefore, the predestination of God (which is to our benefit, and comfort)
is (as I said) the preparation before* and to grace: but grace is the'ffect of
the same predestination. This promise, was not grounded upon the power of man's
will, but upon the predestination of god, for he promised not that what men,
but that what he himself should bring to pass.

This is the immou^ble truth of predestination, and grace. In the. xviii.
Chapter of the same book.
For what meaueth that the Apostle says, as he chose us in him, before the
world was made. Certainly, if this be therefore spoken, because God knew
before hand, that they would believe: the son speaks against this
forknowledge, saying. you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

Seeing that God did rather know before hand this, that they should chose him,
that they might deserve to be chosen of him. They are therefore chosen, before
the world was made, in that predestination, in the which God knew before
hand his own works, that were to come: But their are chosen from the world
by that calling, by the which, God has fulfilled that, which he did
predestinate. For, whom he has predestinate, them has he called, that is to
say, with that calling, that is according to purpose: he has not then called
any other but those whom he has predestinate, them has he also called:
Neither has he justified any other, but them whom he so called, them has he
also justified: Neither has he glorified any other, but them whom he has
predestinate, called, justified, them has he also glorified, with that end,
which has no end.

God then has chosen the faithful: but that they might be made faithful.
The Apostle James says, has not God chosen the poor in this world, rich
in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which God has promised to the^ that
believe him?

By election therefore, he makes both rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom, whom I pray you, hearing the lord saying, you have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you. Dare be so bold, as to say, that men are chosen
through belief: whereas rather they are chosen, that they may believe, least
that they should be found, to have chosen Christ first, contrary to the
sentence of the truth, unto whom Christ says: you have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you.

Wherefore of two infantes, that are both fast wrapped In his book of the
goodness of perseuera^ce, and. 8. Chapit.
together, in the bands of original sin, why this is taken, and he
forsaken: And of two ungodly persons, that be now of age, and discretion,
why this is called after such a manner, that he may follow the caller, but
the other is not called at al, or at the least wise, is not called after such
a sort, that he may follow the caller: the judgments of God are
unsearchable.

Notwithstanding, this ought to be most certain to the faithful, that the
one is of the number of the predestinate, but the other is not: For if they had
been of us (says one of the predestinate, which out of the Lords breaste,
did suck this secret) they had undoubtedly continued with us. What means
this I pray you, they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they had
certainly continued with us? Were they not both created of God: both borne in
Adam: both made of the earth, and of him which said, I have made all
breathe: did they not both receive souls of one, and the self same nature?
Last of all, were they not both called, and followed the caller, both of
ungodly, justified, and both renewed by the fountain of regeneration? But if
he (which certainly knew what he said) should hear this, he might answer,
and say: These are true, and according to all these things, they were of us:
Neuerehelesse, by a certain other difference, they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, they should undoubtedly, have co^tinewed with us, but in
conclusion, what is this difference?

Gods books are open, let us not turn away our face, the divine scripture
does cry, let us therefore give ear: They were not of them, because they
were not called, according to purpose: they were not elect in Christ, before
the making of the world: they were not made heirs through him: they were not
predestinate, according to the purpose of him that woorketh all things.

But they say, that the difinition, and determination of predestination, In
the 14. cha. of the sam^ book.
is contrary to profitable preaching, as though it had hindered the preaching
of the Apostle, did not that teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth, many
times commend predestination, and nevertheless, ceased not to preach the
word of God? because he said, it is God that woorketh in us, both to will
and work, even of good will.

Shall we not speak, that which we are able to speak by In the. xvi.
ch^piter of the same book.
the authority of the scriptures? For we are afraied for ^oothe, least (if we
should speak) that he would he offended, which cannot away with the truth:
and are we not afraied least by holdyng our peace he should be deceived with
falshoode, which cannot understand the truth? For either must predestination
be preached after such manner, as the holy scripture does manifestly teach
it, that the gifts and calling of God in the predestinate be such, that it
cannot repent him of them, or else we must confess, that the grace of God is
given according to our merits, according to the opinion and heresy of the
Pelagians.

This is certainly to predestinate, and none other thing, In the. xvii.
chapter of the ^ame book.
but only to ordain in his own foreknowledge (which can neither be
changed, nor deceived) his own works that are to come.

By the preaching of predestination, he is not only not hindered from this
work, but also he is this far furthered, that when he does glory, he might
glory in the lord. I leave it rather to be judged of them selves, that they
may perceive what manner a thing that is, wherein they have pe^waded them
selves, that by preaching of predestination, the people are rather brought into
desperatio^, then exhorted to live godly. This is even as much to say, as if
they should say, that a man must then despair of his salvation, when he has
learned to put his hope, not in him self, but in God, when as yet the Prophet
cries: cursed is every one that puts his trust in man.

It is therefore a poincte of to great contention, either to In the. xxi.
chapter of the same book.
gain say predestination, or to doubt of the same.

I pray you, if after the hearing of this doctrine, many be In the. xv.
chapter of the same book.
turned unto slothfulness and negligence, and being ready from labor, to
lust, do follow their own concupiscences: should it be therefore thought,
that, that were false, which was spoken of the foreknowledge of God? Shall not
they be good (how ungodly now so ever they live) which God knew aforehande
should be good: but if he knew them aforehande to be evil, shall they not be
evil, how godly soever they seem now to be? There was one in our Monastery,
which being rebu^ed of the brethren, because he did certain things that ought
not to be done, and omitted certain things, which he should have done, made
answer and said, what soever I am now, I shall be such a one, as God knew
before hand that I should be. Which undoubtedly said the truth, and yet by
this true speaking, did not profit in goodness: but fell so far unto
wickednsse, that he (leaving the fellowship of the Monastery) became a dog
returned to his vomete: And nevertheless, what he yet shall be, it is
uncertain. Should those things therefore, which are spoken of the true fore
knowledge of God, be either denied, or kept under silence for such occasions,
namely then, when if they were not spoken, men do fall into other errors?

In giuyng that unto some, which they do not deserve, he In the. xii.
chapter of the same book.
does show his free mercy and grace, but in not giuyng it to all men, he
does declare what all did deserve, he is good in showing mercy to some, he is
just in punishyng the rest.

But for as much as the will of some, is prepared of the In his book of the
predestination of saints, the 6. cha.
Lord to believe, and of other some it is not: we must put a difference between
that, that comes of his mercy, and that, that comes of his judgment.

God did before the beginning of the world, chose these In his. xx. book and.
7. chapter of the city of God.
nations, that he might deliver them, out of the power of darkness, and
translate them into the kingdom of the son of his own brightness, as the
Apostle says. For, what faithful knows not, that the devil does even
now, seduce nations, and draw them with himself into everlasting pain. But
not those nations which are predestined into everlasting life.

That number therefore of the righteous, which are called In his. v. book^ of
Baptism the. 27. chapit^^
according to Gods purpose, concerning which is said, that the Lord knows,
who they be, that be his, is the fensed garden, the sealed fountain, the
pit of springyng water, and the paradise full of the fruit of Apples. Of
this number there be some, that are spiritual, and walk in the excellent
way of charity, and when they do in the spirit of lenity, instruct a man
that is overtaken with any fault, they do take good head, least they them
selves be tempted also, and when it happens that any of them be overtaken,
the affection of love is some thing repressed in thiem, but it is not utterly
quenched, and when it rises again, and waxes fervent, it is restored again
to his old course or raze, for, these men can say, my soul did slomber for
very weariness, do thou make me strong in thy words.

There be also some of that number, which do yet live wickedly, either do
lie in heresies, or in the superstitions of the Heathen: And yet the lord
does even there know, who be his. For in that unspeakable fore knowledge of
God: many that seem to be without, are within: and many that seem to be
within, are without. That enclosed garden therefore, that sealed fountain,
that pit of springyng water, and that Paradise of the fruicte of apples,
does consiste of al those, that be in wardly and secretly within, if I may
so speak.

And his Sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own In his. 45. trea ^ise
upon Ihon.
Sheep by name: for he has their names written in the book of life: He
calls his own Sheep by name, hereof comes it that the Apostle says, the
Lord knows who they be, that be his.

I have kept those that thou haste given me, and none of In his. 107. treatise
upon Ihon.
them is perished, save only the child of perdition, that the scripture
might be fulfilled. He that betrayed Christ, is called the child of perdition,
because he was predestined to destruction, according to the scripture, which
in the. 108. Psalm chiefly is prophe^ied of him.

The cause may be secret, but it cannot be unjust. Is there In his. 59.
epistle to Paulinus.
any iniquity with God? God forbid.

When we were not, God predestined us, when we were Upon the words of the
Apostle in his. 16. Sermon.
turned back, he called us, when we were sinners, he justified us, when we
were mortal, he glorified us, wherefore, he tha^ will fight against us, he
raises war against God, and kicketh against the prick.

Wherefore is that man, and that man, and wherefore is In the same book, and.
7. Sermon.
not that man, and that man, predestined? ask not of me: I am a man, I
turn me to the deepth of the cross, I do not enter far in, I am afraied,
I am no searcher in, his judgments are unsearchable, thou art a man, I am a
man, it was a man that said, O man who art thou, that desputest with God?

But thou will say, wherefore made he me to honor, and In the same book,
and* (...) Sermon.
an other to dishonor? What shall I answer? Will thou hear Augustine, that
will not hear the Apostle, saying: O man, what art thou, that desputest with
God? There are two little children borne, if thou sekest a due, or a right,
both are made of one lompe of perdition. But wherefore the mother bears one,
to grace, and the other choketh, being a sleep? What will thou say unto me,
what did he deserve, that was choked up by his mother in slepyng: both of them
deserved no good? But the Potter has power over the claye, of the same lompe,
to make one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor, will thou dispute
with me: rather will thou wonder and cry out with me: O the great deepth of
his riches, let us agree together in fear: least we perish in error.

He is willing, that all men should be saved, that thereby, In his book of
rebukyng grace and the 14. chapter.
all that be predestined might be understood. For, that among them are
men of all sorts: as it was said to the Phariseis, ye do pay the tenth of
every garden herb, where we may not understand, more then all that they had,
for they did not give the tenth, of all the herbs that be in the whole city.

The electes cannot perish, because that all things, with In Soliloquio,
chapter. 28.
them do frame to good, yea, their sins also.

By these and such like testimonies of holy Scripture, In his book of grace,
and freewill, the 21. chapter*
whereof it were to long to make a whole recital, it is (as I suppose)
sufficiently showed, that God does work in the hearts of men, to incline
their wills, whither it pleases him, whether it be to good things, according
to his mercy, either to evil things according to their merits, and
according to his own judgment, which is sometime open, and sometime
secret, but always just. For, this persuasion ought to be fixed, and
immovable in our hearts: that there is none iniquity with God. And hereby,
when ye read in the writings of the truth, that God does lead men out of
the way, or that he does dull, or harden their hearts: do ye not doubt, but
that their evil deservings went before, that they might justly suffer these
things, least ye should run into that Proverb of Solomon, the foolishness
of a man, does defile his ways, but in his heart, he lays the blame to God.

God therefore has not predestined any such things In the. xi. article
which are falsely imposed upon Saiucte Augustine.
to be done, neither has he prepared that soul to live filthily, and
wickedly, of purpose that it should so live but he was not ignoraunte that it
would prove such a one, and he knew before hand, that he himself should
execute just judgment upon such a one. And so nothing may be referred to
the predestination of God, more then that, which appertains to the due
reward of justice, or to the undeserved gift of grace, or mercy.

That many does perish, it is the merit of them that perish, In his. 2.
aunsvvere, to the articles, which are falsely imposed upon S. Augustine.
that many are saved, it is the gift of saving. That the guilty shall be
damned, the justice of God is immovable, that the guilty shall be justified, it
is the great goodness and grace of God.

Gods predestination, is never without goodness, nene^ In the. x. article of
the same book.
without justice.

The predestinatie^ of God, by no means, does make that the children of God,
should be mad^, the children of the devil, In the. xi. article of the same
book.
or of the Temple of the holy ghost, the temple of devils, or of the members
of Christ, the members of an harlotte? But rather predestination does make,
that of the children of the devil, are made the children of God, or of the
temple of devils are made the temple of the holy ghost, or of the members of
an harlotte, are made, the members of Christ because he has bound the strong
man, and spoiled his armor etc.

None of those that are predestined, shall perish with In his. 13. book of
the Trinity and. 16. chapi.
the devil, none of them shall remain under the power of the devil, unto
death.

Surely do thou hold this, and in nowise doubt, that God In the. 35. chapter
of faith (...) Peter.
has made before the foundation, or beginning of the world, all that are the
vessels of mercy, into the adoption of the sons of God, predestined of
God, neither can any of them perish, whom God has predestined to the
kingdom of heaven, neither can any of them, whom he has not predestina^,
come to (...), and be saved, by (...) means.

God is said to harden, whom he will not make soft, God In his book of
predestination and grace, (...) 4. chapter.
is said to blind, whom he will not illuminate, God is said to cast a way
or repel, whom he will not call. These whom he has predestinate, he calls
them, and justifies them, he gives that we be, and he gives that we may
be good.

He foreknoweth by his Godhead: he makes by his wisdom: In the. v. chapter
of the same book.
he damneth by his justice the saves by his grace.

God is everlasting: and foreknowledge: he is just, and good: he exercises
due punishemente, and gives undeserved goodness. And has power in creatyng,
and electyng men, as the Potter has power upon the claie, to make some
vessels to honor, and some to dishonor and contumely, before he made us, he
foreknewe us, and in the same foreknowledge, when as yet he made us not, he
choosed us, but by who^ might this be, but of him that calls all things
that are not, as though they were (as the Apostle says) which predestined
us before the foundation of the world. In the world we are made and created:
but before the world, we were elected and predestined.

Where does the counsel of the Lord remain forever, Upon the 32. Psalm.
but among us, whom he foreknowe, and predestined? Who does extol and
magnify the predestination of God? He saw us, he made us, he help us, he
send to us, he redeemed us, before the world was made and created, this his
counsel tarieth forever, this his thought does remain forever world without
end.

GOD might turn the will of the wicked into good, because In his book de
Genesim (...). x (...)
that he is almighty, plainly, he could do it, wherefore then does he if
not? Because that he will not, why he will not, that do we leave unto him, for
we ought not to be (...) then it (...).

For this cause also, it is said, all, and all: for not the same In his book
of the remissio and forgiveness of synne^s. 15. chapter
all that are begotten by Adam, are by Christ regenerated. But this is well
said: that even as the carnal generation of (...) man, is otherwise then by
Adam: So is the spirituallgene^ of no man, otherwise then by Christ. For if
there might be some men begotten in the (...), and not by Adam, and some men
regenerated in the spirit, and not by Christ: we might not say plainly,
all, either in the one place, or in the other. And afterward he does say,
that the same, all, are many: for in some certain thing, those which are but
few, may be all. But the carnal generation, has many: and the spiritual,
has many also. Although this spiritual has not so many as the carnal. But
yet for all that, even as that has all men: So has this all just men. For,
as without that, no man is a man: even so without this, no man is a just man,
and in each of these are many.

Who will have all men to be saved, not that there is no In his Enchiridion to
Lawrence, the. 103. chapter.
man, who^ he will not have to be saved: who would not work the virtues of his
miracles amongst them, who (he says) would have repented, if he had done
it, but that by all men, we should have understood all sorts, and degrees of
men, being divided, into certain orders: kings, subjects, noble me^, men of
the common sort, high and low, poor and rich.

As this, where it is said, all shall be viuified and quickened In his. 107.
Epistle to Vitalis
in Christ, where as yet many are damned, with eternal and everlasting death,
is therefore spoken, because that as many as do receive life everlasting,
they do not receive it, but in Christ, or through Christ, even so where it is
said, that God will have all men to be saved, where as there be so many, whom
he will not have to be saved, it is therefore spoken, because that they which
be saved, are only saved in him, being willing to save them.

God did not promise all things, which he foretold, although Fulgentius to
Monimus in his first book.
he foretold all things, which he promised, as he did not predestinate all
things which he foreknewe, although ^e foreknewe all things he
predestined. He foreknewe the wills of men, good and badde, but, he did not
predestinate the naughty wills, but the good.

The kingdom of God, is given, is promised, is declared, Bernarde upon the
words of the book of wisdom.
is received: It is given, in predestination: It is promised, in calling: It is
declared, in justification: It is received, in glorification. Therefore that is
said, come ye blessed of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you: So
does the Apostle say, those whom he predestined, he calls, whom he
calls, he justifies, and them he glorifieth. In predestination, is grace: In
calling, is power: In justification, is ioyfulnesse: In glorification, is
glory, and praise.

The second Chapter.
All things comes to pass by Gods providence, and not by fortune, and
destenie.
GOD sent me before you, to preserve your Genesis: 45. 7.
posterity in this land, and to save you alive, by a great deliverance.

Now then, you sent not me hither, but 8.
GOD, who has made me a father unto Pharao, and lord of all his house, and
ruler through all the land of Egipte.

Fear not: for am I not under God* 50 chapit. 19.


When ye thought evil against me, God disposed it to good, 20.
that he might bring to pass, as it is this day, and save much people a live.

And if a man has not laid wait, but God has delivered Exodu. 21. 13.
him into his hand, then I will appoincte thee a place to flee.

I kill, and I give life, I wound, and I make whole, neither Deute. 32. 3^.
is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

And the wrath of the Lord was kindeled against Israel, ii. Samu. 24. ^
and he moved David against them, in that he said, go, and number Israel
and Judah.

Then said Abishay unto the king, why does this dead ii. Samu. 16. 9.
dog curse my lord, the king? let me go, I pray thee, an^ take away his
head.

But the king said, what have I to do with you, ye sons 10.
of Zeruiah: for he curses, even because the Lord has bidden him curse
David, who then dare say, wherefore haste thou done so?

Thus says the lord, behold, I will raise up evil against ii. Sam. 12.
(...)
thee, out of thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and
give them unto thy neighbors, and he shall lie with thy wives, in the sight
of this son.

For thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing openly 22.
before all Israel, and before the son.

Now therefore behold, the Lord has put a liyng spirit ^. King. 22. 23
in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, and the Lord has appoincted evil
against thee.

Are not his days determined? the number of his months Job. 14, 5*
are with thee: thou have appoincted his bounds, which he can not pass.

I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and Esaias. 45. 7.
create evil: I the Lord do all these things.

The lotte is cast into the lap: but the whole disposition Proverbs, 16. 33.
thereof, is of the Lord.

Who is he then that says, and it comes to pass, and Lament. 3. 37.
the Lord commands it not?

And if the Prophet be deceived, when he has spoken a Ezechiel. 14. 9.
thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, and I will stretche out my
hand upon him, and will destroy him from the mids of my people.

Then the lord said unto Satan, lo, all that he has is in thy Job. 1. 12.
hand: (...) upon him self shalt thou not stretche out thine hand. (...)
Satan departed from the presence of the Lord.

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the city, and the people be Amo^. 3. 6.
not afraied? or shall there be evil in a city, and the lord has not done
it?

Thy providence, O father, governs it, for thou have made Wisedo. 14. 3.
a way, even in the sea, and a sure pathe among the waves.

Declaryng thereby, that thou haste power to help in all ^4.
things, yea, though a man went by the sea without means.

Then was Jesus led a side of the spirit into the wilderness, Matthew. 4. 1.
to be tempted of the devil.

Behold the fowls of the heaven: for they sow not, neither Matthew. 6. 26.
reap, nor carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them, are
ye not much better then they?

And the Devils besought him, saying, if thou cast us out, Matthew. 8. 31.
suffer us to go into the heard of swine.

And he said unto them, go: so they went out, and departed 32.
into the heard of swine.

Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthyng? and one of Math. 10. 29.
them shall not fall on the ground, without your father.

Yea, all the hears of your head are nombred. 30.


Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more valeure then many 31.
Sparrowes.

Ye shall be betrayed also of your parents, and of your brethren, Luke. 21.
1^.
and kinsmen, and friends, and some of you shall they put to death.

And ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake. 17.


Yet there shall not one hear of your heads perish, by 18.
your patience possess your souls.

Master, the Jews lately sought to stone thee, and dooest Ihon, 11. 8.
thou go thither again?

Jesus answered, are not there twelve hours in the day? 9.


Pilate said unto him, speak thou not unto me? Know Ihon. 19. 10.
thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to lose thee?

Jesus answered: Thou could have no power at all against 11.
me, except it were given thee from above.

Him I say, have ye taken, by the hands of the wicked, Acts, 2. 23.
being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God, and
have crucified and slain.

For doubtless, against thy holy son Jesus, whom thou Acts. 4. 27.
had anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the
people of Israel, gathered them selves together.

To do whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel had determined 28.
before to be done.

In him we live, and move, and have our being. Acts. 17. 2^


Cast all your care on him, for he cares for you. 1. Peter. 5. ^.


The agreement of the Doctors.
WHen thou do see the ungodly made rich, Easile in the 48. Psalm and 13.
sermon.
and the godly lack, and have need, do not fear in thy self, neither
doubt in thy mind, as though the providence of God were not certain, which
beholds al our things.

All things are governed by Gods providence: Hierome upon Ezechiell.
and those things that are thought for punishementes, are medicines.

No good nor evil, does happen without a cause. Or by Hierom.
fortune, without Gods providence, but all things does happen after his
judgment.

Wherefore, that necessity is not to be feared, the fear Augustine in his.
^* book and. 10. Chap. of the city of God.
whereof causes the Stoikes so to divide the causes of things, that they
pulled away some things from necessity, and thrust some things under it:
and among those things, that they would not suffer to be under necessity,
they have places our wills, least they should not be free, if they should be
(...) unto necessity.

The kingdoms of thi^ world, are altogether ordained In the. 5. chap. of the
same book.
by the providence of God: which if any man have given unto destiny, because
he does call the will, or power of God it self, by the name of destiny: let
the same (...) in his (...) but let him reform his tongue. For (...) he (...)
the first say that, which afterward he will say, when (...) shall ask him,
what he does call destiny? For, when men do hear that thing: they do not
by the common manner of speech, understand any other thing, then the force of
the position of the stars, as the same is, when any is borne, or concesued:
which some men do separate from the will of God; and some does prove that
the one does hang upon the other.

They do attribute to the power, and will of God, that order, In the. ^. cap.
of the same book.
and certain knittyng together of causes, which is very well and truly
thought, to know all things before they come to pass, and to leave nothing
unordered, of whom all powers have their being.

Let Cicero therefore strive with them that say, that this In the. ^. chater
of the same book.
order of causes is fatal, or rather that do give it the name of destiny,
which thing we do abhor, chiefly for the name, which is not accustomed to
be understood, in the thing it self. But where as he does deny, that the
order of all causes is most certain, and known to the prescience of God: we
do detest him more then the Stoikes did: for, either he does deny that there
is a God, which thing in his books, concerning the nature of the Gods, he
does under an other man's person endeavor to do: or else if he do confess
that there is a God, who^ he denies to know, of things before they come to
pass, even so saying, he does none other thing, then did that foolish man,
which said in his heart, there is no God. For, he that does not know
aforehande, all things that are to come, doubtless the same is not God.

We say not that all things do come to pass by destiny: yea, we say that
nothing is done by destiny. For, we do plainly show, that the name of
destiny, is of no value, in the place, where men use to place it in speaking,
that is ut the constitution of the heavenly signs, wherein every man is
conceived and borne, because the thing it self is vainly affirmed. As for the
order of causes, wherein the will of God is of great force and power: we do
neither deny, nor call it by the name of destiny, except it be so as we may
understand, fatum, to be derived of the word, for faris, that is, of
speaking. For, we cannot deny, but it is written in the holy scriptures: GOD
spoke ones, these two sayings: I my self heard it: that power belongs unto
God: And unto thee (O Lord) belongs mercy: for thou will give to every man,
according to his works. And where as it is said, he spoke ones: we
understand that he spoke vnmoutablie, that is vnchaungeablie, even as he did
vnchaungeably know all things that are to come, and that he himself will
do. After this sort therefore, we may say, fatum, or destiny is derived;
a fando, or speaking, if this name had not now been accustomed, to be
understood of an other matter, whereunto we are not willing, that men's In the.
10. chapter of the same. 5. book.
hearts should be inclined.

The life of man is evil, when his belief concerning God, is not good.
Wherefore be it far from us, that we, to the end that we our selves would be
free, should deny the providence of him, by whom we are, or shall be free.
Therefore laws, reprehensions, exhortations, commandments, and sharp
rebukes, are not in vain: because that both he did know before hand, that
the^ should come to pass, and also they are of great force, even of as great
force, as he did foreknowe that they should be. And just rewards are appointed
for good works, and punishments for sins. Neither does man sin, because
God did foreknowe before, that he should sin, yea, rather it is therefore out
of doubt, that he does sin, when he does sin: because he, whose
foreknowledge, cannot be deceived, did know before, that it was not destiny,
nor fortune, or any other thing, that should sin, but he him self. Which if
he be not willing: he synneth not at all. But if he should not be willing to
sin: God did also know that before.

These are the great works of God, sought out, according In his Enchiridion
to Law* rence. 100. chapter.
to all his wills: and yet wisely sought out, so that when the nature both of
Angels, and man had sinned, that is, had done, not the thing that he willed,
but that it self willed, even by the same will of the creature, whereby that
thing was done, that the creator was not willing should be dooen, he No^
fulfilled that which he would have dooen, even as he that is best of all,
vsyng well, even those things that are evil, to the condempnation of those,
whom he has justly prede^inated to pain: And to the salvation of those, whom
he has louyngly predestined to free mercy.

As touching them selves, they did that God was not willing they shoule do:
But as touching the almighty power of God, they were by no means able to
bring that to pass. For even in the very same thing, that they did contrary to
the will of God: his will was wrought upon them. For that cause therefore, the
works of the Lord are great, and searched out according to his wills.

So that after a marvelous and unspeakable manner, that No^*
thing that is dooen, even contrary to his will: should not be dooen without
his will* For if he would not suffer it, it should not be dooen: neither does
he suffer it being unwilling, but willing: neither would he that is good,
suffer a thing to be evil dooen: except the same being almighty, were also
able to work a good effect of things, that (...) evil.

It is not to be doubted, that God does well, yea, when he In the same book
and. 96 Chapter.
suffers to be done, what soever things are evil dooen, for he does not
suffer this, otherwise then by just judgment. And surely all that is just, is
good, although therefore those things that be evil, in as much as they be
evil, be not good: yet it is good, that there should be^ things, not only
that are good, but also that are evil. For except it were good, that there
should be things that are evil: the almighty goodness would by no means
suffer them to be. To whom no doubt, it is as easy a thing, not to suffer
that thing to be, which he would not should be: As it is ^o do^ that, which
he is willing to do. Except we believe this, the very beginning of the
confession of our faith, wherein we do confess, that we believe in God (...)
father almighty, is in danger and li^e to be untrue. For, he is not truel^
^alled almighty, for any other cause, but for that he is able to do what he
will, and the ffect^ of his will being, almighty, is not by the will of any
creature let.

What soever is pass, is not now, what soever is to come, In his book of
diverse questions 83. 15. 16. 17.
is not yet. Therefore, what soever is paste, or to come, is wa^yng, but with
God there is nothing wantyng. There is with God, therefore nothing past, or to
come, but all present.

I do repent, that I have so named fortune there, because In his first book
and. 1. chapter of Retractations.
I see, that men have in a very evil custom to say, this was Fortunes will,
where they ought to say, this was Gods will.

And this does he declare to have happened by Gods providence, In his book
of the ^nation of ^ctes the 16. Chapter.
which can use well, even things that are evil. Not that the vessels of
wrath should profit him: but that they might (through his well vsyng of them)
profit the vessels of mercy. For, what could be spoken more plainly, then
that was (...), a^ concerning the Gosp^ll, they are enemies for your (...)* It
is then in the power of the evil to sin: but that by synnyng, they should
through their malice do either this, or that, it is not in their power, but
in the power of God, that deuideth the darkness, and desposeth the same, so
that for this cause, even in that, that they do, against the will of God,
there is nothing fulfilled, but the will of God.

The third Chapter.
Of man's freewill before his fall.
GOD said, let (...) make man in our o^ne Gene. 1. 26.
Image, according to our likeness, and let them rule ^uer the fish^ of the
sea* (...).

And GOD saws all that he had made, 31.
and we, it was very good.

Then the lord took the man, and put Gene. ^. 15.
him into the garden of ^en, that he might dress it, and ^pe ^f.

God made man from the beginn^ng* and left (...) in the Eccl^. 15. 14.
hand of hi^ (...), and (...) him his commandments, and precepts.

If thou will, thou shalt observe the commandments, 15.
and testify thy good will.

He has set water and fire before thee: stretche out thine 16.
hand unto which thou will.

Before man, is life and death, good and evil, what him likes, 17.
it shall be given him.

The Doctors.
ALL men, in the first man, were created without Ambrose in his 1. book and 3.
chap. of the ^llyng of the Gentiles.
vice or fault, and all our nature was sound, and in healthe^ and by the sin
of the same man we have lost it

Freewill before the fall was an upright freewill, before which, fire and
water was laid of God, and the Augustine in in the book of the nevve song the
^. chapter.
first man did reach his hand to wh^he he would, he did (...) fire, and
forsook water. See the righteous judge, the same, which man being free did
choose, he did receive, he would have evil, and the same old follow him.

I say that freewill was in that man, which (...) In his. 11. disputation
against fortu^.
first, for he was so made, that nothing could withstand his will, if he
would have kept Gods commandments, but after that he had sinned through
freewill, he did cast us all that come of his stock, into necessity.

It is true that man, when he was made, did receive great In his. 2. sermon
upon the words of the Apostle.
strength of freewill, but he did loose it through sin.

The first man was created in nature without blame, in nature without fault*
he was created upright, he did not make In the same book and. 11. Sermon.
himself upright: It is known what he made himself, falling out of the hand
of the Potter, he was broken, for he that made him, did govern him, but he wa^
willing to (...), (...) him that had made him, and God suffered (...) so to
(...), as (...) were saying thus: Let him forsake me* that he may (...) self,
and that he may by his misery prove, that without me, he can do nothing. By
this mea^e therefore, wou^d God she we unto man: what freewill is able to do
without God.

Hold this for certainty, and doubt of it by no means, Unto Peter the
Deacon. 25. Chapter.
that the first^ man Ada^ and Cua, was treated go^d, ^uste, and without sin,
with free will, by the which the^ might* In his (...) of nature and grace,
against the Pelagians* Chapter. 43.
if they would: ser^ (...), wi^h (...) and good will, and by the some freewill;
also might if they would, to sin by their own proper will.

Who knows not, that man was made sound, and blameless, and with freewill
to live godl^, and was ordained, In his book against the Ie* was, Paganer, and
Arians* (...) Chapter.
with a (...); an^ (...) to (...) righte^usly.

The first man was (...) of the (...) of the (...) the Image of GOD (...) was
nacked with shamefastness, he was prepared with temperaunce, he was compassed
a^oute, with In his 22. (...) and. 30. Chap. of the City of God* 1. ^*
love, he was (...) with immortality.

Freewill was given to man, when he was (...), by the which, he might (...)
chosen, tither to (...), (...) to ^* In hi^. ^* (...) and. 18. Chap. of
free will.


When we speak of the will that is ^ree, to do (...) speak of that will,
wherein man was made and created.

We say truly, that the first man, only could fulfill In his 3. book
against the Arians.
that he would, when as yet, his will of free choice was sound and whole
before the fault,

All men, before sin, had freewill, either to follow the Chrysostom in his
sermon of the coming of our lord, in his. 36. (...).
devil or not.

The. iiij. Chapter.
Of man's freewill after his fall.
THE Lord saw, that the wickedness of Genesis. 6. 5.
man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart, were only evil continually.

And the Lord said in his heart, I will Genesis. 8. 21.
hence for the curse the ground no more for man's cause: for, the imagination
of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. Genesis. 20. 6.


And God said unto him by a dream, I know that thou did this with an
upright mind, and that kept thee also that thou should not sin against
me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. (...) 29. 2.


Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your ^yes, in the land of Egipte
unto Pharao, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land.

The great temptations, which thine eyes have seen, those 3.
great miracles and wonders.

Yet the lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and 4.
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto thi^ day.

All are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, there is Psalm. 14. 3.
none that does good; no not one.

Man is in honor, and understands not: he is like to beasts Psalm. 49. 20
that perish.

I said in my fear, all men are liers. Psalm. 115. 11.


The preparatio^s of the heart are in man: but the answer Proue^b. 10. 1.
of the tongue, is of the Lord.

The heart of man purposes his way: but the Lord does 9.
direct his steps.

Who can say, I have made mine heart clean, I am cleansed Proueb, 20. 9.
from sin?

The steps of man are ruled by the lord, how can a man 24.
then understand his own ways?

The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers Proverb. 21. 1.
of waters, he tourneth it where soever it pleases him.

O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and Esaias. 63. 17.
hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake. etc.

O Lord I know, that the way of man, is not in himself, Ieremi. 10. 23.
neither is it in man to walk, and to direct his steps.

I will give the^ an heart to know me, that I am the lord, Ieremi. 24. 7.
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God. etc.

Convert thou me, and I shall be converted: for thou art Ieremi. 31. 18.
the Lord my God.

A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will Ezechi. 36. 26.
I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your body,
and I will give you a heart of flesh.

And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to 27.
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments to do them.

It is not ye that speak, but that spirit of your father, Matthew. 10. 20*
which speaks in you.

Those things which proceade out of the mouth, come Matthew 15. 1^.
from the heart, and they defile the man.

For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, 19.
fornications, theftes, false testimonies, sclaunders, these are the things,
which defile the man.

Flesh and blood has not reueiled it unto thee, but my father Matthew. 16. 17*
which is in heaven.

I say unto thee, arise, and take up thy bed, and get thee Mark. 2. 11.
hence into thine own house.

And by and by he arose, and took up his bed, and went 12.
forth before them all, in so much that they were all amassed, and glorified
God.

As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the (...). 1. 10.
sons of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Which are borne, not of blood* nor of the will of the flesh, 13.
nor of the will of man, but of God.

Uerely, verily, I say unto thee, except that a man be John. ^. 5.
borne of water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that, that 6.
is borne of the spirit, is spirit.

A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from 27.
heaven.

No man can come to me, except the father, which has John. 6. 44.
sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

Every man therefore, that has heard, and has learned of 45.
the father, comes unto me.

I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me* John. 15. 5.
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruict: for with out me can ye
do nothing, for we know the law is spiritual, Roma. 7. 14.
but I am carnal, sold under sin.

For, I allow not that which I do: for what I would, 15.
that do I not: but what I hate, that do I. 18.


I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will
is present with me: but I find no means to perform that which is good.

I see an other law in my members, rebellyng against the ^3.
law of my mind, and leadyng ine captive unto the law of sin, which is in
my members.

The wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of Roma. 8. 6.
the spirit, is life and peace.

Because the wisdom of the flesh, is enemitie against 7.
God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither in deed can be.

We know not what to pray as we ought, what have thou 26.
that thou haste not received? If thou haste received it, why reioycest 1. Cor.
4. 7.
thou, as though thou had not received it?

Such trust have we through Christ to God, not that we (...) Cor. 3. 4. 5.
are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God.

It is God which woorketh in you, both the will and the Philippi. 2. 13*
deed, even of his good pleasure.

Every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above, Iame^. 1. 17.
and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadowyng by tournyng.

The Doctors.
IT is God that works in us, both to will, and Augustine in his book of
perseverance unto the end the. 13. chapi.
also to work, even of good will. We will then, but it is God that works in
us also to will: we work tha^, but it is God that does also work in us, the
work even of good will. It is expedient for us, both to believe this, and also
to confess this, this is godly, this is true, that our confession may be
humble and sowely, and that all may be ascribed unto God. We thinkyng believe,
thinkyng we speak, thinkyng we do what soever we do: But as touching
that, that appertains unto the way of godliness, and true worship of God, we
are not able to think any thing as of our selves, but our ableness comes of
god. For, our own hearts, and our own thoughts, are not in our own powers.
Therefore, that which is spoken in the Sacraments of the faithful, that we
should lift up our hearts unto the Lord, is the gift of the Lord.

We do then live in most sauegarde, if we ascribe all unto In the. 6. chap.
of the same book.
God. But we do not commit our selves partly to him, and partly to our selves.

Man misusyng his freewill, lost both him self, and his In his Enchiridion to
Lavvrence the. 30. Chapter. Ibidem.
will.

No man can believe, hope, or love, unless he will, but even the self same
will, to believe, hope, and love, comes not, but from God. In his book of
nature and grace the. 53. chapter.


What do men so much presume of the possibility of nature, it is wounded, it
is mangled, it is troubled, it is lost. It behooves us rather truly to
confess it, then falsely to defend it. To Bonifaciu^ in his. 3. book and. 8.
chap.


Freewill ones made thrall, avails nothing now but to sin.

That we live well, that we understand a right, we have Upon the words of
the Apostle in the. 10. sermon.
it of God. Of our selves we have nothing, but only sin, that is within us.

O, evil is freewill, without God. In the. 11. sermon of the same book.


He that made thee without thee, does not justify thee without thee,
therefore he made thee: when thou knew not: but he does justify thee,
being willing. In his. 15. sermon of the same book.


The first man was created in nature without blame, in nature without fault,
he was created upright, he did not make In his. 11. sermon of the same book.
him self upright. It is known what he made him self. Falling out of the hand
of the Potter, he was broken. For he that made him, did govern him, but he was
willing to forsake him that made him. And God suffered him so to do, as it
were saying thus: Let him forsake me, that he may find him self, and that he
may by his misery prove, that without me he can do nothing. By this mean
therefore would God show unto man: what freewill is able to do without God.

When we fight in this battle, we have God to behold, In his. 13. sermon of
the same book.
and look upon us: when we are in danger in thi^ battaill, we do pray unto
God to help us. But if he do not help us, I say not, that we shall not
overcome, but that we shall not be able so much as to fight.

Why dare miserable, and wretched men be proud, or In his book of the spirit
and the letter the. 29. Chapter.
boaste them selves, either of freewill, before that they be delivered: or of
their own strength, if they be already delivered? And do not mark that in
the very name of freewill, liberty or freedom is signified.

After that (man) had sinned with his freewill, we were Against For^unatus in
the ^. disputation.
cast headlong down into necessity, as many as ever came of his stock.

Let no man slatter him self: for of his own, he is a very In his 4 9.
treatise upon John.
Satan, he has that of God only, whereby he is blessed. For, what haste thou
of thine own, but sin? Take away sin from thee, which is thine own: for
righteousness is of God. In his book of the nevve song the. 8. Chapter.


It was showed in Adam, what freewill can do without help, it is able enough
of it self to evil, but not unto goodness, except it be helped of God. In his
book of the doctrine of the church the 27. Chapter.


God does so work in the hearts of men, and in the freewill it self, that
every good thought, Godly counsel, and all good motion of the will or mind,
is of God.

It belongs to a man to prepare the heart, and the answer Against the. 2.
Epistles of Pelagius unto Bonifacius in hi(...). book and 8. Chapter.
of the tongue, is of God. Some not understanding this well, are deceived, in
somuche that they believe, that to prepare the heart, that is to begin
goodness, without the help of the grace of God, pertains unto man. God
forbid that the children of promise so understand it, as though they would
confute the lord, whereas they have heard him, saying: without me ye can do
nothing, and say: behold, we are able of our selves to prepare our heart, and
by that to think some goodness. Who can with a good thought, prepare his heart
unto goodness?

God forbid that any man should understand it so, save the proud defendours
of their will. Therefore it is written, it is the man's part to prepare the
heart, and the answer of the tongue is of the Lord, because the man
prepares the heart, yet for all that, not without the help of God.

It is said also after this manner: open my mouth, and I shall fulfill it. For
although we can not open our mouths, except he help us, without whom we can
do nothing, yet we open by his help and woorkyng, and he fulfilleth that
thing, either with our work, or without our work. For, what is it to prepare
the heart, and to open the mouth, but to prepare the will. And yet for all
that, it is read in the same letters: the will is prepared, and made ready
before of God, and I shall open thy mouth, and I shall teach thee what good
things thou ought to speak. Wherefore, God does many good things in a
man, that man does not, but a man does no good things, which God has not
done, that a man should do:

Not every one that trusts in his own strength, and power, In hi(...) 9.
(...)stle.
but he that calls upon the name of God, shall be saved.

No man can be continente, except the Lord gives it, In the same 89.
Epistle.
therefore God commands continence, and he gives continence: he commands
by the law, he gives by grace: he commands by the letter, he gives by the
spirit.

Therefore, that we should believe in God, and live godly, In his. 107. Epistle
to vitalis.
it lies not in the will, or runnyng of man, but in the mercy of God: not,
that we ought not both to will and to run. But because that he him self does
work in us, both to will, and also to run.

The law is given, that grace should be sought for: Grace In his book of true
innocence the. 44. chapter.
is given, that the law should be fulfilled: It is not through the fault of
the law, that it was not fulfilled: but through the wisdom of the flesh:
which fault is declared by the law, that by grace it might be healed. In his
book of correction and grace the. 3. chapter.


O man, know in the commandments what thou art bound to do: in rebukyng,
learn that through thine own fault, thou haste it not, and in prayer learn
whence thou must receive that thing that thou will have.

The first man had not this grace, whereby he should never In the same book
and. 11. chapter.
be willing to be evil: but yet he had that grace, whereby he might have been
always preserved from evil, if he would have continued therein. And without
which also he could not by freewill be good, but yet he was able, by freewill
to forsake it.

GOD therefore would not have him to be without his grace, whom he had left in
his own freewill. For, freewill is able enough to do evil, but to do good
it has no power at all, except it be helped by the almighty goodness, which
help, if that man had not by freewill forsaken, he should have been good for
ever: but he did forsake, and was forsaken. For the help was such, that he
might forsake it, when he would, not such whereby it might come to pass, that
he should be willing.

Did not he give that thou might fight, a good fight? I^ In his 50. book of
Homilies the. 14. Homily.
he him self did not give, what was it, that thou say in an other place? I
labored more then all they, yet not I, but the grace of God within me? Behold
thou say, I have ended my course. Did not he also give unto thee, that thou
should finishe thy course? If he gave not unto thee, that thou should
finishe thy course, what is it that thou say in an other place: that it
lies not in the willer, nor in the runner, but in GOD that shows mercy? I
have kept the faith, I acknowledge and allow it, I confess and grant, thou
have kept the faith. But except the lord does keep the city, he watches in
vain that does keep it. Pardone me, O Apostle, I know nothing of thine own
but evil, pardon us, O Apostle, we say so, because thou have taught us.

The Pelagian heretics, thinks that they have great In his book of grace
and freewill the. 4. chapter.
knowledge, when they say: God would not command, that he knows man is not
able to do: who knows not this? But therefore he, does command some
things, which we be not able to do, that we may know what to ask of him.
That is the same faith, which by prayer we obtain: that the law does
command.

Man is able of himself to sin: that he should be justified Upon the. 98.
Psalm.
is not able of himself: but only by him that does justify, which only is
just.

Man is apt and able to wound him self, but he is not apt and able to heal
him self: when he will, he may be sick: not when he will, he may rise.

O love, which do ever burn, and art never quenched, In his 10. book of
confessions and. 29. chapi.
O my loving God, kindle in me, and inflame me, thou commaundest continence:
give me, that thou commaundeste, and command what thou will.

Lord I grant, as thou haste taught me, I am nothing In his book of
contemplatio^s the. 15. Chapi.
else but al whole together vanity, a shadow of death, a dark bottomless
pit, and a barren, and a void ground, which without thy blessyng, brings
for the nothing, and bears no fruicte, but confusion, sin, and death, if I
have had any goodness, I receive it of thee: what soever goodness I had, it is
thine, for I have it of thee, if I did stand at any time, I stood through
thee. But when I fell, I did fall by my self. And I had lien always still in
the mire, if thou had not lift me up, and I had been always blind, if
thou had not given me light, when I fell, I had never risen again: if thou
had not reached me thy hand. Yea, after that thou did lift me up, I
had always fallen, if thou had not stayed me, and holden me up. I had
oftentimes perished if thou had not governed me.

So always, O Lord, thy grace and thy mercy prevented me, deliueryng me from
all evils, saving me from them that be paste, stirryng me up from them that
be present, defendyng me from them that be to come, cuttyng away the snares
of sins before me, taking away the occasion and causes. For, if thou had
not done this unto me, I had done all the sins in the world, because Lord,
I know, that there is never any sin that any man has done, but an other man
may do the same, if his God be not with him, which made him.

But thou broughtest it to pass, that I did them not, thou commaundest that I
should abstain, and thou pourest in me thy grace, that I might believe. Thou
Lord did rule me, to thee, thou did keep me, to thee, and thou have
given unto me, grace and light, that I should not commit adultrie, and all
such other sins.

What other thing is declared, in the lost Sheep, of an In his. 3. book
against the Pelagians.
hundred, but freewill, of possibility in good things, was lost by the
fault and transgression of the first man, and did err from the company of
the righteous, neither could he return by him self, without the undeserved
grace, by the good will of his good pastor Christ, wanderyng in the
wilderness of his freewill, in the works of the devil, he called him again,
and put him upon his shoulders.

All men in the first man was created without any fault Ambrose in his book
of the calling of the Gentiles, the. 3. Chapter.
or vice, and all our natures were in health, but by the transgression of the
same man, we have lost it: there hence is drawn mortality, there hence are
so many corruptions of the mind, there hence is ignorance, and difficulty,
unprofitable cares, and unlawful concupiscence. etc.

These therefore an other evils brake into our nature, by lost faieth,
forsaken hope, blind wisdom, and bond will, no man does find in him self
wherewith he may be repaired, or amended. etc.

That nature was good, was made evil by quality, (man) may not therefore trust
in his own strength, for when it was whole and sound, did not stand, but
must seek victory by him which can not be ouercomme, but does ouercomme
all things.

That the turnyng of the heart to God, is of God, the lord In the. 9. chap. of
the same book.
him self testifies, saying, and I shall give them a heart that they shall
know me that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God, because they shall be turned unto me with all their hearts.

Not in our will, but in the Lord we must trust, where Hie ^me in the. 9.
chapi. of Jeremy.
are they then, which do say, that man can rule himself by his freewill,
and so does give power of freewill, that the mercy, and justice of God is
taken away.

We will go after our own thoughts: where then is Upon the. 18. chapter of
Jeremy.
the power of freewil, without the grace of god? And the judgment a of man's
own will? when as it is a great offense to God, for a man to follow his own
thoughts, and to do the will of his wicked heart.

Therefore, the Heretics be wont to promise felicity, Upon the. 23. chapter
of Jeremy.
and to open unto sinners, the kingdom of heaven, saying: thou may follow
the majesty of god, and be without sin, sith that thou haste received the
power and strenght of freewill, and the understanding of the law, whereby thou
art able to obtain what so ever thou will. And so the Heretics do deceive
the poor, simple, and ignorant persons, and specially women: which being
laden with sins, are led to and fro with every wind of doctrine, deceiuyng
by their flattery all them that give ears unto them.

We always pray in vain, if it be in our own freewill In his. 1. book
against the pelagians.
to do what we will.

Do thou hear so manifold mercies, and do thou dare to trust in thine
own strength and power? In his. 2. book against the Pelagians.


Neither in our own wisdoms, neither in any of our strengthes, we ought to
trust, but only in the lord, who does In his. 3. book against the Pelagians.
direct the steps of men, when he says, no man can come to me: he breaks
the pride of freewill: if he would go foor the to Christ: yet he does but in
vain endeavor it, unless that be dooen that follows: except my father of
heaven draw him: also this must be considered: that thing that is drawn does
not come willingly: but being slow or drawing back, is led against his will.

He that cannot come to Christ by his own strength and Upon the words of
Christ, those whom thou have given me. etc.
labor: how can he avoid all sins?

Where there is mercy and grace: freewill must cease of his part.

What do they pray unto God: that have the power of Chrysostom of the ^myng
of our lord, in his 36. Homily.
freewill?

He says not, I have given them power of freewill, that they by their own
labor should save theimselues: but I have kept them, I have saved them, I
have preserved them.

We had freewill before sin, to work well, but after sin, we had none,
because we were not able, by our own power and strength after sin, to
escape, from the power of the Devil, but as a Ship when the stern is
broken, is driven hither and thither where the tempest will: So by the Devil
we are driven from one sin to another, neither hitherto can do any thing, but
even as the Devil will, and except God does deliver us, with his strong hand
of his mercy, we shall remain in the bonds and chains of sins, unto death.

When man delivered himself by sinnyng, under the kingdom In the same Homily.
of Satan: now is not able of his own power and strength to come out. So the
first will is now turned into necessity. Therefore by our own wills, and
negligence we are bound, but by the mercies of god, we are loosed and set at
liberty.

When we speak of the will that is free to do well, we Augustine in his. 3.
book. and 18. chapter of freewill.
speak of that will wherein man was made.

If the Apostle did mean none other thing, but that it does not only lie in
the will of ronnyng of man, except the merciful In his Enchiridion to
Lavvrence, the. 31. chapter.
lord does help, we may also say on the otherside, that it lies not only
in the mercy of God, without the will and ronnyng of man. But sith that were
a plain ungodliness so to say, let us not doubt, but that the Apostle did
attribute all things unto the mercy of God: and that he did leave no manner of
thing unto our own will and endeavors. In his. 3. book against the Pelagians.


Man therefore of himself, could make his fall because he would. But yet as
he fell of himself, so was he not able straight ways of him self, that is
by his proper will to rise from falling, except by the most merciful hand of
the lord, when it pleased his heavenly goodness he had raised him up.

Every good work then, which we do work in God, the Fulgentius to Monymus
in his. 1. book.
same does GOD work in us, for all things are of him, through him, and in
him, both our good will then, and also our good works be of him, which the
doctor of the gentiles affirms, with these words, it is God that works in
us both the will and the deed, even of his own good will and pleasure.

Natural freewill, we do believe is of no more valewe, but Maxentius in his.
1. book of faith.
only for carnal, or worldly desires, or discernynges, which possible may
seem glorious among men, but not with God. But those things, which belongs
to everlasting life, can neither think, neither will, neither desire, neither
perform, except it be by the infusion and operation of the holy ghost.

God does prevent us with his grace, that we may be willing, Gregory in his 9
Homil. and 1. book upon Ezechiell. Upon the. 63. Psalm.
and with his helpyng hand he does follow us, least we should will in vain.

Since that freewill has been corrupt in our first father, we are not able to
will a good thing, except we be helped by the grace of God.

Holy men do know that after the fall of the first father, In his. 22. book
of Morales and. 10. chapter.
they be borne of a corruptible stock, and that they be not by their own
virtue, but by the heavenly grace that does prevent them, turned unto better
desires or works: And what evil soever they know to be in theimselues, they
feel that is deserved, and come of their mortal kind: But what good soever
they see to be in them selves, they acknowledge to be the gift of the
immortal grace: And for this gift that they have received, they be debitours
unto him, which by preuentyng them, did give unto them that they should
will that good thing, which they would not, and by following did grant, that
they should be able to do that good thing, that they would.

What then? Is this therefore the whole work of freewill? Barnarde in his
book of grace and freewill.
Is this the only merit of it, that it does consent and agree? Truly it
is, not that the consent, wherein all the merit does consiste, does come, or
is of it: Sith that we be not of our selves, as of our selves able to think
any thing, which is less then to consent or agree. These be not my words,
but the words of the Apostle, which does attribute unto God, and not unto
his freewill, all that be good, that is to say, to think and to will, and
not to perform, according to his good will and pleasure.

Let us be changed into the same likeness, from clearenesse to clearness,
as it were with the spirit of God. Therefore, if it be with the spirit of
God, then it is not with freewill. Therefore, let no man think that it is
named freewill, because it is occupied with equal might and power, between
good and badde, seeing that by it self it can fall, but not rise again, but
through the spirit of the Lord.

They that are wise in deed, will confess, three workings, not of freewill,
but of the divine grace, in him. First, is creation: second reformation: the
third endyng. In the first we were created in Christ, into the liberty of
will. In the second, we are reformed by Christ, into the spirit of liberty:
In the third, we shall in the end reign eternally with Christ.

What haste thou, that thou haste not received? Thou art created, thou art
healed, thou art saved. To thee I say, O thou man, which of these, haste thou
of thy self? Thou that wast not: could not create, when thou wast a sinner:
thou could not justify: when thou wast dead, thou could not raise thy
self up again, besides other things, either are necessary for them that
healed: or laid up for them that shall be saved.

Three blessings there are, which are necessary to us, In his. 39. sermon of
his little sermons.
first is preuentyng: second is, helpyng: third is endyng: first is of
mercy: second is, of grace: third is of glory: he does preuente our
conversion by his mercy: he helps our conversion by his grace: he does
accomplish our endyng with glory: unless the Lord does give these three
blessings, our bodies can give for the no fruit. Neither can we begin any
good thing, before we be prevented by mercy: or to do any good thing, until
we be helped, by grace, or that we can end in goodness, until we be filled
with glory.

The soul is in such manner, let down into the body, as (...)
if a man should fall into a myrie, ^epe, and stony place, and Parisiensis, in
his book of the sum of vices and virtue*
so should both be drowned, be araied with mire, and also be hurt. So by
original sin, we are drowned in the darkness of ignorance: we are defiled
with lusts and concupiscence: and we are wounded, as touching the powers, and
faculties of the mind.

Item, if any man do contend, that in the purging of our The second co^ ^ll
of Arovvsicane the 4. chapter.
sins, God does tarry and abide for our will, but do not consesse, that
the will also to be purged from sin, is wrought in us, by the infusion and
operation of the holy ghost: he does resist the self same holy ghost,
speaking by Solomon, the Proverb. 16. 1^ and. 20. 24. Philip. 2. 13.
will is prepared of the Lord, and he does also resist the Apostle holsomely
preaching, it is God that does both work in us the will, and also the
performaunce of the deed, even of good will.

Item, if any man do affire, that as well the increase, as In the. 5. chapi*
of the same counsel.
also the beginning of faith, the self same affection to believe, whereby we
believe in him that justifies the ungodly, and whereby we come to the new
birthe of baptism, is in us naturally, and not by the gift of grace, that is
to say, by the inspiration of the holy ghost, that redresseth our will from
infidelity to faith. From ungodliness, to godliness, is an adversary to
the doctrine of the Apostle: for as much as blessed Paul says, we trust
that he, which has begun in you Phil. 1. 6.
a good work, shall perform it until the day of our Lord 29.
Jesus Christ. And this: unto you is given for Christ's sake, not only that
you may believe in him, but also that ye may Ephesians. 2. 8.
suffer for him. And again, ye are saved by grace through faith, and that not
of your selves, for it is the gift of God.

Item, if any man do affirm, that unto us, beleuyng, willing, In the. 6.
chap. of the same counsel*
desiryng, endeuouryng, labouryng, watchyng, studiyng, askyng, sekyng,
knockyng, mercy is given without the grace of God: but also do not confess,
that it is wrought in us of God, by the infusion and inspiration of the holy
ghost, that we may believe, will, or be able to do all these things, as it
behooves, or do put the help of grace under man's humility, or man's
obedience, neither consents that the gift of obedience, and humility, do
appert^ne to the self grace, resists the 1. Cor. 4. 7.
Apostle, which says, what have thou, that thou have not received? 1. Cor.
15. 10.
And again, by the grace of God, I am that I am.

It is agreed, that whosoever shall say, that therefore the The counsel of
Myluent the. 5. Chap.
grace of justification is given unto us, that we may through grace fulfill
that more easily, which we are commanded to do, by free choice: As though if
grace also were not given, although not easily, yet nevertheless we might
also without grace, fulfill Gods commandments, let him be accursed. For the
Lord did speak of the fruictes of his commandments, where as he said not,
without me ye can do them very hardely: ^on. 15. 5.
but he said, without me ye can do nothing.

The. v. Chapter.
It is impossible for us to fulfill the law.
WHy tempt ye God, to lay a yoke on the disciples Acts. 15. 10.
necks, which neither our fathers, nor we were able to bear?

I see an other law in my members, rebellyng Romans 7. 93.
against the law of my mind, and leadyng me captive unto the law of sin,
which is in my members.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the 24.
body of this death?

I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. etc. 25.


For (that was impossible to the law, in as much as it was Romans 8. 3.
was weak, because of the flesh) GOD sendyng his own soonne, in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.

The Doctors.
THE Pelagians think them selves cunnyng men, Augustine in his book of grace
and free will, the. 4. chapite^*
when they say GOD would not command that thing, that he knows a man is
not able to do, and who is there that knows not this? But therefore God
commands us to do some things, that we are not able to do: that we may
understand, what we ought to crave of him.

Set not thy face against heaven, to mock fools ears In his. 1. book
against the Pelagians.
with these words, be, and can be. For, who will grant you, that a man can
do that thing, that no man ever was able to do?

I said, it is possible, that a man may be without sin, if In ^is book of
the ^pirite, and the letter, the 1. chapter.
he want not will, the power of God assistyng him: and yet I said, that
besides only Christ, in whom all men shall be quickened to life, there was never
man, nor never shall be, who being in this life, shall have this perfection.

The virtue that is now in a just man, so far forth is In his. 3. book and.
7. chap. to Bonifacius.
called perfect, that it pertains to the perfection thereof, both in truth
to know, and in humility to confess, that it is imperfect.

To this purpose was the Law given, that of great, it Upon the 118. Psalm.
might make the little, that it might show unto thee, that thou have no
strength of thy self to do the law. And so being needy, unworthy, and
poor, mighteste flee unto grace, and cry: have mercy on me, O God, for I am
weak.

All the commandments of God, are accoumpted to be In his. 1. book^ of
retractions and. 19. Chap.
done, when that thing, that is not done, is forgiven.

He has much profited in this life, that by his prof^tyng In his book of the
spirit an^ letter. 35. chap.
has learned, how far he is from the perfection of righteousness.

Our very righteousness it self is so great in this life, that In his 19.
book and. 27. Chap. of the City of God.
it stands rather in forgiveness of our sins, then in perfection of
righteousness.

The Lord has given a just law, to unjust men, to In his preface* to the
Galath.
make manifest their sins, and not to take them away. For it takes not
away sins, but by grace of faith. etc. H^erome to Ctesiphontus against the
Pelagians.


Ye say Gods commandments be easy: and yet ye are not able to show us no
man, that ever fulfilled them all together. In his. 1. book against the
Pelagians.


What then do we think, or what ought we to think, that ^e not perfect? We
ought to confess, that we are vnpe^fecte, and that we have not yet gotten, nor
taken, that is required. This is the true wisdom of man, to know him self to
be imperfect. And, as I might say, the perfection of all just men living,
in the flesh is imperfect.

The. vj. Chapter.
All sorts of people ought to know, and read the Scriptures.
THese words which I command thee Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
this day, shall be in thine heart.

And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shalt talk
of 7.
them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, 8.
and they shall be as frontlettes, between thine eyes.

Also thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, 9.
and upon thy gates.

But Moises said unto him, enuiest thou for my sake? yea Nomb 11. 29.
would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would
put his spirit upon them.

Let not the book of the law depart out of thy mouth, Joshua. 1. ^.
but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do,
according to all that is written therein.

But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his law Psalm. 1. 2.
does he meditate day and night.

Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be learned ye judges Psalm. 2. 10.
of the earth.

The law of the Lord is perfect, conuertyng the soul. Psalm. 19. 7.
The testimony of the lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart. 8.
The commandments of the lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

And more to be desired then gold, yea, then much ^ine 10.
gold: sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb.

Moreover, by them is thy servant made circumspect, and 11.
in keeping of them is great reward.

Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? in taking Psalm. 119. 9.
heed thereto according to thy word.

I will delight in thy statutes, and I will not forgette thy 16.
word.

Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet, and a light unto 105.
my path.

Every word of God is pure: he is a shield to those that Proverb. 30. 5.
trust in him.

Woe be to you, enterpreters of the law, for ye have taken Luke. 11. 52.
away the Keye of knowledge: ye enter not in your selves, and them that came
in, ye forbade. Search the Scriptures: John. 5. 39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me.

These were also more noble men then they which were Acts. 17. 11.
at Thessalonica, which received the word with all redines, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

And a certain Jew named Apollos, came to Ephesus, an Acts. 12. 24.
eloquent man, mighty in the scriptures.

Whatsoever things are written before time, are written Romans 15. 4*
for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope.

Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentifully, teaching Colloss. 3. 16.
and admonishyng your selves. etc.

Till I come give attendaunce to readyng, to exhortation, 1. Tim. 4. 13.
and to doctrine.

Thou haste known the holy Scriptures of a child, which 2. Tim. 3. 15.
are able to make thee wise unto salvation through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

For the whole Scripture is given by inspiracion of God, 16.
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to corecte, and to instruct in
righteousness.

And he said unto me, seal not the words of the prophecy Revel. 22. 10.
of this book: for the time is at hand.

The Doctors.
WE may become like unto God, as far ^orth as the Basile in his book of the
holy ghost 1. chapter.
weak nature of man can bear. But the likeness cannot be without knowledge,
neither is knowledge without doctrine, and the beginning of doctrine is
speech: and the parts of speech, be words and sillables.

Would God we would all do: according as it is written, Origin in his ^.
Homily upon Esaie. Ambrose upon ^he. 118. Pl^l.
search the scriptures.

The word of God is the lively meat of our souls, with the which it is
nourished, fed: and governed, neither is there any thing else, that makes a
reasonable soul to live, but the w^de of God.

Young men that use to rea^e Gods word, afterward become Cyrill against
Iulianus, in his 7. book.
most virtuous and godly.

Here we are faught, that even the lay men ought to have Hierome upon ^he
Epistle to the Colloss. the 3. chap. upon these words, let the word of God
dvvell plentifully in you.
the word of God, not only sufficiently, but also abundantly: and one to
instruct, and to warn an other.

Both married men, and Monks, and wives, commonly have this contention among
them selves, who may learn most scriptures.

The Lord has spoken by his Gospel: not that a few should understand him,
but that all.

All that ever we speak, we ought to prove it by the scriptures. Upon the.
133. Psalm.


We must read the scriptures with all diligence, that as Upon the. 86. Psalm.
being good exchaungers, we may know the lawful coin from the Copper. In
his. 3. book and. 4. chap. upon the Epistle to the Ephe.


In all these books (of the scripture) they that fear God and are tamed
through Godliness, do search the will of GOD. The first note of which
labor and travel (as we Augustine, in his. 2. book and 9. chap. of the
christian do^,
said) is to know these books, and if as yet we cannot understand them, yet
let us all by readyng of them, get them in memory, or not to be
altogether ignora^e of them, furthermore those things which be planly
contained therein, whether they be precepts of living, or else of beleeuyng,
are earnestly and diligently to be searched: which how many the more every man
finds, so much the more is he apt in his understanding.

Get ye to the hills of the scriptures, there be the pleasures In his book of
Pastors.
of your hearts, there is no noisome, hurtful, or venomous things, no
inco^ueniente thing, there be most plentiful pastures.

It is not sufficient, that ye hear the divine Scriptures in In his. 55.
sermon.
the Church: But also in your houses, either read them your selves, or else
desire some others to read them, and give you diligent ear to it.

Here me ye men of the world, get ye the Bible, that most Chrisos^ome upon the
Colloss. in his. 9. Homily.
wholesome remedy for the soul: if ye will nothing else, yet at the least, get
the new Testament. S. Paul's Epistles, and the Acts, that may be your
continual, and earnest teachers.

Let one of you take in hand the holy Bible, and let him In Genesis in his 6.
Homile.
call his neighbors about him* and by the heavenly words, let him water and
refreshe both their minds, and also his own.

Being at home, we may both before, and after meat, In his. 10. Homily upon
Genesis.
take the holy books in hand, and thereof receive great profit, and
minister spiritual food unto our souls.

Even when we (...) home, let us bestow our time in In his. 29. Homily
upon Genesis.
readyng the scriptures.

Hearken not hereto only in the church; but also at home, let the husband
with the wife: let the father with the child, In his. 2. Homily upon John and
in his. 78. Homily upon Matthevve.
talk together of these matters, and both to and fro, let them enquire, and
give their judgments. And would GOD they would begi^ne this good custom.

Then let them that be in (...), ^ee into the mountains, In his. 49. Homily
upon Matthevve.
that is ^o say: let them that be in Christ^s (...), flee to the (...). The
scriptures of ^he Apostles, and Prophe^es, be the mountains. etc. Our Lord
knowing that there should be such confusion in the last days, therefore
commands, that (...), that (...) in Christ, willing to ^aue an assurance of
the (...)* ^ould have recourse ^o nothing else, but unto the scriptures.
Otherwise, if they have regard to any other thing, they shall be offended, and
perish, not understanding, what is the true Church, and by the mean whereof,
they shall fall into the abomination of desolation.

This is it, that as it were with a Pestilence, infecteth all In his. 3. Homily
upon Matthevve.
things, that ye think the readyng of the scriptures, pertains only unto
Monks: where as it is much more necessary for you then for them: It is more
wickedness to think Gods law is superfluous, then if he should never read
it, for these be the words, that come from the study of the devil.

Ye may commonly see, that our doctrine is known, not Theodoretus in his. 5.
book of the nature of man.
only of them that are the doctors of the Church, and masters of the
people, but also even of the Tailers, and Smithes, and weauers, and of all
artificers: yea, and further also of women, and that not only of them that be
learned, but also of labouryng women, and Sewsters, and servants, and
handmaides. Neither only the citezens, but also the country fol^es, do very
well understand the same. Ye may find, yea, even the very Dichers, and
Deluers, and Cowheardes, an^ Gardiners; disputing of the holy Trinity, and of
the creation of all things.

The vij. Chapter.
That the (...) are easy to be understood of the simple people.
I Will be with thy mouth, and with his Exodus. 4. 15.
mouth, and will teach you what ye ought to do.

This commandment, (...) I command Deuteronomy. 30. 11.
thee this day, is not hid from thee, neither is it far of.

It is not in heaven, that thou should ^ (...).
^

Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who 13.
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it, that
we may do it?

But the word is very nere unto thee: even in thy mouth 14.
and in thy heart for to do it.

The enteraunce into thy words shows light, and gives Psalm. 119. 130.
understanding to the simple.

The law of the Lord is perfect, conuertyng the soul: Psalm 197.
the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

Knowledge is easy, to him that will understand. Prouer. 14. 6.


And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much Esaie. 54. 13.
peace shall be to thy children.

They shall all know me, from the least of them, unto the Ierem. 31. 34.
greatest of them (says the Lord).

And the Lord answered me, and said, write the vision, Habac. 2. 2.
and make it plain upon the tables, that he may run that reads it.

The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory 14.
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

O father, I give theo thanks, because thou haste hid these Matthew. 11. 25.
things from the wise, and men of understanding, and haste opened them unto
babes.

It is given unto you, to know the secrets of the kingdom Matthew. 13. 11.
of heaven, but to them it is not given.

When he is come which is the spirit of truth: he will John. 16. 13.
lead you into all truth: for he shall not speak of him self, but what soever
he shall hear, shall he speak, and he will show you the things to come.

And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power Acts. 2. 17.
out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams.

And on my servants, and off my handemaides, I will 18.
power out of my spirit in those days, and they shall prophecy.

The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has 1. Cor. 2. 9.
heard, neither came into man's (...), are, which God has prepared for them
that love him.

But God has reueiled them unto us by his spirit: for the 10.
spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God.

He has made his word manifest in due time, through the Titus. 1. 3.
preaching, which is committed unto me.

So that we first know this, that no prophecy in the scriptures, 2. Peter. 1.
22.
is of any private motion.

The Doctors.
THe scriptures are plain, and without doubtfulnes, Ireneus in. 1. book and.
31. chapter.
and may be heard indifferently of all men.

The fewer places, must be expoundes by the more places. Tertullian against
Prapeas.


Marvel not: for the word of God is called Origin upon the. 15. chap. of
Exodus, the. 7. Homily.
both flesh, and bread, and milk, and herbs: and according to the measure
of the beleuers, and possibility of the receivers is diversely named.

I demand not, what these great learned Philosophers Ambrose is his 1. book
and 5. chap. to Gratianus of faith.
say, but what they do, they are forsaken, and left alone in their
schools: behold how much more weight there is in faith, then in
arguments. They, with their profounde reasons, are daiely forsaken of their
fellows. These with their simple faith, go forward, and increase daiely,
men believe not the learned Philosophers: they believe unlearned fishers.

The simple plain faith of fishers, confounds the words In his book of
the incarnation of our Lord, the. 9. chap.
of the learned Philosophers.

It pleased not GOD by Logique to save his people. The kingdom of God is in
the simplicity of faith, not in the contention In his. 1. book and. 3. chap.
of faith.
of words.

It may be said, the Scriptures are heard, yet, that notwithstanding, if
thou read them, they shall do thee good. For, Origin in his 20. Homily vopon
Joshua.
the Lord Jesus Christ, if he find us occupied in the scriptures, and
exercised in the study thereof, not only vouchsafes him self to be
refreshed, and fed in us, but also seeing such a banquet prepared, brings
with him his father unto us.

These things have I said, that we loathe not to hear and read the
scriptures, although we understand them not.

Even they be saved that follow the letter, that is to say, In his. 26.
treatise upon Math.
the plain story of the Gospel. For only the simple story is sufficient
unto the salvation of the simple.

The wisemen of this world, seeing the walls of the gospel, In his. 4.
Homily upon the Canticles.
to rise up without Grammar, and profounde knowledge in Philosophy, say
scornefully among them selves, that all this by subtlety of speech, and
crafty shifts, and Logical arguments, may full easily be shaken down.

It is the order of the Scriptures, after heard things, to Hierome upon the.
19. of Esaias Upon the. 3. cha. of Nahum.
join other things that be plain.

At the coming of Messiah, the people shall be lifted up, and shall prophecy,
that before lay a sleep under their masters: and they shall go unto the
mountains of the Scriptures: and there shall they find mountains, Moises,
and Joshua the soonne of Nun, the mountains of the Prophets, the mountains of
the new Testament, the Apostles, and Eua^gelistes. And when they shall flee to
such mountains, and shall be occupied in the readyng thereof, if they find not
one to teach them, yet shall their endeavor and good will, be allowed, for that
they have fled unto the mountains.

The scriptures are easy to the slave, to the husbandman, Chrysostom in his.
1. Homily upon Mathevve.
to the widow, to the child, and to him that may seem to be very simple of
understanding.

It cannot possible be, that he, that with earnest study, and In his. 36.
Homily upon Genesis.
fervent desire reads the scriptures, should evermore be forsaken, for
although we want the instruction of man, yet God him self from above, entryng
into our hearts, lighteneth our mind: powers his beams into our wits,
opens things that were hidden: and becomes unto us a schoolemaister, of
that we know not: only if we will do so much as sieth in us.

The holy scriptures expounds it self, and suffers not In his. 12. Homily
upon Genesis.
the reader to err.

Neither has the scripture of God, any need of man's wisdom, that it may be
understood, but the revelation of the holy ghost: that the true meaning
being sucked there out, great advantage may grow to us thereby.

We by our selves without a master, shall be able to understand In his
preface to the Romans,
the things, which are there entreated of. So that we do occupy our selves
in these Epistles, day and night, for we do not, by the sharpness of wit,
and understanding, perse unto all those things which we understand, for even
they also, which are of more dull wits, do by continual study, attain
to hard things: Even as the cogitations and senses of man, are most hard to
be known, yet notwithstanding, our friends, whom we fervently love, and
with whom we are continually conuersante, do often times, even by a beck,
open unto us the cogitations, and senses of their minds, without any token of
words, and speech by them spoken. So shall it come to pass in these
Epistles (of holy scriptures) so that a man love them, and be continually
conversant in them, he which asks, receives: he which seeks, finds:
unto him that knocks, it shall be opened.

The Manichies, and all heresies deceive the simple. But In his 8. Homily upon
the Hebrews.
if we have the senses of our minds practiced to discern good, and ill, we
may be able to discern them. But how may our senses become practiced? By
the use of the scriptures, and often hearing.

We need no Sillogismes, or knowledge of Logique, to In his. 1. homily upon
math.
understand Gods word: Husbandmen, and old women do understand it.

Ye enlarge, and lay out with many words, how hard Augustine in his. 5.
book against Iulianus.
a matter the knowledge of the Scripture is, and meet only for a few learned
men.

The phrase or manner of speech, wherein the Scriptures In his. 3. Epistle to
Volusia^.
are written. etc. speaks without color, as a familiar friend, unto the
heart, as well of the unlearned, as of the learned. In his. 83. book the. 69.
question.


The circumstaunce of the scriptures is wont to give light, and open the
meaning.

Darcke places are to be expounded by more plain places, In his. 3. book and.
26. chap. of christian doctrine.
that is the surest way of declaryng the scriptures: to expound one scripture
by an other.

Who so loves the law of GOD, honors in it, even Upon the. 119. Psalm.
that thing that he understands not.

The scripture of God is like an Apothecaries shop, full Basile upon the
first Psalm.
of medicines of sondrie sorts, that every manne may there choose a
convenient remedy for his disease.

Only to the children of the holy ghost, all the holy scriptures Epiphanius
in his. 2. book.
are plain and clear.

Christ unto the strong, is strong meat: unto the weak Gregory Nissenus in
his (...) ^f the life of Moses.
sort, he is herabes: and unto infantes, he is milk.

In the word of God is ple^tie, for the strong man to eat, there is enough
for the child to suck: there is also milk to Fulgentius in his Sermon of the
Co^fessours.
drink, wherewith the tender infancy of the faithful may be nourished:
And strong meat, wherewith the lusty youth of them that be perfect, may
receive the spiritual increasementes of holy virtue.

Nothing can deceive them that search the holy scriptures, Theophilactus of
Lazarus.
for that is the candle, whereby the thief is espied.

The scriptures, is a flood, wherein the little Lamb may Gregory in his
Epistle to Leonarde.
wade: and the great Elephante may swim.

The. viij. Chapter.
Ignorance of the scriptures is very dangerous.
THE nations which thou haste removed, 2. Kings. 17. 26.
and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the
land: therefore he has sent Lions among them, and behold, they slay the^,
because they are ignoraunte of the God of the land.

Forty years have I conte^ded with this Psalm. 95. 10.
generation, and said: they are a people that err in heart, for they have not
known my ways, wherefore I swear in my wrath, saying: surely they shall not
enter into my rest.

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they Proverb. 1. 2^.
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

Because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear 29.
of the Lord.

The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Esaie. 1. 3.
cryb, but Israel has not known, my people has not understood.

A sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of 4.
the wicked, corrupt children: they have forsaken the Lord.

Therefore my people is gone into captivity, because they Esaie. 5. 13.
had no knowledge.

We have erred from the way of truth, and the son of Wisdom. 5. 6
understanding rose up against us.

We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, 7.
an ddestruction: But we have not known the way of the Lord.

Whereas they lived in great wars of ignorance, those Wisdom 14. 21.
so great plagues called they peace.

In no wise speak against the word of truth, but be ashamed Eccle. 4. 25.
of the lies of thine own ignorance.

They be blind leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead Math. 15. 14.
the blind, both shall fall into the ditche.

Ye are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power Matthew. 22. 29.
of God.

This is condemnation, that light is come into the world, Ihon. 3. 19.
and men loved darkness more then light.

He that walks in the darcke, knows not whither he Ihon. 21. 35.
goes.

For as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered Romans 1. 28.
them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

I bear them record, that they have a zeal, but not according Romans 8. 2.
to knowledge.

For they being ignoraunte of the righteousness of God, and 3.
going about to stablishe their own righteousness, have not submitted them
selves to the righteousness of God.

If any man be ignoraunte, let him be ignoraunte. 1. Cor. 14. 38.


Some have not the knowledge of GOD, I speak this to 1. Cor. 15. 34.
your shame.

None of the Princes of this world has known: For had 1. Cor. 2. 8.
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

I would not brethren have you ignoraunte, conceruyng 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow not, even as other which have no
hope.

The Doctors.
SAncte Paul says, knowledge puffs up the Ireneus in his 2. (...), and 45.
chapter.
mind, not, for that he found fault with the knowledge of God, otherwise he
should first of all others, have reproved him self.

Unto the devil it is a torment above all torments, Origene in his 27. Homily
upon the book of Nombers.
and a pain above all pains, if they see any man readyng the word of God,
and with feruente study, searchyng the knowledge of Gods law, and the
mysteries, and secrets of the scriptures: herein stands all the flame of the
deuilles: in this fire they are tormented: for the are seized, and possessed of
all them that remain in ignorance.

Consider in what danger they be, that have no care to In his 10. book and.
16. chap. upon the. To.
read the holy scriptures, for by the same scriptures only, the judgment of
this trial must be allowed.

Giuyng them selves to sleep, and slouthfulnes, they think Hierome upon the.
1. Chap. to Titus.
it sin to read the scriptures: and such as both day and night, are
studious in the Law of God, they despise, as pratelers, and vain men.

It was not lawful for any one of all the sisters, to be ignoraunte Upon the
Epitaphe of Paula.
of the Psalms, nor to pass over any day, without learning some part of the
scripture.

If ye have, or know not, what way to go, what shall it Augustine in his.
11. book of God, and. 2. Chap.
profit you to know, whither to go?

Ignorance in them that would not understand, without doubt is sin: But in
them that could not understand, it In his sentences, exceplis. page 1067.
is the punishment of sin. Therefore neither of them both has good excuse:
but either of them has just damnation.

There be certain men, that when they hear, they must Upon the. 131. Psalm.
be humble, abase theimselues, and will learn nothing: fearyng that if they
attain to any knowledge, they shall be proud: and so they remain still only in
milk, but the scripture of God reproves them.

There was in them the kingdom of ignorance: that is Upon the. 33. Psalm.
to say, the kingdom of error.

Ignorance is the horrible depth, out of the which all errors In his. 22.
book and. 22. chap* of the City of God.
does arise up, and spring forth.

Thou will say I am no Monk, I have wife and children, and charge of
household, this is it, that as it were with a Pestilence Chrysostom in his. 2.
^ milie upon Matthevve.
infecteth altogether, that ye think the readyng of holy scriptures belongs
only unto Monks.

The fault is greater, and more grievous, to think Gods laws is superfluous
(and not needful for thee) then to be ignorant whether there be any such
law, or no: for these words come even from the persuasion of the Devil.

This is the workyng of the Devils inspiration, he would not suffer us to see
the treasure, least we should have the riches. Therefore he counsels us,
that it utterly avails nothing to hear the laws of God: least upon the
hearing, he may see our doings follow.

Thou will say, I have not read the scriptures, that is no In his. 17. Homily
to the Hebrews.
excuse, but a sin.

The readyng of the scriptures is more necessary for you, In his. 3. Homily
upon Matthevve.
then it is for Monks.

Saint Paul says, let the word of God dwell in you abundantly, but what
will these fools say hereunto. O, say In his. 16. Homily upon John.
they, blessed is the simple soul: and he that walks simply, walks
surely. This is the very cause of all mischief, that in cases of necessity,
there be not many able to allege the scripres. For a simple man, in that place
may not be taken for a fool, or a man that knows nothing: but for a man
that means no ill: or woorketh no fraud, for if it were to be taken so: it
had been in vain for Christ to say, be ye wise as Serpents.

This is the cause of all evil, that the Scriptures are not In his. 9. Homily
upon the Colloss.
known.

The readyng of the Scriptures is a great fence against Io his. 3. sermon of
Lazarus.
sin: And the ignorance of the scriptures is a dangerous dounefall, and a
great Dungeo^. To know nothing of gods laws, is the loss of salvation,
ignorance has brought in herisies, and vicious life, ignorance has turned
all things vpside down.

It is a great sin dear brethren, to be ignorant of the In his. 42.
Homily.
holy scriptures.

Even as if a man walk without this visible light, he must In his preface to
the Roma.
needs stumble in the darcke, and so often times fall. So he which turns
not the eyes of his mind to the light of the scriptures, must needs of force
sin.

Who so knows not the things that partaine unto the Gregory in his 1. book
and. 1. Chapter of a Pastor.
lord, be not known of the lord.

If we either read not the scriptures our selves, or be not desirous to hear
others read them, then are our medicines Augustine in his. 55. Sermon of time.
turned into wounds: And then, where we might have had remedy, we shall have
judgment.

Ignorance is the mother of all errors. In the Counsel of Toledo, in Spain.
4. Can. 24.


The ignorance of the scriptures: is the ignorance of christ.

The. ix. Chapter. In the. 38. distinction. Si. iuxta.

The word of God written in the Canon of the Bible, contains in it self
fully, all things needful for our salvation.
THE Messiah shall come, which is John. 4. 25.
called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

Search the Scriptures, for in John. 5. 39.
them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

All things that I have hard of John. 15. 15.
my father, have I made known unto you.

When he is come, which is the spirit of truth, he will John. 16. 1^.
lead you into all truth.

Many other signs also did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, John. 20.
30.
which are not written in this book.

But these things are written, that we might believe that 13.
Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that in believing, ye might have
life through his name.

I have made the former treatise, O Theophilus, of all that Acts. 1. 1.
Jesus began to do, and teach.

Until the day that he was taken up, after that he through 2.
the holy ghost, had given commandments unto the Apostles, whom he had
chosen.

I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the Acts. 20. 27.
counsel of God.

I obtained help of God, and continue unto this day, witnessyng Acts. 26. 22.
both to small and great, saying none other things, then those which the
Prophets, and Moses did say should come.

Iam not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power Romans 1. 16.
of God, unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile.

Whatsoever things are written before time, are written ^om. 15. 4.
for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures
might have hope.

Thou have known the holy scriptures of a child, which ^. Timo. 3. 15.
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

For, the whole scripture is given by inspiration of GOD, 16.
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct and to instruct in
righteousness.

That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect 17.
unto all good works.

The preaching of the Cross, is to them that perish, foolishnes: 1. Cor. 1.
18.
but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.

Being borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, 1. Peter. 1. 23.
by the word of God, who lives and endures for ever.

The word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the 25.
word, which is preached among you.

The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: ^. peter. 1. 21.
but holy men of GOD, spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost.

The word of the lord is lively in operation, and sharper Hebrews, 4. 1^.
then any two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the deuidyng a
sonder of the Soul, and the Spirit, and of the joints, and the marie, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intentes of the heart.

The Doctors.
THE holy scriptures, being inspired from GOD, Athanasius against the Gen tiles.
are sufficient to all instructions of truth.

Let us which will have any thing observed Isychius in his 5. book and. 16.
chap. upon Leuiticus.
of God, search no more but that, which the gospel does give unto us.

For as much as thou deniestthe things that be written, what remains
there, but that thou must allow the Hillary in his 9. book of the Trinity.
things, that be not written.

This very word, substance, is not plainly expressed, Epiphanius in his. 3.
book and 73. heresy.
neither in the new, nor old Testamente, but the sense and meaning of that
word, is every where.

Read the holy scriptures, wherein ye shall find fully Augustine to the
brethren in the wilderness. In his 4 9. treatise upon Ihon.
what is to be followed, and what to be avoided.

Not all things, that the Lord Jesus did, are written, as the same Evangelist
witnesses: for, the Lord both did and said many things, that are not
written: but things were choosen out to be written, which seemed sufficient
for the salvation of the beleuers.

For as much as Christ him self has not reueiled these In his 96. tre^ tise
upon John.
things, which of us will say, they be these, or these? For who is there,
either so vain, or so rash, who, notwithstanding he speaks the truth, to
whom he lists, and what he lists, will affirm without any testimony of
the scriptures, that these be the things that the lord then would not open.

How much less the abundance of gold, silver, and clothing, In his. 3.
book of christian doctrine and last chapter.
which that people brought with them forth of Egypt, is in comparison of the
riches, which afterward they had at Jerusalem, which above all other, was
showed in king Solomon: So let all knowledge (which is gathered out of the
books of the Gentiles) be such, if it be compared to the knowledge of Gods
scriptures. For, what soever man learneth without them, if it be evil, there
it is condemned: if it be profitable, there it is found. And seeing then every
man shall find all things there, which he has profitably learned
otherwhere: much more abundantly shall he find those things there, which
can no where at all else be learned: but only in the merueilous deepenesse,
and wonderful humility of those scriptures.

In these therefore, which are evidently contained in the In his. 2. book and.
3. Chap. of christian doctrine.
Scriptures, are found all things which contain faith, manners of living,
hope, and love.

Let us seek no farther then is written of God our savior, In his. 198.
Epistle to Fortunatus.
least a man would know more, then the Scriptures witness.

What so ever is required for our salvation, is all ready Chrysostom in his.
19. Homily upon Matthevve.
contained in the holy scriptures, he that is ignoraunte, shall find there
what he may learn, he that is stubborn, and a sinner, may sinde there
scourges of the judgments to come, the which he may fear: He that is
troubled, may find there the joys and promises of everlasting life, through
the beholding of the which, he may be stirred to good works.

All things be plain, and clear in the scriptures, and Upon the. 2. to the
These. 2. Chapter.
what things soever be needful, be manifest there.

If there be any thing needful to be known, or not to be Upon the. 2. to
Timoth. the 3. Chapter.
known, we shall learn it by the holy scriptures: if we shall need to
reprove a falsehoode, we shall fetch it from thence: if to be corrected, to
be chastened, to be exhorted, or comforted, to be short, if ought lack that
ought to be taught, or learned, we shall also learn it out of the same
scriptures.

But why did not the Apostles write all things? Chiefly, In his. 89 Homily
upon the ^0. of John.
because of the multitude of them. Moreover they did consider, that he, which
would not believe these, would not believe more: but he that believes these,
need no more to attain faith.

In the word of God is plenty: for the strong manne to Fulgentius in his
Sermon of the Confessou^
eat: there is enough for the child to suck: there is also milk to drink,
wherewith the tender infancy of the faithful may be nourished, and strong
meat, wherewith the lusty youth of them that be perfect, may receive the
spiritual encreaseme^t of holy virtue: There provision is made for the
salvation of all men, whom the Lord does vouchsafe to save: there is also
that, which is meat for all estates. There we learn the commandments,
which we ought to do: there we know the rewards which we hope for.

Like as in a merchants Ship, are carried diverse things Lyi^ upon the last
chap. of the Proverbs.
necessary for man's life: So in the scripture are contained all things
needful to salvation.

Doubtless, the holy scriptures are able to instruct thee to Eruno upon the
second Epistle to Timothy.
salvation. For, every scripture being inspired from God (that is to say)
spiritually understood, after the will of GOD, is profitable to teach them
that be ignorant: to reprove, (that is to say) to convince them that speak
against the faith: to correct sinners, such as deny not them selves to be
sinners: to instruct those that be yet rude and simple, to instruct (I say)
in righteousness, that they may be made righteous, by puttyng away their
instructions of infidelity: that he may be so taught, that, as much as in
the teacher lies, he that is taught, may be the perfects man of God: so
perfect, that he may be instructed to do every good work.

The. x. Chapter.
Nothing ought to be put to, or taken away from the word of God.
Y^ shall put nothing unto the word which Deuteronomy. 5. ^.
I command you, neither shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep
the commandments of the lord your god, which I command you.

What so ever I command you, take Deuteronomy. 12. 3^.
heed you do it, thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there from.

Be thou strong, and of a most valiante courage, that thou Joshua. 1. 7.
may observe and do, according to all the law which Moses my servant has
commanded thee: thou shall not turn away from it, to the right hand, nor to
the left, that thou may prosper where so ever thou go.

Every word of GOD is pure: he is a shield to those that Prouer. 30. 5.
trust in him.

Put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and 6.
thou be sound a liar.

Teaching them to observe all things, what so ever I Matthew. 28. 20.
have commanded you.

Brethren, though it be a man's covenant, when it is confirmed, Galath. 3. 15.
yet no man does abrogate it, or adds any thing thereto.

I protest unto every man yt hears the words of the prophecy Revel. 22. 18.
of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, god shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book.

And if any man shall diminish of the words of the book of 19.
this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and
out of the holy City, and from those things which are written in this book.

The Doctors.
IT is aduouterous, it is wicked, it is abominable, Cyprian in his 1. book
and. 8. Epistle.
what soever is ordered by the rashenes of man, that Gods order should be
broken.

We justly do condemn al new things which Ambrose is his 3. book and. 1.
chap. of virginity.
Christ has not taught: for Christ is the way to the faithful. If therefore
we our selves preach any thing that Christ has not taught, judge that
detestable, and abominable.

By that which Eua added to the word of God (thou shall Ambrose in his book of
paradise the. 12. chapter.
not touch. etc.) We do learn how much this present lesson puts us in
remembrance, that we ought to add nothing to the word of God, yea, though
it be for a good purpose. For, if thou put to, or take away any thing, it
appears to be a transgression of the commandments: For there ought
nothing to be added, although it seem good.

Neither (says the Apostle) if they preach contrary: but if Upon the Epistle
to the Galath. 1. chap.
they preach any thing besides that, that we have preached, that is, if they
add any thing to it at all, hold them accursed: Neither do I except my
self, if I put to any thing, beside that which was preached before.

Ye see therefore this is your drift, that all authority of the Augu. against
^austus in his 30. book and 18. chapter.
scriptures be removed, that each man may be led by his own fantasy,
what he list, either to allow in the holy scriptures, or to disalowe: that is
to say, that he submit not him self, touching his faith, to the authority of
the scriptures: but that he make the scriptures subject unto him, not that he
will allow any thing, because it is written in that high authority of the
scriptures: But that he will think it well written, because he aloweth it.

Sittyng upon the chair of Moises, they teach the law of In his 46. treatise
upon John.
God: therefore God teaches by them. But if they will teach their own, hear
them not, do not after them: For truly such men search their own: but
not those things which are Jesus Christ.

I may feign unto you, and hastily I shall be no sure Steward, Upon the. 29.
Psalm.
but a foolish fabler. Behold, to feign without the gospel, is to fable.

Who so forbids us to do that God commands: or Basile in his morals.
14. chapter.
commands us to do that God forbids, is accursed unto all them that love
the Lord.

Every preacher is a servant of the law, which may Chrysostom of the
imperfect work upon Math. 7. chapter.
neither add any thing above the law, of his own mind: nor withdraw any
thing after his own understanding, but preach that thing only, that is had
in the law, as Solomon says, thou shall add nothing to the word of God,
nor take ought there from.

Like as the Bedell cries openly to all them that be in the In his first
Homily upon Titus.
Court, so do we preach openly: but on that condition that we add nothing,
but preach only that thing that we have heard, for the office of a Crier is,
to speak out those things that be committed unto him, and not to add,
change, or take away any thing.

All other things which they seek out, and invent at their Upon the first
cap. of Aggeus.
own pleasure, without the authority and testimony of the scriptures (as
though they were the traditions of the Apostles) the sword of God cutteth of.

If any thing be brought unto us under the name of the In his book of the holy
ghost.
holy ghost, besides the Gospel, let us not believe it. For, as Christ is
the fulfillyng of the law and the Prophets: So is the holy ghost the
fulfillyng of the Gospel.

The fruictes of a man is, the confession of his faith, and In his. 9. Homily
upon the 7. of Matthew.
the works of his conversation. If thou therefore shall see a Christian man,
forthwith consider, if his confession agree with the scriptures, he is a true
Christian: but if not, he is (as Christ said) false, for so Ihon wrote in his
Epistle of the heretics: said not, if any come unto you, not having the name
of Christ, bid him GOD speed: But if any bring not this doctrine. etc.

There be two offices of a Bishop, to learn the scriptures Siryll in his. 6.
book upon Leuitic^s.
of God, and by often readyng, to digeste the same, or else to teach the people,
but let him teach those things, which he has learned of GOD, and not of his
own heart, or by man's understanding: but those things which the holy Ghost
teaches.

If any man speak, let him speak as the words of God, Beda in the. 1.
Epistle of Peter and. 5. chapter.
fearyng least he say, or command any thing besides the will of God, or
besides that, which is manifestly commanded in the holy scriptures, and be
found as a false witness of God, or a committer of Sacrilege, or a brynger in
of any strange thing from the lords doctrine, or leave out, or pass over any
thing, that pleases God: seeing that Christ commands the preachers of the
truth, concerning them whom they had taught, saying, teach them to keep all
things that I have commanded you. Yea, even the same which he had
commanded, and none other: and he commanded his preachers, to command their
hearers to keep, not some of these, but all.

The. xj. Chapter.
The scriptures are sufficient to d^bate, and deside all doubte^ and
controversies.
THy word is a Lantern unto my feet, Psalm. 119. 105
and a light unto my paths.

He shows his word unto Jacob, his Psalm. 147. 20.
statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

He has not dealt so with every nation, 21.
neither have they known his judgments.

The word of God most high, is the wisdom 1. 5.
fountain of wisdom, and the everlasting commandments, are an entrance
unto her.

If thou be the son of God, command that these stones Matthew. 4. 3.
be made bread.

He answered and said, it is written, man shall not live 4.
by bread only, but by every word that proceadeth out of the Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
mouth of God.

It is written again, thou shall not tempt the lord thy God. Psalm. 92. 11.


Avoid Satan, for it is written, thou shalt worship the 10.
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Deuteronomy 6. 13. and 10. 20.


Go ye and learn what this is, I will have mercy, and not Matthew. 9. 13.
Hosea. 6. 7.
Sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungered, Matthew. 12. 3.
and they that were with him?

How he entered into the house of God, and eat the show 4.
bread, which was not lawful for him to eat. etc. 1. Sam. 21. 6.


Or have ye not read in the law, how on the Sabbath day 5.
the priest in the Temple, brake the Sabbath, and are blameless. Leuit. 8. 31.
Exodus 29. 33. Nomb. 28. 9. Matthew 12. 40. Jonas. 2. 8.


As Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly: so shall the
son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

O hypocrites, Esaias prophesied well of you, saying: This Matthew. 15. 7. 8.
people draws nere unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far of from me. Esaie. 29. 12. Matthew. 16. 4.


The wicked generation, and adulterous seeks a sign, and there shall no sign
be given it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.

And concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not Matthew. 22. 31.
read what is spoken unto you of God, saying.

I am the GOD of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the 32.
God of Jacob? God is not the god of the dead, but of the living. (...). 3. 6.


Master, which is the great commandment in the law? 36.
Jesus said to him, thou shalt love the Lord thy God with Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
all thine heart. etc. 37.


Then the Pharisees came and asked him if it were lawful Mark. 10. 2.
for a man to put away his wife, and tempte him. 6.


At the beginning of creation, God made them male and female.

For this cause shall man leave his father and mother, and Gene. 1. 27.
cleave unto his wife. 7.


Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to Genesis 19. 4. Luke. 24.
26.
enter into his glory?

And he began at Moises, and at all the Prophets, and interpreted 27.
unto them in all the scriptures, the things which were written of him.

They have Moises and the prophets: let them hear them. Luke 16. 29.


It is written, mine house is the house of prayer, but ye have Luke. 19. 46.
Icremy. 7. 1.
made it a den of thieves.

Is it not written in your law? I said ye are Gods. John. 10. 34.


But this is that, which was spoken by the Prophet Joel. Psalm. 82. 6.


And it shall be in the last days, says God, I will power Acts 2. 16.
Joel. 2. 28.
out of my spirit upon all flesh. etc.

To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through 17.
his name all that believe in him, shall receive remission of Acts. 10. 43.
Ierem. 31. 34.
sins. Micah. 7. 11. Chap. 15. 9. Acts. 18. 28.


For, mightily he confuted publicly the Jews with great vehemency, showing
by the Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ. Romans 3. 10.


As it is written: There is none righteous, no not one.

There is none that understands: there is none that seeks 11.
Psalm. 14. ^. Romans 4. 3.
God. etc.

For, what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and Genesis 15. 6. Romans 9.
12.
it was compted to him for righteousness.

It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. Gene. 25. 23.


As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. 13.
Mala^. ^. 2.


For he says to Moises, I will have mercy on him, to who^ 15.
I will show mercy: and will have compassion on him, on Exodus 33. 19.
whom I will have compassion.

The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty 2. Cor. 10. 4.
through God, to cast down holds.

^astyng down the immaginations, and every high thing 5.
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bryngyng into captivity
every thought, to the obedience of Christ. 1. Cor. 11. 23.


For, I have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you,
to wit, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread.
etc.

The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is 2. Tim. 3. 16.
profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness.

The word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and Hebre. 4.
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the
diuidyng a sonder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and the
marie, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intentes of the heart.

The Doctors.
THE very doctrine of the heretics, compared Tertullian of the prescriptio^
of Heretics.
with the Apostles doctrine, by the diversity and contrariety that is between
that, and th^other, will soon pronounce sentence of it self, that neither
Apostle, nor Apostolic man, was aucthour of it.

The holy Scriptures will easily bewraie and confound In his book of the
Trinity.
the guiles and theaftes of heretics.

Consider in what danger they be, that have no care to read Origene in his
10. book and 16. chap. to the Romans.
the holy scriptures, For by the same scriptures only, the judgment of this
trial must be allowed.

We must needs call to witness the holy scriptures: for In his. 1. Homily
upon I^remy.
our judgments and expositions without those witnesses, they carry no
credits.

As what soever gold is without the Temple, is not sanctified, In his. 25.
Homily upon Matthew.
so what soever sense is without the holy scripture: although unto some it
seem wonderful, yet it is not holy, because it is not contained in the sense
of the scripture.

Never move question hereof: but only learn of the holy At^anasius to
Serapion, that the holy ghost is no creature.
scriptures. For, the only proofs that ye shall there find, are sufficient
(to prove the Godhead of the holy ghost.)

By openyng and expoundyng the holy scriptures, often times Socrates in his
first book and 16. (...).
we overthrow them (that were the Arrian heretics.)

If we return to the head, and beginning of our Lords tradition, all error
of man must needs give place. Cyprion to Pompeius.


This is the very order of the Apostles doctrine in the Gospel, to preach
God out of the law and the Prophets. Hilarie upon the 65. Psalm.


In matters touching God, there is no speech left unto In his. 7. book of the
trinity.
men, but only the word of God. All other aucthorities be short, and
narrow, and dark, and troublesome.

The sword of Gods word is laid upon the mountains, Hierom upon the. 1.
Chap. of Aggeus.
that lift them selves up against the knowledge of God.

All that ever we speak, we ought to prove it by the scriptures. Upon the.
98. Psalm.


We must read the scriptures with all diligence and must In his. 3. book and.
5. chap. to the Ephesians.
be occupied in the law of the lord, both day and night: that we may
become pefecte exchaungers, and be able rightly to discern what money is
lawful, and what is counterfecte.

Thou that art a mainteiner of new doctrine, whatsoever To Pammachius.
thou be, I pray thee spare thy Roman ears, spare the faith that is
commended by the Apostles mouth, why go thou about now after four
hundred years, to teach us that faith which before we never knew? Why
bryngest thou us forth that things, that Peter and Paul never uttered?
Evermore until this day, the Christian world has been without this doctrine.

Neither will I allege the Counsel of Nice against thee: Augustine in his.
3. book and 14. chapter against Maximinus.
nor shall you allege the Counsel of Arimiminum against me. By the
authority of the scriptures, let us weigh matter with matter: cause with
cause: reason with reason.

Have away al those aucthorities, that either of us alleges In the. 3. cap.
of his ^oke of the
against the other: saving such only, as be taken out of the heavenly
canonical scriptures. But perhaps, some will ask me, wherefore would ye have
al such other aucthorities put away? I answer, because I would have theholy
church to be proved, not by the doctrines of men, but by the word of God.

Let us yield and consent to the holy scriptures, which In his. 1. book
and. 22. chap. of remission of sins.
can neither deceive, nor be deceived.

According to those books of the scriptures, we judge frankely of all other
writings, whether they be of the faithful, In his. 2. book and. ^9. chap.
against Cresconius the Grammarian.
or of the unfaithful.

Where as the Lord him self has not spoken, who of us can say, it is this,
or that? or if he dare say so, how can he prove it? In his. 96. treatise
upon John.


I require the voice of the Shephearde: read me this matter out of the
Prophets: read me out of the Psalms: read In his book of pastors the 14.
Chapter.
it out of the Law: read it out of the Gospel: read it out of the Apostles.

I owe my consent without gainsaiyng, only unto the canonical In his book of
nature and grace the 61. chapter.
scriptures.

I may saine unto you, and hastily I shall be no sure Steward: but a foolish
fabler. Behold, to feign without the Gospel, Upon the. 93. Psalm.
is to fable.

Yea, if they say that Christ has appeared in the very Chrysostom in the
imperfect work the 49. Homily.
true church of God, yet believe them not, for this is no worthy or sufficient
knowledge of my godhead. By this he shows that out of the very true churches,
oftentimes come forth deceivers. Therefore we may not believe, no not them,
unless they speak and do such things as are agreeable to the Scriptures.

I beseech you all, weigh not what this man, or that man In his. 3. Homily upon
the 2. to the. Cor.
thinks: but touching all these things, search the scriptures.

Whosoever uses not the holy scriptures, but comes in In his. 58. Homily
upon John.
another way, that is not lawful, he is not the Shephearde of the flock: he
is the thief.

The Euangeliste and Apostles writings, and the saiyngs Theodoretus in his. 1.
book and. 7. chap.
of the old Prophets do clearly instruct us, what judgment we ought to
have of the meaning and will of GOD. Tripertite history. 2. book an l. 5. Chap.
Therefore laiyng a side all contentions, out of those heavenly Oracles let us
seek for the assoilyng of our questions.

Let us take the resolution of our questions, out of the words of the holy
ghost, in our disputations of godly matters, we have laid before us, the
doctrine of the Gospel.

Let our judgment stand a part: and let us ask saint Ambrose to Gratianus
the Emperor in 1. book. 7. cap.
Paul the question.

We rejoice together, each of us in others behalf, for the faith both of our
churches, and also of yours, is agreeable both Euagrius in his. 3. book and 18
chap.
unto the heavenly inspired Scriptures, and also to the tradition, and
exposition of our fathers.

We know that these godly fathers concluded this matter, by such words as the
Evangelists and Apostles have uttered of our Lord.

The. xij. Chapter.
The Church is known by the word of God.
WHO soever hears of me these words* Matthew. 7. 2.
and does the same, I will liken him to a wise man, which has builded his
house on a Rock.

Whom do men say that I the son of Matthew. 16. 13.
man am?

And they said, Some say, John Baptist, 14.
and some Elias, others, Ieremias, or one of the Prophets.

He said unto them, But whom do ye say that I am? 15.


Then Simon Peter answered and said, thou art Christ 16.
the son of the living God.

I say also to thee, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I 17.
will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not overcome it.

To whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal Ihon. 6. 68.
life.

He that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear John. 8. 47.
them not, because ye are not of God.

My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they John. 10. 27.
follow me.

Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have Ihon. 5. 39.
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

And they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, Acts. 2. 42.
and breakyng of bread, and prayers.

Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10. 17.


Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is 1. Cor. 3. 11.
laid, which is Jesus Christ.

And if any man build on this foundation, Gold, Silver, 12.
or precious stones, Timber, Haie, or Stubble.

Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day 13.
shall declare it, because it shall be reueiled by the fire: and the fire shall
try every man's work, of what sort it is.

Husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the Ephe. 5. 25.
Church, and gave him self for it.

That he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washyng 26.
of water through the word.

If I tarry long, thou may know yet, how thou ought Timoth. 3. 15.
to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Pillar and ground of
truth.

The Doctors.
THE Pillar and Butteresse of the Church, is Ireneus in his 3. book and. 11.
Chapter.
the Gospel and the spirit of life.

Heretics when they be reproved by the In his. 3. book and. 2. Chap.
scriptures, they fall to the accusing of the scriptures, as though either they
were not well and perfect, or wanted authority, or were doubtfullie uttered:
or that they that know not the tradition, were never able by the scriptures to
find out the truth. Augustine in his book of the unity of the Church the. 3.
Chapter.


There be certain books of our Lord, unto the authority whereof each part
agrees, there let us seek for the Church: thereby let us try and examine our
matters.

I will, ye show me the holy Church, not by the decrees of men: but by the
word of God. In the. 16. cap of the same book.


Whether they have the Church, or no, let them show by the Canonical books
of the holy Scriptures, we must know the church of Christ, even like as we
know christ, which is the head of the church, in the holy Canonical
scriptures.

The question or doubt is, where the Church should be, In the. 2. chap. of
the same book.
what then shall we do? Whether shall we seek the church in our own words,
or in the words of her head, which is our Lord Jesus Christ? In my
judgment, we ought rather to seek the church in his words: for that he is
the truth, and best knows his own body.

Let us not hear these words: this say I, this say thou: In the. 3. chap.
of the same book.
But these words let us hear, thus says the lord: there let us seek the
church: there let us discuss our cause.

Whether of us be Schismatikes, we, or you, ask you not In his. 2. book and.
85. chap. against the letters of Petilian.
me, I will not ask you: Let Christ be asked: that he may show us his own
church.

The holy Scriptures shows the Church, without any doubtefulnes. In his. 1.
book and. 33. chap. against Cresconius the Grammarian. Chrysostom in his. 49.
Homily of the imperfect work upon Matthew.


When you shall see the abomination of desolation stand in the holy place,
that is, when you shall see ungodly heresy (which is the army of Antichrist)
stand in the holy places of the church, in that time let them which are in
Jury, fly unto the Hills (that is) let them that be in christendom, resort
unto the scriptures.

For like as the true Jew is a christian (as the Apostle says, he is not a
Jew, which is outward. etc.) In like manner, the very Iewry is christianity,
the Hills are the scriptures of the Apostles and prophets.

And why does he command all christians at that time to resort to the
Scriptures? For in this time, since Heresy has prevailed in the church,
there can be no other proof of true christianity, neither can there be any
other refuge for christian men (willing to know the truth of the right faith)
but only unto the holy Scriptures. Before time, it was showed by many other
means, which was the true Church of Christ, and which Gentilitie: But now
there is no other way to know it. And why? For all those things which
pertains to Christ in deed, have the Heretics in their Schisms: likewise
churches: likewise the Scriptures of GOD: likewise Bishops, and other orders of
Clerks: and likewise Baptism: and the Sacrament of thankesgiuyng, and (to
conclude) Christ him self.

Wherefore, he that will know which is the true church of Christ, in this so
great a confusion of things, being so like: how shall he know it, but only
by the scriptures?

It was also known which was the true church of christ, by their manners, when
the conversation of christian men (either of al, or many) was holy, which was
not among the heathen.

But now, Christian men are become like, or worse then the Gentiles or
Heretics: yea, and there is more continency found amongst them, then
among christians.

Therefore, he that will know which is the true church of Christ, whereby shall
he know it, but only by the scriptures.

The Lord therefore knowing that so great a confusion of things should come
in the later time, commands that christian men, that be willing to know the
right faith, should flee to none other things, but only to the Scriptures:
for if they look upon any other thing, but only the scriptures, they will be
offended and perish, not perceiuyng which is the true church: And so to fall
into the abomination of desolation, which stands in the holy places of the
church.

The. xiij. Chapter.
What credit Doctors and Counsels are of them selves, without the word of
God.
IF there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer Deuteronomy. 13. ^.
of dreams (and give thee a sign or wonder.

And the sign and wonder which he has told 2.
thee, come to pass) saying, let us go after other Gods, which thou have not
known, and let us serve them.

Thou shall not hearken unto the words of the prophet, 3.
or unto the dreamer of dreams.

Hear not the words of the Prophets, that prophecy Ierem. 23. 16.
unto you, and teach you vanity: they speak the vision of their own heart,
and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

Let him speak my words faithfully: what is Chafe to 28.
the Wheat, says the Lord?

Say thou unto them that prophecy out of their hearts, Ezechiel. 13. 2.
hear the word of the lord.

Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own 3.
spirit, and have seen nothing.

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, Math. 5.
19.
and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.

In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's Matthew. 15. 9.
precepts.

Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am 1. Cor. 1. 12.
Paul's, I am Apollos, and I am Cephas, and I am Christ's.

Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Either 13.
were ye baptized in the name of Paul?

Let no man rejoice in men. 1. Cor. 3. 21.


Who is Paul then? And who is Apollos? but the ministers ^. Cor. 3. 5.
by who^ ye believed, and as the lord gave to every man.

I have planted, Apollos watered, but god gave the increase. 6.


So then, neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither he 7.
that wattereth, but God gave the increase.

I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which Romans 16. 7.
cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which is have learned,
avoid them.

Though that we, or an Augell from heaven, preach unto Gala. 1. 8.
you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits ^. John. 4. 1.
whether they are of God: for many false prophets are gone out into the world.

Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine ^. John. 1. 9.
of christ, has not God.

He that continues in the doctrine of christ, he has both 10.
the father, and the son, if there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him god speed,

For he that bids him god speed, is partaker of his evil 11.
deeds.

My brethren, have not the faith of our glorious lord Jesus Ian. ^. 2. 1.
christ, in respect of persons.

For if there come into your company, a man with a gold 2.
King, and in goodly apparel, and there come i^ also a poor man in vile
raiment.

And ye have respect to him that wears the gaie clothyng, 3.
and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place, and say unto the poor,
stand thou there: or sit here under my footestoole.

Are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judges 4.
of evil thoughts?

The Doctors.
AMong you, the right of God is weighed by Tertullian in Apologetico.
the judgment of men.

It is not lawful for us to flatter our selves, His prescriptio^ against the
heretics.
with any thing of our judgment and discretion, nor to choose that which any
man has brought in of his own head, we have the paterns of the Apostles for
us: which took nothing to bring in after their own pleasure, but faithfully
assigned to the Nations, the doctrine that they had received of Christ.

Whosoever speaks any thing more then is written, although Ignatius in his
Epistle to Hier.
he be worthy credit, although he fast, although he keep his virginity,
although he do miracles, although he prophicie, yet let him seem to thee a
woolfe in the flock of sheep.

After the Apostles of christ, notwithstanding some man Hierom. upon the. 86.
Psalm
be holy, notwithstanding he be eloquent, yet he wants authority.

I think that the ancient father Origene, in respect of his In his secon^
Tome to Tran quillinus.
learning, may be read some times, as Tertullian, Nouatus, Arnobius,
Appollinarius, and sundry other Ecclesiastical writers, as well Greeks, as
Latins: that in them we may take the good, and flee the contrary.

Truly, wheresoever I expound not the Scriptures, but In his second Tome
against Iouinia^
freely speak of my own self: let any man that list reprove me.

We must be partakers of other men's saiyngs, wholly after Easile.
the manner of the Bees: for they flee not a like unto all flowers: nor where
they sit, they croppe them quite away: But snatchyng so much as shall suffice
for their honey making, take their leave of the rest, even so we, if we be
wise, having got of other so much as is sound, and agreeable to truth,
will leap over the rest.

I would not ye should believe us: but read the sciptures: Ambrose in his
kooke of the incarnation of our Lord the. 3. chapter. Augustine in his. 2.
book of only Baptism.
I say not of myself, in the beginning was the word: but I hear it, (I make
it not) but I read it.

We may argue, and doubt of the writings of any Bishop, whosoever he be:
But we may not so do of the holy scripture.

We receive not the disputations or writings of any men, be they never so
catholic, or praise worthy, as we receive the canonical scriptures: But
that, saving the reverence due In his. 198. Epistle unto Fortunatianus.
unto them, we may well reprove or refuse some things in their writings, if
it happen we find they have otherwise thought, then the truth may bear
them. Such am I in the writings of others: and such would I wish others to
be in mine.

I reckon not, my brethren, that ye would have us so to In his. 19. Epistle to
Hierom.
read your books, as if they were written by the Apostles, or Prophets.

Other writers or Fathers I read in this sort, that be their learning or
holiness never so great, I will not think it true, because they thought so:
but because they are able to persuade me so, either by other Canonical
writers, or else by some like reason.

Hear this the lord says: hear not this Donatus says, In his. 4^.
Epistle.
Rogatus says, Vincentius says, Hilarious says, Ambrose says, Augustine
says, but hearken to this: the lord says.

In steed of all these learned Fathers, or rather above In his. 19. Epistle.
them all, Paul the Apostle comes to my mind, to him I run: to him, I
appeal from all manner writers that think otherwise.

The Judges or Doctors of the Church, as being men, In h^ (...) book and. 21.
Chap. against Cresconius.
are often deceived.

The very general councels are often corrected, the former by the later, as
often as by trial and experience the thing In his. 2. book and. 3. Chap.
against the Donatistes.
is opened, that before was shut.

This kind of writings must be read, not with necessity to believe each
thing, but with liberty to judge each thing.

We may not consent unto the Bishops. notwithstanding In his. 11. book and. 5.
Chap. against Faustus.
they be catholic, if they judge contrary to the holy Canonical scriptures.

Whether it be of christ or of his church, or of anythyng In the. 10. cap. of
his book, of the unity of the Church.
else whatsoever perteinyng either to our life, or to our faith, I will not
say, if I my self, but if an Angel from heaven shall teach us otherwise,
then we have received in the books of the law, and in the gospel, hold him
accursed. In his. 3. book and. 6. Chap. against the letters of Petilian. Upon
the. 103. Psalm.


They shall bring forth thy voice from the mids of stones. If that I should
say now unto you, believe me, for Tully said this Plato said this, Pithagoras
said this, which of you would not mock me? For I shall be a bird which
bring not forth my voice from the stone, what ought every one of you say unto
me? if any man bring any glad tidings besides it that ye have received,
accursed be he. Wherefore speak ye to me of Tully, Plato, and Virgill? Thou
haste before thee the stones of the mountains, bring forth thy voice out from
the mids of In his. 2. book and. 29. Chap. against Cresconius the grammarian.
the stones, for christ was the stone.

We offer no wrong to saint Ciprian, when we sever any his letters, or
writings, from the Canonical authority of the holy scriptures. In his
Proheme of his. 3. book of the Trinity.


Be not bound unto my writings, as unto the canonical scriptures: But when
thou shall find in the scriptures that which thou did not believe, believe
it without any doubtyng In his. 7. Epist.
or delaie, but when thou find that in my writings, which thou did not
know certainly before, except thou shall certainly understand it, do not
stiffely affirm it.

There is extante with us the aucthority of holy scripture, In his. 3. book
and. 11. Chap. of the Trinity.
from the which our mind ought not to swarne, nor leauyng the substanciall
ground of Gods word, run headlong on the perils of our own surmises, where
we have neither sense of body to rule us, nor apparent reasons of truth to
direct us.

It had been great folly for Saint Paul, having received Chrysostom upon
the. 1. Chap. to the Galath.
his doctrine from God himself: afterward to confer thereof with men.

I beseech you all, weigh not what this man, or that man In his. 3. Homily
upon the 2. to the Cor.
thinks: but touching al these things, search the scriptures.

We may not believe Paul himself, if he speak any thing of his own, or
o^ worldly reasons: But we must belei^ In his. 2. Homily upon the 2. Epistle
to Timoth.
the Apostle, bearyng about Christ speaking with in him*

For as much as the word it self, is come to us from heaven, Clemens
Alexa^drinus in his oration to the people.
we may not now any more seek unto the doctrine of man.

We are not bound upon the necessity of salvation, to believe, Thomas of
Aquincin quodlibet. 9. and last Article.
not only the Doctors of the church, as Hierome, or Augustine: but also,
neither the church it self.

We ought to give more credit to one private lay man, then to the whole
counsel, and to the Pope, if he bring better Abbas panormitane, de electio.
Chap. Significasti.
authority and more reason.

We ought rather believe the saying of any teacher, armed with the Canonical
scriptures, then the Popes determination. More credit is to be given to a man
that is singularly Gersone.
learned in the Scriptures, bringyng forth catholic authority, then to
the general counsels. Pycus Myrandula in the question where the Pope be above
the Counsel


Naie, we ought to believe a simple plain husbandeman, or a child, or an old
woman, rather then the Pope, and a thousand Bishops, if the Pope and the
Bishops speak against the gospel, and the others with the gospel.

Pope Pius the second says, we are bound to withstand Abbas Vspergensis.
pagina 443.
any man to the face, be it Peter, be it Paul, if he walk not to the truth
of the gospel.

The. xiiij. Chapter.
Faith only justifies.
ABraham believed the Lord, and he counted Gene ^. 6.
that to him for righteousness.

The just shall live by his faith. Habac. 2. 4.


Jesus turned him about, and seeing her, Mat. 9. 22.
did say, daughter be of good comfort: thy faith has made thee whole.

Be not afraid, believe only. Mark. 5. 36.


And he said to the woman, thy faith has saved thee, go Luke. 7. 50.
in peace.

To him also give all the prophets witness, that through Acts. 10. 43.
his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

And put no difference between us and them, after that by Acts. 15. 9.
faith he had purified their hearts.

There is no difference: for all have sinned, and are deprived Romans 3. 23.
of the glory of God.

And are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption 24.
that is in Christ Jesus.

Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith: 28.
without the works of the law.

But to him that works not, but believes in him that Chap. 4. 5.
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

We being justified by faith, we have peace toward god Chap. 5. 1.
through Jesus christ.

Know that a man is not justified by the works of the law, Galath. 2. 16.
but by the faith of Jesus christ: even we, I say, have believed in Jesus
christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus christ, and not by
the works of the law, because that by the works of the law, no flesh
shall be justified.

If righteousness be by the law, then christ died without a 21.
cause.

And that no man is justified by the law, in the sight of god, Chap. 3. 11.
it is evident: for the just shall live by faith.

The scripture has included all under sin, that the promise 22.
by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given to them that believe.

By grace, are ye saved through faith, and that not of your Ephe. 2. 8.
selves: it is the gift of God.

The Doctors.
Paul by these words: we suppose therefore that Origene in his 3. book and.
3. Chapter to the Romans.
man is justified by faith without the works of the law, affirms that the
justification: solius fidei, of faith only, is sufficient, so that any man
beleuyng only, can be justified, although no manner of work has been
fulfilled or dooen by him. And if we require an example, who was justified
(sola fide) by faith only without works, I suppose that the same thief does
suffice, who, when he was crucified with Christ, did cry unto him from the
cross: Lord Jesus, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Neither
any other good work of his is described or set forth unto us in the Gospels.
But for ( ha^ sola fide) this faith only. Jesus said unto him: Ueryly I say
unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

This thief then was justified by faith without the works of the law. For,
the lord did not upon this require what he had wrought before, neither did he
look what work he should do after he did believe, but being ready to enter
into Paradise, he took him for his waityng man: being justified by that
confession only.

The grace of God is given only of mercy, and favor: and Hesichius in his. 4.
book and 14. Chap. upon Leuiticus.
is embraced and received (sola fide) by only faith.

They not knowing that GOD justifies (sola fide) by faith only, and suppose
theimselues to be just by the works of the law, Hierome upon the x. Chap. to
the Romans.
which they never observed, they would not submit theimselues unto the
remission of sins, least they should seem to have been sinners.

It moves the Scribes that sin was forgeuen by man, Hyllary in the 9. Canon
upon the. 8. of Math.
for they did only behold man in christ Jesus, and that to be forgeuen of him,
which the law could not release (fides enim sola iuctificat) for, faith only
justifies.

That at length is a perfect and found rejoicing in God, Basile in his Homili
of humility.
when a man does not brag or boast of his own righteousness, he is justified
(sola fide) by faith only in christ.

They were justified freely: for they workyng nothing, nor Ambrose upon the. 4.
Chap. to the Romans.
making any recompense, they were justified (sola fide) by faith only, by the
gift of God.

He says that it was so decreed of God, that the law being at an end, the
grace of God should require (solam fidem) faith alone, or faith only unto
salvation.

He does strengthen or fense this, by the example of the Prophet, he says
that the same man has blessedfulnes: or that blessedfulnes pertained and
belongs to that man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, he
calls them blessed unto whom God had made this decree, that without labor,
and without any observation, they should (sola In the. 9. chap. of the Romans
August. in the 83. questions, question. 76. Glosla ordinaria.
fide) by faith only, be justified before God.

(Sola fides) faith only is laid or appointed unto salvation.

Abraham was justified by faith, without works, it is to be understood of
the works that did go before. For he was not righteous through the work
which he had done before, (sed sola fide) but by faith only. Chrysostom in
his. 7. Homily upon the Romans.


He shows the virtue and power of God, how that he did not only save, but
also justify, using no works unto it, but requiryng (fidem tantum) faith
only.

They said, who so staieth himself (sola fide) by faith only, In his Homily
upon the. 3. Chapter to the Galath.
is accursed: Contrariwise saint Paul proves, who so staieth him self (sola
fide) by faith only, is blessed.

Not by any works of ours, but (per solam fidem) by only Theodoretus in his.
7 book of the nature of man.
faith, we have gotten the mystical good things.

(Sola fides) only faith purifieth the hearts, and makes them meet to
receive the secrets and priuities of heavenly Erasmus upon the. 3. of John.
Philosophy.

Because no man is justified by the law. etc. Now he does Theophilacte upon
the. 3. Chap to the Galath.
plainly she we that (fidem ipsam, vel solam) faith it self, yea, even alone,
has power to justify.

The. xv. Chapter
Against men's merits and righteousness.
Say not thou in thy heart (after that the Deuteronomy. 9. 4.
Lord thy God has cast them out before thee) saying, for my righteousness the
lord has brought me in: to possess this land.

For thou enterest not to inherit their 5.
land for thy righteousness, or for thy upright heart: but for the wickedness of
those nations, the lord thy God does cast them out before thee. etc.

If he would dispute with him, he could not answer him Job. 9. 3.
one thing of a thousand.

If I would justify myself, mine own mouth shall condeinne 20.
me, if I would be perfect, he shall judge me wicked.

We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness Esaie. 64. 6.
is as filthy clowtes.

Likewise ye, when ye have done all those things which Luke. 17. 10.
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants: we have done that
which was our duty to do.

There is none righteous, no not one. Romans 3. 10.


There is none that does good, no not one. 12.


By the works of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his 20.
^ight.

If Abraham were justified by works, he has wherein to Romans 4. 2.
rejoice: but not with God.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal Romans 6. 23.
life through Jesus Christ our lord.

Even so then at this present time, is there a remnaunte Romans 11. 5.
through the election of grace.

And if it be of grace, it is now no more of works, or else 6.
were grace no more grace: but if it be of works, it is no more grace: or else
were work no more work.

Who has given to him first, and he shall be recompensed? 35.


For of him, and through him, and for him, are all things, 36.
to him be glory for ever, Amen.

I know nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby justified: 1. Cor. 4. 4.
but he that judges me is the lord.

Who separateth thee? And what have thou, that thou have 7.
not received? if thou have received it, why reioy^est thou, as though thou
had not received it?

By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your Ephe. 2. 8.
selves: it is the gift of God.

Not of works, lest any man should boaste himself. 9.


Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not 2. Timo. 1. 9.
according to our works: but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given to us through Jesus christ, before the world was.

Not by the works of righteousness which we had dooen: Titus. 3. ^.
but according to his mercy, he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and
the renuyng of the holy ghost.

That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs 7.
according to the hope of eternal life.

(Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy Psalm. 143. ^.
sight shall none that lives be justified.)

Herein is love, not that we loved God: but that he loved 1. John. 4. 10.
us, and sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins.

We love him, because he loved us first. 19.


I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water Reuela. 21. 6.
of life freely.

The Doctors.
IDOE scarsely believe that there can be any Origene in his 4. book. and. 4.
Chap.
work, that may of duty require a reward.

Say ye that ye be unprofitable servants. In his. 8. treatise upon Mat.
For not withstandyng we have dooen all things that are commanded, yet have
we done na good thing, for if our doings were good in deed, then were we not
unprofitable. But any good deed of ours is called good, not rightly, or duly,
but by abuse of speech.

For as much as all men are shut up and closed under In his. 9. book and.
12. Chap. upon the Romans
sin, now the salvation of man stands not in man's merits: but in Gods
mercies.

He that trusts not to his own deeds: nor hops to be Bafile upon the 32.
Psalm.
justified by his works, has the only hope of his salvation in the mercies
of God.

No man can be found pure and clean from all filth, no Upon the. 31. Psalm.
though he be but one day old.

This is our full and perfects rejoicing in God, when we In his book of
humility.
acknowledge that we are void of any our own righteousness, and are
Justified by only faith in Christ.

If we fast once, we think we have satisfied: if out of the Hilary upon the.
118. Psalm.
Barnes of our household store, we give somewhat to the poor, we believe we have
fulfilled the measure of righteousness.

But the Prophet hops all of God: and truiteth all of his mercy.

If we behold our own merits, we must be driven to Hierome upon the. 64.
Chap. of Esaie.
desperation.

In Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and Upon the. 3. Chap. to
the Ephesians.
liberty to come and trust, and affiaunce by the faith of him: not through our
righteousness, but through him, in whose name our sins be forgeuen.

Did not he give, that thou might fight a good fight? If August. in his 50.
book of Homilies, the 14. Homily.
he himself did not give, what was it, that thou say in another place: I
labored more then all they, yet not I, but the grace of God within me?
Behold, thou say I have ended my course. Did not he also give unto thee
that thou should finishe thy course? If he gave not unto thee that thou
should finishe thy course, what is it, that thou say in another place: It
lies not in the willer, nor in the runner, but in God that shows mercy? I
have kept the faith: I acknowledge and allow it, I confess and grant, that
thou have kept the faith.

But except the Lord does keep the City, he watches in vain that does keep
it.

Pardon me, O Apostle, I know nothing of thine own, but evil. Pardon us, O
Apostle, we say so, because thou have taught us. Therefore when he crowns thy
merits, he crowns nothing but his own gifts,

I say not unto the Lord: Despise not the works of my In his book upon. 117.
Psalm.
hands. I have sought the Lord with my hands, and I was not deceived. But I
do not praise or commend the works of my hands, for I am afraid least when
thou lokest upon them, thou find more sins then merits. This only I say,
this I pray, this I covet, despise not the works of thine hands, see thine
own work in me, and not mine: for, if thou see mine, thou do condemn,
if thou see thine, thou crownest. For, all the good works that I have, they
are of thee.

O God, he less loves thee, that loves any other thing In his book of
Confessions.
besides thee.

O lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, what In his. 49. sermon of
time.
means that, enter not into judgment with thy servant? Thus much it
means: stand not with me in judgment, requiryng of me all that thou haste
commanded, for if thou enter into judgment with me, thou shall find inee
guilty. I have need therefore, not of thy upright judgment, but of thy
mercy.

What be the merits of any men? For Christ that came In his. 52. Epistle to
Macedonius.
not with his due reward, but with his grace that was not due, found all men
sinners, being him self only free from sin, and a deliverer of sinners.

God crowns with favor and mercy, that shall be dooen In his book of the
spirit and the letter.
in the last judgment: whereas when the just King shall sit in his throne, to
render to every man according to his works, 33. Chapter.
who shall boaste that he is clean from sin? Or who shall boast that his
heart is chaste? Therefore it was needful to make mention of the pity and
mercy of our Lord.

If thou will be a stranger from the grace of God, boaste Upon the. 31. Psalm.
thou of thine own merits.

If God would deal with us according to that we have Upon the. 94. Psalm.
deserved, he should find nothing but that he might condemn.

Woe be to all our righteousness, if it be judged: mercy being In his. 9. book
of consessions.
taken away, or set a side.

God in the end of the world, will crown us with favor In his. 105. Epistle
to Sixtu^
and mercy.

For nothing thou shalt save them: what is meante by Of the words of the
Apostle the. 15. (...).
these words: for nothing thou shall save them? Thou find nothing in them
wherefore thou should save them: and yet thou sauest them, thou find
nothing wherefore thou should save them: but thou find much wherefore
thou should condemn them.

Deserved pain would all men into death, unless the undeserved In his 14.
book and. 1. Chap. of the city of god.
grace of God delivered some from it.

I acknowledge nothing of mine own, I shall be mindeful of thy mercies, of
thee I have whatsoever goodness I have, Upon the. 70. Psalm.
whatsoever evil I have, I have it of my self: thou have not rendered
punishment for my merits: but thou have given me freely thy grace.

Thou art nothing of thy self, call upon God, thy sins are thine own:
merits are of God, punishment is due unto thee, and when the reward shall
come, he will crown his own gifts, not thy merits.

He will not crown our merits in us, but his own gifts. Upon the. 98. Psalm.


God will not render to thee thy deserved pain, but will Upon the. 31. Psalm.
give to thee undeserved grace.

I do confess, that I am grieved that there is no place given In his book of
predestination of saints the 1. Chapter.
to so many and manifest aucthorities of Gods word, whereby the grace of God
is commended (which is utterly no grace) if it be given for our merits.

But that godly doctor (I mean the blessed Cyprian) was In the. 3. Chap. of
the same book.
not of this judgment: which he said that we ought to glory in nothing,
forasmuch as nothing is our own.

They which glory, should not glory in their own merits ^n the. 9. chap. of
the same book.
(which they perceive to be like unto the merits of them that are damned)
but should glory in the lord.

Because from him, and by him, and in him, are all things: Upon the. 31. Psalm
the. 2. exposition.
Therefore we have not given any thing unto him, and hold him as a debtour,
where is he our debtour: Even because he has promised. We say not unto God:
Lord, give again that thou have received, but give unto us, that thou have
promised.

See the goodness of God, it is not said, see thy merits and Chrysostom upon
the. 11. to the Romans.
thy labors: for it comes all whole of grace from above.

If thou be a bond slave, then fear the wippe: if thou be a Gregory
Nazyanzene in his book of holy Baptism.
hirelyng, then look only for thy reward. But over and beeside these, if
thou be a child, then reverence GOD as thy father. Do well, because it is
good to obey thy father, yea, and although thou shall have nothing else, yet
even this shall be thy reward, that thou have been obedient to thy father.

First of all thou must believe, that thou can not have remission Bernarde in
a sermon of the anunciation of the Virgin Marie.
of sins, but through pardon and forgiveness of God, and then next, that thou
can have no good work, except he give it thee, and last of all, that
everlasting life can not be deserved with any works, except it be given unto
thee also freely.

My merit, is the mercy of God, so long as God is not poor Upon the Psalm.
qui habitat.
of mercy, so long can not I be poor of merits. If his mercies be great,
then am I great in merits. This is the whole Upon the canticle the. 61.
Sermon.
merit of man, if he put his whole affiaunce in the lord.

What can all our righteousness be before God? shall it not In his. 1. sermon
upon the feast of all Saints.
according to the prophet, be counted as a filthy blooddy cloute? And if it be
streictly judged, shall not all our righteousness be sound unrighteousness, and
having less then it ought to have? What shall then become of our sins, if
our righteousness cannot answer by it self? Therefore criyng earnestly with
the prophet: enter not into judgment O lord, with thy servant, for in thy
sight no man living shall be justified, let us with all humility have our
recourse unto mercy, which alone is able to save our souls.

There is no means for grace to enter, where merit keeps In his. 67. Sermon
upon the Canticles.
place.

What haste thou, that thou have not received? Thou art In his book of
freewill and grace.
created, thou art healed, thou art saved. To thee I say: O thou man, which of
these have thou of thy self? Thou that was not, could not create: when thou
wast a sinner, thou could not justify: when thou wast dead, thou could
not rise up thy self again: beside other things, either are necessary for
them that healed, or laid up for them that shall be saved.

What worthy thing do we, that we may be found in waldensis in his book
agunst wicleffe.
the fellowship of the heavenly spirits? The Apostle says, I judge that the
afflictions of this time, are not worthy of that glory that shall be reueiled in
us: Therefore I take him to be the sounder divine, the faithfuller catholic,
and more agreeable to the holy scriptures, that utterly denies all such
kinds of merits.

We are justified freely without works, that may deserve D. (...) in his book
a detection of sundry foul errors, lies. etc. in folio. 357.
the grace that God gives.

The. xvj. Chapter.
What is not done of faith, is sin.
EIther make the Tree good, and his fruicte Matthew. 12. 33.
good: or else make the tree evil, and his fruicte evil: for the Tree is
known by the fruicte.

O generation of Uipers, how can ye 34.
speak good things, when ye are evil?

How shall they call on him, in whom Roma. 10. 14.
they have not believed? How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear, without a preacher?

Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Chap. 14. 23.


Without faith, it is impossible to please God. Hebre. 11. 6.


The Doctors.
WIthout the worshippyng of the true GOD, the Ambrose in his book of the
calling of the gentiles. 3. cap.
things that seem to be virtues, are sins.

That it is therefore sin, for that he (which is an infidel) does so
godly a work (as to cloth the naked) glories of his work, for he does not
August. in his 4. book and. 3. Chapter against Iulia^us.
by faith acknowledge either god or Christ, nor thinks that he has received
the same at his hand.

To avoid the nature of sin, it is not enough that a good thing be done: but
also that it be well and uprightly dooen. Shall we then say that an infidel
has dooen a good work, and wrought uprightly? if we grant not this, then
must we confess that he sinned: but if we grant it, then must we confess the
fruicte to be good, not withstandyng, an infidel without christ, is an evil
Tree? So shall we grant, that an evil Tree, can bring forth good fruict:
which yet Christ expressedly denies.

Cornelius when he prayed, was helped by his own faith, In his book against
the Donatistes.
and not by the faith of others that stood by.

A good intent makes the work good: but that intent is In his book upon the.
31. Psalm.
directed by faith: wherefore, consider not what a man does: but what he has
a regard unto, whilst he is in doing.

I praise the building of work: but I see the foundation of faith: I praise
the fruicte of good works: but I acknowledge the root in faith.

If Abraham (in offering up his son) had not done it in a true faith, it had
little or nothing profited him, whatsoever work that should have been.

Those which are said to be works before faith: although they seem never so
laudable to men, they are vain and nothing.

Where faith is not, good works is not: the intent makes a good work: but
faith directs that intent.

Many does glory of works. And thou shall find many Paganes do the same:
but they are not therefore made christistians: as though their good life were
sufficient to them, they say, I have done no murder, nor theft, nor have
taken any woman, he has to glory: but not with God.

Our religion does not discern the righteous from the unrighteous, In his. 3.
book and. 5. Chap. to Bonifacius.
by the law of works: but by the law of faith: without the which, yea,
those works that seem good works, are turned into sins.

Before works, must faith be first brought in, I can not Chrysostom of
faith, and the law of nature, and the holy ghost.
prove that he was a live, which works of righteousness with out faith. But I
can show you a faithful man, without works, and that he lived, and obtained
the kingdom of heaven, there has none had life without faith. But the thief
believed only, and was made righteous of the most merciful God.

And here lest thou say unto me, that he wanted time, wherein that he might
live justly and do good works: About this I will not contend and strive.

But this will I hold and say, that only faith by it self did save him.
But this is now asked, and is in hand to be entreated, that faith by it self
has saved: And that works by them selves, did never justify or make
righteous any workers. Will thou see plainly that works without faith does
not quicken and give life? Cornelius had a good testimony and report for his
alms and prayers: But he knew not christ: yet beleeuyng that there was a
God, and was not taught the word of God. And because the works was good and
wonderful, they pleased God, the rewarder and lover of goodness and truth (I
mean) the righteous judge, which is not partial, and regards not one more
the^ another, did see the good works (I grant) but dead and without life,
because they had not faith, he sends his divine Angel ministering, to get
rewards to his works, that in fightyng well, he may be rewarded for his
faith, which says unto him, Cornelius, Thy prayers has ascended. etc. And
therefore works could not save, for if he be saved and all his house, with
those things that Peter preached, Cornelius had not at that time salvation of
his works, till that faith offered a reward to be obtained unto his works.
etc. Therefore faith must shine before works, and works must be hand
maids, and waiters of faith, and follow her.

Not by virtues, we come to faith: but by faith, virtues Gregory in his ^9.
Hornily upon E^echiell.
come, faith is the entire whereby we come to good works: but not contrariwise,
that by good works we can come unto faith.

Cornelius could do no good, except he had believed first, for it is
written, it is impossible to please God without faith: Therefore he had
faith, that his prayers and alms could please, he comes to good work by
faith.

The. xvij. Chapter.
The certainetie of our faith and salvation
LO, though he slaie me, yet will I trust in Job. 1^* 15.
him, and I will reprove my ways in his sight.

He shall be my salvation also: for the Hipocrite 16.
shall not come before him.

I am sure that my redeemer lives, and Chap. 19. 25.
he shall stand the last on the earth.

And though after my skin, worms destroy this my 26.
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh.

Whom I myself shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and 27.
none other for me, though my raines are consumed within me.

In thee O Lord I trust: I will never be confounded. Psalm. 71. ^.


I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, John. 10. 28.
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.

My father which gave them me, is greater then all, and 29.
none is able to take them out of my fathers hand.

Now there is noe damnation to them that are in Christ Romans 8. 1.
Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that 16.
we are the children of God.

If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of 17.
God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that
we may also be glorified with him.

For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, 38.
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,

Nor height, nor deapth, nor any other creature, shall be 39*
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of Galath. 4. 5.
his son into our hearts, which cries, Abba, father.

Let us draw near with a true heart, in assurance of says. Hebre. 10. 22.


Let us keep the profession of our hope, without waueryng 23.
(for he is faithful that promised.)

Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and Chapter. 11. 1.
the evidence of things which are not seen.

Let him ask in faith, and waver not: for he that wauereth, is James. 1. 6.
like a wave of the Sea, toste of the wind, and carried away.

A waueryng minded man, is unstable in all his ways. 8.


The Doctors.
THat we might be certified that we be the children Tertullian in his. 5.
book against Marcion.
of God, he has sent the holy ghost into our hearts, criyng, Abba, father.

And dooest thou stagger and stand in doubt Cyprian is his 4. sermon of
mortality.
(of thy salvation)? that were as much as with the sin of unbelief, to
offend christ the master of beleuers, that were as much as being in the
Church, in the house of faith, to have no faith.

Paul boasts and presumes of the contempt of his Basile in his book of
humility.
own righteousness.

I will not glory, for that I am a just man: But for that I Ambrose of Jacob
and a blessed life.
am redeemed, therefore will I glory: not for that I am void of sin: but
that my sins are forgiven me: I will not glory, for that I have done good to
any man, nor for that any has done good unto me: But for that Christ's blood
was shed for me. Augustine in his. 28. sermon of the words of the Apostle.


Presume thou not of thine own working: but of the grace of god: for the
Apostle says: ye are saved by grace: here therefore is not presumtion: but
faith, to proclaim that thou haste received, it is no pride, it is devotion.
In his. 22. treatise upon John. In his. 11. book and. 7. Chap. of confessions.


It is not of my presumption: but of his promise, that I shall not come into
judgment.

What shall I render unto our Lord, for that I call to remembrance all these
my sins, and yet thereof my Soul is not afraied? Prosper, of the promises of
God, par. 16. Cap.


They unto whom the world is crucified, and are crucified unto the world,
wait for the day of judgment without fear.

In deed hope is, as it were the blood of faith, in which faith Clemens.
Alexandrino in Paelagogo in his. 1. book and. 6. Chap. Barnarde in his 61.
sermon upon (...) Canticles.
hope is contained, even as faith is contained in the Soul. And when hope is
gone, then is all the lively power of faith dissolved, as if the blood were
shed out of the body.

What safe reast or suertie can the weak Soul find, but in the wounds of
our savior? as he is mightier to save, so dwell I there with more safety.
etc. I have committed a great sin, my conscience is troubled: yet shall it
not be shaken down: because I will remember my Lords wounds: for he was
wounded for our sins. Antonius Marinarius in the Counsel of Trident the. 1.
Act. Anno. 1546.


If the Heaven should fall, if the earth should vanishe, if the whole world
should come down headlong, yet would I stand priest, and bold before god. If
an Angel from heaven would ^ell me otherwise, I would accurse him, O the
blessed trust and certainty of a christian heart.

The. xviij. Chapter.
It belongs only unto God to forgive sins.
Salvation belongs unto the lord: Psalm 3. 8.
and thy blessyng is upon thy people. Selah.

Show thy merueilous mercies: Psalm. 17. 7.
thou that art the savior of them that trust in thee.

Blessed is he whose wickedness is Psalm. 32. 1.
forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man: unto whom 2.
the Lord imputes not iniquity.

Thou O lord, forgauest the punishment of my sin. Selah. 5.


A man can by no means redeem his brother: he can not Psalm. 49. 7.
give his Ransom to GOD.

So precious is the redemption of their souls, and the continuance 8.
for ever.

Deliver me from blood, O God, which art the God of my Psalm. 51. 14.
salvation.

Help us God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: Psalm. 79. 9.
and deliver us, and be merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

O lord, unto us appertains open shame, because we have Daniel. 9. 8.
sinned against thee.

Yet compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our God: 9.
albeit we have rebelled against him.

I, even I, am he that puts away thine iniquities for Esaie. 43. 25.
mine own sake: and will not remember thy sins.

The whole seed of Israel shall be justified, and glory in Chap. 45. 29.
the Lord.

I, even I, am he that comfort you. Chap. 51. 12.


And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his Math. 1. 21.
name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.

Thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his Luke. 1. 76.
ways.

And to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the 77.
remission of their sins.

Through the tender mercy of our GOD, mine eyes have Chap. 2. 30.
seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared, before the face of all people. 31.


Who can forgive sins, but God only. Chap. 5. 21.


And that repentance and remission of sins, should be Chap. 22. 47.
preached in his name among all nations.

The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and John. 1. 29.
says, behold the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the sin of the world.

Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men Acts. 4. 12.
there is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be saved.

This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, 1. Timo. 1. 15.
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

The blood of Jesus christ his son, cleanses us from all sin. ^. John. 1. 7.


If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to 9.
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Little Children, I write unto you, because your sins are Chap. 2. 12.
forgiven you, for his names sake.

The Doctors.
IT is our part to remove the Stone from the Ambrose in his. 2. Book and 7.
Chap. of repentance.
Grave: but it is the lords work to raise up the dead: It is the lords
work to bring him from the Pit.

It is not the Ambassador: It is not the messenger: In his. 9. book and. 76.
Epist.
but the lord himself that has saved his people.

The Lord remains alone. For, no man can be partner with God in forgiving of
sins, this is Christ's only office, that has taken away the sins of the
world.

It parteineth only to God to forgive sins, and to give the Upon the. 2.
(...) the Cor. and 12 Chap.
holy ghost, he alone forgiueth sins, which alone died for our sins.

As my father has sent me, so I send you, when he had Augustine in his. 2.
book and 11. Chapter against the Epistle of Parmenianus.
said that, he breathed in them, and said: take ye the holy ghost, and if ye
forgive any men their sins they shall be forgiven. And if ye hold any man's
sins, they shall be holden. It were against us, if that we should be
compelled to grant that this thing were done of me^: but not through or by
men, if after that he said (and I send you) he had immediately said: if ye
forgive any his sins, they shall be forgiven: and if ye hold any man's
sins, they shall be holden. But seeing that it is put between (when he had
said this, he blewe on them, and said unto them: take ye the holy ghost:
and afterward it was brought in, that by them the remission and holdyng of
sins were done) it is sufficiently showed that they do it not: but the holy
ghost through them: as it is said in another place, ye are not they that
speak, but the holy ghost which In a sermon of the remission of sins, and
1. question. (...). Canon. Chap. vt euidenter.
is in you.

That the Lord might evidently show that sins be forgiven by the holy
ghost (whom he has given unto his faithful, and not by the merits of men)
he says in a certain place: take ye the holy ghost, and straight way
after he put that, he said this saying, if ye forgive any man his sins, they
are forgiven: that is, the holy ghost forgiueth, and not you.

Our lord has granted the office of Baptisyng unto many: Of the Ladders of
Paradise.
But the power and authority in Baptism to forgive sins, he has reserved
only to him self.

Hereof grew Schisms and divisions in the church, when In his book of faith
an^ vorkes the. 14. Chapter.
men say: we sanctify the unclean: we justify the wicked: we desire: we
obtain.

My brethren, we have Jesus Christ the righteous, our advocate In his. 1.
treatise upon the Epistle of S. John.
with the father; he is the propitiation or pardon for our sins: He that
held this, never made heresy: He that held this, never made Schism. For,
whereof do Schisms come? hereof they come, when men say, we are righteous: we
do make holy the unholy: we do justify the wicked: we do pray, we do
obtain.

In whose name are sins forgeuen? In the name of Augustine: In his. 2.
treatise upon the Epistle of John.
or of Donatus? Ye see what Augustine is, or what Donatus is? Neither in the
name of Paul, nor of Peter* but he calls them to the love of the name of
Jesus Christ.)

Of a suertie it belongs to the virtue of Christ, to deliver Chrysostom, in
his. 15. Homily upon the 5. of Matthew.
men from the filthiness of sins, but that they fall not again of fresh into
them, it does appertain unto the cure and labor of the Apostles.

The bondage of sin is most grievous, and from it only In his. 53. Homily
upon the ^. of Math.
God can deliver us: for no man has power to forgive sins save only God.

It is the office of God only to quicken within, and to take Cyril in his. 7.
book and. 23. Chap. upon the 11. of John.
away sin, which says by the Prophet, I am he that puts away your
iniquities and sins.

Doubtless, it belongs only unto GOD, to be able to loose In his. 12. book
and. 56. Chap.
men from sins, for, to what other man is it lawful to deliver and quite the
breakers of the law from sin, but to him that is the author of the Law.
etc. For, when they forgive, and hold, the spirit which dwells in them,
forgiueth, and holds.

Christ could not have been known any other way, but Theophilactus upon
the. 1. Chap. of Luke.
by forgiuyng the people their sins, for it is the office of God to forgive
sins.

For, to forgive sins pertains only unto God, therefore, In his book upon
the. 8. of Ihon.
every man that synneth, is the servant of sin, there ye are servants and
bondmen of sin, because ye are sinners. Moreover, because it was likely that
they shauld say, for all that we be under such bondage, yet we have
sacrifices, and Priests, which will make us clean of our sins. He says
that even they also be servants and bonds: for all men have sinned, and
wants the glory of God.

And your Priests, because even they be bonds, has not authority to forgive
other men their sins. The which thing Paul shows more plainly, saying:
the Priest has need to offer for him self, as well as for the people, for
he is also subdued and in danger of infirmity. The servant says, he abides
not in the house, that is, has no power to expende and pay forth, because he
is not the goodman of the house, that is the lord of the house, but the son
is the lord of the house, and abides in the house. He means by the house,
power: as in another place, he means by it, rule and dominion: saying: in my
fathers house, are many Mansions.

Therefore your Priests, because they are bonds and servants, has not
authority to forgive and release sin.

The word of God forgiueth sins, the priest is the judge, First distinction
verbum dei.
the Priest executes his office: But he exercises the right of no power (to
forgive sin.)

The. xix. Chapter.
Of Confession
WHo can understand his faults? cleanse me from Psalm. 19. 1^*
secret faults.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor Psalm. 2^. 7.
my rebellions: but according to thy kyndnesse remember thou me, even for thy
goodness sake, O Lord.

Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee: neither hid I Psalm. 32. 5.
mine iniquity: for I thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness
unto the Lord: and thou forgauest the punishementes of my sin. Selah.

Therefore I said, Lord have mercy upon me: heal my Psalm. 41. 4.
soul, for I have sinned against thee.

I know mine iniquities: and my sin is ever before me. Psalm. 51. 3.


He that hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he that confesses, Prouer.
^. 13.
and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

Be not ashamed to confess thy sins. Eccle. 4. 26.


And I prayed unto the lord my God, and made my confession, Daniell. 9. 4.
saying, oh lord God, which art great and fearful. etc.

We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and dooen 5.
wickedly. etc.

I will rise and go to my father, and say unto him, father, Luke. 15. 18.
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee.

And am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me 19.
as one of thy hired servants.

But the Publicane standing a far of, would not lift up Chap. 17. 13.
his eyes to heaven: but smote his breaste, saying, O GOD be merciful to me a
sinner.

And they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessyng their Math. 3. 6.
sins.

If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive 1. John. i. ix.
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one James. v. xvi.
for another, that ye may be healed.

The Doctors.
PEter mourned and wept, he prayed nothing Ambrose in his. 4. 6. sermon of
Peter's repentance.
with his mouth, I find that he wept, I find not what he said, I read of
his tears, but I read not of his satisfaction.

Therefore Peter used not speech: by the which he was deceived: by the which he
sinned: by the which he denied the faith: neither would he speak by that,
which was used to deny. So he would rather weep for his fault then speak.
And that he denied in voice, he confessed by tears unto God.

Go and show thee to a priest. etc. Who is the true priest, In his. 3. sermon
upon. Beati immaculati.
but he that is a Priest for ever? after the order of Melchi^idech.

Thou must needs humble thy self, and desire many to entreat for thee. Let
the Church thy mother weep for thee, In his. ^ book and. x. Chap. of
repentance.
and let her wash thine offenses with her tears.

How know they when they hear me speak of my self, Augustine in his. x.
book. 3. Chapter of Confessions.
whether I say truth or not,

We speak in your ears: but how know we, what is wrought in your hearts?
how be it, whatsoever is wrought within you, it is wrought, not by us, but by
God. God therefore Upon the. 101. Psalm.
has looked forth, to loose the children of them that were appointed to death.

What have I to do with men, that they should hear my In his. x. book of
Confessions and third Cap.
confessions, as though they should heal all my viseases? here is a curious
and a busy kind of men, to know an other man's life, and a slow sort to
amend their own, wherefore seek they to hear of me what man I am, which
will not hear what they be.

All evil vices ought to be far away from us whiles In his book of
wholesome teaching.
Christ will be our heritage. Therefore, because that we be uncertain of such
things, let us fall down lowly in the sight of our holy father, and let us
bring forth our sins roundly at once, that our heavenly father may take
them away. And when we have confessed us, let us not justify our selves in
our prayer, lest we go away condemned as the Pharesie did. Let us remember the
Publicane, and let us pray so that we may deserve to get forgiveness of our
sins, let the criyng of our heart beat and ascend unto the ears of
almighty god, for with a pure mind he will be pleased in the time of prayer.

Uerely I say unto you, that what so ever ye shall bind upon In his. xvi.
sermon of the words of the Lord, upon Math.
earth, it shall be bound also in heaven: and what soever ye shall loose upon
earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Thou haste begone to take thy brother as a
publicane, thou bindest him in earth, but take heed thou bind him justly,
for justice breaks unjust bonds: but when thou do amend him, and agreest
with thy brother, thou have loosed him in earth, and when thou haste loosed him
in earth, he is also loosed in heaven.

Hereof grow Schisms and deuisions in the Church, In his book of faith and
works the. 14. Chapi^*
when men say, we sanctify the unclean: we justify the wicked: we desire:
we obtain.

Do penance, such as is dooen in the Church, that the In his book of ^0.
Homilies the. 49. Homily.
Church may pray for you: Job says, I was not ashamed in the sight of all
the people, to confess my sins: Therefore god would that Theodosius should
do penance, even in the presence of all the people, ye wives suffer not your
husbands to live in fornication, come before the congregation, and cry
against them.

He that has offended, comes forth into the mids of Origene upon the. 37.
Psalm.
the people, and makes his confession.

To thee shall I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. etc. Hierome upon
the. 16. of Math.
This place, the Bishops and priests not understanding, take unto them some
part of the proud looks of the Pharisees: thinkyng themselves able either to
condemn the innocent, or to absolve the guilty, whereas in deed, it is not
the absolution of the Priest: but the life of the sinner, that is weighed
before God.

The Bishops, or Priests, neither binds the innocent, nor loose the guilty:
But according to his office, when he has heard the diversity of sins, he
knows who ought to be bound, who ought to be loosed.

I will thee not to confess thy sins unto the Priest Chrysostom in his. 2.
Homily upon the 50. Psalm.
that is thy fellow servant: confess them unto God that may heal them.

Here is a place of medicine, and not of judgment: renderyng In his. 9. Homily
of repentance.
not punishment, but remission of sins, open thine offenses to God only.

I say not unto thee, that thou should bewraie thy self In his. 3. Homily
upon the 12. to the Hebrews.
abroad openly, neither yet accuse thy self before other. But I will that
thou obeie the Prophet, which says: show unto the Lord thy way (that is,
thy manner of living) therefore confess thy sins before God, confess thy
sins before the true judge with prayer, for the wrong that thou haste dooen,
not with thy tongue, but with the memory of thy conscience.

And then at the last, believe, that thou may get mercy: if thou have them
continually in thy mind, thou shalt never keep any evil in thy heart
against thy neighbor.

It is not now necessary to confess, other being present In a Sermon of
conf^^^ion and repentance.
which might hear our confessions, let the seeking out of thy sins be in thy
thought: let this judgment be without the presence of any body: let only God
see the making of thy confession. God which does not vpbraide thee for thy
sins, and cast them in thy teeth, but loses them for thy confession.

Confess thy sins that thou be cleansed of them, if thou In his. 2. Homily
upon the 50. Psalm.
be ashamed to tell any man thy sins, tell them daily in thy soul: I say
not unto thee that thou should confess them to thy fellow servant, that
he might rebuke thee for them, tell thy sins unto God which heals them. And
if thou do not tell them, is God ignorant of them? will he know them of thee?
when thou did them, he was by, when thou will hide them, he knows. Thou
art not ashamed to sin, and yet art thou ashamed to confess thy sins?
tell them in this life, that thou may have reaste in the life to come.

I desire and pray you most dear brethren, confess you In his. 5. Homily of
the incomprehensible nature of God.
often unto the immortal God, and after that ye have reckened* up your sins,
ask forgiveness, and that the godhead will be merciful. I do not lead thee
into the common Hall of thy fellow servant, I compelle thee not to open thy
trespasses unto men, rehearse thy conscience before God, declare and open thy
self, show thy wounds unto the most excellent physician, and ask of him a
medicine, show unto him that will vpbraide thee of nothing, but will most
gently heal thee.

Beware thou tell any man thy sins, least he cast them In his. 4. Sermon of
Lazarus.
in thy teeth, and revile thee for them: Neither do thou confess thee unto
thy fellow servant that he might tell thy faults abroad, but to him
which is the lord and master, which also cares for thee, to him that is
kind and gentle, and thou show thy wounds unto him, which is a Physician.

God will that thou should tell, not that thou should be punished, but be
released and justified.

They that have offended fall down flat, with weepyng and Sozomenus in his 7.
book. and 16. Chapter.
lamentations, to the ground, the Bishop comes to him with tears, and
himself likewise falls down: And the whole multitude of the church is
powered over and over with tears.

Uerely I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind upon Theophilacte upon the.
18. Chap. of Math.
earth. etc. If thou when thou have a displeasure done unto thee: take him
that has done thee the displeasure and wrong, as a Publicane and an heathen
man, he shall even so be in Heaven. But if thou will loose him, that is to
say, if thou will forgive him, he shall be forgiven also in heaven. For, not
only those things be loosed which the Priests loose: but whatsoever things
we (when we be hurt and have wrong done unto us) loose or bind, are also
loosed and bound.

It appears that in the time of S. Hierome (which was Erasmus in his brief
exposition upon the Epitaphe of ^ybiola.
400. years after Christ) secret confession of sins, was not yet ordained:
which notwithstanding, was afterward holsomly, and profitably appointed by
the Church, so that it be well used, as well by the Priests, as by the people.
But herein certain Deuines, not considering advisedly what they say, are
much deceived: For, whatsoever the ancient fathers write of general and open
confession, they wreast and draw the same to this privy and secret kind,
which is far of an Of Penance the. 1. distinction, Conuer^mini.
other sort.

Peter Lo^bard 4. sentence. and 18. distinction, Ne^ ideo.
God has given to Priests, power to bind and to loose, that is to say, to
declare unto men, that the penitentes be either bound or loosed. Peter
Lo^barde. 4. Sentence 17. distinction Quid ergo.


The sinner is made clean, not by judgment of the Priests: but by the
abundaunce of the heavenly grace.

We may safely say, that without confession of the mouth, Beatus Rhenan^ upon
the argument of Tertullians book of repentance.
and absolution of the outward pain, sins be forgiven by the contrition and
humility of the heart.

Tertullian of this privy confession of sins, says nothing: neither do we
read that the same kind of privy confession in old times was ever
commanded.

Before we open our mouth unto the Priest, that is to Gratian of penance.
1. distinction, conuertimini.
^ais, before we make confession of our sins, the leprosy of our sin is
made clean.

Confession was appointed by some tradition of the universal In the Gloss of
repentance in the. 5. distinc^, i^ penitentia.
Church, then by any authority or commandment of the new or old
testament.

Perhaps then in the time of saint Ambrose (which was 400. years after
Christ) the manner of confession that now is used, was not appoincted. In the
Gloss* the. 1. distinction. De penitentia.


In the Church now at this day, the Bishops and Ministers has authority
to discern between good and bad, that those whom they see humble to confess
and weep for their Haymo in his Homily upon the feast of Peter and Paul*
sins, they may loose them from their sins: Those whom they see to remain
and abide in their sins, they may send them away bound: because in the
sight of God almighty, they are bound, notwithstanding they have not power, of
them that be no Lepers, that is to say, to make the righteous leperous
sinners: or else should make of sinners righteous men* without confessyng and
repentyng their sins.

Whatsoever thou bind on earth. etc. That is, by thy sentence in earth, I
shall confirm it in heaven. The bishops binds men when he separateth them
from the society of the Church, and keep him from receiuyng the body and
blood of christ: He loses them when as after repentance made, receives him
again into the fellowship of the congregation, and admit him to the Lords
table.

The. xx. Chapter.
The Apostles received the Keys as far forth as Peter, and are equal with
him in authority.
VErelie, verelie, I say unto you, what soever ye Math. 1^. 1^*
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and what ye loose in earth, shall
be loosed in heaven.

And he said unto them, go ye into all the Mark. 14. 1^*
world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

And there arose a strife among them, which of them should Luke. 22. 24.
seem to be the greatest.

The Kings of the Gentiles, reign over them, and they 25.
that bear rule over them, are called gracious lords.

But ye shall not be so: but let the greatest among you, be as 26.
the least: and the chifest, as he that serves.

Whosoeuers sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto John. 20. 23.
them: and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Math. 16. 18.
Church: and the gates of Hell shall not overcome it.

Feed the flock of God. etc. 1. Peter. 5. 2.


Not as though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but 3.
that ye may be ensamples to the flock.

To thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. etc

The Doctors.
THis saying, to thee I will give the Keys of the Origene in his 1. treatise
upon Matthew.
kingdom of heaven, is common to the reast of the Apostles: and the words that
follow, as spoken unto Peter, are common unto all.

Shall we dare to say, that the Gates of Hell shall not overcome only Peter?
And that the same gates shall prevail against all other the Apostles.

If we speak the same, that Peter spoke, we are made Peter, and unto us it
shall be said, thou art Peter. For he^ is the Rock, that is the disciple of
Christ.

If thou think that the whole Church was builded only upon Peter: what will thou then say of John the son of Thunder, and of every of the Apostles?

And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Cyprian of the
simplicity of Prelates.
etc. In the person of one man, the Lord did give the keys unto all the
Apostles, for to signify the unity of them all. For, truly the other
Apostles were even the same that Peter was, they were endued with like
fellowship of honor and power. But he did begin with unity, that is to say,
with one, that thereby it might be signified that there is but one church of
Christ.

Christ gave to all his Apostles, like and equal power and authority.

Notwithstanding we be many shepheardes, yet we feed In his. 3. book and. 13.
Epist.
but one flock: And we are all bound to gather up, and to nourishe all the
sheep, that Christ has won with his blood and passion.

Peter neither revenged him self, nor took any thing To (...)*
proudly upon him, as to say, that he had the primacie, or that others that
were but Nouices, and aftercommers ought to be obedient unto him.

Our lord said unto Peter, feed my sheep, which sheep Ambrose of the
dignity of Priesthood. 2. Chap.
and flock not only Peter then received, but he receives the same together
with us: And all we have received the same together with him.

Ye will say: the Church is founded upon Peter, notwithstanding, Hierom in
his 1. book against Iouinianus.
in another place the same thing is done upon all the Apostles: And all receive
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the Church is founded
equally upon them all.

Let Bishops understand, that they are above the Priests Upon the Eipistle to
Titus the. 1. Chap.
rather of custom, then of any truth or right of Christ's institution: And
that they ought to rule the Church altogether.

What does a Bishop, saving only the orderyng of Ministers, To Euagrius.
but a Priest may do the same? Neither may we think that the Church of
Rome is one, and the Church of all the world beside another* France, England,
Aphrica, Persia, Leuante, India, and all the barbarous nations, worship one
Christ, and keep one rule of the truth. If we seek for authority, the
whole world is greater then the City of Rome, whersoeuer there be a Bishop,
be it at Eugubium, be it at Rome, be it at Constantinople, be it at Rhegium,
be it at Alexandria, be it at Tanaies, they are all of one worthiness, they are
all of one Bishopprike. The power of the richesse, and the baseness of poverty
makes not a Bishop either higher or ^wer, for they are all the Apostles
successors, what bring you me the custom of Rome, being but one City?

The Lord shall take away the name of vain glory, and Upon the Prophet
Sophony the. 1. Chap.
of fained wondryng which are in the Church: yea, he shall take away both the
names of those priests and the Priests withal, which vaunt theimselues in
the dignity of Bishopprike and Priesthood, but not in labor.

And to thee shall I give the keys of heaven. etc. The Bishops Upon the 1^.
Chap. o^* ^ath.
and Priests not understanding this place, have taken unto them some thing of
the arrogant pride of the Pharisees, in so much that they believe that they
may condemn innocents, and quite and loose them that be guilty.

This is the only blessed Rock of faith, that Peter confessed Hylla. his in.
6. book of the Trinity.
with his mouth.

Christ said unto Peter, love thou me? feed my sheep. Basile in his book
of a solitary life the 23. Chapter.
And in like sort unto all Pastors and Doctors he gave the same power: A
token whereof is this, that all others bind and loose equally, as well as Peter.

When they were all asked, Peter alone does make an answer, Augustine in his.
124. treatise upon John.
and it is said unto him: and I will give thee the keys of heaven, although
he alone had received authority to bind and to loose, whereas he had spoken
that for them all, and received this (as bearyng in him self the person of
unity.

If there were not a mystery of the Church in Peter, the In his. 50. treatise
upon John.
Lord would not have said, I will give to thee the keys of heaven: if this
was said only to Peter, then the Church has them not, if the Church has
them, then when he received the keys, he signified the whole Church.

In the person of Peter the good Church is signified: In the person of
Judas, the cursed and evil Church is signified.

Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock which thou confessest: In his. 13. Sermon
upon Math. of the words the of Lord.
upon this Rock which thou acknowledgest, saying: thou art Christ the son of
the living God, I will build my church, that is, upon my self being the son
of the living God. I will buide my church. I will build thee upon me, and not
me upon thee: for, men willing to build upon men, said, I am of Paul, I am
of a Apollo, and I hold of Cephas side, which is Peter: But others that
would not build upon Peter, but upon the Rock, said, I hold of Christ.

The words of Christ, love thou me? feed my sheep: In his book of the
troubles of the Christians the 3. Chap.
when they are spoken unto Peter, they are spoken unto all Priests and
Ministers.

Therefore wretched men, while in Peter they understand In the same book. 31.
chap.
not Christ that is the Rock, and while they will not believe that the keys
of the kingdom of heaven are given unto the Church, they have quite lost the
keys out of their hands.

Did Christ pray but for Peter, and not for James and In his. 1. book of his
questions upon the old and new Testament the 75. question.
John? it is manifest and clear that all they were meante in Peter: because in
another place he says: O father, I pray for them whom thou haste given me:
And I will where that I am they may be with me.

The keie is the knowledge of the word of the scriptures, Chrysostom in his.
44. homily upon the 23. of Math.
whereby the Gate of the truth is opened unto men. And the keepers of the
keys, are the Ministers, unto whom charge is given to expound and declare the
Scriptures.

Paul had no manner of lack of Peter: nor stood in need Upon the Epistle to
the Gal. 2. Chapter
of his voice or allowance: but in honor was his fellow. For I will here say
no more.

Every Christian man that receives the word of Peter, In his. 33. Homily
upon Mathewe.
is made Peter's Chair: and saint Peter rests in him.

The office of a Bishop is a boue the office of a Priest after August in his
^9. Epistle.
the names of honor, which the custom of the Church has now obtained.

A priest and a Bishop are both one thing: And before that Hierome upon the
Epistle to Titus. 1. Chap.
by the enflamyng of the devil, parts were taken in religion, and these
words were uttered among the people: I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo, I
hold of Peter: the churches were governed by the common advise of the Priests.

The titles, and dignities, and rightes of honor given to Nicephorus i^ his
12. book and 13. Chapter.
the Bishop of Rome, and to the bishop of Constantinople, are one and equal.

This communication does gender and importe some higher Cyrill in his 12. book
upon John, the. 64* Chapter.
matter, for because Peter being enobled of Christ him self, with the name of
the Apostleship with other, did thrice deny Christ in the time of his
passion. Now by right is required of him, three confessions of his love: that
the three denialles might be counteruailed and recompensed with equal number of
confessyng. So that, that is committed in words, is cured with words:
Christ asked of him whether he loved him more then another? for he which
experted greater clemency of the lord toward him: ought of right to be
affected with greater love.

For although generally all the disciples were stricken with great fear, when
the Lord was betrayed: yet the fault of Peter was greater, which denied
Christ in so short a time. Because therefore he obtained remission of sins by
greater clemency of the Savior: great love of right is required of him. For
he to whom more is forgiven, ought more to love.

Therefore, by the three confessions of Peter, the crime of the three denials
was made void, and put away. And where Christ said, feed my sheep, renewed
that dignity of the Apostleship by human infirmity, he should seem to be
abased and made weak.

For this, as I judge, Peter received this commandment Bernarde of the
resurrection of our Lord, in his first Sermon.
of the lord, thrice to feed his flock, feed (says he) with thy mind:
feed with thy mouth: feed with thy work: feed thou with prayer of thy
mind: with exhortation of the word, and with example of exhibition.

Hierome seems to match all Bishops together, as if Erasmus in his brief
exposition upon the Epistle to Euagrius.
they were all equally the Apostles successors. And he thinks not any bishop
to be less then other, for that he is poorer, or greater then other, or for
that he is richer. For he makes the Bishop of Eugubium equal with the Bishop
of Rome. And farther, he thinks that a bishop is no better then any priest,
saving that the Bishop has authority to order Ministers.

I merueile of some men, which do wrest this place (upon In his Annotations
upon the 16. of Matthew.
this Rock I will build my Church) to the Bishop of Rome, since it is meant,
not upon Peter: but upon all christian people.

None of my predecessors Bishops of Rome, ever consented Gregory in his 4.
book. and 3^. and 36. Epistle.
to use this ungodly name. No Bishop of Rome ever took upon him this name of
singularity: we the Bishops of Rome, will not receive this honor being offered
unto us.

What answer will thou make unto Christ (meaning In the. 3^. Epistle of the
same book.
John the Bishop of Constantinople, the first usurper of that title) the head
of the universal church, when thou shall be examined at the last judgment,
that thus go about by the name of universal Bishop, to make all his
members subject unto thee?

Your holiness (that is, Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria) In the. ^0.
Epistle o^ ^e same book.
says thus unto me: as you have commanded: have away this word,
commaundyng from my hearing. I beseech you, I command you not: but that I
took to be the best, I thought good to she we you.

I speak it boldly, whosoever calls himself universal Bishop, or desires
so to be called, is in his pride the forerunner of Antichrist: because in his
pride he sets him self before others.

Behold even the title of your letter (meaning Eulogius) In his. 7. book and.
30. Epist.
ye have written the proud posie, naming me the universal Pope:
notwithstanding I have forbidden it, I beseech your holiness to do so no
more: for whatsoever is given unto any other above reason, the same is taken
from your selves.

The power of bindyng and loosyng, notwithstanding it Beda upon the 16. of
math. what do men say that I am, in his homily.
seem to be given only unto Peter: yet without all doubt we must
understand, that it was given also to the rest of the Apostles.

Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock which thou haste Upon the. 1. to the
Corin. the 1. Chapter.
confessed: upon this Rock which thou have known, saying, Thou art Christ
the son of the living God, will I build my church, that is to say, I will
build my church upon my self, being the son of God. I will build thee upon
me: and not me upon thee. For men being desirous to be builded upon men, did
say: I hold of Paul: some, I hold of Apollo: and other, I hold of Cephas
(the same is Peter) but other that would not be builded upon Peter, but upon
the Rock, did say: I hold of Christ.

We decree, that the Sea of Constantinople shall have The counsel of
constantinople. 2. Chap. 36.
Rightes and privileges equally with the Sea of old Rome.

Whosoever desires primacie in earth, in heaven he shall find confusion:
neither shall he be accoumpted among the servants Chrysostom, the. 40.
distinction. Quicunque.
of Christ, that will once entreat of primacie.

Because thou have professed me truly, to be the son of the living God:
upon this Rock, that is, upon me whom thou Haymo in his Homily upon the feast
of Peter and Paul.
confessest to be the son of the living God: I will build my church. To
thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of heaven: by the keys we must
understand, knowledge, and power, to discern between good and bad, that
those whom thou see to abide in the true faith, thou shalt judge them
worthy of Heaven* those whom thou see depart from the truth, thou shall
judge them worthy of hell fire.

This authority the Lord gave, not only unto Peter, but also to all the
Apostles: because Peter expressed the faith of all the Apostles, saying, thou
art christ, the son of the living God.

So that, that the Lord said unto Peter, he said unto al his Apostles, as it
appears in John, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. etc.

The Bishop of Rome him self may not be called the universal Gratian in the
99. distinction. Prime sedis.
Bishop.

Pope Bonifacius the third obtained of the Emperor Phocas (that Rome should
be called the head of all churches) but Platina of Bonifacius. 3.
with great contention and much a do.

It was decreed in the counsel of Nyce, that in Alexandria, Ruffinus in his. 1.
book and 6. Chap. of the history of the Church.
and in Rome, the old custom should be kept: that the Bishop of Alexandria
should rule over Egipte: And the Bishop of Rome, over the church of his
Suburbs.

That it may the more plainly appear that the Pope has Nylus in his book of
the supremicie of the Bishops of Rome.
no government over al other Bishops, read the sixth Canon of the council of
Nyce: there it is expressedly commanded, that the Bishop of Alexandria,
shall have the rule over certain churches: And the Bishop of Rome over
certain: And the Bishop of Antioche likewise over certain. And that it be
not lawful for any one of them to invade an others jurisdiction, if any one
not contented with his own, crave dominion over others, he ought to be called
a breaker of the customs, and also of the holy Canons.

Seeing there be certain countries appoincted out for the Bishop of Rome:
Certain for the Bishop of Alexandria* And certain for the Bishop of
Constantinople: they are now no more subject unto him, then he unto them.

The Pope is the greatest Bishop: although not in virtue, Codrus (...) in his.
1. Sermon.
yet at least in money.

The. xxj. Chapter.
Against praiyng for the dead.
WHile the child was yet a live, I fasted and 2. Sam. 12. 22.
wept: for I said, who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the
child may live?

But now being dead, wherefore should 23.
I now fast? can I bring him again any more? I shall go to him, but he shall
not return to me.

A man can by no means redeem his brother: he can not Psalm. 4^. 7.
give his ransom to God.

So precious is the redemption of their souls, and the continuance 8.
for ever.

The dead know nothing at all: neither have they any Eccle. 9. ^.
more reward: for their remembrance is forgotten.

And they have no more portion for ever, in all that is dooen 6.
under the Sun.

All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy 10.
power, for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave whither thou go.

And the foolish Uirgines said to the wise: give us of our Math. 25. ^.
Oil, for our Lamps are out.

But the wise answered saying, we fear least there will 9.
not be enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and bye
for your selves.

What shall it profit a man, though he should win the Mark. 8. 36.
whole world, if he loose his soul?

Or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul? 37.


Then Dives said, I pray thee therefore Father, that thou Luke. 16. 27. He
says not that they should pray, or cause Masses, or diriges to be done for him.
would send him to my Fathers house (for I have five brethren) that he may
testify unto them, least they also come into this place of torment.

I would (not brethren) have you ignoraunte concerning them which are a
sleep, that ye sorrow not even as other which have no hope. 1. These* 4. 13.


For if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen, even so 14.
them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Wherefore, comfort your selves one an other with these 18.
words.

The Doctors.
MY Dove, come unto the herbour of the Rock, Epiphanius in his. 2. book and 1.
Homily against herisies, the. 50. heresy, upon the Ballets or Canticles of
Solomon, 2.
that touches the wall, unto the benignity and goodness of Christ, and unto
the mercy of the lord. The same is the herbour of the Rock, the herbour of
faith, of hope, and of the truth touching the wall, or which touches the
wall, that is to say, a fore the gate be shut, a fore the King being within
the walls, will receive no more, after our departing hence, after the death
when the gates touch no more the wall, but are shut up, so that we be no more
able to amend: There is neither fasting, nor alms deeds, nor repentance,
nor righteousness, nor good, nor evil, that can either profit or hurt after
our death.

For there the Lazarus comes not unto the Rich, nor the Rich unto Lazarus:
the rich receives not the thing that he does ask, though he does ask it
with earnest prayers of the merciful Abraham, for the Garners and Sollors be
made fast, the time is accomplished and past, the battle is foughten, and
the place thereof empty and void, the Crowns are given: they that have
foughten are at rest, they that have not prevented or come before, are gone,
they that have not foughten, be no more there, and they that have been overcome
are driven out.

For all things are plainly consummated and ended, by and by after the
departing out of this world: but whiles they be yet all in the conflicte or
battle, there is a rising again, after the fall, there is yet hope, there is
a medicine and confession. And although these things be not in all men most
perfect, yet the salvation of other is not without hope.

Seeing that we know that our brethren which be delivered Ciprian in his
(...) of mortality.
out of this world, by the hand and calling of the lord, are not lost: but
sent before, we must not here take on us black gowns, since that they have
already there put on white garments, we must not give occasion unto the
Panymes, that they may deseruingly and by good right blame us, or lay to our
charge, that we do lament and be wail them as perished and lost: whom we do
affirm to live with God. And so reprove with the testimony of our heart and
breast the same faith, that we do profess and set forth by our communication
and talk.

When we be once departed out of this life, there is no more In his first
treatise against Demetriu^.
place of repentance, there is no more effect or workyng of satisfaction: life
is here either lost or won: everlasting salvation is here provided for, by
the due worshippyng of God, and the fruictes of faith.

Then he shall be without the fruicte of repentance, and grief of pain: in
vain shall weepyng be, and prayer shall be of no force nor effect.

Therefore all these things, that is to wit, the lookyng Augustine in his
first book. and. 12. Chap. of the City of God.
unto the Corpse, or caryng for it, the condition of the buriyng, and the pomp
of the Funerals, are rather for the comfort of the living, then for the aid
and help of the dead.

If costely and precious buriyng does profit the ungodly: vile buriyng or
none at all shall hurt and hinder the godly. The multitude of Servants did
in the sight of men, make excellent and gorgious Funeralles unto that rich man
that was all clothed in Purple: but the ministry of Angels made much more
excellent and noble Funeral in the sight of God, unto the poor seely creature
that was full of scabbes, pockes, and sores, for they did not lay him in a
Tomb of Marble, but did carry him into the bosom of Abraham.

We know that in this world, we can be helped one of a Hierome in his. 13.
question and. 2. Chap.
another, either with prayers, or with counsel: but after we be come once
before the judgment seat of Christ: neither Job, nor Daniell, nor Noah, be
able to pray for any body, but every man shall bear his own burden.

When thou do hear that our Lord did rise again naked, Chrysostom in
his. (...) Homily upon the 20. of John.
cease I pray thee, from the mad expense of the buriyng. What means this
superfluity and unprofitable dispense, which unto them that make it,
brings hurt, and no profit unto the dead, but rather harm?

We do bid and command, that they which depart The counsel of Toledo. 3.
cap. 22. 23. qu. 2. chap. Qui diui.
out of this life, by the divine calling of the Lord, be carried forth to their
Graves, only with Psalms. For, we do altogether forbid the same prayer of
funeralles, that they be wont to sing commonly for the dead.

He that prays for a Martyr: does wrong unto the Martyr. Sentence. 4.
distinction. 45. Neque.


The. xxij. Chapter.
Against Purgatory and Pardons.
COme and now let us reason together, says Esaie. 1. 18.
the Lord, though your sins were as Crimsin, they shall be made white as
Snow, though they were red like Scarlet, they shall be as Weell.

No man understands that the righteous Chap. 57. 1.
is taken away from the evil to come.

Peace shall come: they shall rest in their beds, every 2.
one that walks before him.

I, even I, am he that puts away thine iniquities, for Chap. 43. 25.
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Pourge me with Isope, and I shall be clean: wash me, Psalm. 51. 7.
and I shall be whiter then Snow.

As high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his Psalm. 103. 11.
mercy toward them that fear him.

As far as the East is from the Weast, so far has he removed 12.
our sins from us.

When the wicked turns away from his wickedness Ezechi. 1^. 27.
that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall
save his soul alive.

Because he considers, and turns away from all his 28.
transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, and shall not
die.

I will redeem them from the power of the Grave: I will Hosea. 13. 1^.
deliver them from death: O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy
destruction: repentance is hid from mine eyes.

The living know that they shall die, but the dead know Eccle. 9. 5.
nothing at all: neither have they any more reward, for their remembrance is
forgotten.

Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now 6.
perished, and they have no more portion for ever, in all that is done under
the Sun.

And if the Tree does fall toward the South, or toward Chap. 11. 3.
the North, in the place that the Tree falls, there shall it be.

The Souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and wisdom. 3. ^.
no torment shall touch them.

In the sight of the unwise they appeared to die, and their 2.
end was thought grievous.

And their departing from us, destruction, but they are in 3.
peace.

Defraude not thy self of the good day, and let not the portion Eccle. 14. 14.
of the good desires ouerpasse thee.

Give and take and sanctify thy soul, work thou righteousness 16.
before thy death, for in the hell there is no meat to find.

Command therefore that I may be dissolved out of this Toby. 3. 6.
distress, and go into the everlasting place.

Enter in at the streicte Gate: for it is the wide gate, and Math. 7. 13.
br^ade way that leads to destruction.

Because the Gate is streicte and the way narrow, that 14.
leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

He that blasphemeth against the holy ghost, shall never Mark. 3. 29.
have forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation.

And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous Math. 25. 46.
into life everlasting.

And being in Hell torments, he lift up his eyes, and saw Luke. 16. 23.
Abraham a far of, and Lazarus in his bosom.

Besides all this, between you and us there is a great 26.
Gulf set, so that they which would go from hence to you, can not, neither
can they come from thence to us.

And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me, when thou Chap. (...). 42.
come into thy kingdom.

Then Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day 43.
shalt thou be with me in Paradise.

And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said, father into 46.
thy hands I commend my spirit, and when he had thus said, he gave up the
ghost.

He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he John. 3. 1^.
that believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name
of the only begotten son of God.

He that believes in the son, has everlasting life, and 36.
he that obeys not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him.

Uerely verily, I say unto you, he that hears my words, Chap. 5. 24.
and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but has passed from death to life.

They shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection 29.
of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be Chap. 17. 24.
with me even where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou haste
given me: for thou love me before the foundation of the world.

And they stoned Stephen, who called on God, and said, lord Acts. 7. 59.
Jesus, receive my spirit.

Now there is no damnation to them that are in Christ Romans 8. 1.
Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

While we have therefore time, let us do good unto al men. Galath. 6. 10.


Christ is to me both in life and in death advantage. Philip. 1. 21.


Desiryng to be loosed and to be with Christ which is best 22.
of all.

I would not brethren, have you ignoraunte, concerning 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow not, even as other which have no
hope.

I have fought the good fight, and have finished my course, I 2. Timo. 4. 7.
have kept the faith.

From henceforth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, 8.
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearyng.

How much more the blood of Christ, which through the Hebre. 9. 14.
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, to pourge your
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God.

It is appoincted unto men, that they shall once die, and after 27.
that comes the judgment.

The blood of Jesus Christ his son, pourgeth us from all 1. John. 1. 7.
our sins.

I hard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write: Blessed Revel. 14. 13.
are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord, even so says the spirit: for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

The Doctors.
Always reason requires, that whiles we have Ignatius in hi^ 6. Epistle.
space and time, should amend and correct our faults, whiles in this life
we have occasion given of repentance, for it is truly said, after death
there is no place, nor time to confess our sins.

Thy blood, O Lord seeks no revenge: thy blood washes Cyprian of Christ's
passion.
our sins, and pardons our trespasses.

After we be once departed out of this life, there is no more In his first
treatise againt Demetrian.
place of repentance, there is no more effect or workyng of satisfaction,
life is here either lost or won: everlasting salvation is here provided for,
by the due worshippyng of God, and the fruictes of faith.

No man is let either by sins, or by years to come to the obteinyng of
salvation, as long as a man is yet abidyng or remainyng in this world, no
repentance is to late.

The Gate is open unto pardon and forgiveness, and they that seek the truth,
shall have an easy access unto it.

Although thou dooest at thy very departing out of this world, and going down
of this temporal life, pray unto god for thy sins, who is the true and
only God, calling upon him with a faithful confession and acknowledgyng both
of thine offenses, and of his truth: thus confessyng and believing, thou haste
free pardon and forgiveness, given and granted unto thee, of the mere
goodness and mercy of God. And in the very death, even as soon as thou have
given up thy ghost, thou passest unto immortality.

In that very moment of time: even when the soul is ready In his sermon of
the Lords Supper.
to depart away from the body, is even at the lips of the party to yield
up the spirit, the goodness of our most merciful God refuses not
repentance. And whatsoever is truly done, is never to late done.

He that here in this life, receives not remission of sins, Ambrose of good
death.
shall not be there (in the life to come.)

David as a Pilgrim and stranger, made haste unto the In the. 2. chap. of the
same book.
common country of all saints, desiryng for the filthy infectio^ of his
tariyng here, to have his sins forgiven unto him before he should go out of
this life. For he that does not receive here forgiveness of his sins, shall
not be there, but he shall not be there that cannot come unto life everlasting.
For, life everlasting is the remission and forgiveness of sins.

Him shall the day of the Lord find unprovided, whom Augustine in his. 80.
Epistle.
the last day of this life finds unprovided.

Until thou pay the last Farthyng: I merueile, but that In his first bok of
the L. Sermon in the mount.
he means that pain, which is called everlasting.

What means this is, and what sins these be, which so let a man from coming
unto the kingdom of God, that they In his. 21. book and. 27. Chap. of the
City of God.
may notwithstanding obtain pardon by the merits of holy friends, it is very
hard to find: and very dangerous to determine. Certainly I my self,
notwithstanding great study and travel taken in that behalf, could never
attain to the knowledge of it.

The souls of the godly being separated from their bodies, In his. 13. book
and* ^. Chap. of the city of god.
are in reaste: and the souls of the ungodly do suffer punishment, until
the bodies of those do rise again unto life everlasting, and the bodies of
those unto eternal death, which is also called the second death.

Let only the price of the blood of my lord, avail me unto In his book
upon (...). 25. Psalm.
the perfection of my delivery.

Whenever any man turns himself unto GOD, all In his. 59. Sermon of the*
words of the Lord.
things utterly are forgiven him, let no man be doubtefull, least any thing
happily be not forgiven.

Be ye folowers of me as I am of Christ? etc. he never dared to say, be ye
justified of me, as I am of Christ: for no man is In his. 1. book and. 14.
Chap. of remission of sins,
just, but Christ iustifiyng: whosoever is so bold to say, I do justify
thee, it follows also that he should say, I believe in thee, which ought to
be dooen to none of the holy ones: but to the holiest of all.

The first place the catholic faith, by Gods authority believes In his. 5.
book Hipognostichon.
to be the kingdom of heaven: from whence whosoever is not baptized, is
excluded. The second place, the same catholic faith believes to be hell,
where all Runnagates, and whosoever is without the faith of Christ, shall
taste everlasting punishment. As for any third place, we utterly know none,
neither shall we find in the holy Sciptures that there is any such. In his.
80. Epistle to Hesichius.


In what state his own last day shall find each man, in the same state the
last day of the world shall find him: for such as every man in the same day
shall die: even such in that day In the. 11. Homily in the Apocalips.
shall he be judged.

Who so in this life shall not please God, shall not in the life To Peter the
Deacon. 3. Cap. In his. 49. treatise upon John.
to come have repentance for his sins: but pardon in the sight of God he
shall not find, for although there shall be the prick of repentance, yet
there shall be no amendment of the will.

Every man shall die with his own cause, and rise again with his own cause.
In his. 18. Sermon of the words of the Apostle.


There be two habitations or dwelling places: the one in the fire everlasting:
and the other in the kingdom that never shall have end.

There is none other place to correct our manners and conditions, In his. 54.
Epistle to Macidonius.
but only in this life: for after this life, every man shall have that, that he
has purchased unto himself here in this world.

The victory is gotten in his name, that has taken man upon In his. x. book
and. xxii. chap. of the ^ie of God.
him, and has lived without sin, that in him, and through him, being the
Priest and the sacrifice, remission and forgiveness of sins should be
obtained and given, that is to say, by the mediator of GOD and man, that man
Jesus christ, by whom the purging of our sins being made, we are reconciled
unto god. For, men be not separated from God, but by sins, whereof the purging
is not made, or which are not purged in this life by our own virtue and
strength, but by the mercy of god: by his pardon and clemeneie, and not by our
own power. For, the same small virtue and strength, that is called ours, is
granted and given unto us by his goodness.

My brethren, we have Jesus Christ the righteous, our advocate In his. 1
treatise upon the Epistle of John
with the father, he is the propitiation or pardon for our sins, he that
held this, never made heresy: He that held this, never made Schism: For,
whereof do Schisms come? Hereof they come, when men say, we are righteous: we
do make holy the unholy: we do justify the wicked: we do pray, we do
obtain.

O vanity, sellyng vanity, to them that will hear vanity: In his book of
50. Homilies, the. 63. Homily.
and vain are they that will believe it.

Thou shalt not go thenee, until thou have paid the last farthyng: Christ's
meaning is, that he shall never come out: Hierom in his 1. book and. 1. Chap.
upon the lamentation of Ierimie.
for that he must ever more pay the last farthyng, whiles he suffers
everlasting punishment for his sins committed in this world.

He that does not obtain forgiveness of his sins whiles In his book upon
the. 95. of Esaie.
he yet lives in the body, does perish to God, and ceasseth to be, but he
does remain or abide to him self, unto everlasting torments.

The dead has no part in this world, nor in any work In his book upon the.
9. of Ecclesiastes.
under the Sun. etc. The dead can add nothing unto that, which they have
taken with them out of this life, for, they can neither do good, nor sin,
neither increase in virtue, nor vice.

A sinner yet living may be better, then a righteous man that is dead, if he
will follow his virtues. And wherefore? for they that be alive, may for fear
of death do yet good deeds: but they that be dead, are able to add nothing
unto that, which they have once borne away out of this life with them.

The thief on the Cross needed not so much as one day, to Chrysostom in
his. 27. Homily upon Genesis.
repent himself: what speak I of one day? No, he needed not one hour: So
great is the mercy of God toward us.

This thing only I require of a sinner (says God) that he In his. 44. homily
upon Genesis.
confess his sins, and leave the same: afterward I lay no more punishment
upon his sins.

Prepare thy works against the end, make thy self ready In his. 2. Sermon
of Lazarus.
to the way: If thou have taken away any thing from any man, restore it
again, and say with Zacheus: if I have taken away any thing from any man, I
do give it him again fourefolde: if thou be made an enemy to any man, be
reconciled unto him again, before ye come before the judge. Pay all thy
debtes here, that thou may without any fear or trouble of conscience see
that dreadful judgment seat: whiles we be yet here we have a godly hope:
but as soon as we be once departed hence, it lies no more in us for to
repent, nor for to wash away our sins.

This is a plain and a manifest doctrine of Lazarus and Justinius. Q. 60. to
Orthodosius.
Dives, by which is taught, that after the departing of the soul from the
body, men cannot by any means, or provisions, or by any policies, bring
profit or commodity to them.

It is most certain, that the souls of the righteous, being Gregory in his 4.
book of dialoges and. 25. Chapter.
loosed from the flesh, are received into the heavenly seats. And that the
very truth it self testifies, saying, where the Corpse is, there the Egles
will resort. Olimpiodo^us in the. 9. Chapter of Ecclesiastes.


In what place, or state soever a man shall be found when he dies: in the
same state and degree, he shall remain for ever. De. B. Philogonio.


I will stand bound in Gods behalf, if any of us forsake his sins, with
all his heart, and make true promise unto God, that he will no more return
unto them, that then God shall require nothing else unto satisfaction.

No Catholiqueman now doubts of purgatory: whereof Polidorus of the
inventions of things, in his. 8. book and. 1. ^hap.
notwithstanding, among the ancient fathers there is either no mention at all,
or very seldom, yea, even until this day the Grecians believe it not: for,
as long as there was no care for purgatory, no man sought after Pardons.

Pardons are not known unto us by the authority of Syluester Prierias in his
book against Luther
the Scriptures: but by the aucthority of the Church of Rome, and of the Popes,
which is greater then the authority of the Scriptures (O blasphemous mouth so
to say.)

Thus I answer: It cannot well appear from whom Roffensis in his book
against Luther.
Pardones first begun. Among the old Doctors, and Fathers of the Church,
there was either no talk at all, or very little talk of purgatory: but as
long as purgatory was not cared for, there was no man that sought for Pardons.
For the whole price of Pardons hangs of purgatory, take away purgatory, and
what shall we need of Pardons? Pardons began, when folk were a little
affraied with the pains of purgatory.

Of Pardons little may be said of certainty: for the Scripture John. Mayor
upon the. 4. Sent. and. 20. distinction Quest. 2.
expressly says nothing of them, touching that Christ said unto Peter: unto
thee will I give the keys. etc. We must understand this authority with a
corn of Salt: (therefore certain of the Popes Pardones that promise twenty
thousand years, are foolish, and superstitious.)

There is nothing in the Scriptures less opened, or Alphonsus de Castro, in
his 8. book of pardon.
whereof the old learned Fathers have less written, then Pardons* of Pardons
there is no mention.

In many of their books, there are contained so many days In the Triparte
work, that is joined with the Counsel of Lateran, the. 3. book and. 8. cap.
Bernarde of Clunyce in Sa^yra.
and years of Pardon, that good men marvel that they could ever come out: by
the consent, either of the Pope, or of any other good man.

Rome gives all things to them, that give all things: all things at Rome
will pass for money.

The deuisyng of Pardons, is a Godly guile, a hurtlesse deceipte, to the intent
that by a devout kind of error, the people may be drawn to Godliness.

Emonges us in Rome, Churches, Priests, Altars, Masses, Veselus a Schole
Doctor.
Crowns, Fire, Incense, Prayers, and Heaven are set to Baptista Mantuanus.
sale: yea, God himself among us may be had for money.

The Popes Canons seem not now, to guide men's lives: Budaeus in Pandec^s.
but if I may so say, they serve rather to make a bank and to get money.

Rome our mother is become an harlot, and for money, and Thomas Becket in his
Epistle to the. B. of Menze.
reward, lays her self to sale.

If Caput come of capio, which signifies to take: then may Rome well be
called so, which does nothing forsake.

If you decline capio capis, and to the grounds come. Her B. in. R.
Nets are lardge and can not miss, to catch both all and some.

The. xxiij. Chapter.
Against Aparitions of Souls, after they depart from the body.
IN the sweat of thy face shalt thou Genesis. 3. 19.
eat bread, till thou return to the earth: for out of it was thou taken,
because thou art duste, and to duste shall thou return.

Let none be found among you, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
that makes his son or his daughter, to go through the fire, or that uses
witchcrafte, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the fliyng of Fowls, or a
Sorcerer,

Or a Charmer, or that counsels with spirits, or a soothsaier, 11.
or that asks counsel at the dead.

Now being dead, wherefore should I fast, can I bring 1. Sam. 12. 23.
him again any more? I shall go to him: but he shall not return to me.

Are not^nry days few? let him cease, and leave of from Job. 10. 20.
me, that I may take a little comfort,

Before I go, and shall not return, even to the land of 21.
darkness and shadow of death.

So man sleeps and rises not, for he shall not wake again Chap. 14. 12.
nor be raised from his sleep, till the heaven be no more.

And he knows not if his son shall be honorable, neither 13.
shall he understand concerning them, whether they shall be of low degree.

They shall go down into the bottom of the Pit: surely Chap. 17. 19.
it shall lie together in the dust.

As the Cloud vanishes and goes away, so he that goes Chap. 7. 6.
down to the grave, shall come up no more.

He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his 10.
place know him any more.

The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so Psalm. 103. 15.
florishe ye.

For the wind goes over it, and it is gone, and the place 16.
thereof shall know it no more.

And when they shall say unto you, enquire at them that Esaie. 8. 19.
have a spirit of divination, and at the Southsaiers, which whisper and
murmr, should not a people enquire at their God? from the living to the dead?

To the law, and to the testimony. etc. 20.


A people that provoke me ever unto my face, that sacrifices Chap. 65. 3.
in Gardens, and burns incense upon Brickes.

Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the deserts. 4.
etc.

Our life is short and tedious: and in the death of a man Wisdom. 2. 1.
there is no recovery, neither was any known, that has returned from the
grave.

The Souls of the righteous are in the hands of GOD, Chap. 3. 1.
and no tormente shall touch them.

Take no heaviness to heart: drive it away and remember Eccle. 38. 20.
the last end.

Forget it not: for there is no turnyng again, thou shalt 21.
do him no good, but hurt thy self.

Seeing the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest, and 23.
comfort thy self again for him, when his spirit is departed from him.

But God said unto him, O fool, this night will they fetch Luke. 12. 20.
away thy soul from thee.

And he said, nay father Abraham, but if one come unto Chap. 16. 30.
them from the dead, they will amend their lives.

Then he said unto him, if they hear not Moses, and the 31.
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead
again.

And they stoned Stephen, who called on God and said, Lord Actos. 7. 59.
Jesus, receive my spirit.

And no marvel: for Satan himself is transformed into 2. Cor. 11. 14.
an Angel of light.

I would not, brethren have you ignorant, concerning 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow not, even as other which have no
hope.

And when he was come out of the Ship, there met him incontinently Mark. 5. 2.
out of Graves, a man which had an unclean spirit.

Who had his abiding among the graves, and no man could 3.
bind him, no not with chains.

The Doctors.
GOD forbid, that we should believe, that the soul Tertullian in his book of
the soul.
of any saint, much less of a Prophet, have been fetched up by the devil,
being taught that Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, much
more into a man of light: and that he shall also affirm himself to be God, and
work wonderful signs, for to subuerte even the very elect, if it were
possible.

But although the virtue of god, has called again certain souls into their
bodies, for to teach us that he might do it by his own right: It shall not
therefore be communicated, or granted unto the confidence and boldenes of
Magicians or Sorcerers, and unto the deceiptefulnesse of Dreams and liynges of
Poets: but when in the examples of the resurrection, the virtue or power of
God does bring again the very souls into their bodies. It is showed with a
whole and full truth, and which can be touched and handeled, that is a shape
or form of verity, or that it is a true, and an unfeigned shape or form: so
that thou may judge, that all fetchyng up, and appearyng of the dead,
without bodies, is mere illusion and deceiptefulnesse.

The spirit of Samuel, which the woman Sorcerer raised Augustine to
Symplician. 3. question.
up to Saul, was not the soul of Samuel, but the devil, which appeared in
Samuels likeness, for to deceive Saul.

You ought to know this, that every nation asks counsel Hierome upon the.
8. Chap. of Jeremy.
at their own Gods, and enquireth of the dead, for the health of the quick:
but God has given you the law for your help.

The Soul that is departed from the body, can not wander Chrysostom in his.
29. Homily upon the 8. of Math.
in this countries or regions. For, the souls of the righteous are in the
hands of God, and also the Souls of the children, for they have not sinned.
And that the Souls of sinners are straight ways after their departure, led
away, it is made manifest, by the rich man, and Lazarus.

But the lord does also say in another place: this day will they fetch
away again thy Soul from thee. Therefore the Soul, after that it is once
gone from the body, cannot wander here among us, and not without a good
cause, for, if they that go in a journey, if they chance to come into some
unknown countries, can not tell whither to go, except they have a guide: how
much more shall the soul being departed from the body, when she enters
into a life and way that is altogether new unto her, be uncertain and
ignorant, whether she may go, except she got a guide:

It may be proved by many places of Scripture, that the Souls of the
righteous men do not wander here after their death. For Stephen says: lord
receive my spirit: and Paul did desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ.
The Scripture also does say of the Patriarch, and he was laid to his fathers,
being dead in good age. And that the souls of sinners can not abide here,
neither hear the rich what he says, mark and weigh what he does ask and
not obtain. If the Souls of men might be conuersante here, he would have come
hymsef, as his desire was, and certify his brethren of the torments of Hell.

By the which place of the Scripture, this is also most manifest and plain,
that the souls, after the be gone out of their bodies, are led into a
certain place, from whence they come not again at their own will and
pleasure, but do tarry there for the dreadful day of judgment.

How shall they persuade me, or make me to believe that the souls of
unspotted men, do work with them? shall it be, because that thou have some
times hard them, that be possessed with deuilles, cry out and say, I am the
soul of such a one? but this saying does also proceed and come of the fraud
and deceiptefulnes of the Devil. For, it is not the soul of the head that
speaks such things: but the Devil does feign and counterfaict them, that
he may deceive and beguile them that hear.

These ought to be taken as old wives Fables, the words ofliers, and fraie
bugges of children: neither can the soul, being departed from the body, walk
in the earth.

That thou may also abundantly and fully know that In his. 4. Sermon of
Dives and Lazarus.
the doctrine of the scriptures, and of the Prophets, is of more weight and
authority, than if they that be raised again from death, should show any
thing: consider this with thy self, that whosoever is dead, is a servant: but
whatsoever the scripture does speak, the lord has spoken it. Therefore
though a dead man should rise again, or an Angel come down from heaven: we
must chiefly and above all things believe the Scriptures. For, the master of
the Angels, and the Lord, both of the living and of the dead, has made them.

And if god had known that the dead, being raised again* might have profited
the living: he that has done all things for our profit, would not have left
the same undone. And if it were, that the dead should often times rise again,
men would also despise the same, and set naught by it now adays.

Let us not seek to hear those of the dead, that the holy Scriptures do
teach us most plainly, least by the process of time, the devil should have
set forth pernicious doctrines, and also least the word of God, should have
come into contempt. For in steed of good spirits, the Devil would have
appeared for every trifle unto men, and would have trasformed himself into
the souls departed: for to bring every day new revelations, or he should
have made as though he had raised some of the dead by false and deceiptfull
iullusions, or he should have turned away some men from the true faith, which
would have made folk to believe, that they had been dead and raised up
again, and so he would have made them to say, whatsoever it had pleased him.

Whereby it should have come to pass, that the holy Scriptures should have
been utterly despised, and that men would only have given credit to fuche
reuelatious as we do see by experience now at this day And so men could not
have deserned or known the true revelations of God, from the revelations of
the Devil.

And therefore, God would not teach us by the dead, but by his holy Scriptures,
and by the ministry of living men: of whom also he had us to beware, that
they do not set forth unto us one thing for an other, and deceive us.

Let Iulianus show and prove, where the holy Apostles Syrill in his. 10.
book against Iulianus
have taught us, that we must lie about the Sepulchr^s or Graves, and seek
for the visions or appearinges of the dead, that is to say, dreams.

But he can not do it, for he is deceived and sedu^ed in it, yea, the good
man did not perceive nor understand that he did in this thing, rather
condemn the abominable superstition of the Greeks, then any superstition
that he can find in us. For, neither the Jews, nor we after them, following
the sacred and holy laws, be wont to enquire and seek for visions by
dreams, nor to take pleasure, as little infantes with sundry and diverse
appearinges: but contrariwise, we do hate them, that teach such things: for
the law of God speaks of them in Deuteronomy. 13. Chap. after this manner, if
there rise among you, a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, etc. We have then a
commandment to withdraw our selves from dreams: but these things are
pleasant and acceptable unto them that serve Deuilles, and seem unto them
both great and worthy to be observed with all diligence.

It is most certain, that when they gave themselves to serve Deuilles, then
they did sleep in the Graves, and went after dreams, and southsaiyng,
behauyng themselves after the manner of Sorcerers.

The rude ignoraunte people thinks, that men's souls Lactantius in his. 2.
book. and. 2. Chap. of his institutions.
walk about the Graves, and relics of their bodies.

Theophilacte upon the. 16. of Luke.
There be such now a days, which are wont to say: who has seen what is
done in Hell? who ever came to bring us word? But let them hear what Abraham
says: For if we do not believe the scriptures, we would not believe them,
neither that should come from hell. The Jews have well declared the same: which
because that they believed not the Scriptures, would in no wise believe them
that were raised again from the dead: but would have slain Lazarus, that was
raised again. And although many were raised again from death, after that
Christ was crucified: yet did they not let therefore to persecute most cruelly
the Apostles afterward.

We must not then seek after the dead, for to have instruction by them. For,
first and foremost, God does not by death separate the soul from the body,
for to suffer the spirits and souls of the dead to wander here upon earth:
but he makes this separation for to satisfy unto his ordinance, whereby he
has ordained and appointed, that this earthly body, which is of earth and
dust, should return into the earth, and into the dust whereof it was taken, and
that it should rest in the same, as in his bed, until that day, that he
shall make it to rise again, and that he shall fashion and shapen it a new,
by the resurrection and glorifiyng of the same, which he has promised unto
it: for as he has formed and fashioned it by creation: so has he determined
to shapen it again by resurrection.

And as he has appointed of the body, so has he ordained, that the soul and
the spirit that he has given unto man, and which is partaker of a spiritual
substance, should return unto him that has given it, and that it should go
up again unto the place, that is convenient and meet for his nature: As the
body goes down unto the place that it is partaker of.

Because of his nature and weight, until the Lord do come again, to unite
the soul with the body. And as a man might say, to join heaven with earth,
that is to say, the divine and heavenly part, with the human and earthly
part, by the resurrection, which is a new regeneration, and as it were a
second creation: as he did in the beginning, by the first creation, when he
did join the soul, which is a spiritual substance, with the body that is
made of earth.

If it had been profitable for the faith, that the dead had oftentimes appeared
unto the living, the Lord would have done it often. But now there is nothing
so profitable, as the diligent searchyng out of the scriptures. The Devil can
also counterfaict falsely and in out ward apperaunce, the resurrection of the
dead, for to seduce and deceive the ignoraunte and foolish, and for to sow
pernicious and deuillishe doctrines according to his malice.

But they can have no illusions that search the scriptures, as it behooves,
for they be the Candle, which if it shines and give light once, the thief is
taken and manifested. We must then believe the Scriptures, and not care for
the raisyng, or wandryng up again of the dead souls.

The. xxiiij. Chapter.
Christ is only our mediator and intercessour, to God the father.
COme unto me, all that are weary, and laden, Mat. 11. ^8.
and I will ease you.

And there was a voice from heaven, saying, Luke. 3. 22.
thou art my beloved son, in thee I am pleased.

Uerely, verily, I say unto you, he that enters John. 10. 1.
not in by the door into the sheepefolde, but climeth up an other way, he is
a thief and a robber.

I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, 9.
and shall go in and out, and find pasture.

Jesus said unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and Chap. 14. 6.
the life. No man comes unto the father but by me, verily, verily, I say
unto you: whatsoever ye shall ask the father in Chap. 16. 23.
my name, he will give it you.

If God be on our ^ide, who can be against us? Who spared Rom* ^ 33,
not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him
give us all things also?

Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea rather, 34.
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes
request and intercession for us.

Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be Chap. 10. 13.
saved.

Ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto 1. Cor. 1. 30.
us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

There is one God, and one mediator, between God and 1. Timo. 2. 5.
man, which is the man Christ Jesus.

This man, because he endures for ever, has an everlasting Hob. 7. 24.
Priesthood.

Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come 25
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives, to make intercession for them.

My Babes, these things write I unto you, that ye sin 1. John. 2. 1.
not: And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ
the just,

And he is the reconsiliation for our sins: and not for ours 2.
only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

The Doctors.
Christ is our mouth whereby we speak unto the father, Ambrose in his book of
Isaac and of the soul.
our eyes whereby we see the father, our right hand, whereby we offer our
selves unto the father, without whose intercession neither we, nor all the
Saints, have ought to do with God.

In his book upon the first Chap. to the Romans.
Men through shame, use accustomably every where this miserable excuse, why
they neglect to come unto God, saying, that by them we go unto God, as by the
noble men we come unto a King. Well said: is there any man so mad, or so
vnmyndefull of his health, to give unto a noble man the honor due unto the
king only? for that if any in such sort behave them selves, they are justly
condemned as guilty of treason. And shall these men not think them guilty,
which give the honor of the name of God unto a creature? and forsake their
Lord, do worship their fellow servants: as though there were any thing
greater then God, to whom a man might do service.

For therefore also do we go unto a King by Tribunes and noble men, because
the King is also a man, and knows not to whom to commit the public weal.
But to obtain Gods favor, from whom undoubtedly nothing is hidden (for he
knows what is meet for every man to have) we have no need of an Advocate,
or spokesman, but a devout mind. For, wheresoever such a one speaks unto
God, God will answer him.

We have all things in Christ, if thou desire to be cured of In his. 4. book
upon Luke.
thy wounds, he is thy Phisician: if thou be grieved with thy sins, he is
thy righteousness, if thou lack help, he is thy strength, if thou fear
death, he is thy life, if thou be in darkness, he is thy light, if thou will
go to heaven, he is thy way, if thou seek meat, he is thy nourishement.

He being such a man did not say, ye have an Advocate Augustine in his. 1.
treatise, upon the Epistle of John.
with the father: but if any do sin, we have an Advocate with the father,
he said not, ye have me for our Advocate: But brethren we have an Advocate
with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the satisfaction for our
sins.

He that has holden this, has committed no heresy: he that has holden
this, has committed no Schism.

He said not, ye have, neither ye have me, neither said he, ye have Christ:
but he put Christ, and not him self, and said, we have, not ye have, he had
rather put himself in the number of sinners, that he might have Christ his
Advocate, then put himself an Advocate: whereas Christ should be the Advocate.
And to be found among the proud men, which shall be damned. In his enchiridion
unto Laurence the. 3 2. Chap.


We are reconciled and brought in favor again with god, through Christ which
is the mediator, that of enemies we might be made sons.

Neither should we be delivered through him, as only the In the. 11 9. Cha^ ^
the same book.
mediator of God and man Christ Jesus, if he were not also GOD. But when Adam
was made, that is to wit, a right man, he needed no mediator: but when as
sins did separate and sunder mankind, far from God, we must be brought in
favor again with GOD, by a mediator, and a mean, which was only borne
without sin, lived and was slain, unto the risyng again of the flesh, and
to everlasting life.

If thou desire for the priest, he is above in heaven, where Upon the. 9 4.
Psalm.
he makes intercession for thee, which upon the earth died for thee.

We are not commanded to go unto the creatures that In his. 3. book of
free will.
we may be blessed, or obtain blesfulnes: but unto the creator, of whom, if
we be otherwise persuaded then the matter is, or then it behooves, we are
deceived, with a most pernicious error.

Christian men do pray one for another in their prayers: In his second book
and eight Chap. against Parmenian.
but he for whom no man does pray: but he for all men, is the only and true
mediator.

Is he far from thee, that thou need to go to some place? Chrysostom in
his. 12. Homily of the woman of Canane.
God is not shut up in a place, but is always at hand, and he that is not
included and sparred up in a place, is holden with faith. For if thou will
ask a man any thing, thou dooest enquire what he does, and he hearing,
pretends sleep, or is not at leisure, or surely the servant will not
answer. But with God thou need none of all these: but whersoeuer thou
art, or call for help of him, he will hear thee. Thou need no Porter,
no Mediator or goer between, or servant: but say, God have mercy upon me.

Tell me O woman, since that thou art a wicked and a sinful woman, how
durst thou go unto him? I know (says she) what I do: behold the wisdom
of the woman, she prays not unto James, she entreats not John, she goes
not unto Peter, she did not getter her self to the company of the Apostles,
she sought for no Mediator: but for all these things, she took repentance for
her companion, which did fulfill the rowme and place of an Advocate, and so
she did go to the highest fountain.

We have no need of Advocates with God, nor of any runnyng In his ^mily of
going forward of the Gospel.
or gaddyng about, for to speak fair unto other. For, although thou be
alone, and without any Advocate, and pray unto God by thy self, thou shall
obtain thy petitions. For, God does not so easily hear us, when other prays
for us, as when we pray our selves, although we be full of much evil, and
unrighteousness.

Thou see how that Christ denied and put her back, when other men prayed
for her: but as soon as she praiyng, cried for her bone, and gift, he
granted it.

Christ is made unto thee all things, he is thy table, thy In his. 2. Homily
to the people of Antioche.
clothyng, thy house, thy head, thy root, and thy mouth.

Cyrill in his 11. book. upon John.
He put to it (in my name) to show that he was a Mediator, and a graunter,
and a giver with God: for there is none that can come unto the father, but
through the son: by who^ we have leadyng to the father in spirit, as it is
written, therefore he calls himself the haven, and the way, for he says,
no man comes unto the father, but through me.

We must pray in the name of our Savior, if we will be In his kooke upon the.
1. of Esaie.
hard of the father.

The son of God prays for us, prays in us, and is prayed Beda upon the
Epistle to the Ephe. 2. Chap.
of us: he prays for us as an Advocate, and everlasting priest, he prays in
us, as our head, he is prayed of us, as our God.

The. xxv. Chapter.
Against praiyng to Saints.
THy righteousness is like the mighty Mountains, Psalm. 36. 6.
thy judgments, are like a great deep thou Lord do save man, and beast.

The lord is near unto all that call upon him: Psalm. 145. 18.
yea, to all that call upon him faithfully.

Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, Psalm. 146. 3.
for there is no help in them.

Give us help against trouble O Lord, for vain is the Psalm. 60. 11.
help of man.

The dead praise not the lord, neither any that goodowne Psalm. 115. 17.
into the place of silence.

Doubtless thou art our father: Though Abraham be ignorant Esaie. (...). 16.
of us, and Israel know us not: yet thou O Lord art our father, and our
Redeemer: thy name is for ever.

Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine Jeremy. 15. 1.
affection could not be toward this people.

Thus says the Lord cursed be the man, that trusts in Chap. 17. 5.
man: and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord.

Though these three men, Noah, Daniell, and Job, were among Ezechi. 14. 14.
them, they should deliver but their own souls, by their righteousness, says
the Lord.

Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egipte, and Hosea. 1^. 4.
thou shall know no God but me, for there is no Savior besides me.

O my Lord, thou only art our King: help me desolate Esther. 14. 3.
woman, which have no helper but thee.

Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will Math. 11. 2^.
^ase you.

Jesus said, I am the way, and the truth, and the life, no John. 14. 6.
man comes unto the father, but by me.

Neither is there salvation in any other: for among men Acts. 4. 12.
there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must he saved.

How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Roma. 10. 4.


If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which James. 1. 5.
gives to all men liberally.

Every good giuyng, and every perfect gift, is from above, 17.
and comes down from the father of lights.

The Doctors.
Paul makes not himself a mediator, between Augustine in his. 2. book and
8. Cha. against the Epistle of Permenian.
God and the people: but requires that they pray all one for another, being
all the members of Christ. If saint John would say, this have I written
unto you, that ye sin not: and if ye sin, ye have me your mediator before
God, and I will entreat for your sins. As Permenian (the Heretic) in a
certain place made the Bishop a mediator between God and the people, what
good and faithful christian man could abide him.

Who would look upon him, as the Apostle of Christ, and not rather think him
to be Antichriste.

All prayer that is not made unto God by Christ, not only Upon the. 108 Psalm.
does not put away sin, but also is turned into sin.

We are not commanded to go to any creature that we In his. 3. book of
freewill*
may be made blessed: but to the creator and maker of all things, of whom if
we be persuaded otherwise then the truth is, we are deceived with a damnable
error.

The souls of them that are dead, are there where they do In his book of the
spirit and the soul. ^ 9. ^ Chap.
not see, neither hear what things are dooen, or chances in this life:
Such is their care for the living: that they know not what they do, even as
our care is for the dead, that we know not what they do.

My Mother whom ye have called blessed, therefore is blessed, In his. 10.
treatise* upon John*
because she has kept the word of God: not because in her the word was made
flesh.

The Apostle said truly, be ye folowers of me, as I am of In his book of the
remission of sins, the 14. Chap.
Christ, he never durst say, be ye justified of me, as I am justified of
Christ, none is just but Christ iustifiyng: therefore he said, he that
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is coumpted for
righteousness. Whosoever is so bold to say, therefore I do justify thee, he
sho^de say also, I believe in thee, which may not be said of the saints:
but of the holy of holiest, that said, believe in God, and believe in me.

Here hence comes Schisms, when men say, we are In his. 1* treatise upon
the Epistle of John In his. 4. book and. 2 2. Chap. of the City of God.
righteous, we make holy the unholy, we do justify the wicked, we do pray,
we do obtain.

Varro says, the knowledge of Gods is profitable, if a man understand, what
power and authority each God has in every thing: for so says he, we may
know whom to call upon, and whom to pray unto, lest happily we do, as
certain, Mimi, are wont to do: that is to say, left of Bacchus, the God of
Wine, we beg water, or of, Lymphe, the Goddess of water, we beg Wine.

But to obtain Gods favor, from whom nothing is secret, Ambrose upon the. 1.
Chap. of the Romans.
as knowing what every man is meet to have: we need no spokesman, but a
devout mind, for whersoeuer such a one speaks unto God, God will answer
him.

Tell me woman, since thou art a wicked and a sinful woman, Chrysostom in
his 12. Homily of the woman of Canane.
how durst thou go unto him? I know says she what I do, behold the
wisdom of the woman, she prays not unto James, she entreats not John, she
goes not unto Peter, she did not get her self to the company of the
Apostles, she sought for no mediator: but for all these things, she took
repentance for her companion, which did fulfill the rowme and place of an
Advocate: and so she did go to the high fountain.

There is no need of a Porter, of a Mediator, or Minister: In his Sermon of
going forwards of the Gospel.
say only, Lord have mercy upon me, we have no need of Advocates with
God, nor of any runnyng or gaddyng about, for to speak fair unto other, for
although thou be alone, and without an Advocate, and pray unto GOD by thy
self, thou shall obtain thy petitions.

He was taken up into heaven, but as God he is showed to Cyrill in his book of
righ^ faith.
grant the petitions of them that worship him, if they make their prayers in
his name, for whom is it more meet to ge^s Saints their asking, and grant
them their petitions, then for him which is only by his own nature, and
truly God.

Furthermore, they that be sanctified and made holy by the In his. 4. book and.
1. Chap. of the treasure.
partakyng of Gods holiness, keep their gift, and observe the commandment.
But they cannot sanctify or make holy any other men* For, there is no man
which is made holy, with the partaking of the holy ghost, that can give by his
own power, and will, that holiness unto other men. For, only the well of
holiness can grant of his own self, to who^ soever he list, holiness. We see
that the Angels be holy by partakyng, and grace, and yet we can never find
that they gave any holiness unto men. Blessed Moses, gave not his own self
unto the seventy elders, which were made rulers, the spirit: but God took it
(asit is written, from the spirit which was in Moses, and gave it unto them.)

Therefore the Saints, through grace, and partakyng, doubtless their selves
has received the gift: but they can not give it at their will unto other. But
the son of God is not so: but as the well of holiness, of his own power
makes his disciples holy, saying, take ye the holy ghost.

If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, and not Erasmns in his book
called the Preacher.
of the saints.

The. xxvj. Chapter.
Against Prayer and service in ^ strange tongue.
IF I pray in a strange tongue, my spirit ^. Cor. 14. 14.
prays: but mine understanding, is without fruicte.

What is it then? I will pray with the 15.
spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the
Spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also.

Else when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that 16.
occupies the rowme of the unlearned, say. Amen, at the geuyng of thanks,
seeing he knows not what thou say.

For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not 17.
edified.

I thank my God, I speak languages more then they all. 18.


Yet had I rather in the Church, to speak five words 19.
with mine understanding, that I might also instruct others, then ten thousand
words in a strange tongue.

Therefore when the whole Church is come together in one, 23.
and all speak strange tongues, there come in they, that are unlearned, or
they, which believe not, will they not say, that ye are out of your wits.

When ye come together, according as every one of you 26.
has a Psalm, or has a doctrine, or has a tongue, or has revelation, or
has interpretation, let all things be done to edifiyng.

The Doctors.
THe Greeks, name God in the greek tongue: and the Origene in his his. 8.
book against Celsus.
Latins, in the latin tongue: and all several nations, pray unto God, and
praise him in their own natural, and mother tongue. For, he that is the Lord
of al tongues, hears men praiyng in all tongues, none otherwise, then if it
were one voice, pronounced by diverse tongues. For, GOD that rules the whole
world, is not as some one man, that has gotten the Greek, or Latin tongue,
and knows none other.

Let thy tongue sing: but let thy mind search out the meaning Basile upon the
28. Psalm.
of the things, that thou speak, that thou may sing with the spirit,
and sing also with thy mind.

The Priest before prayer, prepares the minds of his brethren, Cyprian upon
the Lords prayer.
saying thus, lift up your hearts, to the intent they may be put in mind they
ought to think on nothing else, but of the Lord, for not the sound of voice,
but the mind and understanding, must pray unto the Lord with pure intention.

It is sin to pray any otherwise then Christ has ordained.

The ignoraunte knows not the end of the prayer, and Ambrose upon the. 1. to
the Cor. the. 14. Chap.
answers not, Amen, that is to say, so be it, that the blessing may be
confirmed. For thereby the confirmation of the prayer is fulfilled, when Amen
is answered, and all the words that be spoken by the testimony of the thing
it self, are confirmed in the minds of the hearers.

What profit is there in speech, be it never so perfect, if Augustine in
his. 4. book and 10. Chap. of christian doctrine.
the understanding of the hearer can not attains it? for there is no cause, why
we should speak at all, if they understand not what we speak. For whose
sake we speak, that they may understand us. In his. 14. book and. 16. ca. of
the^ ^inity.


My mind is without fruicte: this the Apostle saint Paul says, when the
thing that is spoken, is not perceived.

Set a part the understanding of the mind: and no man In his. 11. book and.
8. Chap. de Gene. ad Literam.
has fruicte, or profit of that thing, that he perceives not.

Upon the. 99. Psalm. Upon the. 18. Psalm.
What needs us to sing, if we understand not what we sing, to sing with our
voice, and not with our heart? for understanding is the sound, or voice of the
heart.

We that have learned to sing in the Church, the heavenly words of God, must
also endeavor to be that thing that is written, blessed are they that
understands what they sing. Therefore dearly beloved, that we have song
together, with tunable voice, we ought also to know, and see with pure heart.

What is the Queens apparel? it is precious and full of Upon the. 44. Psalm.
variety the mysteries of doctrine in all sundry tongues: There is one tongue
of Aphrica, an other of Siria: an other Greek: an other Hebrewe, an other
this, an other that. These tongues make up the variety of the Queens apparel.

But as all the variety of colors in the apparel agrees in unity: even so
all tongues agree in one faith, let there be variety in the apparel: but
rent, or cut there may not be. Behold by the variety we understand the
diversity of tongues, and by the apparel, we understand the unity.

The Queen stood at thy right hand, apparelled in cloth In his. 4. Oration
against the Jews.
of Gold, adourned with variety. Hereby is signified the diversity of
tongues, in all nations, the faith whereof, that lies within, is one and simple.

The people, unto the thing that they plainly understand, De catechizandis
rudibus. Cap. 9.
may say, Amen.

We ought to understand what it is that we sing, or pray, Upon the. 18. Psalm.
and so sing with man's reason, not with voice, as Birds do, Ouselles,
Popiniayes, Ravens, and Pies, and such like, oftetymes be taught of men to
sound they know not what.

To sing with understanding, is granted through Gods will, unto the nature of
man.

If Moses should speak unto me in the hebrewe tongue, In his. 11. book of
Consessions and. 3. Chap.
be should beat my sense in vain, neither should there any thing thereof
enter into my mind.

How can he sing duly or devoutly unto God, that knows In his Prologue upon
the Psalms.
not what he sings.

In the gatheringes of Bed^ upon the 1. Cor. 14.
No man is edified or made the better by the hearing of it which he does not
understand.

Chrysostom in his. 18. Homily upon the 2. Cor.
Not only the Priest gives thanks to God, but also all the people: and what
do thou marvel, to see the Priest, and the people in the prayers talk
together.

In his. 35. homily upon the 1. Cor. and. 14. Chap.
Unless I speak that you may plainly and clearly understand, but only
show my self to have the gifts of tongues, ye shall depart away having no
fruict of those things, that ye understand not. For of a voice that ye know
not, what profit can ye have?

And you, unless ye utter a sound with understanding, ye shall speak to the
wind, that is to say, ye shall speak to no body.

Some enteryng into the Church, stretches forth and draws In his. 12. Homily
of the woman Canane.
at length their prayer, till they have said a thousand verses, as though the
great number of words were needful before GOD, as though he knew not what
thou do ask, which knows before thou think, even they wot not what they
say. Their lips only moves, and their mind is without fruicte, and his
ears are unto them deaf. Thou hear not (that is, understand not) and
take no heed of thy prayer, and yet thou will that God should hear thy
prayer.

We command all Bishops and Priests, to minister the Justinian the Emperor
in his. 123. Constitution.
holy oblation, and the prayer at the holy Baptism not under silence: but with
such a voice as may be hard of the faithful people: to thentent that thereof
the hearts of the hearers may be sturred to more devotion, and honor given to
god the lord. For, so the holy Apostle teaches, saying in the first to the
Cor. for if thou blessest with the spirit only, how shall he that supplieth
the room of the ignorant say, Amen, (to God) at thy thanks giuyng? for he
knows not what thou say, thou give thanks well, but the other is not
edified.

For these causes therefore it behooves, that the prayer of the holy oblation,
and also other prayers, be offered with loud voice of the holy bishops, and
priests, unto our Lord Jesus Christ, with the father, and the holy ghost. And
let the holy Priests understand, that if they neglect any of these things,
they shall make answer therefore at the dreadful judgment of the great
God, and our savior Jesus Christ. And yet nevertheless, we understanding the
same, will not pass it over, nor leave it unpunished. Isidorus of the order of
the Church the 10. Chap.


When they sing, they must sing altogether, when they pray they must pray
altogether. And when the Lesson is read, silence being commanded, they must
hear altogether.

Therefore trusty silence, and secrecy was appointed by subtle Lactantius in
his. 5. book and 20. Chap.
and false Faytours, that the people should never know what they worshipped.
Nicholas Lyra upon the. 1. Cor. 14. Chap.


If thou being a Priest, do bless with the spirit, that is to say, if the
people understand thee not, what profit has the simple people thereby, not
understanding thee?

For so much as in many places within one City, and one Pope Innocentius the
third, extra de officio Iudicis ordina^ij.
Diocese, there be nations mingled together of many tongues, having diverse
orders and customs under one faith. We do therefore streictly command, that
the Bishop of such Cities, or Diocese, provide meet men to minister the
holy service, according to the diversity of their ma^ners and tongues.

It was forbidden in the Primative Church, that no man John Billet in summa de
diuinis officijs.
should speak with tongues, unless there were some to expound it, for what
should speaking avail without understanding? And hereof grew a laudable
custom, that after the Gospel was read literally, it should straight way be
expounded in the vulgar tongue. But what shall we do in our days, when as
there is either none at all, or very seldom that reads, or hears, and
understands? It seems it were better now to hold their peace, then so to
pray or sing.

Uerely in the Primative church this was necessary, when D. Hardyng in his
answer to M. Jewel. Folio. 69.
the faith was a learning. And therefore the prayers were made then, in a
common tongue, known to the people, for cause of their further instruction.

The. xxvij. Chapter.
Against the honoring and worshippyng of Saints.
MAnoah then said unto the Angel of the Iudge^ ^3. 15.
Lord, I pray thee, let us retain thee, until we have made ready a kyd for
thee.

And the Angel of the Lord said unto 16.
Manoah, though thou make me abide, I will not eat of thy bread: And if thou will make a burnt offering, offer it unto the lord.

Give unto the Lord ye sons of the mighty, give unto Psalm. 29. 1.
the Lord glory and strength.

Not unto us, O lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give Psalm. 115. 1.
the glory, for loving mercy, and for thy true these sake.

Let there be no strange God in thee: neither worship thou Psalm. 81. 9*
any strange God.

I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not Esaie. 42. 8.
give unto another, neither my praise to graven Images.

I would have been content with good will for the salvation Esth. xiij. xiij*
of Israel, to have kiste the sole of (Aman) his feet.

But I did it not, because I would not prefer the honor 14.
of a man, above the glory of God, and would not worship any but only thee,
my Lord.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall Math. iiii. x.
thou serve.

And it came to pass as Peter came in, that Cornelius met Acts. x. xxv.
him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him.

But Peter took him up, saying, stand up: for even I my 26.
self am a man.

When the people saw what Paul had done, they lift up Chap. xiiii. xi*
their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, Gods are come down to us, in
the likeness of men.

And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, 12.
because he was the chief speaker.

Then Jupiters Priests, which was before their City, 13.
brought Bulls with Garlands unto the Gates, and would have sacrificed, with
the people.

But when the Apostles, Barnabas, and Paul, hard it, 14.
they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, criyng,

And saying, O men, why do ye these things? we are 15
even men subject to the like passions that ye be, and preach unto you, that
ye should turn from these vain Idols, unto the living God.

Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am Paul's, 1. Cor. 1. 12.
and I am Apollos, and I am Cephas, and I am Christ's, is Christ divided? was
Paul Crucified for you? either were ye baptized into the name of Paul?

Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos but the ministers Chap. 3. 5.
by whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave to every man?

I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. 6.


And I am John, which saw and hard these things, and Reuela. 22. ^.
when I had hard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the
Angel, which showed me these things.

But he said unto me, see thou do it not: for I am thy fellow 9.
servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the
words of this book: worship God.

The Doctors.
LET no man eat of this error, touching saint Epiphanius in his. 3. book
against heresies, the. 59. heresy.
Marie, for, though the tree be fair, yet is not this fruicte to be eaten:
although Mary be beautiful, and holy, and honorable, yet is she not to be
adored and worshipped: but these women worshippyng saint Mary, renew again
the sacrifice of wine mingeled in the honor of the Goddess, Fortuna, and
prepare a table for the devil, and not for God: As it is written in the
scriptures, they are fed with the meat of wickedness: and again, their women
boulte flower: and their children gather sticks to make fine cakes, in the
honor of the Queen of heaven, therefore let such women be rebuked by the
Prophet Jeremy: And then no more trouble the world, and let them not say,
we worship the Queen of heaven.

Christ said unto his mother, woman, what have I to do In the same book
against one Colliridia^.
with thee? My hour is not yet come, least any man should think, our Lady
was of greater excellency, he called her woman: as it were, prophesiyng of the
kinds and sects of heresies that were to come in the world, least any man
having too great opinon of that holy saint, should fall into this heresy,
and into the dotage of the same. For in deed, the whole matter is but a
mockery, and an old wives tale: and soothly to say, nothing else, but the
handlyng of an heresy.

Neither Helias is to be worshipped, although he be yet a In the same. 3.
book. 2. Tome and. 29. heresy.
live: Nor yet is John to be worshipped, although by his own prayers, he made
his sleep wonderful. Naie, rather he received grace from God. But neither
Tecla, nor any saint is to be worshipped, for, that old error shall not
rule in us, that we should forsake the living God, and worship those things
that were made by him. For they have honored and worshipped the creature,
besides the creator, and they became fools. For if he will not have the
Angels to be worshipped, how much less, that which was borne of Anna, which
by Ioachim being given to Anna, which by prayers and all diligence was given
according to promise, to the father and mother? Notwithstanding, was not borne
otherwise besides the nature of men, but like as all men, of the seed of the
man, and the womb of the woman.

My mother whom ye have called blessed, therefore is blessed, Angustine in his.
10. treatise upon the Epistle of John.
because she has kept the word of GOD: not because in her the word was made
flesh.

Mary was more blessed, in that she received the faith of In his book of holy
virginity, the. 3. Chap.
Christ, then in that she conceived the flesh of Christ, motherly kindred
could have done Mary no good, unless she had borne Christ more blessedly in
her heart, then she bare him in her flesh.

Let not the worshippyng of dead men, be counted holiness In his book of true
religion, the. 55. Chap.
among us, for if they have lived godly, they be not so, that they will seek
such honors: but they will that he be worshipped of us, the which giuyng
light, they be glad that we be fellow servants of their merit: Therefore
saints ought to be honored for imitation, in followyng of their living: And
not for religion: that thing that the highest Angel worshippeth: must also the
lowest man worship.

Let us believe this, that the best Angels, and the most excellent Ministers,
would that we should worship one GOD with them, by whose contemplation and
lookyng upon, they are blessed.

Wherefore, we worship them with charity, and love, that we bear unto them,
and not with bondage, nor build we to them any Temples, for they will not so
be worshipped and honored of us, for they know that when we be good, we are
the Temples and Churches of the most highest God.

Therefore it was well and rightely written, that the man was forbidden of the
Angel to worship him, but that he should worship God.

There is no man that dare be so bold, as to say that sacrifice In his. x.
book of the City of God, and. iiii. Chap.
ought to be given unto any, but only unto God.

In the. viii. book and. xvii. Chap. of the City of God.
We offer not unto our Martyrs, sacrifices, for it is unseemly, not due unto
them, and unlawful: and only due unto God.

In the. xxii. book and. x. Chap. of the City of God.
We build no Aulters whereon we may sacrifice unto our Martyrs: but offer up
unto GOD both ours, and the Martyrs sacrifice, at the which sacrifice, the
Martyrs as the men of god, which has ouercommed the world in the confession
of God, are named in their place and order: yet for all that, the Priest that
does sacrifice, does not call for the help of them.

Which of the faithful has hard the Priest at the Altar, In his. 8. book
and. 27. Chap. of the City of God.
yea upon the holy body of the Martyr, made for the honor and worship of
God, say at any time in his prayers: I offer a sacrifice to thee O Peter, or
Paul, or Cyprian. etc.

The very Saints them selves, whether they be dead In his. xx. book and.
xxi. Chap. against Paustus.
men or Angels, will not have honor given unto them, which only is due unto
GOD. This appeared in Paul and Barnabas, when the men of Licaonia, astonished at
their miracles, would have done sacrifice unto them, as if they had been Gods.
For they rentyng their garments, confessyng and perswadyng them, that they
were not Gods, forbade such things to be done unto them. This appeared also
in the Angels, as we read in the Apocalips. The Angel forbiddyng him self to
be worshipped, and saying to him that worshipped him: I am thy fellow
servant of thee, and thy brethren.

No man was made privy to Moses grave: lest if the people In his. 1. book and
last Chap. of the wonders of the holy Scriptures.
had known where his body had been, they would adore and worship it.

In his his book of the manners of the Church, and Manichies, the 34. Chapter.
I know many worshippers of Graves and Images, that drink and quaffe
disorderly over the dead, and offer meat unto their Carcasses, and bury them
selves over the buried, and make accoumpte, that even their very drunkenness
and glottony is a religion that pleases God.

In his book of the work of the Monks Chap. 28.
Some there be that carry about Martyrs bones to sale, and yet it may well be
doubted, whether ever they were Martirs or no.

In his. 1. book and. xviii. Cap. of the consent of the Gospel.
Every GOD ought so to be worshipped, as he has commanded to be worshipped.

In his. i. book against Maximinus, the Aryan Bishop.
If we should make a Temple of wood and stone, for any holy Angel, yea, though
he were the most excellent of all, should we not be accursed from the truth of
Christ, and from the Church of God, because we exhibit that service to a
creature, which is due to God alone. Therefore, if we should offend in
Sacrilege, by buildyng a Church to any creature, how can it be, but he is the
true God, to whom we make no Temple, but our selves are Temples.

The Martyrs are not glad when they are worshipped Chrysostom upon the. 23. of
Math.
with that money, for the which poor men weep.

What virtue of righteousness is that, to reward dend men, and to rob them
that be alive? To take the blood of wretches and sorrowful persons, and offer
it up to God? That is not to offer to God, but to be willing to make God
partner of their violence, that if he receive gladly the offered money of
sin: may consent to the sin.

Will thou build the house of God? give unto faithful poor men, wherewith
they may live, and thou have builded the reasonable house of God. Men do
dwell in houses, but GOD dwells in holy men. Then what unkind men be they,
which rob men, and makes Martyrs houses, and makes houses for men, and
casts down the Mansion and dwelling place of God?

Even as, not all that say, Lord, Lord, are the Lords, but In his. Homily
upon the 23. of Math.
they that do the Lords will: so not all they that praise and magnify the
Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, in places, be their worshippers: but they
which follow their works, and resemble their faith.

A Creature is to adore and worship, and it belongs to In his. 32. Homily
upon the 4. of John.
the Creator to be worshipped.

Joseph liyng in his death bed, said unto his Children and In his. 67. Homily
upon Genesis.
Neuewes, ye shall carry my bones with you forth out of Egypt: lest the
Egiptians remembryng the good things he had done, should use that good man's
body to an occasion of wickedness, and Idolatry.

Such sleightes of huntyng has the Devil, under the color In his. 49.
Homily upon the Acts.
of holiness he hides his snares.

Let us learn to worship Christ, of his own will, he that In his. 51. homily
upon Math.
is honored, is best pleased with that honor which he hynt self will: and
not that we do devise or wish.

As for the holy Martyrs, we neither say that they are Cyrill in his 6. book
against Iulianus.
Gods, neither have been accustomed to worship them. But we praise them
rather with great honor, because they have valiantly striuen for the truth,
and have maintained the sincerity of faith, in so much as they have despised
their own life: and not regarded the terrors of death, have prevailed in very
great dangers, and were of so great strength, as though they would raise up
Images to themselves of their own life.

No man is ignorant, that adoration and worship in the In his. 4. book and. 1.
Chap. of the treasure.
Scripture is attributed to no kind of nature, save only to the nature of God.

The christian men asked the Carcas and dead body of Polycarpus: Eusebius in
his 4. book and 15. Cap. histor. Eccle.
but the Jews did greatly withstand that thing, as though the christian men
had asked it, to worship it: but they know not most wretches, that we can
neither at any time, leave and forsake Christ, which suffered death for the
salvation of all the world, neither worshipped any other, because we know the
true God which is only to be worshipped.

It is reported that with Procession they furnishe up their Pope Gelasius in
the. 2. Canon. D ^onsecratione did. 1. Chap. placuit.
Churches, builte in the name of dead men, and the same for ought that I can
learn, while they were alive, not altogether good faithful men.

The Saints have received them selves, and not given In the book of the
counsel^, in the Epistle of Leo the Pope.
Crowns: And they are made examples of strength, and patience of the
faithful, and not gifts of righteousness.

Sulpitius of the life of saint Martin.
Saint Martin on a time came to a Chapel, built in the name of a holy
Martyr: but afterward he learned by revelation: that the same Martyr had been
some time a common thief, and for robbery had been put to death, and by error
of the people, was honored and worshipped for a Saint.

I deny not, but that if there be such excessive speech as D. Hardyng in his
book, a detection of sondrie foul errors, lies. etc. Fol. 366.
seem to attribute to our Lady, or to any Saint, that which is proper, and
belongs to Christ only: they ought by a convenient interpretation, and
understanding, be drawn unto such a sense, and meaning, as is agreeable unto
the Scriptures of God.

The. xxviij. Chapter.
Against Images.
THOU shalt make thee no graven Exodus. 20. 4.
Image, neither any similitude of things that are in heaven abone, neither
that are in the earth beneath, neither that are in the waters under the earth.

Thou shalt not bow down to 5.
them, neither serve them, for I am the Lord thy God a ielous God. etc. Ye
shall not turns unto Idols, nor make you molten gods. Leuiti. 19. 4.


Ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the Land before Nomb. 33. ^2.
you. And destroy al your Pictures, and break a sunder all their Images of
Metal, and pluck down all their hie places.

Take therefore good heed unto your selves: for ye saw Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the mids
of the fire.

That ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven 16.
Image or representation of any figure: whether it be the likeness of Male or
Female.

Cursed be the man that shall make any earned or moulten Chap. 27. 15.
Image, which is an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the
Crafts man, and puts it in a secret place.

Their Idols are Silver and Gold, even the work of man's Psalm. 115. 4.
hands.

They have a mouth and speak not, they have eyes and see 5.
not.

They have ears and hear not: they have noses and smell 6.
not.

They have hands and touch not: they have seete and walk 7.
not.

They that make them are like unto them: so are all they 8.
that trust in them.

The Idols of the heathen, are Silver and Gold, even the Psalm. 135. 15.
work of man's hand.

To whom then will ye liken God* or what similitude will Esaie. 40. 18.
ye set up unto him?

The workman melts an Image, or the Goldsmith beats ^9.
it out in Gold, or the Goldsmith makes Silver plates.

Does not the poor choose out a tree that will not rotte, for 20.
an oblation? he seeks also unto him a cunnyng workman to prepare an Image,
that shall not be moved.

I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not Cha. 42. 8.
give to another, neither my praise to graven Images.

All they that make an Image, are vanity, and their delectable Chap. 44. 9.
things, shall nothing profit, and they are their own witnesses, that they
see not, nor know, therefore they shall be confounded.

Who has made a God? or moulten an Image, that is profitable 10.
for nothing?

Behold, all that are of the fellowship thereof shall be confounded: 11.
for the workmen themselves are but men. etc.

The Smith takes an instrument, and works in the coals, 12.
and fashioneth it with Hammers, and woorketh it with the strength of his
arms. etc.

The Carpenter stretches out a line: he fashioneth it with 13.
a red threede, he planeth it, and purtreieth it with the Compass, and makes
it after the figure of a man, and according to the beauty of a man, that it
may remain in an house.

He will hew him down Ceders, and take the Pine tree, 14.
and the oak, and takes courage among the trees of the forest. etc.

And man burns thereof: for he will take thereof, and 15.
warm him self: he also kyndleth it, and baketh bread, yet he makes a God,
and worshippeth it: he makes it an Idol, and boweth unto it.

He burns the half thereof in fire, and upon the half thereof 16.
he eats his meat: he rosteth his roste, and is satisfied: also he warmeth
him self, and says, a ha, I am warm, I have been at the fire.

And the residue thereof he makes a God, even his Idol: 17.
he boweth unto it, and worshippeth, and prays unto it and says, deliver
me: for thou art my God.

They have not known, nor understand, for GOD has 18.
shut their eyes that they can not see, and their hearts, that they can not
understand.

And none considers in his heart, neither is there knoweledge, 19.
nor understanding, to say, I have burnte half of it in the fire, I have
baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have roasted flesh, and eaten it, and
shall I make the residue thereof an abomination, shall I bow to the stock of
a tree?

Their Idols stand up as the Palm tree, but speak not, Ierem, 10. 5.
they are borne, because they cannot go, fear them not, for they can not do
evil, neither can they do good.

Altogether they dote, and are foolish: for the stock is a 8.
doctrine of vanity.

In all your dwelling places, the Cities shall be desolate, and Ezechiel. 6. 6.
the high places shall be laid waste, so that your Aulters shall be made waste,
and desolate: And your Idols shall be broken, and your Images of the same shall
be cut in pieces, and your works shall be abolished.

What profits the Image? For the maker thereof has Habac ^* 1^.
made it an Image, and a teacher of lies, though he that made it, trust
therein, when he makes dumb Idols.

Woe unto him that says to the wood, awake, and to the 19.
dumb stone, rise up, it shall teach thee: behold, it is laid over with
gold and silver, and there is no breath in it.

Miserable are they, and among the dead is their hope, that wisdom. 13. 10.
call them Gods, which are the works of men's hands, gold, and silver, and the
thing that is invented, by art. etc.

He calls on him that is weak, for health: he prays unto 18.
him that is dead: for life, he requires him of help, that has no
experience at all.

And for his journey, him that is not able to go, and for 19.
gain, and work, and success of his affairs, he requires furtheraunce of
him that has no manner of power.

The inuentyng of Idolles, was the beginning of whoredom, Chap. 14. 11.
and the findyng of them, is the corruption of life.

For they were not from the beginning, neither shall they 12.
continue for ever.

The vain glory of men, brought them into the world, 13.
therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

When a father mourned grievously for his son that 14.
was taken away suddenly, he made an Image for him, that was once dead, whom
now he worshippeth as a God, and ordained to his servants, Ceremonies, and
Sacrifices.

Thus by process of time, this wicked custom prevailed, 15.
and was kept as a law, and Idols were worshipped by the commandment of
Tyrants.

They deck these Gods of silver, and Gods of gold, and of Baruch. 6. 10.
wood, with garments like men.

Yet cannot they be preserved from ruste, and worms. 11.


One holds a scepter, as though he were a certain Judge 13.
of the country: yet cannot he slay such as offend him.

An other has a dagger, or an axe in his right hand: yet is 14.
he not able to defend him self from battle, nor from thieues, so then it is
evident, that they be no Gods.

They light up candels before them: yea, more the^ for them 18.
selves, whereof they cannot see one: for they are but as one of the posts of
the temple.

The Owls, Swallows, and Birds, fly upon their bodies, 21.
and upon their heads, yea, and the Cattes also.

They can save no man from death: neither deliver the weak 35.
from the mighty.

They cannot restore a blind man to his sight, nor help any 36.
man at his need.

They can show no mercy to the widow, nor do good to 37.
the fatherless.

Their Gods of wood, gold, and silver, are as stones, that 38.
be hewn out of the mountain, and they that worship them shall be confounded.

The most high God dwells not in Temples made with Acts. 17. 42.
hands, as says the Prophet.

Abstain ye from things offered to Idols, and blood, that Chap. 15. 29.
is strangled, and from fornication.

For as much then, as we are the generation of God, we Chap. 17. 29.
ought not to think, that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone
graven by art, and the invention of man.

They turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude Romans 1. 23.
of the Image of a corruptible man. etc.

Which turned the truth of God unto a lie, and worshipped, 25.
and served the creature, above the Creator, which is blessed for ever. Amen.

But now I have written unto you, that ye company not 1. Cor. 5. ^1.
together, if any that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or conetous, or
an Idolater. etc. with such a one eat not.

Wherefore my beloved, flee from Idolatry. Chap. 10. 14.


What agreement has the temple of God with Idols? for 2. Cor. 6. 6.
ye are the temple of the living God.

The works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery, Galath. 5. 19.
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,

Idolatry, witchcrafte, hatered, emulations, wrath, contentious, 20.
seditions, heresies.

Babes, keep your selves, from Idols. 1. John. 1. 21.


Amen.
The Doctors.
GOd has forbidden an Image, as well to be made Tertullian in his book of
Idolatry.
as to be worshipped. As far as making goes before worshippyng, so far is
it before, that the thing be not made, that may not be worshipped. Some man
will say, I make it, but I worship it not: As though he durst not to worship
it for any other cause, but only for the same cause, for which he ought not
to make it: I mean both ways, for Gods displeasure. Naie, rather thou
worshippest the Image, that give the cause for other to worship it.

Some one or other that maintain Idolatry* will say: and why then did Moises
make the Image of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness? The old Idolaters
found out, and used the same above fourtene hundred years agee, well, and
goodone and the same God, both by his general law, forbade any Image to be
made: And also by his extraordinary, and special commandment, an Image of a
serpent to be made: If thou be obedient to the same God, thou haste his law,
make thou no Image: But if thou have a regard to the Image of the Serpent,
that was made afterward by Moses* then do thou as Moses did: Make not any
Image against the lawevnlesse God command thee, as he did Moses.

We make no Image of God, as knowing him to be invisible, Origene in his 7.
book against Celsus.
and without body.

The mind of the law was this, that they should in all In his. 4. book
against Celsus.
things, so behave them selves, as the truth required, nor that they should
beside the truth counterfeite any thing, representyng the shape of a man, or
woman.

Images were first drawn, thereby to keep the countenance Cyprian in his book
of the vanity of Idols.
of the dead in remembrance, upon occasion whereof, things grew at length
unto holiness, that at the first were taken only for solace.

What, do thou bow thy captive body, before foolish In his. 1. treatise
against Demetrian.
Images, and yearthly counterfeites? God has made the upright, and whereas all
other beasts of the earth, are depreassed in shape, bendyng down to the
ground ward: thou haste a lofty state, to heaven, and to thy God thy
countenance is erected: then look up thither, thither cast up thine eyes,
seek God above, that hell thou may lack, lift up thy doubtful heart, to
high and heavenly things: what do thou throw thy self with the devil whom
thou seruest, into the pit of death?

The devil by the mouth of other, is wont to bring forth Clement Recog. to
James the brother of our Lord, in his. 5. book.
such words. We, to the worship of the invisible God, worship the visible
Images, and this is most certain false: for if you will truly worship Gods
Image, ye should by being beneficial unto man, worship the true Image of God
in him.

What honor of God is this, to run about the counterfaicte^ of timber, and
of stone, and to worship the shapes that are without soul, and despise man, in
whom the true shape of God is?

We neither worship, nor wish for crosses, you that consecrate Arnobius in
his. 8. book against the Gentiles.
wooden Gods, peradventure worship the wooden Crosses, as parts of your
Gods.

If you had not this Image, should Christ be ignorant that he were served of
you? Will he think that there is no honor done him? Then does he receive
your seruynges, and worshippynges by certain trains, by other put in trust,
and before he, to whom the obsequie is due, have any feelyng of the matter, ye
do your Sacrifice unto the Image, and send him but the strappes from an other
man's boorde.

And what can be devised, more injurious, sclaunderous, In his. 6. book
against the Gentiles.
discourteous, then to acknowledge one God, and make thy suit unto an other
thing? To hope for help of God, and pour out thy prayers to a senseless
Image? Is not this (as the Proverb has) to have a quarrel to Rowlande, and
fight with Oliver? And where thou se^est for advise of men, to ask the
sentence first of Porklynges, and of Asses?

Is not this an error? Is it not (to speak properly) a madness, in tremblyng
wise, to make thy humble suit to a thing, that thou made thy self? And
whereas thou do know, and art assured, that it is thine own
workemanshippe, the fruit of thine own fingers, to fall grouelyng upon thy
face before it?

Augustine de side, and Symbolo. Chap. 7.
To devise an Image for God, it is abominable.

In his book against Adymantus the 13. Chap.
They would seem to favor Images, which thing they do, to the intent to make
the Heathens to think the better of their most miserable, and lewd sect.

In his. 4. book and. 31. Chap. of the City of God.
They that first erected the Images of the Gods, unto the people, took away
fear, and religion, and increased error unto their cities, because the people
in the folly of Images, may soon be deceived.

In his book upon the. 113.
Uery children know, that these Images have eyes and see not: mouth and
speak not. Wherefore then does the holy ghost so often teach us, and
admonish us* the same thing in the Scriptures, as if we knew it not. For
that the very shape, and proportion of a man set a loft, after it once
begins to be adored and honored of the multitude, it breeds in every
man, that most vile affection of error, that although he find there no
natural mouyng, or token of life, yet he thinks some God, or godly thing is
within it: and so being deceived, partly by the form that he sees, and partly
by the authority and credit of the aucthours, and makers of it, whom they
take to be wise, and partly also by the example, and devotion of the people,
who^ they see obedient to the same, he thinks that the Image, being so like a
living body, cannot be without some living thing underneath it.

Who soever adoreth, or makes his prayer, beholding an Image, he is so moved
in his mind, that he thinks the Image hears him, and hops it will
perform his prayer.

After that Images be once set up in these places, in honorable In his. 49.
Epistle.
height, that they that pray, or sacrifice, may look upon them, although
they have neither sense, nor soul, yet they so strike, and amase the weak
minds of the people, even with the very proportion of living members, and
senses, that they seem to have life, and to draw breathe.

Let no man say unto me, the Image, is no divine power: In his. vi. Sermon of
the words of the Lord, in Math.
It is no God: I would to God they so knew it, as we know it. But what they
have, and in what sort they have it, and what they do about it, the altar
bears witness.

Let us not coumpte it a religion, to worship the works of In his ^ke of true
religion 55. Chap.
men's hands: For the crafts masters them selves, which make such things
are better, whom notwithstanding, we ought not to worship: let us not make it
a religion to worship brute beasts, for the basest sort of men that be, be
better then they, whom notwithstanding, we ought not to worship. Let us not
make it religion, to worship dead men, because they have lived godly: for they
were never coumpted to seek such honors, but they would have him to be
worshipped of us, who alluminyng them, do rejoice.

So they were worthy to be deceived, that sought Christ In his. i. book and.
x. Chap. of the Agreement of the Gospel.
and his Apostles, not in the books of holy* Scripture, but in painted
walls, neither may we marvel, if fayners, by Painters, were deceived.

He adourneth his Image with silver, and gold, that by the Hierome in his. ii.
book and x. Chap. upon Jeremy.
shine, and glitteryng of both these mettalles, he may deceive the simple:
which error doubtless is now cropen in amongst us, so that now we think,
our religion stands in riches.

The Heathens worshipped wood, as the Image of God. Ambrose upon the. 118.
Psalm. Chrysostom in his. 1. Tome 51. Homily.


What if thou should see a man almost frosen with cold, and would
prepare no necessary ^imentes for him: but set up golden Images, in the
honor of him, shouldeste thou not seem to co^te^pne him? So it behooves thee
to think in Christ. When he goes about wanderyng, as a stranger, lackyng
harbor, then thou do not receive him, and in the mean season, thou do
tri^me the paintynges of churches. Thou make up costly walls, thou set
up gorgious heads of pillars, thou cause stelampes to hang down from golden
seelynges, and in the mean season, thou do not visit him being in prisone.
No man was ever blamed or accused* because he had not builded up costely
Temples, or Churches, and Images. But everlasting fire of hell (the punishment
of the devils) do hang over us, except we do the other things diligently.
Lactantius in his. 2. book and 19. Chap. In the* 2. chap. of the ^me book.


Out of all doubt, there is no religion, where soever there is an Image.

They are afraied least their religion be void, and to no purpose, if they
see nothing presently, that they may worship. And therefore they make
counterfaictes, which because the^ are Images of the dead, are like to the
dead, for they be with out sense: but the Image of God, who lives for ever,
must be lively and sensible.

To contemn and despise the earth, is nothing else, but not to worship Images,
which are made of earth.

What madness is this, either to frame those things, which they may after
fear, or fear th^se things, which they have framed? No forsoothe (say
they) we fear not that: but them after whose Image they be made, and to whose
names they be consecrated: for then ye fear them, because ye sup pose them to
be in heaven, for if they be Gods, it cannot otherwise be chosen. But why do
you not lift up your eyes to heaven, and calling upon the Gods by name, do
your Sacrifice openly? Why do you rather look to the walls, to the stocks,
and stones* then to that place where you believe they are?

If a living man cannot teach thee to know GOD, how Athanasius against the
Gentiles. Epiphanius to John, Patriarch of Jerusalem in the second Tome of
Hierome.
shall a carved stock and stone do it, that is dead?

In that, I heard certain did grudge against me, for that when we went
together to the holy place, which is called Bethell, to make a gatheryng
there with me, according to the manner of the Church: and came to a village
called A^abla* tha, and as I passed, saw a Candle burning, and asked what
place it was, and* when I had learned that it was a Church, and had entered in
to make my p^iers, I found there a veil hangyng, at the entry of the
Church, stained, and painted, and having the Image, as it were of Christ, or
of some saint, for whose picture it was in deed, I do not remember.
Therefore, when I saw the Image of a man, to hang in the church of Christ,
contrary to the commandment of the scriptures, I tare and rent it in sunder:
and gave counsel to the Wardens of that Church, that they wrappe, and bury
some poor body in it?

I beseech you, charge the Priests of that place, that they command that
such vailes, or clothes hanged, as be contrary to our religion: be no more
hanged up in the Church of christ. It behooves your reverence to have care
hereof, this is superstition, unmeet for the Church of Christ, and unmeet for
the people (to thee committed) and therefore to be removed.

The Devil enteryng into the mind of men, always under In hi^. ^. book 2.
Tome, against heresies, the. 79. heresy, against the Colliridians.
pretense of justice, aduauncing in the eyes of men, the mortal nature, to the
degree of God, has expressed through variety of cunnyng, Images, presentyng
the counterfeites of men. And they that are worshipped in deed, be dead. And
the Images which never lived, they bring in to be worshipped: the mind
thereby committyng fornication, and estraungyng it self, from the one and only
God, as it were an harlot* departing filthily her body unto many, and as one
that had worn away the sober use of lawful company with one husband.

The old error shall not prevail over us, to leave the living, and worship
those things which are made of him. For they have worshipped and adored the
creature, more then the Creator, and became fools.

My dear children, be ye myndefull, that ye bring no Images into the
Churches, and that ye erecte up none at the burialles of the saints: but
evermore carry God in your hearts. Naie, suffer not Images to be, no, not in
your houses: for it is not lawful, to lead a Christian man by his eyes, but
rather by the study, or exercise of his mind.

Numa, in answer unto Julian (as the enemy himself Cyrill in his. ^. book
against Iulianu^*
affirms) was honest and good, and endued with notable understanding, made
many laws for Priests, let us inquire therefore diligently, what manner of
service he had: Dionise of Halicarnassus, which wrote well the history of the
Romans, reports that he made Temples, and Oratories, but there was no Image
in the world in them, for because he commended the wisdom of Pythagoras,
whose doctrine also he followed, he knew that God was destitute of such form
and shape: and affirmed that he took pleasure in the sacrifices of the mind,
and not of the flesh. Therefore the Temples that he builded, he called the
Temples of faith: by which, only GOD is seen of men, so far as they are
able to reach unto his sight: and he commanded his subjects to take their
oath by faith.

It is no maru^ile that the Heathens, receiuyng such benefits Eusebius in his
7. book and 18. Chap.
of our Savior, did these things: For, we have seen the Image of Paul, of
Peter, of Christ, drawn in colors, and preserved. And it may well be
thought, that men in old times, being not yet removed from the superstition of
their fathers, used after this sort to worship them, by an Heathenishe
custom, as their Saviors.

An unhappy memory is that, which to remember Christ, Charles the great in
his 4. book and 2. Chap. of Images.
who never ought to depart out of the heart of the just man, stands in
need of a sightfull conceipte, nor otherwise can have the presence of Christ
within him, unless he have his Image painted on the wall, or expressed in some
other matter, for such a memory as is nourished, and kept by Images,
proceadeth not of hearty love: but necessity of eye sight.

Must madness it is, that our minds, by the mean of material Images, must
be put in remembrance, least w^ fall to forget him, whereas this is the
fault of infirmity, no sign of liberty.

We praise it well that you had a zeal, that nothing made Gregory Pope first,
in his. 7. book of his Epistles, the 109. Chap. unto Serenus. B. of Massilia.
with hand should be worshipped: And again, you ought to have forbidden the
people from the worshipping of them: and thirdly, that the people should not
offend in adoration or worshippyng of a picture, or Image.

In the second Counsel of Nyce, Acts. 6.
(Theodorus bishop of Ancyra says) we think it not convenient to painte the
Images of Saints, with material or earthly colors, for it is evident, that
this is a vain imagination, and the procurement of the deceiptfulnesse of the
devil.

Heathens was the first deviser, and head of Images.

We think (...) good, there be no picture in the Churches* In the Counsel at
Eliberis Ca^non. 36.
l^aste the thing that is honored, or adoured, be painted on the walls.

For as much as we have a diligente care in all things, In the Counsel at
Constantinople, Peter Crinite, the. 9. book and. 9. cap.
to maintain the Religion of the most high God, therefore we suffer no man to
fashion, to grave, or to painte the Image of our Savior Christ, either in
colors, or in stone, or in any other kind of metal, or matter: But where
soever any such Image shall be found, we command it to be taken down,
assuryng our subjects, that we will most straightly punish all such as shall
presume to attempt any thing, contrary to our decree and commandment.

Be they not monstrous, that worship stones? Clement of Alexandria in his
oration to the Gentiles. a Polidorus virgill in his. 6. book and. 13. Chap. of
the inventions of things. Erasmus in his third book of the Church.


Now let us entreat of the worshippyng of Images, which not only the
Heathens, that were void of our Religion: but also as saint Hierome says,
all the old godly fathers condemned, for fear of Idolatry.

The world is come to such outrage, and mere madness herein, that this part
of holiness differs now, very little from open wickedness.

Some do move affectes by Images, or the wyng of saints Relics, whereof
neither agrees to the gravity of the place, that a Preacher stands in: for
we read not, that ever any such thing was done of Christ, or his Apostles.

The. xxix. Chapter.
Against Transubstantiation.
AND as they did ente, Jesus took bread, Math. 26. 2^*
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and
said: Take, eat, this is my body.

Also he took the Cup, and when he 27.
had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it.

For this is the blood of the new Testamente, that is shed 28*
for many* for the remission of sins.

I say unto you, that I will not drink hence for the of this 29.
fruit of the vine, until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in
my fathers kingdom.

He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake Luk^ xxij. xix.
it, and gave it to them, saying: this is my body, which is given for you, do
this in remembrance of me.

Likewise after supper he took the Cup, saying: this cup 20.
is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

It is the spirit that quickens: the flesh profits nothing: John. vi.
lxiij.
the words that I speak unto you, are spirit, and life.

The Cup of thanks giuyng* which we bless (or prepare) i. Cor. x. xvi.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?

The bread which we break: is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

For we that are many, are one bread, and one body, because 17.
we all are partakers of one bread.

As often as ^e shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Chap. xi. xxvi.
cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come.

Wherefore, who so ever shall eat this bread, and drink 27.
this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord.

The Doctors.
THE bread, water, and wine, in this Sacrament, Justinius in his ^. Apology.
are not to be taken, as other common meats, and drinks be, but they be
meats ordained, purposely to give thanks to God, and therefore be called,
Eucharistia, and be called also the body and blood of Christ* And yet the same
meat and drink is changed into our flesh and blood, and nourishes our
bodies.

The bread wherein we give thanks unto God, although it Ireneus in his 4. book
and 34. Chap. against Valentius.
be of the earth, yet when the name of god is called upon it, it is not then
common bread, but the bread of thanks giuyng: having two things in it, one
earthly, and the other heavenly.

Christ confessed, bread, which is a creature, to be his body, In his. 32.
34. and. 57. Chap. of the same. 4. book.
and the cup to be his blood.

The bread wherein the thanks be given, is the body of the Lord.

Christ taking bread of the same sort that our bread is of, confessed that it
was his body. And that the thing, which was tempered in the Chalice, was his
blood.

The matter of the bread, avails nothing but goes Origene upon the. 1^. of
Math.
down into the belly, and is avoided into the place of easement: but the word
of god spoken upon the bread, is it that avails.

For as much as Christ said, I am a true Uine, therefore Ciprian in his 2.
book, and. 3. Epistle to Cecilius.
the blood of Christ is not water, but wine, nor in it can be thought, that
his blood (whereby we be redeemed, and have life) is in the cup, when wine is
not in the cup, whereby the blood of Christ is showed.

Christ taking the cup, blessed it, and gave it to his disciples, saying:
drink ye al of this. etc. by these words of Christ, we perceive, that the
cup which the lord offered, was not only water, but also wine: and that it
was wine, that Christ called his blood, whereby it is clear, that Christ's
blood is not offered, if there be no wine in the Chalice. How shall we drink
with Christ new wine, of the creature of the Uine, if in the Sacrifice of God
the father, and of Christ, we do not offer wine?

The Lord called bread made of many grains, knedde together, In his. 1. book
of his Epistles.
his body: And called wine made of many Grapes, his bloudde.

Because bread confirms the heart of the body, therefore In his Sermon of
the Lords Supper.
it is conveniently called the body of Christ. And because wine woorketh blood
in the flesh, therefore it has relation to the blood of Christ.

Christ having taken the bread, and having delivered the Tertullian in his. 4.
book. against Mercian.
same to his disciples, made it his body, saying, this is my body, that is to
say, this is a figure of my body.

Christ called bread his body. Against the Jews.


It is not to be believed, because God can do all things, that therefore he
has done all things: But we must search Against Praxeas.
and see, where he has done them.

Christ speaking of a loaf, which is round in fashion, Epiphanius i^
Aucorat^.
and cannot see, nor feel, said of it: This is my body.

Unto how many men could Christ's body have suffice^ Athanasius in that
Gospel, who so ever speaks a word against. etc.
for meat, that he should be the food of all the world? Therefore he made
mention of his Ascension into heaven: that he might withdraw them from
corporal and fleashly understanding.

Let us mark that the bread which the Lord brake, and Hierome to Hede^ (...).
gave to his disciples, was the body of our Savior Christ, as he said unto
them: Take, and eat, this is my body.

They remain the same that they were* and are changed Ambrose in his 4. book.
and. 4. Chap. of Sacraments.
into an other thing.

Augustine upon the. 98. Psalm.
Christ's words were not hard* Christ instructed them that remained, and
said unto them, it is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits
nothing. The words that I have spoken, are spirit and life: Understande ye
spiritually, that I have spoken. Ye shall not eat this body that ye see:
neither shall ye drink that blood that they shall sheede, that crucify me: I
have recommended unto you a certain Sacrament, being spiritually understood,
it will give you life.

That which you see upon the Table, is bread, and that In his Sermon made to
the Infantes and Children.
which is set before your eyes* is the cup: but touching that wherein your
faith desires to be instructed, the bread is the body of Christ, and the
cup his blood.

Jesus called meat his body, and drink his blood. In his. 2. sermon of the
words of the Apostle. In his. 3. book and. 4. Chap. of the Trinity.


Although we may set for the Christ by mouth, by writing, and by the
Sacrament of his body and blood, yet we call, neither our tongue, nor
words, nor ynke, letters, nor paper, the body and blood of Christ: but that
we call the body and blood of Christ, which is taken of the fruit of the
earth, and consecrated by mystical prayer.

If we were bodilesse, GOD would give us these things Chrysostom in his. 60.
Homily to the people of Antioche.
bare and bodilesse: but for as much as we have souls, fastened unto our
bodies, therefore God gives us things spiritual, under things visible and
natural.

Christ, myndyng to pluck up that heresy by the roots, In his. ^3. Homily
upon the ^6. of Math.
used wine as well before his resurrection when he gave the Sacrament, as
after at his Table without mysteries, for he says, of the fruit of the Uine,
which surely brings no water, but wine.

The bread, before it be sainctified, is called bread, but when Ad Caesarium
Mon. chum.
it is sanctified, by the means of the Priest, it is delivered from the name
of bread, and is exalted to the name of the Lords body: although the nature
of bread still remain. In his. 11. Homily upon Math. ^ Cirill in his. 4. book,
and. 14. upon John.


The very body of Christ it self, is not in the holy vessels: but the
mystery, or Sacrament thereof is there contained.

Christ gave unto his disciples, pieces of bread, saying: take eat, this is my
body.

Emissenus, of consecration, the. 2. Distinction.
If thou will know, how it ought not to seem to thee a new thing, and
impossible, that earthly and corruptible things, be turned into the
substance of Christ, look upon thy self, which art made new in Baptism,
when thou wast far from life, and banished from mercy as a stranger, and
from the way of salvation, and inwardly was dead, yet suddenly thou beganst
an other life in Christ, and wast made new by wholesome mysteries, thou
visibly diddeste remain in the same measure, that thou had before, but
invisibly thou wast made greater, without any increase of the body: thou wast
the self same person, and yet by the increase of faith, thou wast made an
other man: outwardly nothing was added, but all the change was inwardly. So
likewise when thou do go up to the reverent Table, to feed upon spiritual
meats, in thy faith, look upon the body and blood of him that is thy GOD:
honor him, touch him, with thy mind: take him in thy hand of thy heart: and
chiefly drink him, with the draught of thy inward man.

He would that they, which be partakers of the godly Sacraments, Theodorete
in his. 1. dialogue
should not set to their minds, upon the nature of the things, which they
see: but by the chaungyng of the names, should believe the things, which be
wrought in them by grace: for he that called that, which is his natural
body, corn, and bread, and also called him self, a Uine: he did honor the
visible tokens and signs, with the names of his body, and blood, not
chaungyng the nature, but addyng grace to nature.

The Sacramental signs, go not from their own nature, In his. 2. Dialogue.
after the sanctification* but continue in their former substance, form, and
figure, and may be seen and touched, as well as before: yet in our minds we
do consider, what they be made, and do repute and esteem them, and have them
in reverence, according to the same things, that they be taken for.

These words of Christ, in the sixte of Ihon, directly pertains Nicolas
Lita upon the. 110. Psalm.
nothing to the Sacramental, or corporal eating: for these words, were
spoken long before the Sacrament was ordained. Therefore of this place, there
can be made no good sufficient argument, touching the Sacramental communion.

The creature, of bread, and wine, by the unspeakable sanctification Beda in
octauis Epiphaniae.
of the holy ghost, is changed into the Sacrament of the body, and blood of
Christ.

There leaves not to be the substance of bread, and wine, Gelasius Pope
against the heretic Eutiches.
or the nature of wine. And in deed the Image, or representation, and
likeness of the body, and blood of Christ, is published in the ministration
of the mysteries.

The Sacrament, by the workyng of the holy ghost, pass^ into a divine
substance: yet notwithstanding, they remain still in the property of their
own nature.

Christ as he now tourneth, the bread, into his body, even Bertrame upon the
Euchariste.
so then in like sort, the Manna that fell from heaven, inuisibly made his
body.

Some men judge thus, some say thus, some have written Peter Lombard Senten.
4. did. 11. Si autem.
thus, some grant thus: some others have thought thus, that the very
substance of the bread and wine, remain still.

If a question were moved, what manner of conversion, or change this is:
whether it be in form, or in substance, or of some other sort, I am not able
to discuss it.

How the body of Christ is there, whether it be by chaungyng Gabriell upon
the canon, lect. 40.
of some thing into it, or Christ's body begin to be there, together with
the bread, both the substance, and the accidents of the bread, remainyng
still without chaungyng, it is not found expreste in the Canon of the Bible.

Of the manner and mean, how this might be (whether by Tonstall in his 3. book
of the Sacrament Page. 46.
transubstanciation) perhaps it had been better to leave every man, that would
be curious, to his own conjecture: as before the Counsel of Laterans, it
was left at liberty.

No man shall prove by the very bare words of the Gospel, John Fisher B. of
Rochester, against the captivity of Babylon, made by Martin Luther
that any Priest in these our days, does consecrate, the very body, and
blood of Christ.

Thus much of Matthewe, who does also only speak of the new Testament. Nor
there is no word found here, to prove that there is the true presence of
Christ's flesh, and blood in our Mass: for albeit that Christ made his
flesh of bread, and blood of wine, it follows not therefore, that we shall
also do the same, as often as we will attempt it, by the virtue of any word
that is there.

It cannot therefore be proved by any scripture, that either a lay man, or a
priest, as often as he shall go about that matter, to make likewise bread,
and wine, the body and blood of Christ, as Christ him self did, seeing that
this is not comprised, nor contained in the scriptures.

By this I think, every man understands, that the certainty of this matter,
depends not so much upon the Gospel, as it does upon the use and custom,
which is recommended unto us in so many hundred years, from the very first
fathers. Thus far of Fishers fishyng, for Crabbes.

The utter bark of the Sacrament, is not received, with Barnarde in his. 33.
Sermon upon the Canticles.
like pleasure, as the fatness of the Corn, faith and shape, memory and
presence, eternity and time, the countenance and the glass, the Image of GOD,
and the fashion of a servant. etc. (By which words he does so divide
remembrance, Nota.
from presence, that he does attribute the one, to the life wherein we be, and
the other to the life to come.)

The. xxx. Chapter.
This is my body, is a figurative speech, and signs and figures have their
names of the things which they signify.
THis is my covenant, which ye shall keep between Gene. 17. 1^.
me and you, and thy seed after thee, let every man child among you be
Circumcised.

That is, ye shall circumcise the foreskinne of your 11.
flesh, and it shall be a sign of the couenaunte between me and you*

And he set up there an alter, and called it, the mighty God Chap. 33. 20.
of Israel.

Thus shall ye eat it, your loins girded, your shoes on Exodus 12. 11.
your feet, and your staves in your hands, and ye shall eat it in haste: for
it is the Lords Passover.

When all Israel shall come to appear, before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 31. 11.
in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this law before all
Israel, that they may hear it.

Jesus took the bread, and when he had given thanks, he Math. 26. 26.
brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said: Take, eat: this is my
body.

Likewise also after supper, he took the cup, saying: this Luke. 22. 20.
Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

After he received the sign of Circumcision, as the zeal of Roma. 4. 11.
the righteousness of faith, which he had, when he was uncircumcised. etc.

GOD calls those things which be not, as though they 17.
were.

And did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for they drank 1. Cor. 10. 4.
of the same spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.)

The cup of blessyng which we bless, is it not the Communion 16.
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ?

According to his mercy he saved us, by the washyng of the Titus. 3. 5.
new birthe.

The Doctors.
Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, Tertullian in his. 7. Homily
upon Leuiticus
this letter kills, will thou that I bring an other letter that kills, out
of the new Testamente? He that has no knife (says he) let him fell his
coat and buy one. Lo, this letter is the Gospel, and yet it kills: but if
thou take it spiritually, it kills not: but in it is a quickenyng spirit.
Therefore, understand spiritually those things which are spoken, whither it
be in the law, or in the Gospel. For a spiritual man discuss thall things,
and is judged of no man.

Christ did not reprove bread, whereby he did represent his In his. 4. book
against Mercion the Heretic.
very body.

Jesus took bread, and giuyng it among his Disciples, made it his body,
saying: This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body: But a figure
it could not be, unless there were a body of a truth, and in deed.

Christ called bread his body, and wine his blood, because that in the old
Testamente, bread and wine were figures of his body and blood.

Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you shall Origene in his 7.
Homily upon leuiticus.
not have life in you. Consider that these things, written in Gods books, are
figures, and therefore examine and understand them as spiritual, and not as
carnal men: for if you understand them as carnal men, they hurt you, and
feed you not: for even in the Gospel is there found a letter that kills.
And not only in the old Testament: but also in the new Testament is there
found letters, that flaieth him, that spiritually does not understand which
is spoken. For if thou follow the letter, or words, of this that Christ said,
except you eat my flesh, and drink my blood, this letter kills. In his.
4. book and. 4. Chap. to the Romans Ciprian in his 2. book and 3. Epistle.


He called Circumcision rightly a sign, for that in it one thing was seen,
and an other was understood.

Christ's blood is showed in the wine, and the people in the water that is
mixte with the wine: so that the mixture of the water to the wine, signifies
the spiritual commixtion, and ioynyng of us unto Christ. In his sermon of the
Lords Supper.


The weakness of our faith, is taught by the understanding of the
Sacraments.

What profit have these words? Uerely, that we eating Basil of Baptism.
and drinkyng, may evermore be myndfull of him, that died for us, and rose
again. Hierom. upon the. 26. of Math.


Christ took bread, which comfort man's heart, that he might represent
thereby, his very body and blood.

Before consecration, an other kind is named: But after Ambrose in his book,
of those things, that are declared by the mysteries, the last Chapter.
the consecration the body of Christ is signified. Christ said, his blo^d:
before the consecration it is called an other thing, but after the
consecration, is signified the blood of Christ.

As thou have in baptism, received the similitude of death, so likewise dooest
thou in this Sacrament, drink the similitude In his. 4. book and. 4. Chap. In
the. 5. Chap. of the same book or Sacraments.
of Christ's blood.

The Priest says, make unto us this oblation to be acceptable, which is
the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thou do receive the Sacrament for a similitude, of the In his. 6. book
and. 1. Chap. of the Sacraments.
flesh and blood of Christ, but thou dooest obtain the grace and virtue of
his true nature: and receiuyng the bread, in that food thou art made partaker
of his godly substance.

In eating and drinkyng the bread and (...), we do signify In his book upon
the. 1. Cor. 11. Chap.
the flesh and blood, which were offered for us. And the old Testamente was
instituted in blood, because that blood was a witness of Gods benefit, in
signification and figure, whereof we take the mystical cup of his blood, to
the tuition of our body and soul.

Let the new Christened man be taught, that Sacraments Augustine of teaching
the ignorant people, the. 26. Chap.
be visible signs, of heavenly things, and that the things them selves,
that he sees not, must be honored in them. And that the same kind and
element, is not so to be taken, as it is in daiely use: Let him also be
taught, what the words mean, that he has heard: Moreover upon occasion
hereof, he must be taught, that if he hear any thing, even in the scriptures,
that sound carnally, let him think, that there is some spiritual thing
meante by it. In his book of the profit of repentance.


As many as in Manna understood Christ, they did eat the same spiritual
meat, that we do eat.

It is a dangerous matter, and a servitude of the soul, to In his. 3. book of
christian doctrine.
take the sign, in stead of the thing that it signified.

Seldom is any difficulty in proper words: But either the circumstaunce of
the place, or the conferryng of diverse translations, or else the original
tongue, wherein it was written, will make the sense plain: But in words that
be altered from their proper signification, there is great diligence, and
heed to be taken. And especially we must beware, that we take not literally
any thing that is spoken figuratively: nor contrariwise, we must not take for
a figure, any thing that is spoken properly. Therefore must be declared the
manner, how to descerne a proper speech, from a figurative, wherein must be
observed this rule.

If the thing which is spoken, be to the furtheraunce of charity, then it is
a proper speech, and no figure. So that if it be a commandment, that
forbids any evil or wicked thing, or commands any thing that is good, or
beneficial, then it is no figure: But if it command any evil, or wicked
thing, or forbids any thing that is good and beneficial, then it is a
figurative speech. Now this saying of Christ (except ye eat the flesh of
the son man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you) seems to
command an hainouls and a wicked thing, therefore it is a figure, commaundyng
us to be partakers of Christ's passion, keepyng in our minds, in our great
comfort and profit, that his flesh was crucified, and wounded for us.

Our lord doubted not to say: This is my body, when he In his book against
Adimantus the 12. Chap.
gave a sign of his body.

In his. 10. book and. 5. Chap. of the City of God.
Signs when they be applied unto godly things, are called Sacraments.

In his. 2. book of christian doctrine. 1. ca.
Reasonyng of signs, I say thus: Let no man consider in them, that they
be: but rather that they be signs, that is to say, that they do signify.

In his 46. treatise and. 26. treatise upon. John.
In Sacraments we see one thing, and we understand an other thing.

The Sacraments is one thing, the thing of the Sacrament is an other thing.

In his. 3. book and. 22. Chap. against Maximinus.
In Sacraments is to be seen, not what they be, but what they signify.

In his Sermon and to the Infantes.
Christ did carry up his body, from whence he shall come to judge the quick
and the dead. There he is now, fittyng on the right hand of the father. How
can therefore the bread be his body, and the cup, or that which is in the
cup, be his blood? These things brethren, are therefore called Sacraments,
because that in them, one thing is seen, and an other thing understood. That
which is seen, has a visible appearaunce or form: But that which is
understood has a spiritual utility and profit.

A day or two before good Fridaie, we use in common In his. 23. Epistle to
Bonifacius.
speech, to say thus: To morrow, or this day two days, Christ suffered
his passion, where in very deed he never suffered his passion but once, and
that was many years passed.

Likewise, upon Easter day we say, this day Christ rose from death: where
in very deed, it is many hundred years since he rose from death: Why then,
do not men reprove us as liars, when we speak in this sort? But because
we call these days so, by a similitude of those days, wherein those things
were done in deed. And so it is called that day, which is not that day in
deed: but by the course of the year, it is a like day. And such things be
said to be done that day, for the solemn celebration of the Sacraments,
which things in deed were not done that day, but long before. Was christ
offered any more but once? And he offered him self: And yet in a sacrament or
representation, not only every solemn feast, of Easter: but every day he is
offered to the people, so that he does not lie, that says, he is every day
offered.

For if Sacraments, had not some similitude, or likeness of those things,
whereof they be Sacraments: and for their similitude and likeness, commonly
they have the name of the things, whereof they be Sacraments. Therefore, as
after a certain manner of speech, the Sacrament of Christ's body, is
Christ's body: the Sacrament of Christ's blood, is Christ's blood: So
likewise the Sacrament of faith, is faith: And therefore, when we answer for
young children in their Baptism, that they believe, which have not yet the
mind to believe, we answer, that they have faith, because they have the
Sacrament of faith. And we say also that they turn unto God, because of
the Sacrament of conversion unto God: for the answer pertains to the
celebration of the Sacrament.

And likewise speaks the Apostle, of Baptism, saying: that by Baptism we be
buried with him into death, he says not, that we signify burial: But he
says plainly, that we be buried. So that the Sacrament of so great a thing,
is not called: but by the name of thing it self. In his. 57. question. upon
Leuiticus.


A thing which signifies, is wont to be called by the name of the thing,
which it signifies, as it is written in the scripture: the seven ears, be
seven years, the seven kine, be seven years, and many other like. And so said
S. Paul. that the rock was Christ, and not that it signified Christ: but even
as it had been in deed: which nevertheless, was not Christ, by substance:
But by signification. Even so, because the blood signifies and represents
the soul, therefore, in a Sacrament, or signification, it is called the
soul. In his book against Adimantus the 12. Chap.


For truly, so the blood is the soul, as Christ was the stone, and yet the
Apostle says not, that the stone signified Christ: but says it was Christ.
And this sentence, blood is the soul, may be understood to be spoken, in a
sign or figure, for Christ did not stick to say, This is my body, when he
gave the sign of his body. In his preface upon the. 3. Psalm.


Christ admitted (Judas) unto the banquet, when he did betake, and deliver unto
his disciples, the figure of his body.

Uisible Sacraments are ordained for carnal men, that In his questions upon
the old Testament.
by the Steps of Sacraments, we may be led from the things, that we see
with the eye, unto the things that we understand. In his. 9. book and. 14.
Chap. against Faustus.


The Sacraments of the old Law, were promises of things to be performed:
Our Sacraments are tokens of things, that already be performed.

The Sacraments of the Jews, in outward tokens, were In his. 26. treatise upon
John.
diverse from ours: But in the things signified, they were equal, and one
with ours. In his. 3. book and. 10. Chap. against the Donatistes.


If we behold the visible creatures, wherein the Sacraments are ministered,
who sees not, that they be corrupt? But if we consider the things, that
are wrought thereby, who sees not, that they cannot be corrupted.

All signs, or tokens, seem in a manner to bear the persons In his. 18. book
and. 48. Chap. of the City of God.
of the things them selves, that they signify. So the Apostle says, the
rock was Christ, for that the rock, whereof it was spoken, signified Christ.
Hierome upon the. 1. to the Galath.


Let us not think, that the Gospel stands in the words of the Scripture,
but in the meaning.

Christ in his last supper, gave to his Apostles, with his Caprian de
unction Chrismatis.
own hands, bread and wine, which he called his flesh, and blood: But on
the cross he gave his very body, to be wounded with the hands of the
soldiers, that the Apostles might declare to the world, how, and in what
manner, bread and wine, may be the flesh and blood of Christ. And the manner
he straight ways declares thus: That those things which do signify, and
those things which be signified by them, may be both called by one name.

If any man understand the words of Christ, carnally, Chrysostom in his.
46. Homily upon John.
he shall surely profit nothing thereby: for what mean these words, the
flesh avails nothing? He meante not of his flesh (God forbid) but he meante
of them that fleshely, and carnally understood those things that Christ
spoke: But what is carnal understanding? To understand the words simply, as
they be spoken, and nothing else, for we ought not so to understand the
things, which we see: But all mysteries must be considered with inward
eyes, that is, spiritually to understand them.

We offer in deed: but in remembrance of his death, this In his. 17. Homily
upon the Hebrews.
Sacrifice is a token, or figure of that sacrifice: The thing that we do, is
done in the remembrance of that thing that was done before, we offer alwaie
the same thing. Naie, rather we work the remembrance of that Sacrifice.

Christ ordained the table of his holy supper, for this purpose, Upon the. 22.
Psaline.
that in that Sacrament, he should daiely show unto us, bread, and wine, for a
similitude of his body.

God will not, that we should understand the words of In his. 14. Homily
upon John.
the holy scriptures, simply, and plainly, as they lie: But with great
wisdom and discretion. In his. 11. Homily upon Math.


In the Sanctified vessels, there is not the very body of Christ in deed:
But a mystery of that body is contained.

If Christ died not, whose sign, and whose token, is this In his. 83. Homily
upon Math.
Sacrament*

Christ left unto us his last remembrance, as if a man In his. 61. Homily
to the people of Antioche.
going a far journey, leave a token with his freinde, to the end that he
seeing the same, may remember his benefits, and his freendship: which token
that freinde, if he love unfeignedly, can not see without great motion of his
mind, and without tears. Fulgent^ in his book to king Thrasimundus.


This cup or chalice, is the new Testamente, that is to say, this cup or
chalice, which I delivered unto you, does signify the new Testament.

Our Savior without doubt changed the names, and Theodorete in his his. 1.
Dialogue.
gave to the bod ie the name of the sign or token, and to the token he gave
the name of the body. And so when he called him self a Uine, he called blood
that, which was a token of blood.

The cause is manifest, why the names were changed, for he would that they
which be partakers of the godly Sacraments, should not set their minds,
upon the nature of the things, which they see, but by the chaungyng of the
names, should believe the things, which be wrought in them by grace, for he
that called that, which is his natural body, corn, and bread, and also
called him self a vine, he did honor the visible tokens and signs, with the
names of his body and blood, not chaungyng the nature: but addyng grace to
nature.

It is clear, that it is the figure of those things, whereof it bears the
name.

Peter Lombarde. 4. distinction.
A Sacrament, is a sign of a holy thing.

In the. 2. distinct. qui manducat.
Therefore it is called a Sacrament, for because one thing shall appear, and
an other thing is understood and eaten.

In the. 2. distinction of Consecration, hoe est quod.
It is called the body of Christ: But improperly, the meaning of it may be
thus. It is called the body Christ, that is to say, it signifies the body
of Christ. Clements Alezander in Pedagogo. 1. book and. 6. cap.


Eat my flesh, and drink my blood: meaning hereby under an allegory, or by
way of a figure, the meat, and drink, that is of faith and promise.

It is to be noted, that the Sacrament is called a figurative D. Hardyng in his
book of a detection. etc. folio. 353.
body: because it is made present for a figurative purpose, that is to say,
to the end the death of the same body (which death is now past and absent)
may be remembered most effectually.

Some time the Sacrament is taken for the form of bread Polio. 334.
and wine, and that in deed is not our Lord.

I grant the Sacrament to be a mystical figure, of Christ's Polio. 339.
death, and of his visible body.

The. xxxj. Chapter.
We eat the body and blood of Christ, only by faith.
VErelie, verelie, I say unto you, he John. 6. 47.
that believes in me, has everlasting life. 48.


I am the bread of life. 50.


This is the bread, which comes down from heaven, that he which eats
of it, should not ^ie.

I am the living bread, which came 51.
down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: And
the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.

Uerelie, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh 53.
of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has 54.
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

For my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in 55.
deed.

He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells 56.
in me, and I in him.

As the living father has sent me, so live I by the father, 57.
and he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

This is the bread which came down from heaven: not 58.
as your fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead, he that eats of this bread
shall live for ever.

Who soever lives, and believes in me, shall never die. Chap. 11. 26.


I am the Uine: ye are the Branches: he that abides in Chap. 15. 5.
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruicte, for without me ye
can do nothing.

Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, that 1. Cor. 10. 1.
all our fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea.

And did all eat the same spiritual meat. 3.


And did al drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank 4.
of the spiritual Rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ.

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye Ephe. 3. 17.
being rooted and grounded in love. etc.

The Doctors.
THE same word, Christ called his flesh: for Tertullian of resurrection of
our bodies.
the word was made flesh: therefore, he must be received in cause of life: he
must be devoured, by hearing: he must be chewed by understanding, he must be
digested by faith.

He was wounded: whose blood we drink, Origene in his 16. Homily upon
Nombers. Cyprian in his Sermon of the Lords Suppe^.
that is to say, the words of whose doctrine we receive.

He that drinks of the holy Cup, remembryng the benefit of God, is more
thirsty then he was before, and liftyng up his heart unto the living God, is
taken with such a singular hunger and appetite, that he abhors all gaully
and bitter drinks of sin: and al favor of carnal pleasures is to him as it
were sharp and sower Uineger. And the sinner being converted, receiuyng the
holy Mysteries of the Lords Supper, gives thanks unto God, and boweth down
his head, knowing that his sins be forgiven, and that he is made clean and
perfect, and his soul (which God has sanctified) he rendereth to God again
as a faithful pledge, and then he glories with Paul, saying, now it is not I
that live: but it is Christ that lives in me.

These things be practiced and used among the faithful people, and to pure
minds, the eating of his flesh, is no horror, but honor: And the spirit
deliteth in the drinkyng of the holy and sainctified blood: and doing this, we
whette not our teeth to bite: But with pure faith we break the holy bread.

The aucthour of this tradition said, that except we eat his flesh, and
drink his blood, we shall have no life in us: instructyng us with a spiritual
lesson, and openyng to us a way, to understand so privy a thing, that we
should know, that the eating is our dwelling in him, and our drinkyng is as it
were an incorporation in him: being subject unto him, in obedience: joined
unto him, in our wills: and united in our affections. The eating therefore of
this flesh, is a certain hunger, and desire to dwell in him.

As meat is to the flesh: so is faith unto the soul.

We eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood, being made, ^asile in his 141.
Epistle.
by his incarnation, and sensible life, partakers of his words and wisdom.
For his flesh and blood, he called al his mystical conversation here in his
flesh, and in his doctrine, consistyng, of his whole life, pertainyng both to
his humanity and divinity, whereby the soul is nourished, and brought to the
contemplation of things eternal.

Ambrose in his. 2. book of Virgins.
In our minds Christ is daiely offered, for the redemption of the body.

In his. 19. Sermon.
Stephen being in earth, touched Christ being in heaven, by faith.

In his. x. book and. 24. in Chap. Luke.
We touch not Christ by bodily touching: but we touch him by faith.

In his 6. book and. 8. Chap. in Luke.
By faith Christ is touched: By faith Christ is seen. He is not touched
with our bodies: he is not holden with our eyes (but with faith.)

In his book of those things that are declared by the Mysteries the. 3. Chap.
That thing is better seen, that is not seen with our eyes.

August. upon the. 75. Psalm.
When we forgette not the gifts of our Savior, is not Christ offered unto
us every day? Of the very remnauntes of our thoughts, that is to say, of our
very memory, Christ is so daiely offered unto us, as though he renewed us every
day.

Of things that be absente, faith is present: of things In his. 13. book
and. 1. Chap. of the Trinity.
that be without, faith is within: and of things that be not seen, faith
is seen.

From whence has the water, this great power, that it In his 80. treatise
upon John.
touches the body, and washes the heart, saving by the workyng of the
word? Not for that it is spoken: But for that it is believed.

Who soever thou be, that with faith, and fear, hear In his. 141. Sermon
on the 2. holp day after Easter.
the word of God, the breakyng of bread does comfort thee, the absence of
our Lord, is not absence: have thou faith, and he, whom thou see not, is
with thee. Therefore our Lord as touching his body, has absented him self
from all his church, and is ascended into heaven, that our faith may be
edified.

How shall I hold Christ being absent? How shall I thrust In his. 50. treatise
upon John.
my hand into heaven, that I may hold him sittyng there? Send up thy faith
and thou hold him. Thy fathers held him in flesh, hold him thou in thy
heart: for Christ being absente, is also present: unless he were present, we
could not hold him. But for as much as it is true, that he faieth, behold, I
am with you until the end of the world. Therefore he is gone, and yet is
here, he comes again, and has not forsaken us, for he has advanced his
body into heaven: But he has not withdrawn his majesty from the world.

Our Lord called him self the bread, that came from heaven, In his. 26.
treatise upon John.
exhortyng us to believe in him. For to believe in him, that is, to eat the
bread of life. He eats, that believes in him. He is fed inuisibly, because
he is new borne inuisibly. Inwardly he is an infant: Inwardly he is new.
Where he is renewed, there is he filled.

Christ him self is our meat, then which, nothing is In his. 7. treatise
upon John.
more sauery: so that a man has a sound taste in his heart.

The Lord comfort us that can not now touch him In his. 1. treatise upon
the Epistle of John.
with hand, sittyng in heaven: But by faith we may touch him.

When ye shall see the son of man ascendyng up, where In his. 27. treatise
upon John.
he was before, then shall ye see, that he gives not his body, in such
sort, as you imagine: then shall ye understand, that his grace is not
consumed by morsells.

He that eats Christ's body inwardly, not that eats In his. 26. treatise
upon John.
outwardly: he that eats the body of Christ it self, in heart, not that
presses with his teeth. To believe in Christ, that is the eating of the bread
of life: prepare not your mouths, prepare your hearts.

To believe in him, is to eat him, that drinkyng of him, what is it else: but to
live by him.

Why do thou prepare thy belly, and thy teethe? Believe, In his. 25.
treatise upon John.
and thou have eaten.

Come unto me and receive the light: what is, come unto In his book against
the Jews* 9. chap.
him: But believe in him?

Your wakyng shall not be painful to you: for there ye In his book of nature
and grace the. 69. Chap.
come to him, where ye believe in him.

There be certain spiritual hands in the heart,

The Preachers deliver Christ unto their auditors, and In his. 4. book and.
16. Chap. of christian doctrine. Upon the. 46. Psalm.
learners.

Behold Christ ascendyng: believe in Christ being absente: trust in Christ
that shall come again: And yet by his privy mercy, feel him present.

This is therefore, to eat that meat, and to drink that In his. 26. treatise
upon John.
drink, to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him.

What other thing here, is it to drink, but to live? Eat In his. 2. Sermon of
the words of the Apostle.
life, drink life, and thou shalt have life, and yet thy life is whole.

The things that we understand (by faith) are more In his. 117. Epistle. Of
the words of our lord in Luke. Chrysostom in his. 16. Homily upon Math.
certain, then the things, that we see with our eyes.

Not that is seen: but that is believed does feed us.

All Mysteries or Sacraments, must be considered with inward eyes, that is to
say, spiritually. For the inward eyes as soon as they do see the bread, do
pass over the creatures, and think not of that bread, which is baken of the
Baker: But of him that calls him self the bread of life, which is signified
by the mystical or Sacramental bread.

Where as the carrion is, there are the Eagles. The car^ion In his. 24. Homily
upon the 1. Cor.
is the body of Christ, in respect of his death: But he names Eagles, to
show, that who so will approach to this body, must mount a lofte, and have
no dealyng with the earth, nor be drawn and creep down ward: But must
evermore fleed^, and behold the son of Justice, and have the eye of his
mind quick and sharp. For, this is a Table of Eagles, that flee on high: not
of Iayes that creep beneath.

Christ is thy bankette, Christ is thy thought, Christ is Hierome of the. 7.
orders of the Church. De Grad^. 7. Hierome upon the book of the Preache^.
thy joy, Christ is thy desire, Christ is thy readyng, Christ is thy rest.

The flesh of the lord is very meat, and the blood of the Lord is very
drink, we have this good profit only in this world, that we may eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, not only in a mystery: But also in the readyng
of the scriptures. For it is very meat and drink, which is taken out of Gods
word: by the knowledge of the Scriptures.

Unto whom Christ was painted out, and crucified among you before your eyes,
yet was not Christ crucified in Galatia: but at Jerusalem: how then says
saint Paul unto the Galathians, Christ was crucified amongst you? His
meaning Chrysostom upon the Epist. to the Galath. the. 3. Chap.
was, to show the strength of faith, which is hable to see things, though
they be far away, and that by the eyes of faith, saw the death of Christ
more plainly, and perfectly, then many that were present at his death, and
saw all that was done.

Christ was the very true Manna: whom under the figure Cirill in his. 3. book
and. 34. Chap. upon John.
of Manna, God gave unto the fathers of the old law.

Christ's is the beginning, and foundation unto holiness, and righteousness: I
mean by faith, and none otherwise, Cirill in his. 4. book and. 39. Chap. upon
John.
Christ dwells in us.

They were under the cloud, and were drinched with Christ, the rock giuyng
them water. Hillary upon the. 67. Psalm. Beda upon the 1. Cor. 10. cap.


No man may doubt: but every faithful man is then made partaker of the body
and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made the member of Christ.

What is it to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood, but to Bernarde in hi^
3. Sermon upon the Psalm. Qui habitat.
be partakers of his passion, and to follow that conversation, which he did
use here in the flesh? Which thing that most holy Sacrament, in the which
we receive the body of the Lord, does signify, that is to say, that as
the form of bread is seen to enter into us, so must we know, that by that
conversation, which he did use in the earth, he enters into us to dwell,
through faith in our hearts.

He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal In (...) Sermon
of the loving of God.
life, that is to say, he that is myndfull, or does remember my precious
death, and by mine example does mortify his members, which are upon the
earth, has everlasting life.

We may not look barely upon those things (of bread Euthinius upon the. 9.
Chap. of John.
and wine) but must thereof imagine some other matter, and behold the same
with our inward spiritual eyes: as it is meet to behold mysteries.

Inwardly he beholds Christ, whom by meditation he Gregory upon the. 1.
Kings a. Chap. and 2. book.
bears in his heart.

In his. 29. book and. 16. Chap. of Job.
Ihon Baptiste by poinctyng with his finger: Esaias by Prophesiyng, Abell by
offering, spoke all three of one lamb. And Abell by signifiyng, held the same
Christ in his hands, whom Ihon held by poinctyng, and whom Esaias held by
Prophesiyng.

This is the drinkyng of the blood of Jesus, to be made partaker Clemens
Alexander in his a book and. 2. Chap. in Paedagogo.
of his immortality.

In the decrees of penance the. 2. distinct.
This is to eat that lively bread, to believe in Christ, that is to say, with
love to stick fast unto Christ,

Leo Pope in his. 3. Sermon of the birthe of of our Lord.
The Sacraments by reason of the time were diuerset when as the faith, by the
which we live, was in no age diuerie.

The. xxxij. Chapter.
The wicked eats not the body of Christ.
Give not that which is holy to Dogs, Math. 7. 6.
neither, cast ye your pearls before Swine, least they tread thein^ under
feet, and tournyng again, all to rent you.

Every branch that bears not John. 15. 2.
fr^icte in me, he takes away.

If any man abide not in me, he is 6.
cast forth as a branch, and withers: and men gather them, and cast
them into the fire.

If any man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Romans 8. 9.


Wherefore, who soever shall eat this bread, and drink 1. Cor. 11. 29.
the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and 29.
drinks his own dampnation, because he discerns not the Lords body.

The Doctors.
THE word was made flesh, and very meat, Origene upon Math.
which, who so eats, shall surely live for ever, which no evil and wicked
man can eat, for if it could be, that he that continues evil, might eat
the word made flesh, seeing that he is the word, and bread of life, it should
not have been written: who so ever eats of this bread, shall live for ever.

Jesus is the bread, which is the Saints, and he that takes Ambrose of the
Patriarchs blessyng, the. 6. Chap.
this bread, does not dye a sinners death, for this bread is the remission of
sins.

This bread that goes into the body, is not so greedely In his book upon the
Sacraments.
sought of us, but the bread of everlasting life, which vpholdeth the
substance of the soul. For he that disagreeth from Christ, d^oeth not eat
his flesh, nor drink his blood, although he receives the Sacrament of so
high a thing, to his utter damnation and undoing.

Neither heretics, nor such as profess a true faith in Augustine in his.
21. book and. 25. Chap. of the City of God.
their mouths, and in their living show the contrary, have neither a true
faith (which woorketh by charity, and does not evil) are to be coumpted
among the members of Christ. For they can not be, both members of Christ, and
members of the devil. Therefore it may not be said, that any of them eat
the body of Christ. For when Christ says, he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. He shows what it is, to eat
his body, and drink his blood: which is, when a man dwells so in Christ,
that Christ dwells in him. For Christ spoke those words, as if he should
say: he that dwells not in me, and in whom I dwell not, let him not say or
think, that he eats my body, or drink my blood.

He that does not eat his flesh, and drink his blood, In his. 26. treatise
upon John.
has not in him everlasting life. And he that eats his flesh and drinks
his blood, has everlasting life: but it is not so iu those meats, which then
we take to sustain our bodies. For, although without them we cannot live, yet,
it is not necessary, that whosoever receives them, shall live, for they may
dye for age, sickness, or otherways.

But in this meat and drink of the body and blood of our Lord, it is other
wise, for both they that eat and drink them not, have not everlasting life,
and contrariwise, who so ever eat and drink, they have everlasting life.

The Sacrament of the unity of Christ's body and blood, is taken in the Lords
table, of some men to life, and of some men to death: but the thing it self is
taken of all men to life, and of no man to death. This is to eat that meat,
and drink that drink: to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwell in him.
And for that cause, he that dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ
dwells not, without doubt he eats not spiritually his flesh, nor drink his
blood: although carnally and visibly with his teeth, he bite the Sacrament of
his body and blood.

The disciples did eat the bread, which is the Lord: but In his. 59.
treatise upon John.
Judas did eat the bread of the Lord, against the Lord, to them it was
life: but to him, it was pain and death.

In his. 53. Sermon of the words of the Lord.
Many do receive the Sacrament of his body: but they shall not all that
receive it, have the place with him, which is promised unto his members.

Chrisostom.
Saincta, sainctis: holy things, for holy men.

Hiero. upon the. 6^. Chap. of Esaie.
All that love pleasure more then god, eat not the flesh of Jesus, nor drink
his blood, of the which him self says: he that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, has everlasting life.

In his book upon Ierimie*
Heretics does not eat and drink the body, and blood of the Lord,

In his book upon the. 8. of Oseas.
Heretics eat not the flesh of Jesus, whose flesh is the meat of faithful
men.

Hillary in his ^. book. of the Trinity.
The bread that came down from heaven, is not received but of him, that has
our lord, and is the member of Christ.

He that agrees not with Christ, does neither eat his Prosper in his book
of Sentences, taken out of Augu. works, the. 339. Ser* ^
body, nor drink his blood, although to the condempnation of his presumption,
he receive every day, the Sacrament of so high a matter.

Barnarde in his 26. Sermon upon the Canticles.
Christ is touched, with affection, not with the hand: with desire, not with
the eye: with faith, not with the senses.

D. Hardyng in his book, a detection of foul errors, lies. etc. folio. 346.
Judas is said to have eaten the bread of our lord against our lord, because
he did eat the Sacrament unworthily, and so he did not eat our lord, as he
is bread, that is to say, as he feeds: but as he is a Judge, and as he
condempneth the unworthy eater, to everlasting pain.

The. xxxiij. Chapter.
What it is to be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Give ye not that which is holy to dogs, Math. 7. 6.
neither cast ye your Pearls before swine, lest they tread them under their
feet.

Who soever shall eat this bread, and 1. Cor. 11. 27.
drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord.

For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and 29.
drinks his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body.

The Doctors. a^ Ciprian of the washing of the Apostles feet.

THE wicked have no gain by the death of Christ: but the benefits that they
have despised, do most justly condemn them.

Athanasius of the passion and Cross of our Lord.
Worshippyng our Lord, and not living so as ^s meet for our Lord, they feel
not, that thereby they are made guilty of our Lords death. c Ambrose upon
the* 1. Cor. 11. Chap.


He is unworthy of the Lord, that does otherwise celebrate the Mysteries, then
it was delivered of the Lord, for he cannot be devout, that takes it
otherwise, then it was given of the Author.

Outwardly they have the Sacrament of Christ's body: Augustine in his. 50.
Epistle ^o Bonifacius. John ^0. Sermon of time.
but the thing it self, inwardly in their hearts they have not. And therefore,
they eat, and drink their own judgment. He is guilty of no small price:
but even of the blood of christ, that defiles his own soul, that was made
clean by the Passion and blood of Christ.

The aduouterer is guilty of everlasting death, because he In his. 120. Sermon
in the same book. Hierome upon the. 1. of Mala^hy.
despised in him self, the blood of our Savior.

When the Sacraments are abused: then he, whose Sacraments they are, is said
to be abused.

The. xxxiiij. Chapter.
The Lay people ought to receive the Cup of the Lord, as well as the Bread.
ALso he took the Cup, and when he had Math. 26. 27.
given thanks, he gave it them, saying, drink ye all of it.

For this is the blood of the new Testament, 28.
that is shed for many, for the remission of sins.

Also he took the Cup, and when he Mark. 14. 23.
had given thanks, gave it to them: and they all drank of it.

And he took the Cup and gave thanks, and said, take Luke. 22. 17.
this and divide among you.

The cup of blessyng, or thankesgeuyng, which we bless, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ?

I have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered 1. Cor. 11. 23.
unto you, to wit. etc.

After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he 25.
had supped, saying, This Cup is the new testament in my blood: this do as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this 26.
Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come.

The Doctors.
ONE Cup is divided, unto the whole Ignatius to Philadelphes.
Church.

How shall we teach, exhort, and Cyprian in his 2. Epist* to Cornelius. the
Pope.
provoke them to shed their blood, for the confession of the name of Christ,
if we do deny, or will not give unto them the blood of Christ, when they
should fight and stand manfully in the quarrel of their master, and Lord
Christ?

Or how shall we make them apt to drink the cup of Martyrdom, if we do
not permit nor suffer them, to drink the cup of the Lord in the Church, by
the right that they have to communicate with us.

Chrysostom in his. xxvii. Homily in the 1. Cor.
Christ both in the bread, and also in the cup, said, do this in
remembrance of me.

In his. ^8. Homily in the 2. Cor.
In the receiuyng of the holy Mysteries, there is no difference between Priest
and people.

Dionisius Hiera. 3. Chap.
The unity of the cup, is divided unto all people.

Beda in his. 6* book upon the xxii. of Luke.
The bread in mystical manner, has relation to the body of Christ: the wine
has relation unto his blood.

Haimo upon the. i. Co. xi. ca.
The Cup is called the communication, because of the participation, for that
every man receives of it.

Theophilact: in the. i. Cor. xi* Chap.
The reverend cup, is in equal manner delivered unto al.

Paschasius.
Drink ye all of this: as well the ministers, as the rest of the faithful.

Augustine of Consecration the. ii. distinction quia passus.
We receive together: we drink together: because we live together.

Gelasius Pope, of consecration, the. ii* distinction. Cap. comperimus.
We have understood, that some having only received the holy portion of the
body, do abstain from the cup of the holy blood: but since that they are
moved by a fond superstition, which I know not, thus to abstain, either let
them receive the whole Sacrament, or be put from all together* For there can
be no division of this one Sacrament, and high mystery, without great
Sacrilege.

It is not without a just and necessary cause, that the Sacrament The Close
upon the same Canon.
is taken under both kinds. For the kind or form of bread, is referred to
the flesh: and the kind or form of wine, to the soul.

It is taken and received under both kinds, for to signify that Christ did
take upon him, both a human body, and an human soul. And also for to
signify that the receiuyng of this Sacrament, is available both to the
flesh, and also to the soul, for if it were only received, under one kind,
it should be signified that it is available only, for the unition and
sauegarde of the one.

Where as for the accomplishement of the Communion, Leo Pope, of Consecration
the. 2. Distinstinction, cum omne.
they dippe the Sacrament, and deliver it unto the people, they have not
receined this witness of the Gospel, for the delivery of the bread, and the
delivery of the Cup, are mentioned a sunder.

They be false catholics, that are not ashamed by all means, Gerardus
Lo^ichius. in the. 7. part of the Canon.
to hinder the reformation of the Church. They to the intent the other kind
of the Sacrament may not be restored unto the lay people, spare no kind of
blasphemies, for they say, that Christ said only unto his Apostles, drink
ye all of this: but the words of the Canon be these: take and eat ye all of
this: Here I beseech them, let them tell me, whether they will have these
words also, only to pertain unto the Apostles. Then must the lay people,
abstain from the other kind of the bread also, which thing to say, is an
heresy, and a pestilente, and a detestable blasphemy. Wherefore it follows,
that each of these words was spoken unto the people, and to the whole Church.

Whole Christ is not contained under each kind, by way Alexander of Hales* 4.
q. 40. m. 3. Article. 2. Ibidem.
of Sacrament: but the flesh only under the form of bread, and the blood
under the form of wine.

The receiuyng under both kinds, which order the lord delivered, is of
greater strength, and of greater fullness. 4. Q. 53. M. 1.


Consideration had unto the Sacrament, and to the perfection Ruardus Tapper,
Cassander, de vtraque specie Page 29.
of the same, it were more conueniente, that the Communion were ministered
under both kinds, then under one alone. For this were more agreeable to the
institution, and fulness thereof, yea, and to the example both of Christ, and
also of the fathers, and of the primative Church.

The. xxxv. Chapter.
Against reservation of the Sacrament.
Eat not thereof raw, boiled, nor sodden in Exodus. 1^. 9.
water, but roasted with fire, both his head, his feet, and his purtenaunces.

And ye shall reserve nothing of it unto 10.
the morning: but that which remains of it unto the morrow, shall ye burn
with fire.

Moises then said unto them, let no man reserve thereof Chap. 16. 19.
till morning.

The Doctors.
THis bread is received, and not shut up. Ciprian of the Lords Supper. Clemens
in his 2. Epistle.


Let there be so many hosts, or so much bread offered at the altar, as may
be sufficient for the people. If any thing remain, let it not be kept
until the morning.

Augustine in his. 3. book and x. Chap. of the Trinity.
The bread made to this purpose: is spent in receiuyng the Sacrament.

Hierome in the. 1. Cor. 11. Chap.
After the Communion was done, what so ever portion of the Sacrifices remained,
they spente it there together in the Church, eating their common supper.

Cirill in his v. homily upon Leuiticus.
The bread that our Lord gave unto his disciples, he lyngred it not, nor bad
it to be kept until the morning (for that Christ said not) take and keep,
but take and eat.

Hesichius in his* ii. book. and 8. ca. upon Le.
The remanentes of the Sacrament were burnt, immediately in the fire.

Nicephorus in his. 17. book and. xxv. chap.
The same remanentes, in some places were given to children that went to
school, to be eaten by them presently in the Church.

Gabriel Biell in his. 26. L^ction.
Christ gave not (the Sacrament) to his disciples that they should reverently
reserve it: but he gave it for their use, saying: Take, and eat.

The. xxxvj. Chapter.
We are not saved by the outward Ceremonies of the Sacrament.
Ask now the Priests concerning the Aggeus. 2. 12.
law, and say. If one bear holy flesh in 13.
the skirte of his garmente, and with his skirte do touch the bread, or the
potage, or the wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the Priest
answered and said, no.

In deed I baptize you with water, to amendment of life: Math. 3. 11.
but he that comes after me, is mightier then I: he will Baptize you with the
holy ghost, and with fire.

Uerely, verily I saic unto thee, except that a man be borne John. 3. 5.
of water and the spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God.

Now are ye clean through the word, which I have spoken Chap. 15. 3.
unto you.

Faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness. Romans 4. 9.


How was it then imputed? When he was Circumcised, or 10.
uncircumcised? Not when he was Circumcised, but when he was vncircumeised.

After he received the sign of Circumcision, as the seal of 11.
the righteousness of faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised. etc.

Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, ^. Cor. 10. 1.
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea.

And were all Baptized unto Moises, in the cloud, and in 2
the sea.

But with many of them GOD was not pleased: for they 5
were overthrown in the wilderness.

Husbands, love you your wives, even as Christ loved Ephe. 5. 25.
the Church, and gave him self for it.

That he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, by the wasshyng 26
of water, through the word.

To the which also the figure that now saves us, even 1. Peter* 3. 21.
Baptism agrees (not the puttyng away of the filthe of the flesh: but in
that a good conscience makes request to God) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

The Doctors.
IN Baptism we are washed with the Passion Tertullian of Baptism. Origene
upon the. 15. of Math.
of Christ Jesus.

The thing, that is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer, sanctifies
not him that uses it, by the nature of itself.

The remission of sin, whether it be given by baptism, Ciprian of Christ's
Baptism.
or by any other sacrament, is in deed of the holy ghost, and to the same holy
ghost, only the privilege of this work does appertain. The solemnity of
the words, and the invocation of Gods holy name, and the outward signs
appoincted by the ministry of the priest, by the institution of the Apostles,
work the visible outward Sacrament: but touching the substance thereof, it
is the holy ghost, that woorketh it.

It is not nature, that gives effect, or force unto the elements In his
Sermon de unction Chrismatis.
being sanctified: but the divine power works more mightily.

If there be any grace in the water, it is not of the nature Basile, of the
holy Ghost in the. xv. Chap. Ambrose in i. book of Sacraments, the 5. Chap.
Augustine in his. 80. treatise upon John.
of the water: but of the presence of the spirit.

The element is one thing, and consecration an other. The work is one thing,
and operation an other. The water heals not, unless the holy ghost
discende, and consecrate that water.

Now are ye clean, because of the word, that I have spoken to you: but why
says he not, now ye are clean because of the Baptism, wherewith ye are
washed, saving that, because in the water it is the word, that makes
clean? take away the word, and what is the water, more then water. Whence
is all this so great virtue, or power of the water, that it touches the
body, and washes the heart: but by the workyng of the word? Not for that it
is spoken: but for that it is believed.

The Infidel when he hears of the water of Baptism, Chrysostom upon the
Cor. ^. (...).
thinks it to be only plain water: but I that believe in christ do not only
see water, but also the cleansyng of the soul, by the spirit of God. I
consider Christ's burial, his refurrection, our sanctification, righteousness,
and the fullness of the spirit: the thing that I see, I judge not with my
bodily eyes: but with the eyes of my mind.

Is it not a man that Baptizeth? Man stretches forth his In his. xxvii. Homily
of his return from Asia to Constantinople.
right hand: but God governs his hand: doubt not of the grace of God, for
it is the gift of God.

In baptism, the paper, is the conscience, the tongue of the Priest is the
pen, the hand is the grace of the holy ghost.

See thou the water? Consider the divine power that The Counsel of Nyce.
lies hid in the water. Imagine that the water is full of heavenly fire.

The minister being a man, gives only the water: but Hierome upon the. 4.
Chap. of Esaie.
God gives the holy ghost, whereby the sins be washte away.

If any man having received only the bodily wasshyng of In his book upon the.
3. Chap. to the Galathians.
water, that is outwardly seen with the eye, he has not put on our Lord Jesus
Christ, although Simon Magus in the Acts of the Apostles, received the
Baptism of water, yet because he had not the holy ghost, he put not on Christ.

True Baptism stands not so much in wasshyng of the Of Consecration in the.
4. Distintion Cap. verus.
body, as the faith of the heart, as the doctrine of the Apostle has taught
us, saying, by faith purifiyng their hearts, and in an other place, Baptism
makes us safe: Not the puttyng away of the filthe of the flesh: but the
examinyng of a good conscience before God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

We may not in any wise say, that the grace of God is contained Bonauentura in
the. 4. Sentence. 1. distinction, and. 3. Question.
substancially, and verily in the Sacraments, as water is contained in the
vessel, or a medicine in the box. For so to say it were erroneous: but we
say the Sacraments contain the grace of God: because they signify the grace
of God.

The grace of god is not in the visible signs, but in the soul.

To the objection, that is made, that the remission of sins is hid in
Baptism: we must answer thus, that it must be taken of the thing signified:
yet not to contain verily, and substantially in it self: but that the grace,
that is signified thereby is contained in the soul:

The Sacrament justifies no man, nor makes him faithful: Luther in his
Homily upon the feast of Corpus Christi day.
but requires that thou be faithful, and justified, before thou come to it.

The. xxxvij. Chapter.
Christ's body is but in one place at once, and not in many places.
IF any shall say unto you, lo, here is christ, Math. 24. 23.
or there, believe it not.

Ye have the poor always with you, but Chap. 26. 11.
me shall ye not have always.

After the Lord had spoken unto them, he Mark. 16. 19.
was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.

And they found the Stone rolled away from the Sepulcher, Luke. 24. 2.


And went in, but found not the body of the Lord Jesus. 3


He is not here, but is risen. 6.


And it came to pass, that as he blessed them, he departed 51.
from them, and was carried up into heaven.

I leave the world, and go to the Father. John. 16. 28.


And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, Acts. 1. 9.
he was taken up: for a Cloud took him up out of their sight.

Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gasing into heaven? this 11.
Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen
him go into Heaven.

And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preathed Chap. 3. 20.
unto you.

Whom the Heavens must contain until the time that 21.
all things be restored: which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy
Prophets since the world began.

Behold, I see the Heavens open, and the Son of man Chap. 7. 56.
standing at the right hand of God.

Though we had known Christ after the flesh, yet now 2. Cor. 5. 16.
henceforth, know we him no more.

If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which Collos. 3. 1.
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also, we look Philip. 3. 20.
for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.

We have such an high Priest, that sits at the right Hebrews. 8. 1:
hand of the throne of the majesty in Heaven.

This man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits Chap. x. xii.
for ever at the right hand of God.

The Doctors.
IF he be here among us still, how can he be gone Origene in his 33. Homily
upon Math.
hence as a staunger departed into another country? Christ is both GOD and
man, having in him two natures. And as a man he is not with us unto the
worlds end, nor is present with all his faithful, that be gathered together
in his name: but his divine power and spirit is ever with us. Paul was absent
from the Corinthians in his body, when he was present with them in his spirit:
So is Christ gone hence, and absent in his humanity, which in his divine
nature is every where. And in this saying we divide not his humanity (for
saint John writes, that no spirit that deuideth Jesus can be of god) but we
reserve to both his natures, their own properties.

It is not christ as being man, is whersoeuer two or three be In his. 23.
treatise upon Math
gathered together in his name: neither Christ as being man is with us, al
days unto the worlds end, nor christ as being man, is present with the
faithful every where gathered together: but the divine power, or nature that
was in Christ. Epiphanius in his. 3. book of his short declaration of the
christian faith.


He sits at his fathers right hand in glory, not puttyng away his body:
but ioynyng to the same in spiritual condition in the perfection of one
Godhead, even as our bodies, that now are sown according to the flesh, shall
be raised ^erordyng to the spirit.

Before Prayer, the Priest with a Preface, prepares the Cyprian upon the
Lords prayer.
hearts of the brethren, saying unto them, lift up your hearts: that when the
people answers, we lift them up unto the Lord, they may be put in mind
to think of nothing else, but of the lord.

The Angel which was with Cornelius, was not at the Basile of the holy ghost
the xxii. Chap.
same time with Philip, nor the Angel which spoke to Zachary in the Alter,
was not the same time in his proper place in heaven: but the holy ghost was at
one time in Abacucke, and in Daniell in Babylon, and with Hierome in Prison,
and with Ezechiell in Chober, and therefore he is God.

Seek the things that be above, not the things that be upon Ambrose in his x.
book and xxiiii. Chap. of Luke.
the earth. Therefore we must not seek Christ upon earth: nor in earth: nor
according to the flesh, if we list to find him.

Marie could not touch Christ, because she sought him upon the earth: but
Stephen touched him, because he sought him in heaven.

Doubt not but Jesus Christ, as concerning the nature of Augustine in his. 57.
Epistle unto Dardanus.
his manhood, is now there, from whence he shall come. And remember well, and
believe the profession of a Christian man, that he rose from death, ascended
into heaven, sits at the right hand of his father, and from that place, and
none other, shall he come to judge the quick and the dead, and he shall come
(as the Angel said) as he was seen to go into heaven, that is to say, in
the same form and substance, unto the which he gave immortality: but
changed not nature. After this form, we may not think that he is every
where. For, we must beware, that we do not so stablishe his divinity, that
we take away the verity of his body.

The Lord Jesus, as God, is every where, and as man, is in heaven.

Doubt not but our Lord Jesus Christ, is every where as God, and as a
dweller he is in man, that is the Temple of god, and he is in a certain place
in heaven, because of the measure of a very body.

Take away from bodies limitation of place, and the bodies will be no where,
and because they be no where, they will be nothing: take away from bodies the
qualities of bodies, there will be no place for them to be in, and therefore the
same bodies must needs be no where.

Our savior Jesus Christ, is above: but yet his truth is In his. 30.
treatise upon John.
here, his body wherein he rose, can be but in one place: but his truth is
spread every where.

You shall have the poor always with you: but me you In his. 50. treatise
upon John.
shall not ever have: Christ spoke these words of the presence of his body.
For, as concerning his divine majesty, as concerning his providence, as
concerning his infallible and invisible grace: these words be fulfilled which
he spoke: I am with you unto the worlds end: But as concerning the flesh
which he took in his incarnation, as concerning that which was borne of the
Uirgine, as concerning that which was apprehended by the Jews, and crucified
upon a Tree, and taken down from the Cross, lapped in Linen clothes, and
buried, and rose again, and appeared after his resurrection, as concerning the
flesh, he said: you shall not have me ever with you.

Wherefore, seeing that as concerning his flesh, he was conuersaunt with his
disciples forty days, and they accompaniyng, seeing, and following him, he
went up into heaven, Both he is not here (for he sits at the right hand of
his Father) and yet he is here, for he departed not hence, as concerning the
presence of his divine majesty, we have Christ ever with us: but as concerning
the presence of his flesh, he said truly to his disciples: ye shall not ever
have me with you. For, as concerning the presence of his flesh, the Church
ha^ Christ but a few days, yet now it holds him fast by faith, though it
see him not with eyes.

Christ, as man, according to his body, is in heaven, and In his. ^1. treatise
upon John.
passes from place to place: and, when he comes to another place, he is not
in the other place, from whence he came.

We must believe, and confess, that the son of God (as In his book, de
^ssentia diuinitatis.
concerning his divinity) is invisible without a body, immortal, and
incircumscriptible: but as concerning his humanity, we ought to believe and
confess, that he is visible, has a body, and is contained in a certain
place, and has truly all the members of a man. In his. xx. book and xi. Chap.
again ^austus.


Christ, as concerning the presence of his body, he could not be together at
one time, in the Sun, in the Moon, and upon the Cross.

These words spoken, he ascended into heaven. Hereby he In his book of the
unity of the Church, the. x. chapter.
gave our ears a praemunire against them which he foretold us, would rise in
process of time, and say: Behold, here is Christ: behold there is Christ,
unto whom he willed us we should give no credit, neither have we now any
manner excuse, if we believe them against the voice of our shepherd, being so
clear, so open, and so plain, that no man, be he never so heavy, or dull of
heart, can justly say, I understand him not.

Christ by his Godhead is ever with us: but unless he had In his. ^0. Sermon
in John. upon the words of our lord. Hierome in the explication of Damasus
Creed the. 4. Tome.
departed away bodily from us, we should evermore carnally see his body.

Christ ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father, the
same nature of flesh wherein he was borne, and suffered, and rose again,
remainyng still: for the substance of his humane nature was not done away:
but glorified.

Although Christ took away from hence the presence of Cirill in his. 6. book
and. 14. chap. upon John.
his body, yet in his majesty of his godhead, he is ever here, as he promised
to his Disciples at his departing, saying: I am with you ever unto the worlds
end.

Christian people must believe, that although Christ be absente In his. 9. book
and xxi. Chap upon John.
from us, as concerning his body, yet by his power he governs us, and all
things, and is present with all them that love him: Therefore he said,
verily, verily, I say unto you, wheresoever there be two or three gathered
together in my name, there am I in the mids of them.

For like as when he was conuersante here in earth as a man, yet then he
filled heaven, and did not leave the company of Angels: Even so being now in
heaven with his flesh, yet he fills the earth, and is in them that love him.
And it is to be marked, that although Christ should go away only as
concerning his flesh (for he is ever present in the power of his divinity) yet
for a little time he said he would be with his disciples.

Although I shall be absente with my body: yet I will be In his. x. book
and. 7. chap. upon. ^n. In his. ii. book of the Trinity.
present with you as I am God.

If the nature of the Godhead were a body, it must needs be in a place, and
have quantity, greatness, and circumscription.

Christ could not be conversant with his Apostles in flesh, In his. xi. book
and iii. chap. upon John. Didimus in his. i. book and i. chap of the holy
Ghost.
after that he had ascended unto his father.

All creatures, visible and invisible, be circumscribed and environed either
within one place, or within the property of their own substance: so that no
Angel can be at one time in two places: And for as much as the holy ghost,
is in many men at one time, therefore the holy ghost must needs be God.

One and the self Christ, of mankind, was made a man, Fulgentius in his v.
book to King Thrasimundus.
compassed in a place, who of his father is God, without measure or place, one
and the self same person. As concerning his man's substance was not in heaven,
when he was in earth, and forsook the earth, when he ascended into heaven: But
as concernng his godly substance (which is above all measure) he neither left
heaven, when he came from heaven, nor he left not the earth, when he ascended
into heaven, which may be known by the most certain word of Christ him
self: who, to show the placyng of his humanity, said to his disciples, I
ascend up to my father, and your father, to my God, and your God. Also when he
had said of Lazarus, that he was dead, he added, saying: I am glad for your
sakes, that you may believe, that I was not there: but to show the
unmeasurable compass of his divinity, he said to his disciples: Behold, I
am with you always, unto the worlds end.

Now, how did he go up into heaven: but because he is a very man, contained
within a place? Or how is he present with faithful people: but because he is
very GOD, being without measure.

Vigil. in his i. book against Eutiches.
Christ said to his disciples: if you loved me, you would be glad, for I go
unto my father. And again he said: It is expedient for you that I go, for if
I go not, the comforter shall not come to you: and yet surely, the eternal
word of God, the virtue of God, the wisdom of God, was ever with his father,
and in his father: yea, even at the same time when he was with us, and in us.
For, when he did mercifully dwell in this world, he left not his habitation in
heaven, for he is every where whole with his father, equal in divinity, whom
no place can contain, for the son fills all things, and there is no
place, that lacks the presence of his divinity.

From whence then, and whither did he say, that he would go? Or how did he
say, that he went to his father, from whom doubtless he never departed? But
that, to go to his father, and from us, was taken from this world that
nature, which he received of us. Thou see therefore, that it was the
property of that nature, to be taken away, and go from us, which in the
end of the world, shall be rendered again to us, as the Angels witnessed,
saying: This Jesus, which is taken from you, shall come again, like as you
saw him going up into heaven. For look unto the miracle, look upon the
mystery of both the natures. The son of God, as concerning his humanity,
went from us, as concerning his divinity, he said unto us: Behold, I am
with you all the days, unto the worlds end.

He is with us, and not with us, for those whom he left and went from, as
concerning his humanity: Those he left not, nor forsook them not, as
touching his divinity: For as touching the form of a servant (which he
took away from us into heaven) he is absent from us: But by the form of God
(which goes not from us,) he is present with us in earth, and nevertheless,
both present and absent, he is all one Christ.

If the word and the flesh, were both of one nature, seeing that the word
is euerywhere, why is not the flesh then every where? For when it was in
earth, then verily it was not in heaven. And now when it is in heaven, it is
not surely in earth. And it is so sure, that it is not in earth, that as
concerning it, we look for him to come from heaven, when as concerning his
eternal word, we believe to be with us in earth: Therefore by your doctrine,
either the word is contained in a place with his flesh, or else the flesh is
every where with the word. For, one nature cannot receive in it self, two
diverse and contrary things: but these two things, be diverse and far
unlike, that is to say, to be contained in a place, and to be every where.
Therefore, in as much as the word is every where, and the flesh is not
every where, it appears plainly* that one Christ himself, has in him two
natures: And that by his divine nature, he is every where: And by his human
nature, he is contained in a place. That he is created: and has no beginning:
that he is subject to death, and can not dye. Whereof, one he has by nature of
his word, (whereby he is God) and the other he has by the nature of his
flesh, whereby the same God is man also.

Therefore one son of God, the self same was made the son of man, and he
has a beginning, by the nature of his flesh: And no beginning by the nature
of his Godhead: he is created by the nature of his flesh: not created by the
nature of his godhead: he is comprehended in a place, by the nature of his
flesh: And not comprehended in a place, by the nature of his Godhead. He is
inferior to Angels in the nature of his flesh: And equal to his father in
the nature of his Godhead. He died by the nature of his flesh: And died not by
the nature of his Godhead.

This is the faith and catholic confession, which the Apostles taught, the
Martyrs have confirmed, and the faithful keep unto this day. Theodoret in in
his. ii. dialogue.


The body of Christ, therefore did rise again, quit Clean from all
corruption and death, and is impossible, immortal, glorified with the glory
of god, and is honored of the powers of heaven, and yet is a body, and the
same bigness, that it had before.

To sit in the Throne of glory, and to set his Lambs upon his right hand,
and the Goats upon the left hand, signifies a thing that has quantity and
bigness.

Christ's body has his former fashion, figure, and bigness, and to speak at
one word, the same substance of his body. Gregory in his xxi. Homily upon
Easter day.


He is risen, he is not here: christ is not here by the presence of his flesh:
And yet he is absent no where by the presence of his divine majesty. Gregory
Nazyanzene against Apollinarius.


Christ, according to his body, is within the limitation of place: according
to his spirit and Godhead, he is without the limitation of any place.

The. xxxviii. Chapter.
Along custom must not be followed: but the truth of God. Exodus xxiii. ii.

THou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil, neither agree to a
controversy, to decline after many, and over throw the truth.

Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinances, Leuiti. 18. 30.
that ye do not any of abominable customs, which have been dooen before
you, that you defile not your selves therein: for I am the Lord your God.

Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do if, Deu. xii. xxxii.
thou shall not put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom.

Fear the Lord your God, and he will deliver you out of ii. Kings. xvii.
xxxix.
the hands of all your enemies.

Howbeit they obeyed not: but did after their old custom. 40.


Thus by process of time, this wicked custom prevailed Wisdom. xiiii. xv.
and was kept as a Law, and Idols were worshipped by the commandments of
Tyrants.

In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's Math. xv. ix.
precepts.

Ye lay the commandments of god a part, and observe Mark. vii. viii^.
the tradition of men, as the washing of pottes and of cups, and many other
such like things ye do.

Well, ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may 9*
observe your own tradition.

But if any man lust to contentions, we have no such custom, i. Cor. xi. xvi.
neither the Church of God.

The Doctors.
Custom, either of simplicity, or of ignorance, Tertullian in his book of
Virgins.
gettyng once an entry, is inured and hardened by succession, and then is
defended against the truth: But Christ our Lord called him self the truth, and
not custom. Let them take heed therefore, unto whom the thing seems new,
that in himself is old. It is not so much the novelty of the matter, as the
truth that reproves an heresy, whatsoever sauoureth against the truth, it
is an heresy, he the custom thereof never so old. Ignatius unto
Philadelphen. Ciprian in his ii. book of his Epistles, unto Cicilius the. iii.
Epistle.


My antiquity, is Christ Jesus.

That Christ ought only to be hard: Even the Father witnesses from heaven,
saying: This is my dearly beloved son, in whom I am pleased, hear him:
wherefore, if Christ ought only to be heard, we ought not to take heed, what
any man has thought good to be done before us: but what Christ which was
before all men, has dooen before. For, we must not follow the custom of man:
but the truth of God, because God speaks by Esaie the Prophet, and says,
they worship me in vain, teaching commandments and doctrines of men.

Certain men, which be overcome with reason, do aledge Unto Iulianus of
Baptizing of Heretics.
and lay for them, against us all in vain, the custom, as though custom
were a greater thing then the truth, as though in spiritual things, we
ought not to follow the better thing always, which is showed by the holy
ghost. Unto Pompeius, against the Epistle of Stephen.


Custom without truth, is the mother of all error, wherefore, let us leave the
error, and follow the truth.

Not the aunciencie of years: but of manners is commendable, no shame it is to
pass to better. Ambrose in his Epistle to Theodosius the Emperor. In his. 4.
book of Virgins.


We do rightly condemn all new things, which Christ has not taught,
because Christ is the way to the faithful. If therefore we teach that,
which Christ has not taught, we judge it detestable.

We must not always imitate or allow, what so ever allowed Augustine in his.
ii. book Gaudentius Epistle.
persons have done: but lay the judgment of scriptures to it, whether they
allow the doing of it.

When the truth is known, let custom give place to the In his. ii. book of
only Baptism.
truth, for there is none that will doubt: but that custom gives place to
the manifest truth. Also, no man should set more by custom, then by reason
and by truth, for reason and truth always excludes the custom.

He that despises the truth, and presumes to follow In his book of
baptizing little ones, and in the. viii. distinction Canon. Qui contempta.
the custom, either he is envious to his brother, and froward, and injurious
to them, unto whom the truth is opened, or else unkind toward God, by whose
inspiration the congregation or church, is instruct and armed.

For, the Lord says in the Gospel, I am the truth, he said not, I am the
custom: Therefore, when the truth is known, let custom give place to
truth, because also Peter which did Circumcise, gave place to Paul,
preaching the truth. Therefore, seeing that Christ is the truth, we ought
rather to follow the truth, then custom, because reason and truth, always
excludes custom.

We love not those sightes that be subject to the eye, least In his book of
true religion i. To me and last Chap.
swaruyng from the truth, and loving shadows, we be cast into darkness.
Let not our religion consiste in our phanises, for any truth what soever it
be, is better then any thing, that can of our own head be devised of us.

It is not true that is said, a thing that was once well In his. ^. Epistle to
Marcellinus*
dooen, must in no wise be altered, for when the cause of the time is
changed, good reason does require, the well dooen thing before, so to be
changed now. That where they say, it cannot be well, if it be changed* the
truth on the other side cries out, that it cannot be well, if it be not
changed. For, that which may chance at one time, in diversity of persons,
that one may do a thing without offense, which an other may not, not that
the matter is of it self unlikely: but the party that does it. So in respect
of diverse times, of the self same person, now may a thing be done, and now
may it not be done, not that he is different from him self that does it: But
the time, when he does it.

The Heathens say, the religion that was first, can not be In his questions
upon the old and new Testament, the 114. question.
false: as though antiquity, and old custom, could prevail against the
truth.

In his* x book and (...). chap. of the City of God.
Neither may we say, why comes it now? Why comes it so late? For the
counsel of GOD that sent it, is unsearchable to the wisdom of man.

Hillary in his 8. book. of the Trinity.
Many there are which ^ainyng of faith, are not subject to faith, and
rather do appoincte them selves a faith, then receive it, puffed up with the
sense of man's vanity, whiles they understand those things that they lust:
But will not understand those things that be true.

I call it novelty, because of the tongues of wicked men^ Bernarde in his book
of a solitary life.
who being not hable to shadow the manifest light of the truth, find
cauillations upon the only name, novelty: But this novelty is no new
vanity, for it is a matter of old religion: of perfect godliness founded in
Christ.

Gregory to william Auersane. B^in the 2. distinct. Canon. Si consuetudo.
If perhaps thou set against it the custom, thou must take heed of it
that the lord says, I am the way, the truth, and life, he said not, I am
the custom: but the truth.

I allow the custom, which notwithstanding, is known Augustine, the xi.
distinction. Cap. consuetudinem.
to usurp nothing against the catholic faith.

Arnobius in his. ii. book against the Gentiles.
The authority of religion must be weighed by God, and not by time: It
behooves us to consider, not upon what day: but what thing we began to
worship. The thing that is true, is never to late.

Augustine, the. 8. distinction.
The Lord in the Gospel said, I am the truth, he said not, I am custom.

Pope Felix. Euripides.
No man ought to prefer custom, before truth and reason: for because reason
and truth, always excludes custom.

What customs we, in tender youth by natures lore receive,
The same we love, and like always and loathe our lust to leave.
The. xxxix. Chapter.
The marriage of Priests is lawful.
TO avoid fornication, let every man have 1. Cor. 7. 2.
his wife, and let every woman have her own husband.

If they cannot abstain, let them marry, 9.
for it is better to marry, then to burn.

Have we not power to lead about a Chap. 9. 5.
a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, and as the
brethren of the Lord, and Cephas.

I beseech thee faithful yoke fellow, help those women, Philip. 4. 3.
which labored with me in the Gospel.

A Bishop therefore must be unreprovable, the husband 1. Timo. 3. 2.
of one wife.

Having children under obedience, with all honesty. 4.


For if any can not rule his own house, how shall he care 5.
for the Church of God.

Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: Hebre. 13. 4.
but whore mongers and adulterers, God will judge. 1. Timo. 4. 1.


Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times, some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and
doctrines of devils.

Forbiddyng to marry, and commaundyng to abstain from 3.
meats, which God has created to be received, with thanks giuyng of them,
which believe and know the truth.

The Doctors.
NOt only they do not, that they teach: but also Origene in his 24.
treatise upon Math.
cruelly and without mercy, they command others to do, that they be not
able, not considering or weighyng each man's strength. Such be they that
forbid men to marry, and from that thing that is lawful, drive, and force
men to an immoderate kind of cleanesse.

If they either cannot, or will not continue, better it is to Ciprian in his 1.
book and xi. Epistle unto Pomponeus of virgins. Ambrose in his. 3. book of
virginity. In his book upon (...). 1. to the Cor. 7 cap. In his book upon
the. 2. to the Cor. 11. Chap.
marie, then to fall into the fire* with their pleasures, at the least let them
breed no sclau^der to their brothers and sisters.

Good are the ^andes of Matrimony, yet are they bands: And although they be
bands, yet are they bands of Charity: wedlock is good, that it shall be no
hinderaunce to perfect life.

We see both virgins careful for the world: and married men careful for
the works of the Lord.

All the Apostles had wives, only Ihon, and Paul excepted.

Augustine in his book of the goodness of marriage, Distinction. 27. Quidam.
Some men there be, that say, they be adulterers that marry after that they
have made a vow: but I tell you, that they sin grievously, that put such a
sunder.

Many of them are kept from marriage, not for love of their goodly purpose of
virginity: but for fear of open shame, which shame also proceeds of pride,
for that they are more afraied to displease men, then God. They will not marie,
because they cannot without rebuke: yet better were it for them In his book of
holy virginity the. 34. Chap.
to marry, then to burn, that is to say, then with the flame of their
concupiscense in their own conscience to be wasted, they are sorry of their
profession, and yet it greeueth them to confess it.

They that sai^, the marriage of such men, or women (as In his book of the
goodness of widowhod, Cap. ^.
have vowed) is no marriage: but rather adultery, seem unto me not to
consider discretly and wisely, what they say.

It comes to pass by this unadvised opinion, that whereas they will remove
these women that so have vowed, from their husbands, and force them to
continue in their single life, they make the husbands of them adulterers in
deed, in case they marry again, their own wives being still alive. the.


The defraudyng of their purpose, and the breach of their In the. 9. chap. of
the same book.
vow is blamed. Such are blamed, not for that they have entered into the
faith of Matrimony: But for that they have broken their first faith, or
promise of continent life.

Whereas saint Paul says, she that is unmarried, thinks In his. 1. book
of the goodness of marriage and 1^. Chap.
of the things that pertain unto the lord, that she may be holy, both in
body, and in spirit, it may not so be taken, as though we should so think,
a Christian wife living chastely with her husband, is not holy in body. For
it is generally said unto all faithful, know ye not, that your bodies be
the Temple of the holy ghost? Therefore if the man, and wife keep their faith
both between them selves, and to the lord, their bodies are holy. In his
questions of the (...) and new Testament the. 127. Question.


Most holy Samuel begatte children: and yet nothing abated the merits of his
righteousness. Zacharias the Priest in his old age begatte a child,
wherefore then is that thing accused, that is proved to do no manner hurt.

The housbande of one wife, saint Paul writes not this Chrysostom in his.
10. Homily upon Timothy.
as making a law, as if it were not lawful, for a man to be made a Bishop
without a wife: but he appoincted an order in that behalf. For it was lawful
for the Jews, to be coupled in the second Matrimony, and to have two wives
at one time. Notwithstanding, marriage have much trouble in it self, yet may
it so be taken, that it shall be no hinderaunce to perfect life.

Marriage, not only hinders nothing, toward the In his. ^1. Homily upon
Gene.
knowledge and service of GOD, if we will be sober: but also brings us
great comfort, for it oppresses the ragyng fury of nature, and suffers us
not to be dashte, and toste, as the waves of the sea: but causes that our
ship may luckely arrive into the haven. And for that cause has GOD given
this comfort unto mankind. In his. 7. Homily upon the Hebre.


So precious a thing is Matrimony, that with the same thou may be promoted,
even unto the Bishops chair, use marriage with discretion, and thou shalt
be the chief in the kingdom of heaven.

The name of certain virgins, not well behauyng them Hierome ad virginem
Demetriadem.
selves, defameth and shameth the holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of
the heavenly and Angelical family, whom we must plainly charge, that either
they marry, if they cannot contain: or that they contain, if they will not
marry.

Touching this place some men think thus: by custom of In his book upon the.
1. chap. to Titus.
the Jews, it was lawful for a man, to have two wives, or m^ at once. And
this they take to be the Apostles commandment, that he, that is to be
chosen a Bishop, have not two wives, or mo together at one time. Upon the.
1. Epistle to Timoth. and 3. Chap.


Let the Deacons be the husband of one wife, not that they should needs
marry a wife, if they have none: but that they should not have two wives
together.

And if Samuel, which was brought up in the tabernacle, In his. 1 book
against louinia^.
married a wife, what makes that against virginity? As though that many
Priests had not wives also now a days, and that the Apostle describes a
Bishop to be the husband of one wife, having children in all chastity.

Let the Bishops and pristes read this, which teach their In his book upon
the Ephe. the. 37. distinction. Canon Legant.
sons secular learning, and makes them read Comedies, and sing writings,
after that they be brought up, by the charge and cost of the congregation.

If any man call lawful copulation, and begettyng of children, Ignatius unto
Philadelphen.
corruption and filthiness, he has the devil, that fell from God, dwelling
within him.

We must have consideration of men, and measure our doctrine Ciril in his. 16.
book upon Leuiticus.
according to every man's ability: and unto such men, as can not take the
word of chastity, we ought to grant marriage.

If any man consider that his own virgin, that is to say, Hierom. in his 1.
book against Iouinian.
his own flesh, grows proud, and boyleth unto lust, and cannot stay it,
there is laid upon him a double necessity, either to take a wife, or to fall.

Let them study to keep and continue the chastity of their Ifidorus, the
distinction. 23. Hic igitur.
body undefiled: or else, let them be coupled with the band of one marriage.

Excuse not thy self by thy marriage, thy lord was at the Chrysostom in his.
3. Tome against the Jews, Gentiles and Heretics. Page 363.
marriage feast, and honored marriage with his presence, and yet do thou
blame marriage? And say thou that marriage is an hinderaunce unto
godliness? I tell thee, marriage is no manner hinderaunce unto godliness? will thou know that it hinders not to have a wife, and children? had not Moses
wife and children? Behold Peter a Pillar of the Church: he had a wife,
therefore find no fault with marriage.

Who speaks these words? Esaias the beholder of the In his. 4. Homily and. 1.
celestial Seraphius: who, not withstandyng he had company with his wife, yet
he quenched not the grace of God. Tome in Esaias upon these words. I have seen
the lord.


Esaie had a son, and a wife, that thou may understand that marriage is not
ill: but fornication is ill.

What? did marriage hinder thee? no, thy wife is given to thee to be thy
helper, and not to deceive thee.

Many of the Bishops have not married, contrariwise, Athanasius to Dracon^*
Monks have become fathers of children.

At that time they say, Eupsichius the Bishop of Caesaria Cassiodorus in his.
6. book. and 14. Chap.
died in Martyrdom, having married a wife a little before, being as yet in
manner a new married man.

Clement in deed, writing against them which despise Eusebius in his 3.
book, and 30. Chap.
marriage, beside many other, says also these words: Do they disalowe the
Apostles also? For Peter and Philip had wives, and married their daughters unto
men: but even likewise, Paul the Apostle is not ashamed in a certain Epistle
of his, to make mention, or to salute his companion and yoke fellow, the
which woman he said that he led not about with him, for this intent, that
he might more easily and without less cumber preach the Gospel.

I also Policrates, the least of you all, observe and keep after In his. 5.
book and. 24. Chap.
the tradition of my fathers, and of them only whom I have followed from the
beginning, for seven of my forefathers each one after other in order, were
Bishops (and I am the eight) which has kept this day.

My Mother being given to my Father of GOD, became Gregory Nazianzene, upon
the Epitaphe of his father. Bishop of Nazianzene.
not only his helper, for that had (...) no great wounder: but also was his
leader, and Captain, both by word and by deed, trainyng him up unto the
best. And albeit in other things, it were best for her to be subject unto her
husband for the right of marriage, yet in religion, and godliness, she doubted
not to become his maistres.

Neither of these two, matrimony, nor single life, does Upon the Epitaphe of
Gorgonia.
either join us to God, or to the world, or withdraw us from God, or from the
world: that the one ought to be refused, and the other absolutely, and of it
self ought to be praised, it is the mind that rules, both marriage and
virginity.

There be some that say, that marriage must be broken Gregory Pope in the.
27. Distinction, and 2. question. Canon. Sunt qui.
for religions sake and holiness: but this is to be known, that if the law of
man grant this, the law of God forbids it, for the truth by him self
says: those that God has coupled, man can not part a sunder.

If any man make difference of a married Priest, as if he In the Counsel of
Gangra. cap. 4.
may not minister the oblation, because of his marriage, and abstaineth from
his oblation, accursed be he.

If any man contrary to the Apostles Canons, presume to In the Counsel at
Constantinople, distinction. 31. Quoniam.
remove either Priest, or Deacon, from the use and company of his lawful
wife, let him be deprived. And in like manner let the Priest or Deacon be
excommunicate, that puts away his wife, under the color of religion.

Deacons, as many as be ordered, if at the time of receiuyng In the counsel of
Ancyra, Canon. 9.
orders, they made protestation, and said, that they would marry, for that
they find not themselves able so to continue without marriage, if they
afterward marry, let them continue in the ministry, for as much as the
Bishop has given them license.

A vow, ill and unadvisedly promised, ought not to be In the Counsel of
Tolete. 8. Canon. 2. The Counsel of Nyce, holden in the year of our Lord.
313. Distinction. 31. Chap. Nycena.
kept.

The Scene which was gathered together at Nyce, willing to redress the life
of Churchemen, did set them certain laws, which do call Canons or Rules.

In the treatyng whereof it was thought good to some, to bring in a law, that
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, should lie no more with their
wives, which they had married, before their consecration: But the holy
confessor Paphuntius rose up and did resist them, saying, and protestyng,
that marriage was honorable, and that it was chastity for a man to lie with
his own wife. And so he advised the Counsel, that they should not make any
such law, assuring them, that the matter was great, and might be an
occasion of fornication, either unto them, or unto their wives. And thus
Paphuntius did set for the the matter (all be it he were unmarried him self.)
And the whole Counsel and Synod, commended his opinion, and decreed nothing
in this matter, and left it to every man's will, and not to be of any
necessity.

It may happen that in some case, a vow may be either Thomas of Aquine. 22.
q. 88. Arti. 10.
utterly ill, or unprofitable, or an hinderance unto some other good things of
more weight. And therefore it must of necessity be determined, that in such
a case a vow ought not to be kept.

If any man have vowed, and cannot contain, and having Alphonsus de Castro,
Philippica. 19.
assaied al means, yet be never the nerer, I would advise him, that he should
provide for the safety of his soul by marriage.

It cannot be proved, neither by reason, nor by authority, Cardinal
Caietanus in Quodlibetis, against Luther.
speaking absolutely, that a Priest synneth in marriyng a wife, for neither
the order of Priesthood, in that it is order, nor the same order, in that it
is holy, is any hinderau^ce to matrimony. For Priesthood breaks not
marriage, whether it be contracted before Priesthood, or afterward, setting
all Ecclesiastical laws a part, and standing only unto those things, that
we have of Christ, and his Apostles.

All the Epistles of the Apostles, which teach sobriety, Clement
Alexandrinus in his. 5. book, Stroma^.
and continente life, where as they contain innumerable precepts, touching
Matrimony, bryngyng up of children, and government of house, yet they never
forbadde honest, and sober marriage.

They say that in old times, before Pope Siricius, it was In the. 8.
Distinction cum in piaeterito, in the Gloss.
lawful for Priests to marry (this was four hundred years after Christ.)

In an evil promise, break thy faith: In an unhonest In the decrees. 22.
Question. 4. chap. malis.
vow, change thy purpose, that thou haste unadvisedly vowed, see thou do it
not. It is an evil promise, that is kept with wickedness.

Pelagius Pope, did create the Bishop of Siracusa, who had Out of the 28.
Distinction.
wife and children, at that time.

Pope Siluerius: Pope Densdedit: Pope Adriane. 2. Pope Damasous Pope,
Distinction. 56. Cap. Sed hoc.
Ihon. 15. Pope Felix. 3. Pope Osius: Pope Agapetus: Pope Gelatius: Pope
Bonifacius: Pope Ihon. 10. Pope Theodorus. etc. were all Popes, Bishops, and
Priests, with many other more that are found, being Priests sons, ruled
the Apostolic See of Rome.

I reckon that there was never more pure, and honest Erasmus in his aunsvvere
to Iodocus Clitoucus.
Priests in the Church, then there was then, when the help of marriage was
open to every man, Clytoueus says, that the mysteries and secrets of the
altar, be higher in dignity, then that they may be occupied of married men.
Then saint Paul did wrong, and far a miss, which allows and admits
not only Deacons: but also Bishops, and Priests, which has wives, to the
mysteries of the Altar. I will not speak now of Peter, which was married,
and Philippe the Deacon. Belike the Church of Christ was in great
blindness, which then could not spy, that the mystery of the altar should
not be committed unto married men, what thinks and judges that Counsel,
which pronounces them accursed, which refused to be at the Communion of a
Priest, which has a wife.

A great part of the Priests lives in great infamy, In his Epistle to
Christopher ^. of Basile.
and with a sore wounded conscience and an unquiet, handeleth the holy
Sacraments. And for the most part, they left all their labors, and the
fruict that should come of them, because their teaching is despised, and set at
naught, for their shameful livings.

There is nothing more to be desired, then that a Priest might live free from
marriage, and might wholly serve the lord: but after that he has assaied all
remedies, and is never the better, and the rebellion of the flesh cannot be
ouercommed, this then is next to be done, let him live chastely with one, not
for pleasure: but for a remedy, having his wife always, endeavoring him self
with all his power, that he which has a wise granted him, fill up and
recompense the weakness of the flesh, with other good living beside, and
with holy study, for by this means every man shall know, that he has taken a
wife for need, and not for pleasure.

And I doubt not: but there is many Bishops, which perceives that it is even
so as we say: but here I am afraied, that lucre and advantage stop us, that
we follow not it which we know is best. If the Bishops would assaie to
change the single living into marriage, peradventure the Officialles and
Commissaries would repine, which does perceive more advantage of priests
Concubines, then they should have by Priostes wives, if they had them.

Take away from the Church honorable marriage, and Barnarde in his 66.
Sermon upon the Canricles.
the bed undefiled, shal^e thou not replenishe it with Concubinaries, with
incestious persons, Sodomiticall vires, and finally, with all kind of beastly
filthiness^.

In those days Priests commonly had wives, as other Auentious in Histor.
Boioris.
Christian men had, and had children also, as may appear by ancient
instruments, and deeds of gifts, which were given then to churches, to the
Clergy, and to religious houses, in the which instruments both the priests,
and their wives also with them, which there be called Praesbyterissae.

These glorious braggers do vaunte them selves, to be the Clement Alexanden
his. 5. book Strom. 7. This Clemont wrote. 200. years aftor, Christ.
followers of the lord, who neither had wife, nor yet possessed any thing here
in the world. etc. To these the Scriptures makes answer: GOD with stands
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Again, they consider not the
cause, why the Lord took no wife. First, he had his own peculiar spouse,
which is the Church. Moreover, neither was he a common man, that he should
stand insuche need of a helper, after the flesh. etc.

There be some which take Gregory for a maintainer of Hulderichus Bishop of
Augusta, to Pope Nicholas.
their sect, whose temeritie I laugh at, whose ignorance I lamente, for they
do not know that the perilous decree of this heresy, established of
Gregory, was afterward pourged of him, with the worthy fruicte of
repentance, when as upon a day, out of his pondes was drawn six thousand
childrens Behold the fruictes of Popish Chastiry.
heads: when he saw it, he utterly condempnyng his decree, did praise the
counsel of Paul: Melius est nubere quam vri, addyng of his own, Mclius est
nubere quam mortis occasionem (...).

If it happen that a priest be seen to embrace, or cull a woman The. 11. cause
3. Question in the Gloss, in the Chap. absit. Polidorus virgill ^o his. 6. book
of the history of England and in his. 5. book of the invention of things.
(in his arms) it shall be judged and interpresed, that he does it to bless
her. (Behold Popish blessings).

The restraints of priests marriage, was first attempted in England, in the
^ere of our lord. 970. And the same afterward was concluded in the Weste
Church, in the year of our Lord, no, and never before.

^abran in his Chro^icle in the page 293.
Priests lived a thousand years together with their wives: no law being to
the contrary.

In the 31. distinction Cap. Quoniam.
The Greeks muke no promise of continent, or single life, neither secretly, nor
expressedly.

D. Har ling in his book a derection of sundry foul e^rours. etc. folio 80.
Now as we do not condemn marriage: neither deny: but that married men in
the Primative Church, and before the Gospel was so generally received, as it
was at length, were, and might be called to the dignity of Bishoppricke.

The. xl. Chapter.
Of choice and difference of mea^es.
THat which goes into the mouth, deflleth Math. 15. 11.
not the man: but that which comes out of the mouth, that defiles the man.

And there came a voice to him, arise Acts. 10. 13.
Peter, kill, and eat.

But Peter said, not so, Lord: For I 14
have never eaten any thing that is polluted, or unclean.

And the voice spoke unto him again, the second time, the 15
things that God has purified, pollute thou not.

I know, and am persuaded through the lord Jesus, that Romans 14. 14.
there is nothing unclean of it self: but unto him that judges any thing to
be vneleane, to him it is unclean.

The kingdom of God is not meat and drink: But righteousness, 17
and peace, and joy in the holy ghost.

Meat makes not us acceptable in God: for neither if we 1. Cor. 3. 8.
eat, have we the more: neither if we eat not, have we the less.

What sa^uer insolde in the shambles, eat (...) and ask no Cap. 10. 25.
question for conscience sake.

For the earth is the Lords, and all that there in is. 26


Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect Collos. a. 16.
of au holy day, of the new (...)* or of the (...),

Which are but a shadow of things to come^ but the body 17
is in Christ.

Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times, 1. Timo. 4. 1.
some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed to spirits of
error, and doctrine of devils,

For biddyng to marry, and commaundyng to abstain from 3
meats, which God has created to be received with giuyng thanks, of them
which believe, and know the truth.

For every creature of GOD is good, and nothing ought to 4
be refused, if it be received with thanks giuyng.

For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. 5


Unto the pure, are all things pure. Titus. 1. 15. Hebre. 13. 9.


It is a good thing, that the heart be stablished with grace, and not with
meats, which have not profited the^, that have been occupied in them.

The Doctors.
GOD is not honored with the beallie: no^ Tertullian in his Epistle of the
leweshe meats.
with meats, which the Lord Christ says, do perish, and are pourged in
conueyaunce by natural order, for who so by meats, honors the lord, in a
manner makes his beally to be his God.

Whereas thou wrote unto me that there Augustine in his. 119. Epists to
lanuarius.
were certain brethren, which did so abstain front the eating of flesh,
that they judged them unclean that rate fleshe^ it is plain against the
faith, and wholesome doctriue.

It makes no matter at all, what nourishement or meat In his book of
questions of the Gospel.
thou take, that thou may succor, and help the necessity of the body,
so that thou do agree with them, that thou live with all.

And to believe that meats are evil, or causes evil, or In his. 1. book
and. 66. chap. of the doctrines and opinions of the Church.
sin to them that receive them, is the proportie, not of the Christian men:
but peculiarly of the Hierarchies, and Manichees, which were heretics.

If there he a man (as it is pouible) so spare of diet, and prositable with
all, that he will take but twice in (...) ruling In his book of the manners the
Church, and of the Maniches.
and temperyng with that abstine^ce, the appetite of his throat and beally. And
be it also, that there be set at supper before this man, a few herbs, and
a little Bacon, sodden with the same herbs, so much in ^uantitie, as may
suffice to put away his hunger, and that the same man quench his thirste,
with three or four draughtes of pure wine, that is vnmyngled with water. And
that this be his daiely diet.

And again on the other side, if there be one that tastes no flesh, nor
drink wine: but strange kind of dishes, made of seeds and fruictes, with a
boundaunce of Pepper cast upon it, whereof he eats plentifully at nine of the
clock in the morning, and at supper, and also drinks of the water, wherewith
the husks of Grapes be washed after the pressyng. etc. Whether of these twain
judge you, as touching meat and drink, do live in more abstinence? I think
ye be not so blind: but that ye will prefer the man, which lives with the
little Bacon and wine, to the other glutton, for the truth it self does drive
you to this annswere.

But you Heretics be of the contrary opinion, for by your opinion, if this
second man should sup with the first, but one night, and should but touch
his lips, and smell of his Bacon, though it were restie, ye would straight
way condemn him to bell (...), as a breaker of your seal, (that is) of ^our
religion. I^ his 30. book and. 5. Chap. against Faustus.


In the (...) season all men for the most part abstain, not only from (...):
but also from certain fruictes, as every man either will, or is able to do,
more or less.

Heretics live by dry bread: but what profit is there in Hillarie upon the.
64. Psalm.
this idle purpose? It is altogether vain, and foolish, and in respect of
the causes of their superstition, it is also miserable. Cassidorus in his. 5.
book and 38. Chap.


Some men eat only fish, others use both fish and flesh too: Some others
when they ^aue fast done (...) three of the clock in the after noone, after
ward they refresh their bodies, without difference or choice of meats: I
think the Apostles left this matter to every man's discretion, that ^iery man
may do good without (...) or superstition, or nere (...).

It is good to (...) the (...) with (...), (...) not with Theophilact
meats, which did not profit them that was occupied with them. Here he
blames them that brought in the Jewish custom upon the 13. Chapter to the
Hebrews.
and abstinence from meats. Therefore this faith is necessary, and not the
accustoming and using of certain meats: For they that before hand did
forbear from meats, that is, they that always look on such keepyng and
using of meats plainly has profited nothing, as men which wander out beyond
the true bonds of says.

Appolonius wrote a book against Montanus the Heretic, Eusebius in his 5.
book, and 18. Chap.
and his sect, and this Montanus was he that taught that marriage might be
dissolved and broken. And this is he that first of al other did ordain the
laws of fasting, and laid them on men's shoulders.

Because we find nothing concerning this matter (of the Socrates in his 9.
book, and 38. Cap. of the Tripertite History.
keepyng of Lent) in old and ancient writing, I think that the Apostles left
it to the judgment of every man, that every man should neither for fear, nor
compulsion work it that is good.

What manner of man Spiridion was, as concerning receiving Sozomenus in his. 1.
book, and 10. Chap. of the tripertite history.
of strangers and waifaring men, by this it does evidently appear. A certain
man in the time of Lent iourneiyng, came unto him, who was without meat five
days, Spiridion seeing the stranger very weak, said to his daughter, go
and wash the strangers feet, and set meat before him. And when the virgin
had said, that there was neither bread nor meat in the house (of the which
then he was wont to have no stoore, by reason of the fast) Spiridion first
praiyng and asking pardon, commanded his daughter, to see the porke, which he
had in his house salted, which being sodde, he sittyng with the stranger, did
eat of the flesh set before him, and requested, that the stranger would eat
with him, who refusing, and professyng him self to be a christian, for that
same (says Spiridion) thou ought not to refuse it, for to the clean all
things are clean, as the words of God has taught us. The Counsel of
Martine, Pope, distinction. 30. Cahoh. Si quis.


If any man abstain, and for be are from flesh, not for abstinence: but
because he defieth and abhor^eth that meat, it ^ath pleased the holy counsel,
that he should aforehand taste, and eat of it, and if he will abstain, let
him abstain: but if he despise and refuse it, so that he will not eat, and
taste the potage that is sodden with the flesh, let this man because he is
disobedient, and will not deliver him self from suspicion of heresy, be
deposed from the degree, and order of the Clergy. Erasmus in his (...) set
before the. 1. Epito the Cor.


I think it more pure Religion, and more agreyng with the learning of the
Gospel, and the Apostles, if no certain kind of meat were prescribed and
appointed: But that all men should be warned, that every man according to the
disposition, and complexion of his body, should eat those things, which be
most profitable for good health, not to use excess: but soberness, with
giuyng thanks, and the desire of a good mind.

I allow and approve it that ye said: the meat makes In his book upon the.
8. Chap. the. 1. of the Cor.
us not in favor with God, seeing that GOD has created all things for the use
of man, and requires nothing of us, but holiness: what forces he whether we
eat flesh of four foted beasts, or of fishes, or of birds that fly? There
is none of all these, that either makes, or marreth holiness, neither puts
any thing to it, or takes any thing from it. The choice of these, and the
puttyng difference between one and an other, may make a man superstitious,
and to have vain Religion: but it cannot make a man holy. Christ taught no
difference of these things.

Therefore it were great rashenesse, if a wretched man should go about to
burden and charge any man with such ordinances, let every man eat what he
list, as his body requires, so it be done soberly, measurably, and for all
things give thanks unto God.

But now a days of what things rises offenses? even of In his book of the
choice of meats to Christopher, B. of Basile.
those things whose use the Gospel does not forbid: naie, whose forbidders
the learning of the Apostles does condemn, for biddyng meats which God has
created to be eaten, and for biddyng to marry.

There is more supersition herein among christians, then In his annotations,
upon the 14. to the Romans.
ever was amongst the Jews.

The. xlj. Chapter.
Of fasting.
Behold, ye fast to strife and debate, Esaie. 58
and to smite with the fiste of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do to day,
to make your voice to be heard above.

Is it such a fast, that I have 5
chosen, that a man should afflict his Soul for a day?

Is not this the fasting that I 6
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness?

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou 7
bring the poor that wandereth, unto thine house?

Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion, Zacha. 7. 9^
every man to his brother.

Oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger 10
nor the poor: and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his
heart.

That which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man: Math. 15. 11.


But those things which proceade out of the mouth, come 18
from the heart, and they defile the man.

For out of your hearts, come evil thoughts, murders, 19
adulteries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, flaunders.

These are the things which defile the man: but to cate 20
with unwashed hands, defiles not the man.

The Pharesey stood and prayed thus with himself, O Luke. 18. 11.
God, I thank thee that I am not as other men, extorsioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publicane.

I fast twice in the week: I give Tithe of all that ever I 12
possess.

But the Publicane standing a far of, would not lift up so much as his eyes
to heatren: but smote his breast, saying, O God, be merciful to me a sinner. 13


I tell you, this man departed to his house justified, rather 14.
then the other.

Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be Chap. 21. 34.
oppressed with surfettyng and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and lest
that day come on you at unawares.

When ye fast, look not sour as the Hipocrites, for they Math. 6. 16.
disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men how they fast,
verelie, I say unto you, they have their reward.

When thou fastest, anointe thine head, and wash thy face. 17.


That thou seem not unto men to fast: but unto God thy 18.
father which is in secret.

So that we walk honestly, as in the day: not in gluttony, Romans 13. 13.
and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and enuiyng.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought 14
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the ^alath. 5. 24.
affections and the lusts.

Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell Philip. 3. 18.
you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ.

Whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and 19
whose glory is to their shame, which mind earthly things.

The bodily exercise profits li^le: but godliness is profitable 1. Timo. 4. 8.
unto all things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that,
that is to come.

Wherefore, girde up the loins of your mind, be sobre, and 1. Peter. 1. 13.
trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you by the revelation of
Jesus Christ.

As obedient children, not fashionyng your selves, unto the 14
former lusts of your ignorance.

But as he which has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all 15
manner of conversation.

Because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. 16


Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth, Colos. 3. 5.
fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is id^latrie.

Now put you away al these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, 8
cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouths.

Now therefore as the elect of God, holy and beloved, put 12
on tender mercies, kindenes, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long sufferyng.

For bearing one another, and forgeuing one another, if any 13
man have a quarrel to another: even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

And above all things put on love, which is the bond of 14
perfectnes.

Therefore give even all diligence thereunto: join moreover 2. Peter. 1. 5.
virtue with your faith, and with virtue, knowledge.

And with knowledge, temperau^ce: and with temperaunce, 6
patience: and with patience, godliness.

And with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly 7
kindness, love.

For if these things be among you, and abound, they will 8
make you, that ye never shall be idle, nor vnfruictefull in the knowledge of
our lord Jesus Christ.

All that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust 1. Ihon. 2. 16
of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the father, but is of the world.

The Doctors.
HEnceforth we must fast without compulsion, of Tertullian in his book against
Phisicos of fasting.
free will, not by commandment of this new discipline, accordingly as every
man shall see time, and cause: for so it appears, the Apostles kept it,
laiyng on none other yoke of certain appointed fastes, to be observed in
common of all men together.

GOD is not honored with the belly, nor with meats, In his Epistle, of the
Iewishe meat.
which the Lord Christ says, do perish, and are purged in conueiaunce by
natural order, for who so by meats honors the Lord, in a manner makes his
belly to be his Lord. Origene in his 10 Homily and. 16. Chap.


If thou will fast after Christ, and bring low thy Soul, all times of the
whole year are meet for thee: Naie, rather take all the time of thy life, to
make lowly thy Soul: if thou haste learned of the Lord our savior, which is
meek and lowly in barte.

Therefore if thou will fast, fast after the commandment of the gospel, and
keep in thy fasting, the rules of the gospel, wherein Christ bids us to do
after this manner in fasting: but thou when thou fastest, annointe thy head, and
wash thy face. etc. Will thou yet that I tell thee what manner a fast thou
must fast: Fast from all sin, take no meat of mal^cet take nomeates of
pleasure: be not who^ with the wine of excess: Fast from evil ^eedes: forbe
are from evil thoughts: touch not the stolen bread of wrong and perverse
doctrine: lust not after the deceiuyng meats of Philosophy, which may
lead thee away from the truth.

Such a fast pleases God: but to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received of the faithful men, with thanks geuyng* and to do
this same with them that crucified Christ, can not be allowed and accepted, of
Christ.

This is a healthful fast, when as we keep our bodies from Ambrose in his. 33.
sermon.
surfetyng, and our souls from sin and vice.

I considering in my mind, do find that fast was commanded Augustine in
86. Epistle to Casulanus the elder.
in the letters of the Gospel, and Apostles, and throughout the book, which
is called the new Testament: but I find not determined and appointed by the
commandment of the Lord, or the Apostles, what days we must fast, and
what days we must not.

In the Lent season, all men for the most part, abstain, I^ his. 30. book
and. ^. chap. against Faustus. In his book of the City of God.
not only from flesh: but also from certain fruictes, as every man either
will, or is able to do, more or less.

Porphirius taught: that abstinence from flesh, and gross meats, does
purify the minds of men, whereby they are made the more prompte to things
divine, and to familiarity with good spirits.

If we will fast well from meats: before all things, (...) In his. 64.
sermon of Time.
us fast from vices, and sins. What avails it, to empty ou^ bodies from
meat, and our souls is filled with synne^ What ^uaileth to be pale and
wanne, with fasting, if thou be replenished with hatered and envy? What
anayleth, not to drink wine, and to be drunk with the poison of displeasure
and wrath? What avails to abstain from flesh created to be eaten: and
with evil slaunderynges and backbitynges, do rent and tear in sunder the
members of thy brethren? What avails if we abstain from those things
which are lawefull: and do those things which are not lawful? God does
love and favor them that do flee unlawful things. Therefore as I have
said, let us fast from meats: but much more let us fast from sin and
wickedness.

Then are our fastinges acceptable to our God: if they that fast through need
and necessity, are refreshed of us.

It is good my brethren, to fast: but better to give alms, if In his. 62.
Sermon of time.
any can do both, it is two good things, if thou can not, it is better to
give alms. Alms is sufficient without fasting: but fasting is not sufficient
without alms.

The fastes of Christians are to be observed more spiritually, In his. 172.
sermon of time.
then carnally: therefore let us chiefly fast from sins: lest our fastes be
rejected of the Lord, as the Jews were.

Wherefore do thou punish thy body with hunger, and famine? which thou
do flatter or deceive with filthy sins.

The sick man does fast, that he may have health, the epicure, In his. 41.
Sermon to the brethren in the wilderness.
that he may have a more desire to eat, the covetous man, that he may spare
and save his meat and drink, the hypocrite, that he may be seen of men, to
have a praise.

Then he that takes meat, and can not fast, let him give Chrysostom in his.
x. Homily upon the i. Chap. of Genesis
more large alms: and be more fervent and earnest in prayer. etc. He that does
those things, shall fast the true fast that the Lord requires of us.

I call the right life, not the labor of fasting, nor the bed of In his. 47.
homily upon the xiii. of Math.
here and ashes: but if thou order thy money none otherwise then thou ought
to do, and burn in charity, and such other, he says not that his fast is to
be followed, although he might set forth the. 40. days: but he says: learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Nay, Paul says the contrary, eat
whatsoever is set before you: but he commanded straightly, a^ concerning money,
saying, Possess neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your girdles. I have
not said these things, because I like not fasting, which I use greatly to
extol and commend: but because I am sorry that we recke^ fasting is enough to
save us, despising other things, the which fast has the last place in the
company of virtues.

Tell not me they fast: but show me that they fast according In (...) ^homilie
of the lewishe fast.
to the will of God, which if they do not, then is their fast more wicked then
any drunkenness.

The honor of fasting, is not the abstinence of meats: but In his. iii.
Homily upon Math.
the fleeing from sins.

What profit is it, if we absteyne from birds flesh, and fish: when as we
eat and devour our brothers flesh?

Not thy mouth only should fast: but thy eyes, thy ears, thy feet, and
hands, and all the members of our body, thy hands from stealing. etc.

Let us bridle the wantonness of our flesh, and we shall In his. 8. Homily
upon Genesis.
keep the true fast. I say, fast and absteyne from vices, therefore is the
abstinence of meats used, that it may bridle and tame the force and strength
of the flesh.

What avails it to eat no oil, and with pain and much Hierome to
Nepotianus.
a do curiously to seek for meats, Figs, Pepper, Nuttes, Dates, fine white
bread, Honey, and Pistacia? Besides this, I hear say, there be some, which
contrary to the common order and nature of men, will neither drink water, nor
eat bread: but seek for delicate suppinges, and herbs shribde together, and
the juice of Beetes, and receive the same, not out of a cup: but out of a
^hell. Fie for shame, do we not blushe at such foolishness? are we not weery
of such foolishness? And yet besides all this, living in such curious
dilicacie are we not weery of such super^tition? we look to be praised for our
fasting.

No man is advanced for his fasting: neither is abstinence Hiero me to
Marcella.
praised, nor sober refreshyng condemned. Gehe man either stands, or falls
to his Lord. No man judges other, least of the Lord he himself be indged.

Here^kes live by dry bread: but what profit is there in ^illarie upon (...),
64. Psalm.
this idle p^rpose: It is altogether vain, and foolish, and in respect of the
causes of their superstition, it is also miserable.

Some think, they ought to fast only one day, others, two Eusebius in his 5.
book, and. 6. Chap.
days, others mo. Some others. 40. whole hours, both night and day together.

Whersoeuer in the holy Scriptures is found affliction of Aben. Ezra.
the soul, there is understood fasting.

Shauing and clipping does remain, the rule of fasting is Bernarde. (...) his
2. Sermon in Lent.
kept: he does sing at hours appointed: but his heart is far from me says
the Lord.

We ought a great deal rather to fast from sins and vices, Bernarde in his
3. Sermon in Lent.
then from meats. Let thine eyes fast: let thine ear fast: let thy tongue
fast: let thine hands fast: and let also thy soul fast.

Let thy eye fast from all vain and wanton looks: let thy ear fast from
filthy and naughty tales, and rumors: let thy tongue fast from backbityng,
slaunderyng, and murmuryng, and from unprofitable, vain, and filthy words:
let thy hands fast from vain fignes, and from works whatsoever are not
commanded: but much rather, let thy soul fast from vices, and from his own
desire: truly without this fast, the others shall be reproved of the Lord.
Surely we must understand, our Lent is not for forty days only: but
continually, all the day of this miserable life.

But the great and general fast, is to absteyne from unrighteousness,
Distinction. v^. cap. Ieiunium.
and from the unlawful pleasures of the world, the which is a perfect fast in
this world: we keep as it were a Lent of abstinence, when we live well, and
when we forbear from wickedness, and unlawful pleasures.

The. xlij. Chapter.
Of traditions and ceremonies of men.
TAke heed therefore, that ye do as the Lord your Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
God has commanded you: turn not a side to the right hand, nor to the left.

But walk in all the ways which the Lord 33.
your God has commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may go well with
you.

Ye shall not do after all these things that we do hear this Chap. xii. viii.
day: that is, every man whatsoever seems him good in his own eyes.

Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them Leuit. x. i.
his Censor, and put fire therein, and put insence there upon, and offered
strange fire before the Lord, which he had not commanded them.

Therefore a fire went out from the Lord, and devoured 2
them: so they dyed before the Lord.

And Samuel said: has the Lord as great pleasure in i. Samuel. xv. xxii.
burnt offeringes and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed?
behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the
fat of Rams.

For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression 23
is wickedness and idolatry: because thou have cast away the word of the
Lord, therefore has he cast away thee from thy kingdom.

When ye come to appear before me, who required this Esaie. i. xii. ^
of your hands to tread in my Courts?

My soul hates your new Moons, and your appoincted feasts, 14
they are a burden unto me, I am weary to bear them.

He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that Chap 66. 3.
sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut of a dogs neck: he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he
blessed an Idol: yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
deliteth in their abominations.

Therefore with joy ye shall draw waters out of the wells Cap. xii. iii.
of salvation.

The Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests receive Ierem. v. xxxi.
gifts in their hands, and my people delight therein.

My people has committed two evils: they have forsaken Cap. (...). xiii.
me the fountain of living waters, to dig them pittes, even broken pittes,
that cannot hold water.

Hear not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto Cap. xxiii. xvi.
you, and teach you vanity, they speak the vision of their own heart, and
not of the mouth of the Lord.

What is Chafe to the Wheat, says the Lord. 28.


The word that thou haste spoken unto us in the name of Cap. xliiii. xvi.
the Lord, we will not hear it of thee.

But will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own 17
mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven. etc.

The lord could no longer forbear, because of the wickedness 22
of your inventions, and because of the abominations which ye have committed:
therefore is your land desolate. etc.

For the wickedness of their inventions, I will cast them Hosea. ix. xv.
out of mine house: I will love them no more, all their princes are rebels.

Let all things be done to the highest God, according to i. Esdras. viii.
xxii.
the law of God, with diligence.

I have hated them that give themselves to deceiptfull vanities: Psalm. xxxi.
(...)
for I trust in the Lord.

I hate vain inventions: but thy law do I love. Psalm. 119. 113. Prou. xvi.
xxv.


There is a way that seems right unto man: But the issue thereof are the
ways of death.

Why do ye also transgress the commandment of god, Math. xv. iii.
by your tradition?

In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's 9
precepts.

Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted, 13
shall be rooted up.

They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and Cap. xxiii. iiii.
lay them on men's shoulders: but they them selves will not move them with one
of their fingers.

Ye lay the commandments of god aparte, and observe Mark. vii. viii.
the tradition of men, as the washyng of pottes. etc.

Ye reiecte the commandment of God, that ye may observe 9
your own tradition.

Why tempte ye God, to lay a Yoke on the disciples necks, Acts. xv. x.
which neither our fathers, nor we were able to bear?

Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Colos. ii. viii.
Philosophy, and vain disceipte, through the traditions of men, according to
the rudimentes of the world, and not after Christ.

If ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the 20
world, why as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?

As touch not, taste not, handle not. 21


Which all perish with the using, and after the commandments 22
and doctrines of men.

Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound Titus. i. xiii.
in the faith.

And not taking heed to Iewishe fables, and commandments 14
of men, that turn from the truth.

If any speak, let him talk as the words of God. If any i. Peter. iiii. xi.
man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God ministers, that
God in all things may be glorified.

If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, ii. John. x.
receive him not to house, neither bid him god speed.

For he that bids him god speed, is partaker of his evil 11
deeds.

The Doctors.
BY a like kind of madness they confess, that Tertullian of prescription
against Heretics.
the Apostles in deed were ignorant of nothing: nor taught any contrary
doctrine among them selves: but they say, the Apostles reveled not all things
to all men: but showed certain things openly, and to all: and other certain
things secretly, and unto a few.

How do thou break marriage, neither couplyng the In his. 4. book against
Martio^.
man and the woman together, nor being coupled, otherwise admittyng them to the
Sacraments of baptism, and thankesgeuyng (note how he strikes away five of
the Popish sacraments that of their own heads, they have devised.)

We must examine what is meant by this that follows: Origene in his 3. Homily
upon ler^mie.
leave her no manner of remnaunt. The meaning is this, abolish not certain of
the superstitions of the Chaldees, reserving certain: therefore he commands
that nothing be leafte in her, be it never so little.

He rebukes such teachers, which not only do not as they In his. 25. Homily
upon Math.
say: but also cruelly and unmercifully, without any consideration of the
strength of their disciples and hearers, enioyneth unto them greater things
then they may (...): As they that forbid to marry, and compels and drives
them from it that is so convenient, unto unmeasurable uncleanness.

They also that teach to abstain from meats, and such other things, to the
which they ought not to compel faithful men, kind by the word of their
exposition, heavy burdens, without the will of Christ, which says, my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light.

The sons of Aaron that put fire upon the altar, which Ciprian in the
treatise of simplicity of prelat^s.
god commanded them not, by and by were slain in the sight of the Lord, which
took a vengeance upon them. The which sons, they re^emble and follow, which
despised the tradition of God, and desires other strange doctrines: And
brings in the au^thoritie of man's ordinances, the which men the Lord
blames, and rebukes in his Gospel, saying, ye cast away the commandment
of God, that ye may ^stablishe your traditions.

That Christ ought only to be heard: even the father brings In his. 2. Roke
and. 3. Epistle unto Cecilius.
witness from heaven, saying: This is my dearly beloved son, in who^ I am well
pleased, hear him. Wherefore, if christ ought only to be ^earde, we ought not
to take heed what any man has thought good to be done before us: but what
christ, which was before all men has done before. For we must not follow the
custom of a man: but the truth of GOD, because God speaks by Esaie the
prophet, and says, They worship me in vain, teaching Commandments and
doctrines of men.

From whence have we this tradition? whether comes: Unto Pompeius against the
Epistle of Stephen.
it from the au^thoritie of our Lord, or of the Gospel, or else from the
Commandments, and Epistles of the Apostles? Therefore, if it be either
commanded in the Gospel, or contained in the Epistles or Acts of the
Apostles, let us keep the same tradition.

It is adulterous, it is wicked, it is abominable, whatsoever In his. ^. book*
and. 8. Epistle.
is ordered by the rashness of man, that Gods order should be broken.

If we return to the head, and beginning of our Lords tradition, To Pompeius.
all error of man must needs give place.

This thing is plainly against the tradition of healthful Ba^ile in his book
of the holy Ghost.
baptism, our baptism according to the lords tradition, is in the name of
the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost: by the very tradition of
baptism, we have the confession of faith.

Who so for bids the thing that God commands: and In (...) Morals Summa.
Chap 14.
commands the thing that God forbids, is to be holden accursed of all
them that love the Lord.

Therefore, those that are bought of God, ought not to be Ambrose upon the. 1.
Cor. 7. Cap.
bondmen of men. They are the bondmen of men, that make themselves subject unto
men's superstition.

We by good right do (...) all new thiges that Christ In his. 4. book of
Virgins.
has not taught, for Christ is the (...) unto the faithful men, for if Christ
has not taught it, that we teach, even that we do judge detestable and to be
defied.

The Scribes (says ^e) and the Pharisees sits in the Augustine in his. 46.
treatise upon John.
chair of Moises, do as they bid you: but do not as they do, Inst^tyng in the
chair of M^yses, they teach the law of God, therefore God teaches by them:
but if they teach their own traditions, hear them not, do not after them, for
surely such seeks for their own advantage, and not the glory of Jesus.

When the Lord Jesus had done many things, all things In his. 49. treatise
upon John.
were not written, as the same Evangelist testifies that the Lord Jesus did
and said many things which was thought sufficient for the salvation of them
that believe.

Therefore let no man judge you (says he) in meat, as In his. 59. Epistle
unto Paulinus.
therefore he had said, all those things, for these men were seduced and
beguiled, and ^ed away from the truth, whereby they were free, by such
obseruaunces and traditions, of the which truth, it is said in the Gospel,
the truth shall make you free.

It is a shameful, and too much a great deal unseeming, and contrary to the
nobleness of your liberty, that ye (seeing ye be the body of Christ) should
be deceived with shadows, and think that ye be sinners, when ye care not to
break these. In his. 86. Epistle.


Upon what days we ought not to fast, and upon what days we ought to fast, I
find it not appointed or limi^ted by any commandment, either of our Lord,
or of the Apostles.

All the most pee^ishe heretics, that ^ayne would be called In his. 97.
treatise upon John.
Christians, go about to color the bold vanities of their inventions, which
the very sense and reason of man does most abhor, with the pretense of this
saying in the Gospel, whereas our Lord said thus, I have many things to ^ay
unto you: but as now ye are not able to bear them.

For as much as Christ himself has not ^eueyled these In his. 49. treatise
upon John.
(...), which of us will say, they be these or these? Or if he so say, how can
^e prove it? for who is there, either so vain, or so rash, who
notwithstanding he speak the truth to whom he (...), and what he lists,
will affirm without any (...) of the Scriptures, that these be the things
that the Lord then would not open.

This thing (...) me, that so many things wholsomelye In his. 119. Epistle^.
comm^unded in the holy scriptures, are not regarded: and all things are full
of so many (...) that he is more sharply punished, which with his ^are foot
does touch the earth in the Octauas, then he that burns his mind with
drunkenness, or be drunk.

All be it these be not against the faith, yet with feruiles burdens they so
oppress our very religion, which God of his mercy would have to be free,
under very few, and most manifest sacraments of divine service, that the
state of the Jews is much more tolerable: for the Jews, not with standing
they knew not the time of liberty, yet were they subject to the packes and
burdens of the laws of God, and not unto the devises and presumptions of men.

All such things in my judgment, ought to be cut of, as soon as just
occasion, or power is given, without any manner of (...). In his book of only
baptism against Petilian. Cap. 9. Of Christ's* Serm^n. upon the mount.


The most true and inviolable rule of truth, does show, that in all (...),
that thing is to be improued and amended, which is false and vicious, that is
to be acknowledged and (...) which (...) true (...).

(...) or (...) o^ (...)* is the more dangerous, for that it de^eiueth us
under the name of Gods service.

Our Lord has not burdened us with signs: but Christ In his. 3. book of
christian doctrine, and. 9. Chap.
and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few sacraments in steed of many,
and the same in doing most easy, in signification most excellent, in
observation most reverend: as is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the
celebration of the body and blood of our Lord.

Such sleyghtes of huntyng has the devil, under the color Chrysostom in
his. 49. homily upon the Acts.
of holiness he hides his snares.

Let (...) to honor Christ according to his own will, for he that is
honored, is best pleased with that honor which In his. 51. Homily upon Math.
he will, and not that we will devise.

Tell not me they fast: but show me that they fast according to the will of
God, which if they do not, then is their fast In his. 1. Homily of the Iewishe
fast.
more wicked then any drunkenness.

The (...) said not unto Christ, wherefore do thy In his. 52. Homily upon
Math.
disciples be^ake the laws of Moses* but, wherefor^ do they break the
traditions of the (...) whereby it appears that they had alterod many things:
whereas God had comma^nded that they should neither ^dde nor diminishe: but
fearing least they should loose their authority, as if they had been law
(...), to the end they might seem the greater, they altered much, which thing
god we (...) a wickedness, that they kept their own commandments indre
then the commandments of God.

To bow to the left hand, is to abstain from meats Hierome upon the. 2.
Chap. of Malachie.
which God has created to be received, and to condemn marriage, it is to ^unne
into this which is written in an other place, Be not much righteous* To turn
to the left hand, is when any man gives himself to excess and (...), and
makes many (...) in the laws.

Hold the traditions which ye have learned, either by our In his book upon
the. 2. to the Thessal. 2.
epistle, or by our word; whereas saint Paul will have his own things to be
kept, he will have no straung^ things there is added.

They brag not of their she (...) single life, (...) Unto Mercella that he
would go to Bethlem
is, who (...) be most (...), (...),counted first. There is neither difference,
nor wondering in apparel, howsoever it pleases a man to go, he is neither
slaundered for it, nor commended.

The Pharisees would that men should receive and magnify Citill in his book,
and. 1. cap. upon* John
their doctrine, and the traditions of their fathers, therefore, how many
soever faithful came unto Christ, they thought so many were lost from them.

He says, that every plantyng that is not of the father, shall be Hillarie upon
Mat. Canon. 4.
pulled up by the root, that is, the tradition of man shall be taken away, by
whose favor and means they have broken the precepts of the law.

Then the Apostles preach the Gospel, and afterward Ireneus in his 3. book,
and. 1. Chap.
by Gods will, they delivered the same to us in writing, to be a foundation and
a pyller unto our faith.

Policarpus, when he had received these things of them Eusebius in his. 5.
book and 20. Chap.
that had seen the life of the word, uttered and showed the same, being all
agreeable unto the Scriptures.

The Gospel has laid upon us no yoke of bondage: but Socrates in his 5. book
and 22. Chap.
men themselves in the countries where they dwelt, for release of labor, and
the remembrance of the passion of christ, of a certain custom, kept the
Easter, and other holy days, each man as he would. For neither our Savior,
nor the Apostles by any law commanded these things.

It seems unto me, that many things have beel^e received by custom, now in
one country, and now in another.

Ueryly, to speak universally, in all manner of observations, or forms of
common prayer, there cannot two churches be found, that agrees thoroughly
between them selves.

They take fornication or whordome, to be a thing indifferent: but they fight
for the keeping of their holy days, as for their souls.

Paul, what things being present, he had plainly taught Nicephorus in his. 2.
book and 34. Chap.
by mouth, the same things afterward being absent, he shortly called to
their remembrance, by writing of an epistle.

Saint Matthewe departing, recompensed his absence by In the. 45. cap.
present writing. Theophilact upon the. 1. Cor. 7. Chap.


Therefore the Apostle has provided very well in both causes (to wit) first,
(...) under the pretense of Gods service, servants should depart from their
masters, in whose power their bodies are: Secondly, l^st they should fall from
God, when as they will serve their bodyly master, further then becomes, or
they ought to (...).

What needs it to believe that thing, that neither the Leo (...), in his
(...). Epistle and. 12. Cap.
law has taught, nor the prophets have spoken, nor the gospel has
preached, nor the Apostle has delivered?

How are these new devises brought in, that our fathers In his. 97. Epistle,
and. 3. cap.
never knew?

If sundry of our predecessors or elders have done certain Stephen Pope, in
the. 63. distinction. Quia sancta.
things, which at that time might well be done without hurt, and afterward are
turned into error and superstition, without any staggering and with great
authority, let them be destrayed and abolished by the successors. (...), of
the supper of the Lord. Bessarion of the Sacrament of the Eucharistia.


These be the Sacraments of Christ in the Catholic Church: Baptism, and
the body and blood of our Lord.

We read that these only two Sacraments were delivered to us plainly in the
Scriptures.

In deed Paul has commanded us to submit our understanding: but unto the
obedience of Christ, not unto the obedience Alphonsus de Castro in his 1. book
and. 7. Chap against herefies.
of men.

In proper speech, those we call Sacraments which are promised with signs
annexed, the rest that have no signs, are bare promises, wherefore speaking
hereof precisely and Luther, in his book of the babilonicall captivity.
straytly, there are two Sacraments in the Church of God: Baptism, and the
Bread, for as much as in these only we find both the sign ordained of God,
and also the promise of remission of sins.

Surely saint Peter in the acts of the Apostles, does openly Erasmus in his
annotations upon the. xi. of Math.
call the law of Moses (which is laid for a time, upon the rebellious people
of the Jews) an hard and a heavy burden, which neither we, nor our fathers
were able to bear: neither can any man doubt it, that it is truth which the
truth has pronounced. The yoke of Christ is in very deed pleasant, and his
burden is light, so that no men's traditions, be laid upon men's shoulders,
beside or more then that thing* which he has already appointed: And he has
commanded nothing else, but that one should love another, and there is
nothing so bittere but that charity will season, and make sweet.

Even as the ordinance of men, did make heavy the law, being by it self
grievous enough for the Jews, which ordinances so at the first crept in, as
though they were small and ought not to be cared for, or regarded, or else,
they being commended with the show of godliness, be gladly received of them
that are more simple, then foresighted.

Those that are once received by peecemeale, do grow and increase, unto a huge
quantity, and do oppress down, and overthrow men, whether they will or no,
either by the help of custom (whose violence is a certain tyranny) or else,
by the authority of princes, which hold stiffly, it that is rashly
received, abusing it for their profit and gain.

There are some that knit together either a cold sylogisme of a piece of
Scripture, which they do not understand, or else make an article of faith, of
a man's ordinances, and of such men are we judged to be christians, or no
christians, which appertain nothing at all to christian religion.

Some wrest this place so far, as men ought to obey all In the same book upon
this 23. of Matthew.
manner of things: whatsoever the Bishops, Presidentes, or rulers command,
although they be ungodly, and that for their aucthorities sake: when as christ
did speak only of them, which did teach rightly the law of Moses, and not of
such as did snare men with their ordinances and constitutions. Now
peradventure after the same manner a Bishop might be heard, which preaches
truly the Gospel, although he (...) but ^tle according to the same.

But who can abide that they should (...) an open tyranny against Christ's
doctrine, and make laws for their own advantage, measuryng all things
according to their gain, and glorious majesty's. They that snare the people
with rites and ordinances, devised for their own profit, and to fulfill
their tyranny, do not sit in the chair of the Gospel: but in the ch^ire of
Simon Magus, and Caiaphas.

The. xliij. Chapter.
Sacrifices of the new Testament.
OFter the sacrifices of righteousness, and Psalm. 4. 5.
trust in the Lord.

The sacrifices of God are a contrite Psalm. 51. 17.
spirit, and a broken heart, O Lord, thou shall not despise.

Then thou shall accept the sacrifices 19
of righteousness, even the burnt offering and oblation: then shall they offer
Calves upon thine altar.

He that offers praise, shall glorify me: and to him that Psalm. 50. 23.
disposes his way a right, will I show the salvation of God.

Let my prayer be directed in thy fight as incense, and the Psalm. 141. 2.
liftyng up of my hands as an euenyng sacrifice.

He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Micha. 6. 8.
lord requires of thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to
humble thy self to walk with God.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the Malach. 1. 11.
same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every plate incense shall
be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name in great among the
heathen, says the Lord of Hoastes.

I will have mercy, and not sacrifices. Math. 12. 7.


I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God* Romans 12. 1.
that (...) up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable seruyng of God.

I was even (...) that I had received of the Epaphroditus Philip. 4. 18.
that which (...) from you, an odoure that smells sweet, a sacrifice
acceptable and pleasant to God.

Let us therefore by him offer the sacrifice of praise always Hebre. 13. 15.
to GOD, that is, the (...) of the lips, which confess his (...).

To do good and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices 16
God is pleased.

Ye as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, and holy priestboode, 1.
Peter. 2. 5.
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

He made us Kings, and Priests unto God even his father, Revelation. 1. 6.
to him be glory and dominion for evermore.

Amen.
The Doctors.
Even so has god willed us daily to offer up our Ireneus in his 4. book, and
34. Chap.
sacrifice at the altar without ceasyng.

The Church offers up unto God, a natural thing of Gods creation: neither is
our Altar here in earth: but in heaven, thither out prayers, and sacrifice^ be
directed.

The sacrifice does not sanctify the man: but the conscience of the offerer,
being pure, sanctifies the sacrifice.

And we that be lay men, are we not priests? truly christ Tertullian in his
exhortation unto chastity.
had made even us a kingdom, and Priests unto his father.

In his book against the Jews.
The pure sacrifice, that Malachie speaks of, that should be offered up in
every place, is the preaching of the Gospel until the end of the world.

In his. 4. book against Marcion.
The sacrifice that Malachie meant, is a devout prayer proceedyng from a pure
conscience.

In his book unto Scapulas.
We make sacrifice unto our god, for the safety of our Emperor, with a pure
prayer.

Origene in his. x. book upon the Romans
It is a work of sacrifice, to preach the Gospel.

In his. 9. Homily upon Leuiticus.
All that are bathed with the holy Oyntmente, are made priests, even as Peter
says, unto the whole Church, you are the chosen stock, and the kingly
priesthood.

Epiphanius in his. 2. book of Melchisedech.
Christ is our sacrifice, our Priest, our altar, God, man, King, Bishop,
Sheep, Lamb made for our (...), all in all.

Justinius* Martyr in dialogis cum Triphone.
Esaias promises not the restoring of blooddy sacrifices: but the true, and
spiritual oblations of praises, and tha^sgiuing.

Ambrose in his. 2 book of Virgins.
I may boldly say, your hearts be aulters, upon which hearts Christ is
daiely offered for the redemption of the body.

In his. 5. book upon the 6. cap. of Luke.
All the children of the Church, be Priests.

Augustine in (...) ^ooke of faith. to Peter ^ie Deacon. 19. chap.
In those fleshely sacrifices, there was a figure of the flesh of Christ,
which he would afterward offer for us, and of the blood, which he would
afterward shed for the remission of sins: but in this sacrified, there is a
thankesgeuyng, and a remembrance of the flesh, which he has already
offered for us: and of the blood, which he being God, has already shed for
us. In those sacrifices it was represented unto (...) ^der a figure, what thing
should be given unto us: but in this sacrifiee is plainly set forth, what
things is already given for us: In those sacrifi^es it is plainly preached
unto us, that the same son of God has already deene ^laint for the wicked.

The flesh, and blood of this sacrifice, before the coming In his. xx. book
and xxi. chap. against Fortunatu^.
of Christ, was promised by sacrifices of resemblaunce. The same in his (...),
was given in truth, and in deed: but after his ascension it is solemnized by
a Sacrament of remembrance. In his. ^. book and. v. Chap. of the city of god


The thing that of all men is called a sacrifice, is a token, or a sign of the
true sacrifice.

In his. xx. book and. x. Cap. of the City of God.
Therefore our altar is in heaven* for thither our praier^ and oblations are
directed.

All be priests, because they are the members of one priest.

Upon the 71. Psalm.
When we believe in Christ, even of the very (...) of our cogitation, Christ
is sacrificed unto us euerydaie.

In his Questions upon the Gospel, the. 1. book.
Then is Christ flaine to every man, when he believes that Christ was slain.

In the beginning of his exposition upon the Romans.
The sacrifice of our Lords passion, every man then offe^ reth for himself,
when he is confirmed in the faith of his passion.

In his. 125. sermon of Time.
The sacrifice of the new Testamente is, when we offer up the aulters of our
pure hearts, and clean in the sight of the divine majesty.

Chrysostom in his. 29. Homily upon the Romans.
My whole priesthood is, to teach, and to preach the Gospel, that is my
oblation: this is my sacrifice.

^o his iii. book against the leyyes.
It is called a new sacrifice, because it proceeds from a new mind and is
offered not by fire, and smoke: but by grace, and by the spirit of God.

In his. 18. homily upon 2. Cor.
In the holy mysteries, the Priest differs nothing from the people.

In his. 3. Homily upon the 2. Cor.
Even thou in thy Baptism art made both a King, and a Priest, and a Prophet.

(...) unction ^matis.
All that of Christ be called christians, offer up unto God the daily
sacrifice, being ordained of god, priests of holiness.

Hierom upon the. 1. of Malachie.
The Prophet Malachie means hereby, that the prayers of holy people should
be offered unto God, not only in Iewrie, that was but one province of the
world: but also in all places.

In his book upon the. 147. Psalm.
When we hear the word of the lord, the flesh of christ and his blood is
powered out into our ears.

In his. 2. book. and. 8. Chap. upon Zachary.
A pure sacrifice is offered unto me in every place, not in the oblations of
the old Testament: in the holiness of the purity of the Gospel.

Upon the. 2^ Psalm.
Every holy man has in himself the altar of God, which is faith.

Upon Malachie. 1. Chap.
All we are the princely and kyngly kindred, that being baptized in Christ, are
called christians, by the name of Christ.

Eusebi. in his 1. book, and. x. Cap. De Monstra.
We sacrifice, and offer up unto God, the remembrance of that great
sacrifice, using the holy mysteries, accordynglie, as Christ has delivered
them, and giuyng God thanks for our salvation.

In the. vi. Chap. of the same book.
We burn the incense of prayer, and we offer up the sacrifice, that is called
pure, not by sheddyng of bleed, but by pure and godly doings.

In his. 2. book de Demon.
They shall offer unto him reasonable and unbloody oblations, the sacrifices
of praise.

Cirill in his x. book against Iutianus.
We having left the gross ministry of the Iowes, have a commandment, to
make a fine, thin, and spiritual sacrifice. And therefore we offer unto God all
manner virtues, faith, hope, charity, as most sweet savors.

Chris. against the Jews in his. 3. orat.
We make our sacrifices, not by smokes, smell, and blood: but by the grace of
the holy spirit, and he that ad^ureth him, must ado^re inspirite and truth.

In the book of consecration the. 2. distinct. Cap. Hoc est.
The sacrifice that is wrought by the haudes of the Priest, is called the
Passion, the death, the crucifiyng of Christ: not in deed: but by a mystery
signifiyng.

In the Canon of the Mass. book.
Remember, O Lord, thy servants, and all them that stand (...), for whom we
offer unto thee, or else, which do offer unto thee, this sacrifice of praises.

The* xliij. Chapter.
Princes ought to (...) in matters of religion.
THou shall seek and make search, Deu^. 13. 14.
and enquire diligently: and if it be true, and the thing certain that such
abomination is wrought among you. Thou shall (...) the (...) of 15
that city with ye edge of the sword: destroy it utterly, and all that is
therein. etc.

And when he shall sit upon the Chap. 17. 18.
throne of his kingdom, then shall he write him this law repeated in a book
by the priests of the Levites.

And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the 19
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep
all the words of this law, and these ^ces, for to do them.

Also Joshua spoke unto the priests, saying, Take up the Joshua. 3. 6.
Arc of the covenant, and go over before the people, and so they to^e up the
Arc of the covenant, and went before the people.

Then Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said Chap. ^. 6.
unto them, Take up the Arc of the covenant, and let seven priests bear
seven Trumpettes of Rams horns before the Ark of the Lord.

The king also and his men went to ^ierusalem unto the ^. Sam^. 5. 6.
Iebusites, the inhabitauntes of the land: who spoke unto David, saying,
Except thou take away the By blind and lame is meant the Idols, so the Godly
(...) them.
blind and the lame, thou shall not come in hither.

And there they left their images, and David and his men burnt them.

And David councelled with the (...) of shoulandes, 1. Chron 13. 1.
and of hundredes, and with all the governors.

And David said to all the congregation of Israel, If it 2
seem good to you, and that it proceeds of the Lord our God, we will send
to and (...) unto our brethren, that are left in all the land of Israel, (for
with them are the Priests and the Levites in their cities and in their
Suburbs) that they may assemble themselves unto us.

And we will bring again the Arc of our God to us: for 3
we sought not unto it in the days of Saul.

And David made him a house in the city of David, and Chap. 15. ^.
prepared a place for the Ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.

And David called Zadock and Abyathar the priests, and 11
of the Levites. etc.

And he said unto them* Ye are the chief fathers of the 12
Levites, sanctify your selves and your brethren, and bring up the Ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it.

And (...) it spoke unto the chief of the Levites, (...) they 16
should^ appoint certain of their (...) to sing with instruments of music,
with Uials, and Harpes, and Cymbales, that they might make a sound, and lift
up their voice with joy.

And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before Chap. 16. 4.
the Arks of the Lord, and to rehearse and to thank and praise the Lord God
of Israel*

And he set (...) of the priests to their offices, a^cording 2. Chron. 8.
to the ^rder of David his father, and the Levites in their 14.
watches, for to praise and minister before the priests every day, and the
Porters by their courses at every gate.

And they declined not from the commandment of the 15
king, concerning the Priests and the Levites touching all things.

And Iehosaphat lift (...) his heart unto the ways of the Chap. 17. 6.
Lord, and he took away moreover the high places, and the groves out of Judah.

And in the third year of his reign he sent his Princes, 7.
Benhol, and Obadiah, and Zachariah, and Nathaneel, and Mychaah, that they
should ^eache in the cities of ^udah.

And with them Levites, (...), and Nethaniah, and 8
Z^badiah, and Asahell. etc. And with them Elishama, and Ieho^am priests.

And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of 9
the Lord with them, and went about through all the cities of Judah, and
taught the people.

Moreover, in Jerusalem did Iehosaphat set Levites, and (...). xix. viii.
of the Priests, and of the chief of the families of Israel, for the
judgment and cause of the Lord.

And Iehosaphat feared, and set him self to seek the Lord, Chap. 20. 3.
and proclaimed a fast through all Judah.

And the ^yng set Zadock the Priest, in the room of Abiathar. 1. King. 2. 35.


Behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Chap 5. 5.
Lord my God. etc.

And Hezechiah took (...) the high places, and brake the ^. King. 18. 4.
Images, and cut down the Groves, and brak^ i^ (...) the (...) Serpent, that
Moises had (...) For unto those (...), the children of Israel ^id burn
Ince^se to i^, (...) he (...) it, Nehushtan, ^s a piece of Brass, thus he
c^lleth it in contempt. Chap. 23. 4.
Nehu^htan.

Then king Josiah commanded Hilkial the high Priest, and the Priests of the
second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring out of the Temple of the
Lord, all the vessel^ that were made for Baall, and for the (...)* and for all
the ^oste of heaven, and he (...) to them with out Jerusalem.

He brake the Images in (...), and c^tte down the Groves, 14
and filled their places with the bones of men.

Then the king commanded all the people, saying: keep 2^
the Passover unto the lord your God, as it is written in the book of the
covenant.

And Hezechiah opened the doors of the house of the lord, ^. Chro. 29. 3.
in the first year, and in the first monethe of his reign, and repaired them.

And he said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify 5
now your selves, and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers, and
carry for the the f^lthinesse out of the San^tuarie.

And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified them 1^
selves, and came according to the commandment of the king* and by the
woord^s of the Lord, for to cle^se the house of the Lord.

Then they went in to Hezechiah the king, and faied, we ^8
have cleansed all the house of the Lord, and the altar of burnt offering,
with all the vessels thereof, and the show bread table, withal the vessels
thereof.

And Hezechiah sent to al Israel, and Judah, and also wrote Chap. ^0. 1.
letters to Ephraim, and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the
Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover unto the Lord God of Israell^*

And the King and his princes, and all the congregation had 2
taken counsel in Jerusalem to keep the Passover in the second month.

Be wise now therefore, ye kings: be learned ye Judges of Psalm. 2. 10.
the earth.

Kings shall be thy noursing fathers, and Queens shal^e Esaie. 49. 23.
thy ^ources.

Give to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, and give, unto Math. 22. 2^.
God, those thyn^es which are Gods.

Jesus suns were^ them, is it not written in your law, I John. x. xxxiiii
^aide ye are Gods?

Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for Romans xiii. i.
there is no power but of God: And the powers that be, are orde^ned of God.

I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, i. Timoth. ii.
i.
intercessions, and giuyng of thanks be made for all men.

For kings, and for all that are in au^thoritie, that we may 2
lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty.

Submit your selves unto al public government for the i. Peter. ii. xiii.
lords sake, whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior.

Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent of him, 14
for the punishment of evil doers, and for praise of them that ^oe well*

The Doctors.
WE are met together at Aquileia, by the commandment Ambrose of the
counsel of Aquileia. Tertullian to Scapula^.
of the Emperor.

We honor the Emperors majesty, as a man next unto God. For so is the
Emperor greater then all men, (...) he is less then only the true God.

When the Emperor holds the truth, and by force of Augu^tine in his. 116.
epistle to Donatus.
the same truth gives out laws, and proclamation against error, whosoever
despises the same, procures judgment against him self, for he shall be
punished before men, and before God he shall have no face, that refused to do
that thing, that the truth it self, through the heart of the Prince, has
commanded.

Is it not lawful for the Emperor, or his Deputy, to give In his. 1. book
against the ^pistle of Per^*
sentence in a matter of religion? Wherefore then went your Ambassadors to the
Emperor? why made they him the judge of their cause*

Kings in the world serve Christ, in that they make In his. 48. Epistle.
laws for Christ.

How do the kings serve the Lord with reverence: but In his. 50. Epistle to
(...).
in for biddyng and punishyng with a religious severity, such things as are
done against the Lords commandments. For a king serves one wa^e in that he
is a man, and another way, in that he is a king. Because in respect that he
is but a man, he serves the Lord in living faithfully: but in that he is
also a king, he lerueth in making laws of convenient force, to command good
things, and to forbid the contrary. So Ezechias served God, in destroiyng the
Temples of Idols, and those high places, which were builded contrary to the
commandment of God. etc.

In this therefore kings serve the lord, when thoi do those things to serve
him, which they could not do, were they not kings. etc. But after that this
began to be fulfilled which is written: and all the kings of the earth shall
worship him, all the nations shall serve him, what man being in his right
wits, may say to kings? care not you, in your kingdoms, who defends or
oppugneth the Church of your Lord? Let it not appertain, or be any part of
your care, who is religious in your kingdom, or a wicked deprauer of religion.
etc.

Now if the christian kings, and Emperors do know, that Nabuchodonozor made
this decree against the blasphemers of God, surely they cast in their minds,
what they are bound to decree in their kingdom, to wit, that the self same
God, and his sacraments, be not lightly set by and contemned.

I have already heretofore made it manifest, that it apperteineth In his. ii.
book. and. xxvi. Cap. against the Epistle of ^audentius.
to the kings charge, that the Ninevites should pacify gods wrath, which the
prophet had denounced unto them. The kings which are of Christ's Church, do
judge most rightly, that it apperteyneth unto their cure, that you (
Donatistes) rebel not without punishment against the same.

This will cause Princes to be blessed, if that they make In his. 5. book.
and. 24. Cap. of the City of God.
their power which they have, a serunant unto gods majesty, to enlarge most
wide, his worship, service, or religion.

That is, in this kings (as it is commanded them of God) In his. 3. book
and. 51. Chap. against Cresconius.
do serve God as kings, if in their kingdom, they command good, and forbid
evil things, not only those things which parteyne to humayne society, or
ciuyll order: but also to gods religion.

The Emperors writtes caused the Bisshoppes, as well Hierome in Epitaphio
Paulae. Chrysostom in his Epistle to innocentius Cirill, in his 17. Epistle,
and 4 Tome, to Theodosius.
of the East, as of the Weste, to draw to Rome.

We went in, and humbly besought the most Christian prince, to call a
Counsel.

The surety of our common weal, depends upon gods Religion, and there is
greater kindred and society betwixt these twain, for they cleave together,
and the one grows with the increase of the other, in such sort, that true
Religion, helped with the endeavor of Justice, and the common weal, helped of
them both, florisheth. Seeing therefore, that we are constituted of God to be
the kings, and are the knit^yng together, or ioynture of godliness, and
prosperity in the subjects, we keep the society of these twain, never to
be sundered, and so far forth as by our foresight, we procure peace unto
our subjects, we minister unto the augmentyng of the common weal: but as we
might say, being servants to our subjects in all things, that they may
live Godly, and be of a religious conversation, as it becomes godly ones,
we garnishe the common weal with honor, having care, as it is conueniente for
them both (for it can not be that diligently prouidyng for the one, we should
not care in like sort also for the other.

But we travel earnestly in this thing, above the rest, that the
Ecclesiastical estate may remain sure, both in such sort, as is seemly for
Gods honor, and (...) for our times, that it may continue in tranquillity by
common co^^ent, without variaunce, that it may be quiet through agreement in
Ecclesiastical matters, that the godly religion may be preserved
vnreprou^able, and that the life of such as are chosen into the Clergy, and
the great Priesthood, may be clear from all fault.

This is a Copy of the Emperors writ, whereby he Theodo^etus in his. ^.
book, and. 9. Chap. In his. 1. book and. 17. Chap.
commanded a counsel to be kept in Rome.

But Julius (Pope) excused his absence, because of his age.

Constantine says, if the Bisshoppe move trouble, by my hand he shall be
punished: for my hand is the hand of Gods In the. 20. cap. of the same book.
minister.

If we have (says Constantine, writing to the Nichomedians) chaste Bisshoppes
of right opinion, of courteous behavior, In the* 19. cap. of the same bo^e.
we rejoice: but if any be inflamed to continue the memory of those pestilent
heresies, his ^oule hardy presumpti^ shall forthwith be corrected, and kept
under my correction, which am Gods minister.

Constantine gave also Injunctions to the chief ministers of the Churches, that
they should make special supplication to GOD for him. He enjoined all his
subjects, that they should keep holy certain days, dedicated to Christ, and
the Saturdaie, he gave a law unto the rulers of the Nations, that the^ should
celebrate the Sundaie in like sort, after the appoinctment of the Emperor.
etc.

We have also herein comprised the Emperors lives, for Socrates in his ^. book
in proaemio.
that, sithence the Emperors were Christened, the affairs of the Church have
hanged of them. And the greatest Counsels, both have been, and are kept by
their affairs.

I caused a great company of Bisshopps to come to Nice: In his. 1. book and.
9. Chap. of Constantine.
with whom together I took in hand the examination of the truth, being my
self one of you, and much desiryng to be therein your fellow servant.

They which being within the Church, offend against Isidorus in his book of
the aucthority, and care of kings.
faith and discipline, let them be feared with the rigor of princes, and let
the principal power lay that discipline, which the humility of the Church
is not hable to execute, upon the necks of the proud.

The Emperor Constantinus sent out his letters, unto Zozomenus in 1. book,
and, 17. Chap.
all his rulers of the Churches, that they should all meet at Nice upon a
day: unto the Bisshoppes of the Apostolic sees: unto Macarius the Bisshoppe
of Jerusalem: and unto Julius the Bisshoppe of Rome. etc.

The Emperor Constantine commanded, that ten Bisshoppes In his. 4. book and.
16. Chap.
of the East, and ten of the West, should be chosen by the Counsel, that his
majesty might consider, whether they were agreed, according to the Scriptures,
and that he might further determine, and conclude, what were before best to
be done.

Constantine the Emperor was a most clear preacher Eusebius of the life of
constantine, orat. 1.
of God, and as it were, the savior, and Physician of souls.

The Emperor, as having inkindeled a great flame, looked In his. 3. orat.
well about with his princely eye, that no privy remnauntes of e^rour should
rest behind.

Yea, he him self with his public Proclamations, did exhort In his. 3. book
of the life of Constant.
and allure his subjects to the Christian faith, he caused the Idolatrous
religion to be suppressed, and utterly banished, and the true knowledge and
Religion of Christ, to be brought in, and planted among his people.

He made many wholesome laws, and godly constitutio^s, In his. ^. bok^
where with he restrained the people with threats, forbiddyng them the
Sacrifi^yng to Idolles: to seek after the deuillishe and superstitious
soothsaiynges: to set up Images, that they should not make any privy
Sacrifice: and to be short, he reformed all manner of abuses about gods
service, and provided 4. book.
that the Church should be fed with Gods word.

I have judged (says Constantine) this ought before all In his. 3. book.
other things, to be the end and endeavor, or purpose, whereunto I should
address my power and authority in government, that the unity of faith,
pure love, and agreement of religion, toward the almighty God, might be kept
and maintained amongst all congregations of the catholic Church.

Your majesty is the captain of the profession of our faith: Nicepho^us in
his preface to Emmanuell the Emperor.
your Majesty has restored the Catholic, and universal Church: your
Majesty has reformed the Temple of GOD from merchants, and exchaungers of
the heavenly doctine, and from heretics, by the word of truth. Theophilact
upon the. 13. to the Romans Carolus Magnus in his. 6. ^oke, and. 162. Chap.


Paul teaches all men, whether he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, that they
submit them selves to Princes.

Carolus Magnus commands, that nothing should be read openly in the
Church, saving only the Canonical books of the holy Scriptures, and that
the faithful people should receive the holy Communion every Sundaie.

Justinian the Emperor, commands, that the Priest Authentiques Constitut.
Titu. 123.
or Bishop, in pronouncyng the public prayers, and in the ministration of
the Sacraments, lift up his voice, and speak aloude, that the people may
say, Amen. And be sturred to more devotion, and let the Priests understand,
that if they neglecte any of these things, they shall make answer before
God: and yet we our selves understanding thereof, will not pass it over, nor
leave it unpunished.

We command (says Justinian) the most holy Archebishoppes, Authen, cola.
9 Titu. 15*
and Patriarchs of Rome, of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Antioche, and of
Jerusalem. etc. Authen Titu. 133.


Justinian commands, that al Monks, either be driven to study the
scriptures, or else to be forced to bodily labor. Leo Pope, in his. 23. Epistle
to the clergy and all the people of Constantinople. The Counsel of
Chalcedon* the. 1. Act. and 748. Page. Pope Leo, unto Theodosius the Emperor
in his. 24. Epi.


Make suit with all discretion, and humble prayer, that our most gracious
Emperor, would vouchsaue to grant our requests, in that we have desired a
general counsel.

By order of the same writ, our most holy Pope Leo, ruler of the Church of
Rome, was called to the Counsel, by the most godly, and most Christian
Emperor.

All our Churches, and all our Priests most humbly beseech your majesty with
sobbes, and tears, that ye will command a general Counsel to be holden
within Italy.

(...) of Chalcedon the 3. Act. Page 804.
Martianus the Emperor said: we confirm the reuere^de Counsel, by the holy
Edicte of our majesty.

Council. Tom. 2. of the life of Vigilius. Franciscus Z^rabella, de Schematae
and Consilio. Aneas Siluius. ali. Pope Pius, 2. of the counsel of Basil in
his. 1. book.
The Emperor ( Justinian) demanded of his captain Belisarius, how he had
done with the Romans: and how he had deposed Pope Siluerius, and placed
Vigilius in his steed, upon his answer, both the Emperor, and the Empress
gave him thanks.

The Pope in any notorious crime, may be accused before the Emperor: and the
Emperor may require the Pope, to yield a reckenyng of his faith.

By these aucthorities they think them selves armed that say, no counsel may
be kept without the consent of the Pope: Whose judgment if it should stand,
as they would have it, would draw with it the decaie, and ruin of the Church,
for what remedy were there the^, if the Pope himself were vicious, destroyed
souls, ouerthrewe the people with evil examples, taught doctrine contrary to
the faith, and filled his subjects full of heresy? should we suffer all to
go to the devil? Uerely when I read the old stories, and consider the Acts
of the Apostles, I find no such order in those days, that only the Pope
should summone Counsels, and afterward in the time of Constantine the great,
and of other Emperors, when counsels should be called, there was no great
account to be made of the Popes consent. Herneus of the authority of the
Pope. 18. Chap.


In the old law, the Bishops, that annoincted the kings, out of doubt were
subject unto the kings.

To say that the Prince cannot, either make or use his laws, before the Pope
have allowed them, it is plainly false. In the. 17. cap.


Pope Bonefacius the third, obtained of the Emperor In the. 13. cap.
Phocas, that the Church of Rome, should be the head of all Churches, whereof
we may in like case gather an argument, that it belongs to the Emperor, to
translate the pri^acie of the church, and to take order for the Churches.

Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: if every Bernarde in his
42. Epistle to the Archebisshop of Syuone^s.
soul, then is your soul subject, as well as others, for yet who has
excepted you from this generality? He that would except you from the
obedience of the Prince, seeks to deceive you, give no ear to their
counsels. For, notwithstanding they be christians, yet they think it a shame,
either to follow christ's deeds, or to obey Christ's words. They use to say
unto you, O sir, maintain the honor of your See. etc. Are you not so good as
your predecessors? if your See be not auaunced by you, yet let it not be
abased by you. Thus say they: but Christ has both taught us, and wrought
far otherwise. For, he says, give to Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and
give to god, that belongs to God.

The Popes Legate came into England, and made a counsel Polichronicon ^abian.
by the assent of king William the conqueror.

And in the counsel at Winchester, were put down many Bishops, Abbottes, and
Priours, by the means and procurement of the king. The king gave to Laufracke
the Archebishopprike of Canterbury, and on our Lady day the assumpsion, made
him Archbishop, on Whit Sundaie, he gave the Archbishoppricke of York, unto
Thomas a canon of Beyon.

Within a while, strief and contention fell between king William, and Anselme,
for Anselme might not call his Sinode nor correct the Bisshoppes: but as the
king would, the king also challenged the inues^ure of Bisshops. This king for
bade the paiyng of any money or tribute to Rome. The Counsel at London, under
Henry the. 1. Fabian. Polidorus. The Counsel at Salisburie, Nauclerius
Polidorus. Abbas v^spergensis.


The Spirituality condescended, that the kings officers should punish
priests for whoredom. In the which Counsel also, the king provided many
things to be enacted, which should greatly help to lead a Godly and
blessed life.

At which Counsel the king called thither, so well the chief of the
Clergy, as the people, and swear them unto him and unto William his son.
And not only the king did make Bisshoppes and Abbottes (which he calls holy
Rites, laws of religion, and Church Ceremonies) but also the princes of every
nation began every where, to claim this right unto them selves, of namyng
and denouncyng of Bisshoppes, the which to this day, they hold fast with
toothe and nail.

Henry the second, made Thomas Becket Archebishoppe Henry. ^. Math. Paris.
Polichron.
of Cantorburie, who thereat was sworn to the King, and to his laws, and to
his son.

In the ninth year of his reign, he called a Parliamente as Northhampton,
where he reformed many privileges, that the Clergy had, (although Thomas
Becket, like a perjured traitor, resisted him.)

In the seventeen year of his reign, he made a journey into Fabian.
Irelande, where, with great travel he subdued the Irish: he reformed Church
matters there, as that of the ruling and orderyng of the Church by the
Curates, how they should order their service, and minister the Sacraments, as
it was in England. How the people should behave them selves toward their
curates: how they should pay their tithes, and make their Testamentes.

He made the statute of Northhampton, so that, after that Edward the first.
Polichronicon Fabian Polidorus. Richard the second, Polidorus.
time no man should give, neither sell, nor bequeath, neither ^haunge, neither
buy title, assign lands, tenementes, neither rentes, to any man of religion,
without the kings leave.

Called a counsel at Westminster, wherein was thought good to the king, and
the princes, for the weal of the realm of England, if a part of the Popes
authority, were bounded within the limits of the Occean Sea: wherefore it
was decreed, that hereafter it should be lawful to no man, to try any cause
before the Bisshoppe of Rome: nor that any man be publicly pronounced wicked,
or enemy of religion, that is to wit, as the common people term it, be
excommunicate by the Popes authority: Nor that if any man have any such
commandment from him, they execute the same, upon pain to forfaicte all
their goods, and to be cast into perpetual prison.

Made laws, that there should be no marchaundise, no Canutus king.
huntyng, no worldly business dooen upon the Sabbath day. And that every man
should communicate, at the least thrice in the year. Also, if any woman
committed adultery, her nose, and ear should be cut of.

Made laws, that the Tithes should be kept holy, from Edga^us king,
nine a clock at night, on the Saterdaie, until the day light of the Mondaie
following.

Gathered a Counsel at London about Easter, at which Edmundus king
Odo, and VVolstan the Archbishop were present, where he made laws, that who
soever committed whoredom with a Nun, should dye as a murderer. And that
all periurers, should be separated from the company of God for ever.

Made a law, that if any servant should work upon the (...) king,
Sundaie, by his masters commandment, should be made free. Also that
children should be Baptized within thirty nights, under pain of thirty
shillynges. Also if any did fight in the Church, he should pay six pounds.

Made laws, if any forsook his faith, he should dye. And Aluredusking,
if any minister should deny Baptism, to any that need thereof, he should dye
for it.

Made a law, that if any within his palaice did swear, he Henry 5. king,
should be taxed: If he were a Duke, he should pay. xl. s^. to the help of
the poor: If he were a Lord. xx. s^. If he were a Knight. x. s^. If he were
a Yeoman. xl. d. If he were a Lackey, E^combert king of Kent. Fox. Ethelbaldus
King of Mercia, Fox. Elutherius Pope, wrote to Lucius. King.
or a slave, to be whipped.

First commanded Lent to be fasted in all his dominions.

He made a law, that all Churches should be free from all exactions, and
public charges.

Let the seculer princes know, that they ought to give an account to God for
the Church, which they have received of God to be defended.

Ye have required of us (says Elutherius Pope) to send the Romayne and
Imperial laws unto you, to use the same in In the ancient records of London,
remainyng in the Guildhall.
your Realm of England: we may always reject the laws of Rome, and laws of
the Emperor: but so can we not the Law of GOD, for ye have received (through
the mercy of God) the law and faith of Christ into your kingdom, you have
both Testamentes in your Realm, take out of them by the grace of GOD, and
advise of your subjects, a law, and by that law, through Gods sufferaunce,
rule your Realm: but be you Gods Uicar in that kingdom.

David is set before al (in the Genealogy of Christ) for that Hugo Cardinalis,
upon the ^. cap. of Math.
the dignity of a king is chief and greatest.

The. xlv. Chapter.
The Pope is antechriste.
IF any shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, Math. 24. 24.
or there, believe it not.

For there shall arise false christ's, and 25
false prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders, so that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very elect.

Babes, it is the last time, and as ye have 1. John. 2. 18.
heard, that antechrist shall come, even now are there many antechristes:
whereby we know that it is the last time.

Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? 22
the same is the antechriste that denies the father and the son.

But this is the Spirit of Antichriste, of whom ye have Chap. 4. 3.
heard, how that he should come, and now already he is in the world.

For many deceivers are entered into the world, which 2. John. 1. 7.
confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, he that is such a one,
is a deceiuer, and an antichriste.

Let no man deceive you by any means: for that (...) shall 2. Thessal. 2. 3.
come, except there come a departing first, and that, that man of sin be
disclosed, even the son of perdition.

Which is an adversary, and exalts him self against all 4
that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sit as God in the temple
of God, showing him self that he is God.

The Doctors.
ANtichriste, notwithstanding he be but a sclaue, Ireneus in his. 5. book, and
last Chap* save one.
yet he will be worshipped, as if he were God, and published and proclaimed as
a king.

Antichriste shall come in the desolation of the Gregory Nazianzenus in (...),
Anselmus in the. 2. Thesa. 2.
world* for he is the abomination of desolation.

Antichriste shall feign him self to be holy, that he may deceive men, under
the color of holiness. Yea, and he shall call him self God, and shall cause
him self to be worshipped: and shall promise the kingdom of heaven.

The abomination of desolation, is the cursed coming Ambrose in his. 10. book
and (...) Chap. upon Luke. ^ Augustine in the. 9. Psalm.
of antichriste.

For that we believe, that antichrist shall come unto such a height of vain
glory, it shall be lefull for him to do such things, both toward all
men, and also toward the saints of God, that many weak men shall think,
GOD has forsaken the care of the world. Hierome to Algasia.


Antichriste shall cause all Religion, to be subject to his power.

By the abomination of desolation, we may understand In his book upon the.
24. of Math.
any manner of perverse, and false doctrine.

The abomination of desolation, shall stand in the church, until the
consummation, or end of time, and show himself as God. Hillarie in Math. 25.
Canon.


When ye shall see the abomination of desolation, standing in the holy place:
Christ spoke these words of the time of antichriste. In his book against
Auxentius.


One thing I read you: Beware of antichriste, for it is not well, that we
should be thus in love with walls: It is not well, that ye should honor the
Church in houses, and buildinges. Is there any doubt: but Antichrist shall sit
in the same.

He is antichriste, that shall claim to be called the universal Gregory in
his 4. book, and. 38. Epistle.
Bishop: and shall have a guard of Priests to attend upon him.

I speak it boldly: who soever calls him self, the universal In his. 6.
book and. 30. Epistle.
Priest, or desires so to be called in the pride of his In his. 34. Epistle.
heart, he is the forerunner of antichriste.

By this pride of his, what thing else is signified: but that the In his. 25.
book upon the. 34. and ^4. c^p. of Job. Chrysostom in his. 49. Ho^ of the
imperfect work. In his. 4. Homily upon the 2. These. 2. cap.
time of antichriste is even at hand?

Whereas he is a damned man, and not a spirit, by living he faineth him self
to be God.

This antichriste is called the abomination of desolation: for that he shall
cause the souls of many Christians to be desolate, and forsaken of God.

As long as the Emperor shall be had in awe, no man shall straight way
submit him self to antichriste: but after that the Emperor shall be dissolved,
antichriste shall invade the state of the Empire standing void: and shall
labor to pull unto himself the Empire both of man, and God.

This is a token that they hate God, for that they will have Eusebi^ (...) his
7. book of preparation. Bernarde in his 125. Epistle Page 1316.
them selves called by the name of God.

That beast that is spoken of in the book of Revelations, unto which (...)
is given a mouth to speak blasphemies, and to keep war against the
saints of God, is now gotten into Peter's chair, as a Lion prepared to his
pray.

What think you, reverend fathers, of this man (the Arnulphus in the Counsel
of Remes, amo^gs the works of Barnarde.
Pope) sittyng on high in his throne, glitteryng in Purple, and clothe of
gold? What think you him to be? Uerely if he be void of ^haritie, and be
blown up, and advanced only with knowledge, then is he antichriste, sittyng
in the Temple of God* and showing out him self, as if he were a God.

They have brought to pass, that Godliness is turned into Cornelius ^tonto
in the Chap. of (...).
Hypocrisy: and that the savor of life, is turned into the ^auour of death.
Would God they were not gone wholly with general consent, from Religion to
Superstition: from faith to infidelity, from Christ, to antichriste: From
God to Epicure: saying with wicked heart, and filthy mouth, there is no God,
neither has there been this great while any pastoure, or Pope, that regarded
these things. For they al sought their own, and not so much as one of them
sought for the things that pertain to Jesus Christ.

Antichriste is (...) the (...) borne in Rome, and yet shall Ioachini Abbas.
be higher auaunced in the Apostolic See.

Hildebrande Pope, under a color of holiness, has laid Auentinus Franciscus
in ^he Counsel a^ Reinspurge. Petrarcha in his. 20. Epistle.
the foundation for antichriste.

Rome, the whore of Babylon: the mother of all Idolatry, and for^ication: the
Sanctuary of heresy, and the School of error.

The. xlvj. Chapter.
Against Usurie and Interest.
IF thou lend money to my people, Exodus 22. 25.
that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an usurer unto him: ye
shall not oppress him with usury. Leuit. 25. 3^.


If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decaie with thee, thou shall
relieve him.

Thou shall take no usury of him, 26
nor vantage, but thou shulte fear thy God, that thy brother may live with
thee.

Thou shalt not give him thy money to usury, (...) 27
him thy victualles for increase.

Thou shalt not give to usury to thy brother: as usury of Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
money, usury of meat, usury of anythyng that is put to usury.

Unto a stranger thou (...) le^de upon usury, but thou 20
(...) not lend upon usury unto thy brother, that the Lord Those strangers
(says Ambrose) were such as the Jews might lawfully kill and destroy. a.
Exo. 20. 17.
thy God may bless thee, in all that thou ^ettest thine hand to, in the
land whither thou go to possess it.

Thou shalt not co^et thy neighbors house, neither shall (...) thy neigbours
wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor his Ore, (...) his Ass, neither
any thing that is thy neighbors.

Now there was a (...) cry of the people, and of their Nehe. 5. (...).
wives, against their brethren the Jews.

For there were that said, we, our sons, and our daughters 2
are many, therefore we take up Corn, that we may eat and live.

And there were that said, we must gage our lands, and 3
our vineyardes, and our houses, and take up corn for the (...).

There were also that said, we have borrowed money for 4
the kings tribute upon our lands, and our vineyardes.

And now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, and our 5
sons as their sons: and lo, we bring into subjection our sons and our
daughters, as servants, and there be of our daughters now in subjection, and
there is no power in our hands: for other men have our lands, and our
vineyardes.

Then was I very angry, when I heard their cry, and 6
these words.

I said also, that which ye do, is not good. Ought ye not 9
to walk in the fear of our God, for the reproach of the Heathen our enemies?

For even I, my brethren, and my servants do lend 10
them money and corn: I pray you let us leave of this usury, or burden.

Restore, I pray you, unto them this day their lands, their* 11
Uineyardes, their Olives, and their houses, and remitte the hundred part of
the silver, and of the corn, and of the wine, and of the oil, that ye exact
of them.

Then said they, we will restore it, and will not require it 12
of them: we will do as thou have said.

Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle* Who shall rest Psalm. 15. 1.
in thine holy Mountain?

He that gives not his money unto usury, nor takes reward 5
against the innocent.

He that increases his riches by usury, and interest, gathers Prouer. 28.
8. God will take away the wicked Usurer, and give his goods to him that shall
bestow* them well.
them for him that will be merciful unto the poor.

Eze. 18. 13.
He that has given forth upon usury, or has taken increase, shall he live?
He shall not live: seeing he has dooen all these abominations, he shall dye the
death, and his blood shall be upon him.

Cap. 22. 12.
In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood: thou haste taken usury, and
the increase, and thou haste defrauded thy neighbors by extortion, and haste
forgotten me, says the Lord God.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so Math. 7. 12.
do ye to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

If ye loud to them, of whom ye hope to receive, what Luke. 6. 34.
thank shall ye have? For even sinners lend to sinners, to receive the like.

Wherefore, love ye your your enemies, and do good, and lend, 35
lookyng for nothing again, and your reward shall be great. And ye shall be
the children of the most high.

The Doctors.
MAny fliyng the precepts of the law, when Ambrose writing of Naboth.
they have delivered their money unto marchaunte men (or occupiers) do not
exact usury in money, but in wares. Therefore, let them hear what the law
says, neither shall thou take usury of meate^, nor of any other thing. So
that a dishe of meat is usury: and what soever is above the principal, is
usury: yea, what soever name thou guiest unto it: it is usury.

Usurie will swallowe up all men's gooddes, lands, (...) In his book upon
Tobiah 13. Chapter.
large patrimony, as it were a Sea: and yet this sea it self ^an never be
filled. The seas, for the most part are used for profit and gain: but the
usurer no man can use, but to his own harm and hinderaunce. There is profit
of many things: but with the usurer, is shipwreck of all things.

If thou le^de for advantage to a man (that is) thou lendest Augustine writing
upon the. 56. Psalm.
thy money to him, of whom thou hopest to receive more then thou did deliver,
not money only, but any thing more then thou did deliver, whether it be
wheat, or wine, or oil or any other thing, if thou look to receive more
then thou haste delivered, thou art an usurer, and in this not to be pra^sed,
but dispraised.

The usurer dares speak on this sort: I have none other Also Writing upon
the. 128. Psalm.
thing whereby to live. So may the theife say, being taken in the deed
doing, or house robber, being found breakyng up the wall: or the Bawd buiyng
maids for the Stews: And also the witch and Sorcerer, may say so unto m^
in the s^le of their mali^ious inchauntementes. So that when we shall forbid
such things, they all may answer* we have not wherewithal to live, and
find our selves, as though they were not worthy to be punished for it. For
that they have chosen to live by naughty means.

Some men think usury to be only in money, which Hierom. in his 6. book
upon (...).
thing the holy scripture fore seeing, does take away the overplus in all
things, so that thou shalt receive no more then thou did deliver.

Others for money lent upon usury, do use to take gifts of diverse kinds,
and do not understand, that the scriptures call the same usury and overplus*

There is nothing more filthier of this world then usury, Chrysostom upon
the. 1. of Math. in hi^. 5. Homily.
nothing crueller. Truly ye usurer does increase his substance, by the hurt
of an other. He takes or gets his great gains, by the misery of his
friend. Further, he does desir^ the praise of bountefulnesse, fearyng lest he
should seem unmerciful.

What is the excuse of many usurers? I am a usurer (say In his. 57. Homily.
they) but I have been very helpefull to the poor. These are good words, but
with such Sacrifice the Lord is not pleased. Mock not with the law. It is
much better, not to give to the poor, then to give after this manner.

The love of money upon usury, is like the poison of an Upon the. 5. chap. of
Math.
Aspe. Who so ever is stricken, or stonge of the Aspe, he falls into a
pleasant sweet sleep, and so by the sweetness of that dead sleep, dies.
For then the venenious poison, disperseth into every member.

So he that does begin under usury, thinks for a time, that it is a great
benefit and profit, but usury runs through all his riches, and
conuerteth all that he has into debte.

When soever thou borowest upon usury, thou shalt never Basile upon the. 14.
Psalm.
ware rich; and thou shall be spoiled from liberty.

Noman cures one wound with an other wound, neither heals one evil with
an other evil, neither helps or amendeth he his poverty and need with
usury.

Dogs in receiuyng things, do become gentle, but for usurers the more they
receive: the more cruel they be.

What thing is usury? A poison of patrimony: what is B^rnarde.
such usury as is permitted by Law? A thief that before hand gives
warnyng what he myndeth to do.

Do any slavery, rather then sell thy patrimony: but yet rather sell thy
patrimony: then borowe upon usury.

If it be proved that any laieman do take usury, and upon The Counsel of
Elibertine.
correction, promises afterward never to exact any more, let him be pardoned.
But if he shall continue in the same iniquity and mischief, let him well
understand, that he shall be cast out, and excommunicated from the Church.

Usurie is, where more is required then was delivered, or In the decrees the.
14. cause, and 3. question. Capite v^ura.
given, as if thou deliuerest ten shillynges, and sekest more. Or if thou
deliver a busshell of Wheat: and receiuest above that, that is usury.

No clarke shall take any more then he lends: If he lend In the same place,
Capite nullus.
money: he shall receive money: the same that he gave, he shall receive, or
what soever other thing, as much as he gave, he shall receive.

Whosoever takes usury: commits robbery: he ought In the same place,
Capite Si quis.
not to live.

Who soever in the time of Harueste, do buy or provide In the same place,
capite Quicunque.
virtualles or Wine, not for his necessity, but for covetousness: and buieth
one busshell for two pence, and keeps it until it be sold for four pence,
and more: this we say is filthy gain.

Usurie is justly to be had in hatred, and contempt, for Aristotle in his
first book of common wealth
because it is used as marchaundise, or chaffer, and of that, that by nature
brings forth no fruit, he gathers fruit. But money was made for the
cause of exchange, one thing for an other. It is greatly therefore against
nature, to make money, a marchaundise, or chaffer.

Caro was asked what it was to lend upon usury: answered Cicero in his. 2
book of Offices.
interogatiuely: Quid hominem (...) What is it to kill a man?

Alphonsus king of Aragon was wont to say, usury seems De reb. gest.
Alphonsi.
to me nothing else then the death of life.

He that boroweth upon usury, shall not be compelled to Plato in his 5. book
of Laws.
render again neither the usury, neither the stock*

Banished out of Sparta all Usurie, and taking of overplus Licurgus.
for lone.

Pourged Asia of this wicked trade of Usurie, which was Lucullus.
almost drowned therein.

Cato said, that Usurers are to be punished four fold, Cato.
therefore he drove them out of Scicilia.

Agesilaus Captain of the Lacedaemonians, persuaded Agis Agesilaus.
(who was king before him of the same people) that all the reckenyng books of
the Usurers, might be burnt. And so entryng their houses, took their books,
and burnte them in the open market place, before the usurers faces. Agesilaus
laughyngly at their sorrows, said: That he never saw puriorem ignem, a more
purer fire.

Claudius, and after him Vespasian, and after him Alexander Claudius. Vespasian.
Seuerus, made sharp laws against usurers, which Alexander Seuerus.
were put in execution with all diligence, and severity.

A Usurer is worse then all all sinners. He is worse then In a book called
sermones discipuli, in the 114. Sermon.
a thief: a thief robs but in the night, but the Usurer robs day and
night.

He is worse then hell, for in hell only the wicked shall be punished: but the
Usurer punishes, and spoileth both good and badde, and spares neither holy,
nor unholy.

He is worse then a Jew, for one Jew will not take usury of an other: but
the Usurer will take usury of his Christian brethren.

He is worse then death, for death kills but the body, but the Usurer
kills body and soul.

He is worse then Judas, for Judas sold Christ but once for thirty pence,
but they sell Christ continually, as often as they take usury. Judas restored
the money again, but the Usurers never restore the money again, that they
unjustly have taken.

A Usurer is like a Pigge, for while he lives, he is good In a book called
dieta salutis. fol. 11*
and profitable for nothing, for he will be ever rootyng up the earth, runnyng
through, and tearyng of headges, eating and deuouryng up good Corn, Beans,
and Peason, so likewise does the wicked swinishe Usurer whilst he lives: but
when the Pigge is dead, then there comes profit by him to many. So the
Usurer when death takes him, then the poor may have some profit. etc.

A Usurer is like an earthen box that is close, with a hole in the upper
part, wherein money is put, so that a man can not have the money within,
unless the box be broken. So likewise, a man can never have any money out of
the Usurers bags and Coffers, until death break his life. etc.

Ecclesiasticus. 8. 9. Go not from the doctrine of the elders: for they have
learned it of their fathers, and of them thou shalt learn understanding, and
to make answer in the time of need.
Faults escaped in the printyng.
Folio. 11. first side and. 20. verse, leave out this word, (therefore.)
Folio. 14. first side the. 18. verse. For, But we do not commit our selves
partly to him, read (rather then to commit parlie to him.) Folio. 23. second
side in the margin, for Prapeas, read, (Praxeas.) Folio. 25. first side in the
margin, for Leonarde, read, (Leander.) Folio. 25. second side, in the margin,
John. 21. read, (xij.) Folio. 26. second side in the margin, the book of God,
read, (of the book of the City of God.) Folio. 32. second side, and. 30*
line, for Arimiminum, read, (Ariminum.)
An Index of the common places that are spoken of in this book.
OF Predestination, and reprobation. Fol. 1. All things comes to pass by
Gods providence, and not by fortune, and destiny. Fol. 8. Of man's freewill
before his fall. Chapit. iij. Fol. 11. Of man's freewill after his fall.
Chapter iiij. Folio. 12. It is impossible for us to fulfill the law. Chap. v.
Folio. 19. All sorts of people ought to know, and read the scriptures.
Chapter. vj. Folio. 20. That the Scriptures are easy to be understood of
the simple people. Chapter. vij. Folio. 22. Ignorance of the scriptures is
very dangerous. Chapter. viij. Folio. 25. The word of God written in the
Canon of the Bible* contains in it self fully, all things needful for our
salvation. Chapter. ix. Folio. 27. Nothing ought to be put to, or taken
away from the word of God. Chapter. x. Folio. 29. The scriptures are
sufficient to debate, and deside al doubts and controversies* Chapter. xj.
Folio. 31. The Church is known by the word of God. Chapter. xij. Folio.
33. What credit Doctors and Counsels are of them selves, without the word
of God. Chapter. xiij. Folio. 35. Faith only justifies. Chapter. xiiij.
Folio. 38. Against men's merits and righteousness. Cha. xv. Fol. 39. What is not
done of faith, is sin. Chap. xvj. Fol. 42. The certainty of our faith and
salvation. cha. xvij. Fo. 44 It belongs only unto God, to forgive sins.
Chapter. xviij. Folio. 45. Of Confession. Chapter. xix. Folio. 47. The
Apostles received the keys as far forth as Peter, and are equal with him in
authority. Chap. xx. Folio. 50. Against praiyng for the dead. Chapter. xxj.
Folio. 54. Against Purgatory and Pardons. Chapit. xxij. Folio. 55. Against
aparitions of souls, after they depart from the body. Chapter. xxiij. Folio.
60. Christ is only our mediator and intercessour, to God the father.
Chapter. xxiiij. Folio. 63. Against praiyng to saints Chapter. xxv. Folio.
65. Against prayer and service in a strange tongue. Chapter. xxvj. Folio.
67. Against the honoring and worshippyng of Saints. Chapter. xxvij. Folio.
70. Against Images. Chapter. xxviij. Folio. 73. Against Transubstantiation.
Cha. xxix. Foli. 79. This is my body, is a figurative speech, and signs and
figures have their names of the things, which they signify. Chapter. xxx.
Folio. 82. We eat the body and blould of Christ, only by faith. Chapter.
xxxj. Folio. 86. The wicked eats not the body of Christ. cha. xxxij. fo. 89.
What it is to be guilty of the body and blood of the lord. Chapter. xxxiij.
Folio. 91. The lay people ought to receive the Cup of the Lord, as well as
the bread. Chapter. xxxiiij. Ibidem. Against reservation of the Sacrament.
Cha. xxxv. Fol. 93. We are not saved by the outward Ceremonies of the
Sacraments. Chapter. xxxvj. Ibidem. Christ's body is but in one place, at
once, and not in many places. Chapter. xxxvij. Folio. 95. A long custom must
not be followed: but the truth of God. Chapter. xxxviij. Folio. 99. The
marriage of Priests is lawful. chap. xxxix. Foli. 101. Of choice and
difference of meats. Chapter. xl. Folio. 105. Of Fasting. Chapter. xlj.
Folio. 108. Of Traditions and Ceremonies of men. cha. xlij. Folio. 111.
Sacrifices of the new Testament. Chapit. xliij. Fol. 116. Princes ought to
deal in matters of religion. cha. xliiij. 118. The Pope is Antichriste.
Chapter. xlv. Fol. 125. Against Usurie and Interest. Chapi. xlvj. Fol. 126.
FINIS.

