A Quest of Inquiry, by women to know, Whether the Tripe-wife were trimmed by
Doll yea or no.

Gathered by Oliver Oat-meale.

Imprinted at London by T. G. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard. 1595.

Oliver, if your name be Oliver, by your leave a cast, for I must show in
between the door and the wall, that is shuffle a letter in between your title
and Pamphlets which Letter was directed to be let at the two fools at London
bridge: and for my heart I cannot find the sign. Now since your Pamphlet
lackes both a Pass and a Patron, I think this letter will fit ye for either,
and by wandering among many, happen at length into the right owners hands. It
follows at adventure. To Simon Huff-snuff the terrible Book-tearer, and furious
d-facer of the Tripe-wiues effigies, peace offered with cap and knee, to
preserve all papers from like extremity.



HAught minded, and hot spirited Simon, I salute ye. Understanding your
valarous assaults against The Tricking of the Tripe-wife, in sundry places: I
could but commend your forwardnes: and praise your adussed opinion upon the
first sight, both of the Author that made it, and of them that never heard of
it before your self: it was well done, you shall find Castalian of my mind,
that of such swift censurers has this sentence: A fools bolt is soon shot,
Adpenitendum proper at, cito qui indicat.


Tut, what tell I you of repentance, proceed, proceed, your neighbor Nichol and
you may answer any thing you do. By your leave sir a little: and while I
talk, have some patience, glare not with your eyes, foam not at the mouth,
strike not with your fists, stamp not with your feet: I will reason reasonably
upon my honesty, and yet I care not if I leave argument, and use example.

A quaint fellow grown fortunate: excelling as he thinks both in wealth and
wisdom all his other riualls, forges to himself an imaginary concept, that
they envying his good, intend to have public jests at him and his late won
wife. The most of them whose good fortunes it was to loose (as it had been
great pity to part so loving a couple) are most Scholler-like Gentlemen, and
one of them generally beloved of act that in printing have experience to
publish any thing, and at this time is possessed of a worshipful place,
according to the laudable customs of this honorable City. Now which way in
your opinion is best to prevent the writing or publishing of any odd toy:
shall he reconcile himself to those that were the quondam suitors, and give
good words, because his widow has been notoriously ridiculous: Or shall be
run up and down the town, with friskes, and heighs, and fillops, and tricks,
accompanied with some such wise-akers as himself, (Be not offended Simon,
though you be his companion) reuiling his betters, and abusing his equals. The
example needs no application: and for answer your neighbor Nichol took this
last course. For I have heard him that trickt the Tripe wife swear, till her
husband abused him, and your self consorting with Nick Tricks misused his
whole company, the Masters especially, one of them in kindness and reverence
that honorable name ye used, vouchsafing both to accompany and counsel you
for your own good: whose good will you reward with reproaches: but they that
touch pitch shall be settled, and those that pleasure ungrateful persons
unthankfully required. He protests before God, that the Masters of his
Company, are utterly ignorant of his proceedings, and for ought he knows
are at him offended. He appeals to all the worshipful Companies in London,
especially to those of whom your selves are free, whether ye have not done the
parts of intemperate idiots, to abuse men in authority without cause: and
protests, had he been but a water man, as he is a professor of the most noble
Science of Printing, he wound not have suffered the abuse of his supertors. He
repents not any thing that he has written, but is only sorry that he is
by an honorable personage mistaken: but doubts not shortly to prove how you
have abused one very nere him. He swears that where he has been a mortal
enime to all Ballad singers, he will never inuaigh against them more, if they
will sing at pour windows a new Tigge, termed Any Tripes. Consider neighbor
Simon the contents, to wast paper be pitiful, and learn patience: keep a
good tung in your head, least it hurt your teeth. Farewell Sim, and commend me
to your euerthwart neighbor.

Yours to use, when ye know how to use your self. D. D.

An Eglogue lovingly begun and unluckily ended between the Tripe-wife, and
Tricks her husband.
Tricks.
Sit we sweet Sowce wife on this frail of figs,
So spite of those that dou our fortunes hate:
Sleting at us with Ballads and with ligs,
Enough to make kind love unkind debate,
And while we carroll of our discontent,
With strained notes, like scritch owls yokesome cire,
The roaring river unto our lament
Shall lend her loud confused harmony.
Tripe-wife,
Ahwere we seated in a sowce-tubs shade,
Over our beads of tripes a canopie:
Remembrance of my past ioy-thruing trade,
Would somewhat case my present misery,
But since I trotted from my trotter stall,
And figd about from neates feet neatly dressed:
I find no pleasure nor content at all,
But live disdaind, dispisde, abusde, distressed.
Tricks.
Why here are sweetes, sweet Love, for sent and taste,
Fruit from the Straights, Spain, Candie, Barbary,
Indian Tobacco, humors moist to wast,
Thou know I have a pipe for thee and me.
Succades and comfets, barts help Cynamom:
Pepper cold in the maw, hot on the tung:
Seny to purge, health keeping Balsamum,
And Mace, to make thy vizard smooth and young.
Tripe-wife.
Out upon all this trash, your drugs, your spice,
Twere well if I had never seen your house:
You tear me my visage vizard, goodman vice:
But I was young, fair, neat, when I sold sowse.
Tricks.
Thy tripes were young, thy neates fette fat and fair,
Thy sowse was sweet, and all these longd to thee:
Thy self were wythered, old, lean, meager, bare,
Yet thou and they were both beloude of me.
But neither thou nor they may make compare
With me or mine, therefore contend no more:
The Butchers offalls were thy sweetest ware,
Mine, of far Kingdoms are the wealthy store.
Tripe-wife.
Accursed was I to leave the Butchers fees,
How base so ere, they brought in golden gain,
The mistres Tripe-wines name by thee I leese:
That loss, their lack, I ceaselesse do complain.
Tricks.
Accursed was I to baunt the pudding house,
Where swine facde beauty only sat in pride:
Cursed be the chitterlings, the tripe, the sowse,
And cursed my self that did not all deride.
Tripe-wife.
What do thou curse my trade? be this thy pain:
Run bootles madding, rauing up and down:
All helplesly against iygging rymes complain,
Let cuerie Ballad-singer bear thee down.
Tricks.
Say thou me so, thou Tripe, thou hated scorn?
Go swill thy sowse-tubs, loathed pudding-wife:
My brother Huf snuf and my self have sworn,
Spite of thy ears to lead a pleasant life.
With this they part: and so the Eglogue ended,
Tripe was with Tricks, and Tricks with Tripe offended.
A Quest of inquiry of twelve good, honest, and substantial women, upon
examination of certain persons, whether the Tripe wife were trimde or no.
IS it even so neighbor Nicholson; now in good sadness I am sorry for your
mishap, that a marriage accomplished so hastily, should be repented so suddenly.
Ye man, keep your own counsel, and fear not, all will be well enough I
warrant ye. You allege in your letters, what a blemish it is to your credit,
and withal, what an inward vexation of mind you are perplexed withal, when
your friends cast in your teeth your marriage with the Tripewife, what a beastly
filthy slut she has been, and still is, without any hope other amendment. Yet
all this is not so grievous to ye, as the bad reports that fly abroad of her,
that not contenting her self to be cosoned by a notable drab, she must
afterward, or at the same instant, be trimde by that new vpstart Barbar, who
instead of Sissers, was glad to use a pair of sheeres, and for want of a
chair, such as men use to sit in when they are trimde, she must advance one
foot upon a Treuet, and make the other leg standing foolishly by accessarie to
the others intolerable folly. O world of iniquity, where are women's wits:
that make no difference between their own secrets, and a Cow heel or a
Tripe, and because their education has only been to dressinge the one,
therefore they must needs make a trial of trimming the other.

For your sake good neighbor, pitying your daily veration, and according to
my promise when we met last at Ratcliffe: I went to the place you wot of, where
(though it was somewhat to my cost, yet nothing is over dear in regard of a
friend) I made means to get in, even so soon as the Quest of women were newly
calde together, and before any of the persons to be examined were admitted to
answer. When seeing how orderly they intended to proceed, and that hereby a
perfect resolution might ensue both for my self and you: I drew forth my
writing Cables, and getting close into a corner noted down every thing so
secre as I could, which now written more at large, then in so small a room I
could comprise, I have sent ye by my servant William, who has further
instruction beside to acquaint ye with, whereof I desire ye to have an
especial care.

First, Margaret, not your wifes daughter, but a by-blowe (as is imagined) of
your predecessors, was called before the women.

Then mother Messingham, the old true penny for trimming of a Tripe, then Alice
and Ione: William should have bin there, but was not, marie Richard very
honestly came in, and defended the cause very substantially, so did Mistress
Rose, and the party with the gold Ring on the forefinger. The intergatories
for examination, were these that follow.

1 Imprimis, whether such a woman, named Doll Phillips, came to the dwelling
house of the Tripe wife at such a time, naming the month and day.

2 Secondly, what talk they had beneath together, and whether she brought with
her a letter or etc.

3 Thirdly, who went up the stairs with them, whether any body, or themselves
alone.

4 Fourthly, how long they tarried above together, and whether any sheeres were
called for or no, or whether they had them ready above in the Chamber.

5 Fifthly, whether they knew them to be used or no, for taking away of hair
from her head, or the other unseemly place.

6 Sixthy, whether the Tripe wife had so many suitors as Doll speaks of, to the
number of nineteen or no.

7 Seaventhly, whether they knew the man that had been so bold with the Tripe
wife, that threw her on the bed, kill her, and did, or would have done aliquid
amplius, because he was the furthest in her books.

8 Eighthly, whether the Capon and Curkie (by any of their knowledge) was sent
to the King and Queen of Faires or no.

Other questions were demanded afterward, but not with such vrgencie as these,
because you know these were most material, and (as the case stood) were most
necessary to be known: yet will I tell ye what the other were, when I come to
speak of them as they happened.

Margaret stood laughing, holding her hand before her month all the while the
articles were read, whereupon, one of the women sharply reprooved her after this
manner. What Margaret, maid (if ye be) ye show small civility, regard ye
not where ye are? you imagine be like, that ye are in the Queens head in
Pater noster row: ye made a wise nights work there, did ye not, when (about
you) a man was stabd so far into the back, fie for shame, be more modest,
else this (and your other tricks) will utterly mar your marriage, if ye live
to be worthy of so honorable a calling.

The woman had no sooner uttered these speeches, but Margaret blushing (for she
has a little grace yet left her) stood very demurely, making courtesy at
every word, and promised to answer every article truly, according to her
knowledge, and thus she began.

Upon the day you name, she whom you term Doll Philips, came to my mothers
house, in the habit of a country woman, saying she was sent from one master
Grace in Essex, a Gentleman professing the law, and a very familiar friend of
my mothers, for whose sake she was the better welcome, and much talk passed
between my mother and her, because she showed her self so perfectly
acquainted with Master Grace. A letter she brought indeed, which being read,
she told my mother, that she had more weighty matters to confer with her on,
which made my mother take her up the stairs with her, not admitting any but
themselves to go with them. The time of their tariance there, was not above
three quarters of an hour at the vttemost in all which space I heard no
Sheeres calde for neither were any carted up to them, nor know I whether any
were above in the Chamber or no.

Now concerning your demand for usage of the Sheeres, truly I am persuaded
it is utterly untrue, and only rumoured abroad to defame my mother. For though
she was desirous to have the spurrialles that were lost, and which I have often
times seen when my father was alive: yet I have a better opinion of my mother
then so, that she would not grant to enjoy than by any such a bad mean. Yet
age now a days in these latter days, shows themselves so simple oftentimes,
that one can hardly answer for them in matters of more importance, therefore I
refer ye in this case to old mother Messingham, she has been most inward
with my mother, and therefore in such a doubtful cause can best resolve ye.

That she had nineteen woers, I am not able to stand directly upon the just
number, but questionless I imagine she had (from the beginning of her
widdowhead) rather more then one fewer, for I tell ye, my father left her that
which made her looked after, and not so much but old Saunders the Sergeant,
became a lusty suter to her: but never I think was widdowe so washed in sack,
Sugar, and good drinks, I warrant there are some that yet sit and think on
their lavish expenses, for my mother was outwardly kind to all, but inwardly
inclined to think well of no one, for if she could not deeply dissemble,
there are liers abroad, but I name no body, in regard she may now make amends
for that fault.

Now that there was one more special in her favor then all the rest, we in
the house have diverse times imagined somewhat, mary could never perceive any
outward token to be noted: but the woman who pretended cunning to her, threw
forth very unmannerly speeches of the matter that under Oathe (as it were) she
disclosed the man to her, which if she did, she was not so wise as I took her
for: my self am but a young wenche, and yet if I intended to bestow such a
token of my favor on any one, mine own mouth should never be the trumpet of
my shame, but rather as I had offended fondely, it should be locked in my bosom
the more secretly, for let the world imagine what they list, when they know
nothing, I have both the wind and water side of them.

As for sending the Capon and Turkey to the King and Queen of Fayries, that's
best known to Doll and my mother, for the match was closely made between
themselves, and whether on any such condition or no, I am not able to say: but
sure I am our maid carried them with her, and delivered them to the woman, ere
they came half way to the king of Fayries house, for they say his dwelling is
at Paddington, and the maid was discharged of her burden in high Holborne.

This is all I can deliver good women, and (upon my maidenhead) I have told ye
as much in these matters as I am able to say: for I had more mind of other
businesses for my self, then either to regard my mothers cousenage or wooing.

Call in mother Messingham (quoth the Crier) and she will resolve ye thoroughly
in these running affairs.

She being come before the Quest, whimpering and making courtesies down to the
ground at every word: desired she might be no accuser of her good old
mistress, for she knew nothing in these matters, and therefore could say
little, but being commanded to proceed in the Articles, she pleaded ignorance
to all but one, and the knowledge she had in that one was but by bare report
neither, therefore (quoth she) build not upon the truth of my words, for I
received them at the second hand, and few things (ye know) are mended in the
carriage. It is (quoth she) concerning her number of suitors whereof I am to
speak, and which of them received most assurance of her kindness: then thus
(after Dols own words) will I tell ye what I heard.

When the coosening Drab had persuaded my mistress, that she could help her
not only to the gold known to be lost, but a great deal more said to be had
in the house: she demanded such a request as has been spoken of, for by the
help thereof she must effect the coniuration, otherwise she was not able to
proceed any further: but by the fatth of an old woman, I think no such
conference past between them, at least I am sure my mistress swears the
contrary, and I tell ye I will not distrust her words for more then she is
worth.

Come mistress (says Doll) I know one kissed ye on Christmasse Eve last past,
when your hat fell into the Sowsetub, I know ye gave a good fellow a Ring,
with seven Diamonds in it, and the Ring I likewise know ye have this day
received again: so, albeit I am able to say who the man is you do most
affection, and can tell therein perhaps more then you imagine: yet must you
your self reveal his name to me, how he kissed ye at the beds side, untied
your hose-garter, and elected ye for his own with the best testimony of good
will.

She says, that my mistress resolude her in all these, which if she did, (as
I will never imagine her so simple, or that at any time she would make so
slender reckoning of her reputation:) I must needs blame her folly and great
indiscretion, which doubles the penalty of the offense so carelessly committed.

Thus much I will confess good women, that my mistress had good store of
suitors, among whom were diverse of good credit and esteem, whose purses launche
out liberally, and nothing was reputed too dear or dainty for the widdowe:
but that I saw ill demeanor offered in any one of them, or any such wanton
humor in my mistress, I neither can or will say for all the worlds good.

Many have been falsely chargde with matters, as now perhaps my mistress is
at this time: but I leave all to him to censure, that knows best whether these
reports are true or no, and so take this as the uttermost of my knowledge.

The rest being examined, and able to say little or nothing to the articles,
the women went alone by them selves a while, and finding every thing so
apparent, that they were not long to be stood upon: they returned that the
Tripe wife was never trimde, yet to prevent the worst which afterward might
ensue, and as women that would not endaunger their credits, they wrote down
upon their bill Ignoramus, whereupon, the sentence was delivered in this
manner.

First, because the Tripe wife had failen into this wonderful oversight, and
thereby had run into so many hard opinions: all her other suitors (ashamed of
their former foolish affection, to fancy such an inconstant woman, of so
durtie a trade, and in so stinking a place) utterly giving her over: she should
thence be sent to London bridge, and there be married to him, that had more then
a months mind to Tripes and Trillibubs.

Lord how glad was I, when I heard the game go on your side, when I remembered
what a tall seruitor you had been all her wooing time for her: your hard
fortune at M. Graces. where you had so slender entertainment, how you walked in
your Ierkin and tawney velvet hose, to view M. Hubbards hoppes, when by that
means you got a bidding to dinner, yea even the best place at the board,
namely, to sit just before your loving mistress, where all amorous discovrse
was feign to pass between ye in the Cup, for further liberty ye were not
admitted. But above all, I commend your short and sweet enstruction given her
at the window, punching her by the finger, and bidding her look to her self,
for she was in danger to be swine away, and all your market marde. And in faith
the merry night at Cpping was worth gramercie, when the Gentleman your rival
supt in your company, and had a priest ready, if need should so require.
Believe me neighbor, you had great reason then to be affraide: yet more then
Hercules-like, you valiantly held out, in despite of Philastorgogh, the bottle
of Sack, and all Richards words, which renownes ye to posterity, for an
unconquerable wooer, and verifies on your behalf that ancient verse, He
loou'd Tripes as his life,
Therefore he has the Tripewife.


Oh that I were acquainted with some excellent wit, who in liueliest colors
could decipher down your heroycall fortunes.

My style is all to blunt and bad,
To write of such an active lad,
That brought the wooers all to baye,
And carried the Tripe wife quite away.
Thus have I sent ye all the proceedings of the Jurie, and there with
(according to your request) my opinion of thy blessed night, when you made such
passage to the purpose, as the next morning you had the fruition of all your
labores, I mean the Garland of your briding day, to the disgrace of all the
other (...), and your own eternal commendation for ever. But first I pray ye
read this Duty, which was devised by a dear friend of yours, Master Ieffray
Kexon, in defense of your wife so much wronged, and in applauding of your rare
conquest, the like being never heard of since the great Conquest.

A Iigge for the Ballad-mongers to sing fresh and fasting, next their hearts
every morning, in sted of a new hunts-up, to give a good morrow to the
Tripe-wife.
O Neighbor Tripewife, my heart is full of woe:
That cousning Doll the Iugler, should iumble with you so,
I that am your poor neighbor, bad rather spent a crown:
Than have ye thus defamed by boys about the town.
Abroad in every corner, the Ballads do report:
That you were trimd unwomanly, and in most shameful sort:
By standing on a Trivet.
to he are what she could say:
She lopt ye of a lovers lock, and carried it away.
Alas were you so simple, to suffer such a thing:
Your own maids sit and mock ye, and every where does ring,
The trimming of the Tripe wife, it makes me in a rage:
And doubt least that the players will sing item the Stage.
I am sorry for your husband, a ^^^ke good honest man;
He walks about, yet mends not, but looks pale and wan:
That where before he vaunted, the conquest he has got:
He sus now in a mammering, as one that minds it not.
A number do imagine, that he repents his marriage,
And gladly to the shambles, would send ye with your carriage;
For all the carts of household stuff, that came to London bridge,
Nere pleased him so, as this one grief does rub him on the ridge.
If gold bring such a hart-breaks,
I Will none I thank ye I:
It Is shame it should be spoken,
and if it be a lie.
But would he be aduisde by me,
if it be true or no:
I would turn her tober Tripes again
and let all matters go.
I. K.

FINIS.
Now all good Ladds, to whose reading this present Jigge shall come, I would
not have ye mistake my meaning in the Song, that ye should go about the
streets singing it, or chaunt it at her door, ere she be by in a morning, No,
God forbid, that would but breed domestical disquietnesse, and if man and wife
should happen to fall out about it, I (not knowing how near the Tripe tub
stands) might bring him in more danger of Can shot then I am aware of.
Therefore I pray ye conceit it after my own entending, that is, a Sorrowful
Sonnet for every friend of his to meditate on least their fortunes should
prove so monstrous as his and they run into peril of hanging themselves, upon
so extraordinary a conclusion.

Here follows the rare atchieuement of the widdowe, from her house behind
the Shambles, how she was conuayed thence to London Bridge, and made a Bride
upon a very short warning.
Yea marie Sir, now ye come to the matter I long to hear of, by reason of the
diverse reports bruted abroad thereof, and whether it were so heroycally acted,
as some have heard it from his own lips. Was it possible, that she (having
such honest well willers and friends, at home at her house at dinner) could
choose no other time to slip away, but even at such a time, thereby to
discredit her self? Was her colored excuse to buy a bat and an apron, and
falls it now out so that she bought a husband? O World full of falsehood, O
women most deceiptfull, when ye are least suspected. But went she then directly
to the Bridge or no? No, she went not then thither, but one of her Sisters,
counterfetting a sudden sickness, the other (being the fatter of the twain)
was made the instrument of fetching her to an intended Banquet: where wine
walking lustely about, and many merry matters familiarly disputed on, it was
set down for an irreuocable determination, that no remedy, the Tripe-wife
must dine next day at her lovers house. But it is wonderful to speak on,
with what zeal she paced thither, her apron in her hand all the way, which she
had not so much leisure as to put on, but looked still behind her, least she
should be caught up for weight and fashion. We, as any kind heart in like
case would do, doubting her coming, because she had so often dissembled with
others, trudges to her house: but happy did he esteem that lost labor, when
at his return back again he found her where he would have her.

Now the Sisters lay on load for him, because he had promised them large
requital: and how the time was wasted in conference, I know not, but well I
wot, home he would not let her go that night, for now he had her at such an
aduatantage, as he never expected the like, if he should now let her escape.

But in good sadness they are much to blame, that say they whitled her with
wine, and so (after some other ceremonies theretoo belonging) drew a promise of
marriage from her. It is very unlike it should be so, because that night
before she went to bed, she protested she would none of him. Oh, but the old
dog beide sure: and though the man himself were somewhat timorous, yet by good
instructions he began to chere up his spirits.

Now you that be lovers tell me whether it were hot sign of love or no, when
the Widdowe (sitching asleep by the fire) he valiantly (coming behind her)
pulled her stool from her, when down fell she, and lie by or upon her, with
that learned and witty aduerbe in his mouth, Keep the widow waking. Well, I
know not whether these words are able to enhaunt or no, or what strength or
vigor the manly acting of them has: but either thorough them, or her late
sitting up that night she took such a surfeit, that needs she must to bed.
And yet me thinks that labor might full well have been spared, because she
had so little while to rest her self: and rising again so early, it might
bring many a qualme over a wiser woman's stomach than hers.

But would you imagine, a woman of her tender years, little above three score
at the uttermost not dareing, to adventure on the water in the broad day
light, could so suddenly conceive such a hardy piece of courage, as
sooner-timely in a morning, to pass through his cellar, and so enter a boat
lying ready for her, to sail so far as Pepper Alley, and there to S.
Georges Church: where because the Church man was not ready, she must needs
pass a larger circuit. But I can tell ye wherefore that was: marry to stop
their mouths, that said she durst not be married by daylight, therefore she
despised two a clock in the morning: A fig for them that dare not be married
at ten a clock in the forenoone, and afterward home to dinner of her own
prouison, brought thither the day before. Here was a cunning bob for the rest.
Call ye him a fool or a simple fellow, that had the wit to compass such an
exployt: Well masters, sit you at the upper end of the table, kiss and snowtch
the Widow never so much: there is one sits nether most, he has an eye to his
business, and whatsoever you but barely hope for, he is the man I tell ye, must
carry the wench away.

Oh, but well fare the friend that made such have for the license: few wooers
are beholding to such a dear Damon, And not at that time only did he stand
him in some sted, but in the country likewise he stuck closely to him. If he
reward him not well for his pains, he is very much too blame: for both his
countenance and credit were no mean helps to him. Hold him then the best
string to your bow (Neighbor) in getting the Tripe-Wife.

Thus have I been as good as my word unto you, my very kind and honest
Neighbor, in sending you this brief collection of your adventures: nor know
I how to extol sufficientlye your great deseruings, though iniquity of time
somewhat obscure your valor, reproach fully throwing this bone for you to gnawe
on, that had your labor been bestowed in better sort, than for a basket of
Tripes and Chutterlings: some one or other would have spoken to our Antiquarie,
to have written four lines at the least in praise of your passing proceeding.
But seeing it is no better,

Give loosers leave to prate their fill,
The Tripes are thine both good and ill.
What others say, take thou no care,
Puddings and Tripes are chapmens ware.
Certain reports spread abroad of the Tripe-wife and her late married husband,
whereby if they be slaundred or no, let themselves be their own Judges.
FIrst for the Tripe-wife, that all the time of her widdowhood, her lips were
so common in kissing every one, and her hands so readee in receiving all gifts
whatsoever, tearming each suter husband, and making so little difference in
outward kindness, that either she imagined she might have many husbands, or
dissemblingly thought to use all alike. A fault, wherein if she were guilty,
as it is credibly reported, doubtless it deserves general reproof, and no
mild censure of her very dearest friends.

That likewise she was very wantonly given, often desiring like them long kept
fasting, the loving morsel of a man. And to show her folly the more in this
one point, I have heard, that with her own hand she made a privy search in a
Gentleman's round hose, whether he ware them with a roll, after the best
fashion: or that they were void of all good shape and making.

That one of her Sisters, knowing her by nature to be thus affected, willed
him that has married her, to show her whether he were a man able for the field
or no, and what good weapon he carried about him: otherwise, there was small
hope of pleasing her, and less to be expected of his success.

Now whether he followed her good counsel or no, I am not able to say: but
hence (as it is reported) grew Dols unhappy aiming at her throwing up on the
bed: Which if he did alone, and no body else, it was the more valorously
performed: but if he had any pertakers, it was the greater wrong to come so
many against one body; for one to one is always counted fair play, manly
and reasonable, but to oppress by multitudes, is ever reckoned an apparent
sign of cowardice.

That she should swear the night before she was wedded, that she would never
marry with the Grocer he was such a logger-head: but if the former condition
of the Obligation stood in full force and virtue, then I imagine he had best
right to her, except some hungry fellow desired to follow, and sup up his
leauings.

And here (by the way) the general rumor is to be examined: namely, that the
night the stool was pulled from her she had abuse offered her two several
ways: first to be vanquished by wine, a shrewd depriuer of the senses: then
dastardlike to be thrown backward, and more laid on her, than she was able to
bear. If this be the way to get a wife, well may it be termed drunkenly done,
but never to be reputed heroycall, like his other active agilities: marry when
no better way is left to speed, welfare the wine that won the widow.

It is said also, that he promised my brother William the present release of
four score pound land by the year (which he was not to enjoy till the widows
death) if he would (as he did) labor for his success. And now that he has
sped, he not only in this breaks promise with him, but in a matter of two
houses beside, standing behind the shambles, the leases whereof were by his
deceased brother made in his name, and conditioned that he should enter on them
after his death: but her lady, my new married brother in law now says no: so
William is like to tarry yet both for the land and houses, But be of good
cheer Brother, you (...) the first that has trauaild for an unkind requiter,
nor shall be the last must lose by him.

Both the Sisters (I hear) likewise are together by the ears, because the
ones reward exceedes the others, and there is such alleging, which of them
has best deserved on his behalf: that while they stand contending, and
counting how much they shall have for their pains, he turns them off with a
fillop of the finger, and flatly says, now he has what he would have, let
them go seek what they should have. Sisters, I would have William and you put
your gains together into a bottomless bag: and if at the years end it
increase not, yet ye shall be sure it will not be less than it it is. Marry,
(if ye can) turn your endeavors another time to better advantage: else you will
be thought unwise, and he that so thriues by your labor more fortunate.

Fie upon ingratitude, cries poor Richard, he will sell all his ge^^^gs for a
pore pepper come: yet he says if promise had been kept, fifty pounds in esse
at the least should have fallen to his share, beside the full and absolute
power of his Sisters trade put over to him only: where now, he is not only
deceived of the one, but disappoynted of the other: and his unkind Sister the
Tripe-wife, that I think will follow four selling even in her grave,
abbridges him of that paltrie prerogative, and flatly executes the office still
her self.

What a lamentable Dittie is here in four parts, of Nihil habemus, which does
not so much disturb the singers, as it urges displeasure in the hearers. Good
people, beware of wooers promises, they are like the music of a Taber and
Pipe: the Pipe sings gold, gifts, and many gay things, but perfourmance
moralized in the Taber, still bears the burden of I doubt it, I doubt it:
which in my conceit is a very pitiful hearing.

Moreover I understand, that very simply himself makes report, how weak his
state stood before he got the widow, and that if she had not come when she
did, his inkhorn had been dry, and he not able to write one letter more.

What folly is this in any man, to disclose his own secrets: If it had been
so, for shame I would never have reueald it my self. But hence I perceive
grows the household disquietnes, as is said, between him and her, because she
finds not what she expected, and therefore wishes her self over head and
ears in the sowce tub.

O what a mournful mornings work was that between my fat Sister and her,
when she taild on Lombard-streete, for exchanging so much of her gold, and
wished she were behind the Shambles again as well as ever she was: for the
roaring of the Thames, (or rather ransacking of her bags) so disquiets her
nightly rest, that her other home was heaven in respect of London Bridge.

Beside, it is no manly part in him to make (...), how often he trickt the
Tripe-wife before he had her. Fie, fie, I am content to wink at small faults,
but (if ye should be such a one) this were intolerable. I Will be swarne, I made
answer on your behalf, where I had a (...) check for my labor, I said, I
(...) laid my life ye would not utter such a word for all the marks (...),
the man is wise enough.

Then I hear how you go bragging about, breathing forth horrible thundering
threats, because certain books and ballads are printed of the Tripe wife: ye
said ye had the trick to out face all the wooers, and so ye would over dare
all the Printers: ye beknaue your betters, calling them at your own pleasure,
and then turn your tung to your tail when you have done. What man? it will
notsnowe always, neither can you or the best tenant ye have, bear down
Paul's Churchyard. Rather win them with kindness, for extremity avayles not,
they know ye for a man and no more, and will take for ye as a man and no more.

I know a very good friend of yours, who would be heartely sorry if these
reports should be true, and means to talk with ye on them when he next meets
ye: for my part, I am sure ye ever found me firm, and so upright unto ye in
wading thorough the cause, that as I would excuse nothing, so would I never
justify any thing.

Ye must regard the world as it is, naturally given to find fault where any
cause is given, be it never so little. And though all the stir about the
Tripe-wife be not worth the least piece of a Tripe: yet it suffices that ye
have won the spurs, from them all, and therefore let me addde these, as
appendixes unto your Arms.

A Chirterling rampant in a feld sowsant, two haggas puddings for the
supporters, a Neates foot cleanly wash (...) your creast, and a (...) Tripe
to cover all for the mantle.

So with my hearty (...) to your good bed fellow and your self, with all the
rest of my (...) friends. I bid ye heartely farewell, this 2. of April. 1595.

By him that is more yours than his own, Oliver Oat-meale.

FIN
Hold Oliver and thou be a good fellow, and let me in two or three words clap
up a conclusion, before then fully end thy Finis.

In the Sowse-wiues time of retailing, (...) were not (...); but since Tripes
have been (...) it seems thou have been her sweet hearts Secretary. Shall I
be plain with thee: I mislike the (...) of thy Jurie, commend thy pl^^^mes
touching the reports, and give thee this privilege, that neither he nor she
shall ever hereafter trust thee, and therefors if thou have any more matter,
turn it to me, and I can send it to mad Dauie, that means to thunder out
terrible matter against Nicholneates foot, and Huff snuff his neighbor.
Farewell till within this fortnight by which time we shall either be all (...),
or make our (...) endless.

FINIS.

