AN EXPOSITION of the Symbol of the Apostles, or rather of the Articles of
Faith. In which the chief points of the everlasting and free covenant between
God and the faithful is briefly and plainly handled.

GATHERED OVT OF THE catechizing Sermons of GASPER OLEVIAN TREVIR,

And now translated out of the Latin tongue into the English for the benifite
of Christ his Church.

By JOHN FIELD.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton, for Thomas Man, and Tobie Smith.

ANNO. 1581.

To the right honorable and my very good Lord, Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Ordinance, Knight of the noble order of the
Garter, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy counsel, I. Field his
faithful servant wishes with his heart, grace from God the Father by Jesus
Christ, and constancy in the truth of the Gospel, to the end. Amen.
OF all the faults that we fall into, in these days of our vanity, (right
honorable and my very good Lord) I know none that deserve greater blame, than
to be unthankful where we have received benefits. And this is the cause yt I
having taken some pains in this profitable work, (which I am bold under your
honors name, to offer to the whole Church of God:) I thought good to leave it
in lieu of thankfulness, as a testimony both of your honors love toward the
truth of God, and of my humble duty again toward your honor and the whole
Church of God to all posterity: for who am I that I should not, whiles life
lasts, live to the profit of the Church? and who are you with all your
honor, auctority, wealth, and liberty, and all the gifts which God in mercy
has bestowed upon you, yt you should not employ all to the maintenance of the
truth, and defense of the Church, under her Majesty, wherein both high and
low, receive the assurance of spiritual blessings, sealed in the hope of an
everlasting kingdom? And as ye glory of God, is showed most herein, that he
defends his spowse, and has bewtified her with gifts from above, that she
might be a pure and undefiled spowse, chaste and holy unto him self: so this is
our greatest glory of what state or condition so ever we be, to be members of
this Church, by the Communion whereof, we are his members. For he is the only
head of his Church, to give it gifts, to govern it, and to lead it, to that
great and everlasting salvation. There is no life, but from this head, nor any
salvation but in this Church: wherein as sincere doctrine is professed and out
of his word shines and dwells, so that holy obedience, of children toward
their father, and of servants toward their Lord, framed and conformed to his
will, always appears and shows it self, And therefore it is called his
house, because he is the husband of it, the householder and master that rules
in it, setting down his own orders to his children and family: wherein it is
intolerable presumption, (if not blasphemy) for any man to dare to alter or
change the least jot against his will. He is the King and Pastor of it, Luke
12.4.
and his friends stand and hear him: Io. 10.4.5.
his sheep follow his voice, and will not go after a stranger. They love
him that keep his words, and he beautifieth them, not only as guestes and
strangers, but as Citizens and Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
and such as are of his own household. These are they that fly as the
clouds, (such is the multitude of them dispersed upon the face of the earth)
and they mount up as Doves to his window. Esaias. 60.8.
And this is both called and is the Church of the living God, 1. Timot. 3.15.
the foundation and pillar of truth, the body of Christ, the house of the
highest, the keeper and teacher of the Gospel, the mother of the faithful,
cleansed of Christ and precious unto him. This is no particular synagogue,
whorish and disobedient, impure and filthy, full of rebellion and falsehood, as
is that synagogue of Rome which has departed from her first faith and love:
which although the Papists would advance above the skies, (always like
Cuckowes singing one and the same song, and shamelesly begging yt which they
should chiefly prove:) yet they shall never be able, though they burst their
hearts for it, to prove it to be either the Catholic Church of Jesus Christ,
or a member of it. For they maintain another head besides Christ, another
word besides the word of Christ, unwritten verities or rather absurd
untruths, preferring the commandments of a sinful man, before the
unchangeable and everlasting truth of God. And truly, I do not a little
wonder, what madness is entered into their brains, that with such Owls faces,
they dare in the open light of the Gospel, schritch forth their old
absurdities, as though now after the great instruction of the truth, they were
able to thrust forth unto us (as in times past when they lead us in the dark)
their counterfaite ware, to deceive us, and so turn us away from the glorious
light of our salvation. We had thought they had received their answer long
ago, and would never have durst to look the truth in the face again: but
now as they are continually instructed from that same enemy of truth, so they
bring forth their old rotten stuff, and their new Jesuits have furbushed
over their old arguments of their blind predecessors, and as if they were
spicke and spanne new, they offer them unto us. But we find them all of one
metal. This only is the difference, that whereas they were wont to speak in
their own language and like themselves, now they speak in an other
dissembling voice, and being in case to couch for fear of the whippe, they
have turned their rustie roughnes into some smoothnes, and like Angels of
light, that they may have some entertainment amongst us: and to the end they
may infect the land again with their idolatries, and turn vpside down the
quiet peace the blessing of the Gospel has brought us, and drink up our
blood, (as together with Antichrist their head they have done in times past,
and in the countries, where they have had entertainment round about us;) with
strong flattery, they prepare even to creep into our bosoms. And hence are
those speeches used by Parsons Howlet, in yt fraudulent and doubling Epistle,
that he of late has presumed to whoope in the ears of her Sovereign Highness,
wherewith because I have dealt more fully in another place, now I do but touch
it. But as there is greatest danger when foes begin to faigne, so have we
greatest cause to distrust these enemies of God and of the common weal, when
they have made their tongues most glyb and smoothe to deceive withal, August.
in Psalm. 9.
that as one says very well, they may bind men's souls in their sins. For
a sinner delights to do those things, wherein not only the reprouer is
feared, but also the praiser is heard. There are therefore more dangers under ye
tongue of a flatterer, then under the hand of a persecutor. For where as the
hand reaches but to the body, the false praise and feigned love of a
flatterer, turns men's hearts from the synceritie of the truth. And therefore
we ought to take heed of these flattering Papists, as of the enemies, August.
ad Demetriadem. Epist. 142,
not of our bodies, but of our souls, whose softest speches and glauering
praises, which they pounce out to the uttermost, to steal in upon us, and to
gain against ye truth, are so many swords and darts to our souls. They corrupt
light minds with their feigned praises, and in the minds of those that are
light of credit, they give gentle wounds. They cover their poison with honey.
And this vice has so increased in this our age, yt it stands at ye last stint
and cannot be increased: every man applies this study, and gives himself
wholly to follow this schole, yt he may deceive and be deceived. we receive that
willingly of others, which we offer as a gift to others, and the hope of
receiving praise makes us to praise those to their faces of whom we would be
praised. We oftentimes refuse the praise of flatterers, when they speak to our
faces, and yet we nourish their flatteries in our minds, and think we have
gained much with men, when God knows and our consciences tell us that they
are forged and feigned. We do not think what we are our selves in deed, but
what we seem to be to others. And hence it is, that the most men push at the
opinion of the world: they labor to be well thought of, fetching the
testimony of their credit, rather from a lying fame, than a sound conscience.
But happy are they that perfectly overcome this vice, that neither flatter,
nor believe those that flatter, that depend not upon the blasts of men's mouths,
but study to approve themselves to God, whose judgment is according to truth.
And I beseech the Lord, that her Highness with all her Counsel and Nobles, may
be endued with this wisdom from above, (because such as they are, are in most
danger of these sweet poisoners) yt they may shun and avoid their pleasant
hissings. For albeit now they creep, because they can not go, yet the time
was when they ran and made deep furrows even upon our backs: when her
majesty should have found courtesy, they executed cruelty; when all should
have found truth and loyalty, they bent themselves and their whole powers to
kill both soul and body. But I see Satan is like himself, and his children
bear his resemblance: that which they can not compass one way, they will
attempt another. And therefore I wonder not, that they are suddenly turned for
a time from yt rough course which yet lurketh hidden in their bones, and which
in times past was wont to be their way, That traitor Story said it openly in
the Parleament house. Ann. prim. of her Highness most gration^ reign.
that now they flatter her who^ they then persecuted and put in danger of
life; whom they so discourteously entreated, and some with such sorrow repented yt
they had not grubbed up the stock, and passed over the branches: against whom
they have moved so many rebellions, and entered into such traitorous and curssed
practices, some of their greatest Clerks, appearing in actual rebellion, and
inuading her majesty's terretories and countries: I wonder not I say, that now
they call her highness Christ's substitute, their sovereign princess, so
extolling her virtues, as though her highness government, the establishing of
Christian religion, and the execution of her highness laws against such
traitorous offenders were enforced and against her will and purpose. Thus they
kiss and kill together. The Pope their god in earth has excommunicated her
highness, and Sanders (as it were their own mouth) to witness their persuasion,
by virtue of that Bull which Mourton procured, and Felton (whom with Thomas
Becket for treason they make a martyr) set up, has pronounced them all free
from all duty and allegiance: and yet forsooth now they will needs be counted
faithful subjects. Allen in his seditious Apology of his english Seminary,
speaks fair for obedience, and yet malapertly presumes, to confute her
highness proclamatio^s, made against such runagates. Their going beyond sea, is
for nothing but religion, and yet from them, and out of their schools has
spronge, the ground of al seditious practices, ye stirring up unto sedition and
rebellion, in diverse places both at home and abroad, the attemps of
compassing her majesty's life, which ye lord long preserve to the maintenance
of the gospel, and their confusion. And because ye man is so hot, for yt we
assure all rank papists to be right traitors: he tells us yt those priests
and Jesuits, have express commandment from their superiors, not to move any
sedition, or to meddle with matters of state or temporal government, Allen
Apolog. Cap. 6. Fol. 72.
but only by their priesthood and functions, to do such duties as be requisite
for christian men's souls, which consists in preaching, teaching,
catechizing, Howlets auctor says in the 7. reason, that none can be called
Priests, but in respect of that sacrifice.
ministering the sacraments and such like. First therefore we answer, that
preaching, teaching, catechizing, and ministering the sacraments is no part of
popish priests office. For they are in deed (as also he will have them
called) mass priests, in respect of their abominable sacrifice. And as they
scarce knew any practice of these he names, so for Catechizing or teaching the
principles of Christian religion, they never knew what it meant. For they could
not so much as abide, ye Lords prayer, or creed, commonly called the Creed of
the Apostles, to be in our mother tongue. As for ministering ye Sacraments, they
had neither calling so to do, neither yet kept any right form in the
administration, or taught the use of the^. And if their commission from their
spiritual superiors there, be sufficient calling to enable them to entrude
them selves here, or to go into other countries, like gadding Circumcellions:
to disturb both Churches and commonweals, where they have neither place
allotted, nor being assigned, either by God or man: how can they show us the
seal of these commissioners commission from above? But if they will draw all
auctority from that stranger, that man of sin and perdition, who as he takes
upon him to give a spiritual commission, (I should have said a spiteful) In
foro conscientiae to excommunicate and to absolve from all sins: then they
should first prove that he received his auctority from God, and so they might
have some better allowance. But what auctority can this strange usurper
challendge over the Lords inheritance? How can he absolve from sins, who is
the very son of perdition? And what auctority can these substitutes have, to
free from schism and heresy, who are the greatest schismatiques and
heretics of the world, renting themselves from the spowse of Christ, from
Christ himself, and joining so fast to Antichrist? Let them show us by what
tenor they hold this privilege, whether in Fee farm, in Socage, or in
Capite. Sure I am that these spiritual keys, in their several privileges
are annexed to ye true ministry and ministers of Christ. And though Master
Allen now be somewhat abated in his reconing, who fraudulently begins to
distinguish betwixt the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and Temporal, and would
persuade us, that these new creatures of the Popes making, take upon them no
dealing in state matters, and therefore, that they are far from being
traitors: yet he knows, and all ye world knows who it is that has usurped
the auctority of both swords; and who they are that think both unlawful
without his allowance; and whether they have a Bull or no Bull, yet he can not
be so ignorant, or rather impudent to deny the Pope, and Papists entermedling
by their Bulls even with our Princes person and state. Her person crown and
dignity, her right over all persons in governing them according to Gods word,
and keeping her subjects in order, are matters of state. And therefore the
matter is not mistaken, concerning the Bull of Pius Quintus, that has, if it
be of force, taken the crown which God has set upon her highness head, from
her, and discharged all her subjects from her obedience. And howsoever he
flattereth, yet he insinuates too plainly, yt our Parleaments are no
Parleaments, our civil Officers and Church Ministers, no Officers and
Ministers, because they have not the approbation and allowance of his holy
father. And yet forsooth, these Romish Romanistes, though they tugge with tooth
and nail for to bring in this Romish jurisdiction which is foreign, against
the word of God, and against the laws of this realm, which the Pope
challenges Iure diuino, and yet can show no evidence out of that law for it,
and that over al causes and persons, bereauing her Highness of that principal
part of her office, which is to look to Gods matters, yea though he
excommunicate her as a schismatique, laying her as a pray open to the swords of
her enemies, yet must they be friends and no enemies, loyal and not
traitorous. If this be their truth, what is their treason? Neither does the
example of Christ and his Apostles suffering for the truth, nor of Daniel
serving the true God, help their cause one whit. For Christ and his Apostles
were wrongfully charged, and these truly. They stood for the truth and glory
of God, and these against it, and therefore all other idolaters, and false
worshippers of God, may as well challendge Christ and his Apostles for their
patrons, as they, and with ye same truth. Besides, Daniel served the true God,
and was faithful to an heathen Prince; these serve a false God, and are
unfaithful to their Sovereign a Christian Prince. And albeit it were to be
granted, yt Mass, Mattins, Confession, Absolution, Beads, Agnus Deies, and
such consecrated tokens as they call them, indeed superstitious trash, and
idolatrous trumperie, were in themselves no matters of treason, yet when
runagates, enemies to her Highness, maliciously bring them in as tokens of
reconciliation to the Pope, withdrawing her people from the dutiful obedience
they owe her, disturb her state, and hazard her Crown and dignity; The Bull
from Mourton, from Cutbert Maine executed in Cornwall, from Stra^guidge
obtained for the Queen of Scotts, prove all this to be true.
they doing all by the commission of a foreign usurper, breaking in
tyrannously both upon the Church and civil government, which always in it
own nature has been deemed treason by the laws of this Realm, and so
stands adjudged, having neither place nor calling, roaring out against her
Highness rightful possession by their Bulls; these superstitions considered in
these circumstances, can no more be sundred from treason, than light from the
Sun, heat from the fire, or moystnes from water. And as true religion is an
enemy to all vices, so superstition most commonly is friendly, and a companion
with them. Truth and treason hardly agree, but falsehood and treason are
conceived in the same womb, and nourished up with the same milk, and this is
the cause that Popery has had in all ages, her greatest maintenance by
treason, and treason by it. How wickedly soever this runagate, to discredit
her highness most honorable and trusty Counsailors, would bear the world in
hand, that she and her government are parted, that she is enforced, and as it
were ravished by some about her, of her free right and power of ruling, so
malapert is this perking proctor of the Popes, that upon the sudden is become
so loyal, and yet fears not to show his traitorous heart, by such ouert and
manifest treasons. In deed it were an easy thing here not to find a staff,
to beat this dog, (that I may use his own word) but a sword, or rather being
unworthy of the honor of heading, a rope, to put an end to his wicked
atte^pts. It had bin an hapy thing both for our church and country, if he had
bin in his man's place in the late rebellion and inuasio^ into Ireland, procured
by such dutiful subjects as himself to have excused him. I doubt not but our
Lions, would have found out his horns, what soever vizard of ears, he and
such have put on. True it is, yt the temporal state and Ecclesiastical are
distinguished. And as a man may be a good civil man, and yet no godly man, so a
man may be a civil subject, and yet is not a faithful and religious subject.
But yet eue^ as the church and common wealth are twins, and the happiness and
flourishing of the elder, gives comfort and glory to the younger, so is it in
these two states. If the ministry, the only mean to ye felicity of the
Church, cause it to flourish: the common wealth is the better. The soul is ye
life of the body, and whilst they continue together in perfect state, it
goes well with the whole man, and so is it with whole mankind. No soul has
true life, that is separated from Christ the life thereof, neither are bodies
any thing else, but dead carcasses and carrio^s, from which ye soul is
departed. First therefore the Ecclesiastical state is occupied about ye soul,
and ye Civil about ye body. Each keep them within their listes to ye
preservation of both, and intrude not one into an others office. The Church
state and government is wholly occupied in Church matters, and the Civil in
common wealth matters. And albeit ye Christian Prince has auctority from God,
over all persons; yet the Prince enforces no laws in Gods matters to bind
the conscience against his laws. The Christian Prince, looks that Gods laws
be had in price, that all estates keep themselves in order, that every man do
his duty according to his order, and inflicteth bodily punishments upon
malefactors and offenders: and the other execute that spiritual sword, that
pierces further than the temporal, even to the soul and conscience. When
both these meet together, dwell in one kingdom, and kiss each other, there is
a blessed state; and in regard of Christian Princes, though treason against
the one, can not be with any loyalty to the other; yet we exempt such ignorant
and seduced Papists from the gilt of treason; as (being led by such Captain
Romanists, as Sanders and Allen are) only have a dislike of ye truth, and yet
bear dutiful hearts to their Prince and Country, having not in such ouert and
actual manner, hatched forth that cursed and treacherous seed. But I wish
these with all my heart in time to take heed, lest whilst they nourish and
foster this conceived superstition in them, they grow to the same wretched
attempts, that they see others have done and do daily to their great cost, and
they pay (as they are worthy) the same price for it. Let them in time therefore
fear God, and honor the King, obey God that they may obey their Prince.

Popery is the nurce and mother of treason, rebellion, and confusion. Popery
has always been a perker and prier in to princes greatest secrets and
intentions, for the maintenance of it own kingdom. True religion in deed
teaches all estates, and takes knowledge to reprove, whatsoever is contrary
to the light: But popery, rusheth into all matters and causes, and chalengeth
and usurps authority over all persons, it takes upon it the alteration of
kingdoms, ouerturneth Princes crowns, alienateth inheritances, and
intermedleth unjustly in all things: as I will (if god assist me) show further if
I be further urged. I beseech your Honor pardon me, that I have passed the
bounds of an epistle. These creaking papists eue^ compel me, who are so
shameless, in ye clear light of the gospel, still to provoke us: But a day
shall come, yt shall reveal al things: in the mean time I nothing doubt of his
merciful goodness (if we go cheerfully forward, and draw not his judgments
upon us by our slacknesse and coldness toward the synceritie of his truth)
toward his poor Church, toward her Majesty, and the whole body of this
common weal. And thanks be to God, for that rich and unspeakable knowledge
of his truth, whereby he has enabled us to discern and see their errors. Of
all benefits this is most precious; and I beseech your honor in your place, to
seek the advancing of it. Let them not be able to prevail with you, that
bewray their own shame, whilst with boasting words, they would seem to mount
up to heaven, and yet lie flat groueling upon the earth, having no spark of
heavenly wisdom, or understanding from the word of God. Only they have a few
waste words, and a little lavish latin, wherewith they think to ouergoe and
overthrow the settled truth of God. We looked for high matter from our
chalinging champion, at the least, seeing he comes after al others; we looked
for some show of weighty and grounded arguments* but alack, our hope is
frustrate, for nothing appears, but that a man may find in these golden
days of knowledge, (...)
even in those youths and boys that yet have scarce a far of saluted
divinity. His ten arguments are nothing else, but so many paralogismes, all
taken from others, that wrote long before him; only he has turned the wrong
side of their coats outward. Because some men have refused certain books to
be numbered in the Canon of the scriptures; for which yet they are not destitute
of some testimonies, and yet some of those books have not bin denied of us:
therefore we fly the scriptures, and Campion has won the field already:
because the sense and meaning of the scriptures have been diversely taken of
some particular, men in some controversies, therefore the meaning of the
scriptures are on his side. Thus he braineth himself with his own hammer, and
cutteth his own throat with his own sword. As though all that profess
papistrie, keep one sense and meaning in the interpretation of ye scripture:
because they boast of the name of a Church, and the name of the Church is
glorious, we look wan at it, and must needs fly, because they com against us
only with ye bare name. We make a church of our own fashion, a Platonicall
Idea, and an idle fancy. In discribing a church, we utterly overthrow it etc.
All the heretics that ever were, are our predecessors, because papists say
so; and we must subscribe to their church, or else to a church that is no
where. The^ forsooth al general Councels are theirs, and we refuse all: because
some have erred, and many have been contrary one to another. The Counsel of
Trent shall live, when Kemnitius shall be buried (if he take not heed) with
Arrius, and now we may trust them; for John Hus brake the conditions that the
Emperor had set him, and running away, which the Emperor had forbidden upon
pain of his head, was justly not headed, but burned: and yet the Council of
Constance debated specially of this matter, and thought they were not bound to
the Emperors promise. Hierom of Prage, spoke freely in ye Council, and
recanting, departed freely, but falling into his heresy again, drunk of the
same cup. We refuse all fathers, he allows all and refuses none, tagge and
ragge are welcome to him, all their errors shall be defended for manifest truth.
Not so much as Dionisius and Hyppolytus, but must be ranked amongst the
Doctors. And if ever any searched the scriptures, these did it, and spent their
whole lives in it. And all histories make for them, and our historiographers,
for 1500 years together, are empty of all matter, saving of that they write
for them and to maintain their cause. And we can not deny but that Rome was an
holy Church, that their faith was famous, that Paul preached there, that a
Church was gathered in yt Babylon, where Peter ruled, Whether Clement succeeded
Peter or Linu^ I would feign have determined.
and Clement succeeded, etc. therefore all are his and for his religion. We
further maintain nothing but Paradoxes, and monstrous opinions, of God, of
Christ, of man, of grace, of righteousness, of manners, etc. And we must
needs speak and be understood as this lusty challenger will have us to
speak and be understood. Our Sophistications are palpable, and our barenes in
testimonies are miserable, he has from heaven, from ye earth, from Roses, from
Lilies, the one purpuled with martyrdom, the other whited with innocence.
They have those that were shepeheardes to all lands, and all flocks of all
faithful, all were theirs, of all sorts, and none ours. And thus we are
confuted. But, my Lord, it has been an old said saw: The greatest barkers are
not the best biters, nor ye greatest boasters ye best fighters. I doubt not but
he shall receive a full answer in time. In mean time let him and all the papists
in the world, if they can, overthrow ye truth of doctrine which we hold, ye
articles of whose faith and religion, depends not upon any man or man's
authority, but upon ye undoubted scriptures. If they can show better warrant
for that they hold, let us hear their evidence, but if their stoare be so
beggarly, that ye richest of them, and he that comes so appointed to challendge
all in the name of all the rest; writing, (which is with greater advice than any
sudden speaking can be) be feign to limpe, and sink in his entry; what shall we
think will be done ere the battle be fought? Surely if we came with carnal
weapons, it is like he would ouermatch us, having man's wisdom, the world and
the devil on his side: But thanks be to God, we come appointed with
spiritual weapons, we come in the name of the Lord, armed with the mighty
word of God, against all counterfeit catholics and heretics. And if God
bless her Majesty's government, so that the Gospel may proceed in a full
ministry, that the youth may be catechized and seasoned with such sound
instructions as this book yields, and those that are ancient may be
confirmed, and the froward by an holy discipline ordered: our youth, our aged,
our common people of al sorts, shall be able to va^quish and put to flight all
such empty and vain boasters. And this is the thing that I sought for, in
tra^slating this excellent and sound work. Which I hope your honor will
accept, according to that humble duty and service wherewith I have evermore
held my self specially bound to your good Lordship as my singular patron,
and as a principal member in ye church of God. The Lord Jesus establish your
honors heart, and give you a settled persuasion in that everlasting truth, yt
evermore you may feel the comfort and assurance of that blessed kingdom,
which he so freely has purchased for you. Amen.

Your good Lordships faithful servant ever to command. JOHN FIELD.

To the most mighty and noble Prince and Lord, Friderike County Palatine by
the Rhene, Duke of either Bauaria, Elector of the sacred Roman Empire, his
most gracious Prince and Lord, Gasper Oleuian Treuir, wishes from his heart,
grace and peace from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THere are two special cause^ (most noble Prince Elector, and my very good
Lord) which have moved me to the publishing of this little book. One, that I
might profit the studious youth by this easy and plain doctrine, to wit, to
the end that by the taste thereof, they may be stirred up and provoked to the
ministry of the word of God. For verily, they chiefly serve the Church of
Christ, who allured by the sweetness of the heavenly doctrine (because they have
tasted how good the Lord is) and being stirred up with a care of promoting his
glory, offer up to the faithful people, yea rather to Christ himself, their
diligence, yea and in a sort themselves also. And truly it is a great matter,
eue^ from the tender years to have deeply tasted Christ in his heavenly
doctrine: for from thence does necessarily flow (as Peter calls it) that same
desire of the sincere milk of his word, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and that same fervent desire of communicating of it unto others. Many good and
learned men here, know that this was the best and principal cause of the
publishing hereof, unto who^ I communicated (some years past) those things
which now I set forth, and also declared the purpose of the publishing thereof:
But hitherto, I have deferred the same, because I feared least this simplicity
of teaching, and writing not so filed and labored, should not satisfy many,
wherewith I endeavored not so much to feed their ears as their minds. An
other cause was, that it might be a testimony of doctrine, against that same
tempest which in many places is stirred up against this Church. Against this, I
would set this bulwark of sand, if peradventure God who is mighty in the
weak, would vouchsafe to appease the same in the minds of certain more
moderate than the rest, and also assuage it a little in others. For I have
thought of that same great power of God, whereby he has set unto the sea her
bounds: which when it would seem with his hugenes, to ouerwhelme the whole
earth, by the commandment of God, all his force is broken against the soft
sand: I have trusted therefore that through this simple and plain declaration,
of the grounds of our religion, which hitherto we have used, that the Lord
would bring some good thing to pass, for the appeasing of certain men's
minds, unto whom peradventure our innocence, hitherunto has been less
known. Many keep a great stir, as though horrible doctrine sounded in the
congregation of this Church, and such rumors are scattered abroad far and
wide. Some may say that even a sea of sclaunderous reproaches, is vomited out
against us, wherewith we might be drowned. But why rage you, o good sirs? (for
let it be free for me, by your highness leave, even to compel them) consider
all the articles of our Christian faith, will you find in any one any such
matter of raging? Be not all things exacted to the rule of God his word, and
are they not directed to edification in true and sound godliness? If you your
selves do not feel that same consolation in your consciences of this
doctrine, I will freely grant, that justly you rise up against us: But take
heed I beseech you, that you rise not up against your own conscience, against
God himself, who in the conscience has erected his high seat. For certainly
nothing has bin done of us in corners. We have many, yea innumerable
witnesses of the exposition of this christan doctrine, yea your highness it
self, who shall read the selfsame things here, which publicly you heave
now hard these fiften years past, in which it has pleased the Lord that I
should deliver here unto his Church these principal grounds of the christian
faith. You have now (most noble prince Elector) the causes of the publishing
hereof, which as I know to be true, so I doubted not to lay them open to your
highness.

Now as touching that, which may privately concern your highness, this short
treatise lately drawn out of those catechizing sermons of the former years,
shall be at the least wise some signification of a thankful mind, for a
special benifite, for that, your highness has given enterteinment to that same
heavenly doctrine, the undoubted word of the prophets and Apostles reueiled
unto men; and also has procured to many of the children of God, (being
gathered together under the wings of your highness, with more than a fatherly
clemency) the pure doctrine of salvation, administered altogether with an
heroical and principal spirit, and altogether through the grace of God, with
a cheerful mind. Now if again, in this your highness age, (which the Lord
vouchsafe to renew, as the age of the Egle) your highness by the reading of the
doctrine of God his providence, of the power of Christ his resurrection, of the
everlasting righteousness now brought into light, and of the glorious government
of all things, of Christ sitting at the right hand of God the father, in the
heavens, and especially of his Church, of which he is the head: if your
highness (I say) by his merciful acceptance an elect and noble member of his,
do conceive any spiritual gladness in the midst of these miseries of the
Church, whereby God does always exercise your highness faith, this certainly
shall be my greatest desire, and the matter of all our joy. The Lord Jesus
continue your highness, (who have by so many means so favorably comforted me
in this sickness, and chiefly with that same excellent gift of God, I mean
with that clear well water) to enrich the same again with all kind of
blessings, together with all your posterity, to the advancement of his
glory, and the consolation of Gods children. Amen: until that same eternal
son of God fill us with joy, gathered together unto himself into heaven,
with that same sweet and everlasting sight of himself: your highness (I say,)
with all that call upon his name, and lead us to those fou^taines of
everlasting waters. Amen. Faithful is he that has promised and he will bring
it to pass. Given at Heydelberge the 19. day of March Anno D. 1576.

Your excellent highness his most bounden. Gasper Oleuian, minister of Gods
word.

To the youth addicted to true godliness, health etc.
THou have vnderstodde, most dearly beloved youth, and flower of the Church,
the purpose of this my little work, by the preface to the most noble Elector
Palatine, only it remains that thou take it with the same hand wherewith it
is reached unto thee, that is with the right hand and not with the left. That
shall be done, if I shall acheiue my purpose, and by the grace of God, shall
kindle many from amongst you, to the fervent study of the holy scriptures.
Surely I my self being but yet a boy, was wonderfully kindled with a desire
both of learning and teaching others concerning God; in outward show upon very
small occasion, but indeed upon very great: for I fell upon the writing of a
certain excellent learned man, where almost even to this purpose he exhorts
youth: there is nothing more excellent (says he) than for men to teach
others, concerning God as touching the creation of mankind, of man's fall into
sin, of reconciliation and restoring of him again through the son of God
that same promised seed of the woman, that shall bruise the head of the
serpent, etc. These seemed to me altogether religious and holy sayings, and it
pleased the Lord by these words to kindle in me ye sparks of a fervent desire
both of learning and in time to come, of instructing others, either in the
school, or in the Church. For I set before mine eyes the company of young men
in the school, also the flock of learners in ye Church: What can be more
notable (thought I) then to have there before me, not only young men, but also
hoare headed husbandmen, who together with thy self are banished from
paradise, for sin, and like Ada^ til ye earth, who for their old age are
reverend, and as fathers: many women also, who are as mothers: if the Lord will
have thee to speak his word unto these, and to instruct them of God, of the
creation and preservation of the world, of the subtlety of the serpent
deceauing man, of the promised salvation by the seed of the woman: what can be
more comfortable, what can happen unto thee, more to be wished for of God?
seeing without the knowledge of these things men live more miserably than
brute beasts. The Lord continually after that time nourished these sparks in
me, by his holy spirit, and by the reading of the holy scriptures. I was then a
boy of fifteen years old, and a little before, for studies sake, sent to
Paris by my parents. But to what end speak I these things so familiarly? I
speak as a young man, to young men: hoping, that it will come to pass, yt
those things which were not of small moment in my mind, will likewise in your
minds kindle the sparks, which may engender that earnest desire as well of
learning, as of teaching. And so much the more, when you shall perceive your
selves, not only provoked by my example, but also (God giving you grace,)
helped by this my little labor. For although before I was sixteen years old,
when I was sent to Paris, I had some direction by my schoolemaisters, who
yearly before Easter did expound unto us in the school called Treuiror, the
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and were wont according to the measure God
had given them, to confer the figures of the old Testament, with the
accomplishing thereof by the passion of Christ (a thing very comfortable, and
which afterward, by the grace of God, opened unto me the whole scope of the
scriptures:) yet notwithstanding that handleading was more dark and obscure, by
reason of the multitude of men's traditions, in which, Christ dead and raised up
again was wrapped and darkened, in the popedom, so, that I could not well
use that light, which by the conference and comparing of those figures, and the
fulfilling of the things themselves I did see to shine in the passion of
Christ: But yet for all that, that same weak foreknowledge in his time, God
blessing it, wanted not his excellent fruit. But here dearly beloved youth,
you shall see Christ, dead, and raised up again, without any mazes of men's
traditions, so lively set before your eyes, that by ye sure and undoubted
prophetical and apostolical word, as it were by the hand, yea as by a light
shining in a dark place being brought unto him, you may know him truly to be
the same, who was made unto us of God, to be our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, as it is written. All that glory, let them glory
in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1. and that we are complete in him: to ye Coloss. 2.
Last of al for as much as the unthankfulness of the world, does drive away and
fear many both from learning and teaching, go to, shall not Christ punish the
world for this unthankfulness? If he remain faithful, ought not this to
satisfy us? Christ the Lord of heaven and earth will not suffer you serving
him, to be altogether destitute of necessary things: but he that provides
seed to the sower, he also will provide bread for food. I have oftentimes
thought of that same saying of Christ, Luke 22. When I sent you without bag
and scrippe and shoes, wanted ye any thing? his disciples answered, Nothing:
yea, they did not once remember, whether they should need any help, for their
iourny, and executing of their office. The same Christ yet lives and reigns
God for ever, who has ye hearts of all in his hands, yt he may do good to all
faithful pastors: even as he had commanded (be it yt he spoke never a word) to
the widow of Sarepta, that she should give food to her servant Elias. I have
also oftentimes thought of that same saying of Daniel: that the reward of
Christ his servants are laid up for them, in the heavens. The teachers (says
he) shall shine, as the brightness of the firmament, and they that have brought
others unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars in everlasting times. Let
us therefore content our selves in our calling, with mean things, and resign
over our selves to our heavenly father to be fed through Christ at his hands,
we, our wives and our children: for he is the true father, and will never be
unmindful of compassion, and a fatherly care over us, and so much the less
he will be unmindful, by how much we shall be more mindful of our calling.
We may therefore safely commit our selves and ours to his providence, which
ought to suffice for the ouercomming of all hinderaunces and letts, specially
to them to whom God is all in all.

Farewell.
An Exposition of the Apostles Creed, or rather of the articles of the
Christian faith.
That the kingdom of Christ is offered unto us in the Articles of our faith;
and that the faithful are partakers of it, whilst they live here.
IT is certain, that there are two spiritual kingdoms, even in this world:
to wit, the kingdom of darkness, and the kingdom of light: and it must needs
be, that every man be of one of these, whilst he lives here. For so Christ
the king himself speaks to his elect vessel: Acts. 26. For this cause have
I appeared unto thee, that I might appoint thee a minister and witness of those
things which thou have seen: And a little afterward; That thou might open
their eyes, that they might be turned from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God, and might receive remission of sins, and a lotte amongst
the sanctified, through the faith which is in me. So to the Colossians the
first: Giving thanks unto God the father, who has made us fit to be
partakers of the lotte of the Saints in the light: who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his dearly
beloved son. Hereby it is clear that there are two spiritual kingdoms,
even in this world: the kingdom of Christ, in which in very deed are all they
that truly repent and believe in Christ, and are also baptized into his name:
as also their children, unless when they shall be grown and come to age,
through unbelief they reject the benifite offered: But the other the kingdom
of Satan and darkness, in which all they are, which do not repent, and
believe not in Christ, these partly are not baptized, but open contemners of
baptism: as the Turks and Jews: and partly again are baptized, but yet are
impenite^t, and unbelievers: these albeit they be baptized and join themselves
to the visible Church, remain notwithstanding in very deed so long in the
kingdom and power of darkness, until they be converted and believe. Mat. 28.1.
Cor. 6 verse. 8.9.10. 12. and 2. Cor. 12. verse. 21. Now forasmuch as the
Articles of the faith contain the sum of that doctrine delivered by Christ
the king to his Apostles: it is certain, that in them the kingdom of Christ
and all the privileges thereof are offered and exhibited to all them that
repent and believe: and again that we are taught by this confession, whence we
may assure our selves, that we are true Citizens of the kingdom of Christ, yea
and that in this life, and that we have a partaking with Christ the king
himself with all his benifites: to wit, if we believe with our heart, and
confess with our mouth. For that saying of the Apostle is sure, in the 10. to
ye Romans: The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart. This is
that word of faith which we preach, to wit, that if thou shall confess with
thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God has raised
him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation. For the
scripture says: whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed.

What the kingdom of Christ is, and that the new covenant is administered
therein.
LEt us then see what ye kingdom of Christ is, which begins in the faithful
in this world; which also in the same sense is named the kingdom of God, and
the kingdom of heaven. Mat* 3. verse. 2. Luke 4. verse. 43. and Chapter 7.
verse. 28. The kingdom of Christ in this world* is the administration of
salvation, whereby Jesus Christ the king himself, outwardly gathers to
himself through the Gospel and sacrament of baptism, a people or visible
Church, (in which many hypocrites are mingled,) and calls them to salvation,
and administreth and gives himself the same salvation to which he calls
them, in those, who^ he accounts for his elect in this congregation, whilst
that he makes this outward vocation effectual, that is to say, calls them
to repentance and faith, by which they answer to him that calls: and whom
he thus calls, those also he justifies, not imputing their sins unto them:
whom he justifies, those also he glorifieth, purging them daily more and more
from their sins, and so instructing, framing, and perfecting them to all
godliness, righteousness, and that to life everlasting, that the glory of
Christ their king may shine in them: using to that purpose, the dispensation of
his word and sacraments by meet ministers, and that both public,
domestical, and private, and therewithal also the diligent administration of
his discipline, as well of repentance and ceremonies, as of man's whole life. The
universal administration of this kingdom of Christ, is that same new
covenant, that God has promised in the last times to make with us by Jeremy
the Prophet, not according to that same covenant he made with our fathers, when
he brought them out of the land of Egypt, because they had made that covenant
void: but that this should be the covenant, that he would give his law in
the midst of us; and that he would write it in our hearts, and that he would
be our God, and we should be his people, and that we should know him, because
he would be merciful unto our iniquity, and would not remember our sins any
more. Ierem. 31. And by Hoseas the Prophet: Cap. 2. I will marry thee in faith,
and thou shall know the Lord. This covenant Christ the king and priest of his
Church, has ratified for ever by his merit, between God and us, and every
day works in us through his efficacy. Daniel the 9. Verily by his merit,
seeing that Christ by his priesthood, that is, by his intercession and
sacrifice, laying an everlasting foundation unto his kingdom, has satisfied
the righteousness of God, and so delivers us from sin and the curse of
the law, and from the kingdom and power of the devil, and obtains the
spirit of sanctification, through which he may reign in us: and through his
efficacy or operation, whereby, as the king of his Church he first brings
our hearts to the knowledge of their evil, and to the consideration of the
divine righteousness, and creates in them the study of reconciling
themselves to God, and converting them to his will. Now afterward, things thus
set in order, he offreth the word of reconciliation, and engenders faith in
them, through which he communicates himself (after whom they thirst,) unto
them; to this end, that having obtained through his merit, justification,
they may use it to the everlasting peace of their conscience, and may daily
also through his spirit be restored and builded up. Lastly he exhorts those
that are reconciled, and thus endowed with his spirit, to bring forth works,
worthy those that repent, to the end, that the glory of their king may shine
in them. Romans 8. ver. 29 30. These degrees, in the administration of the
kingdom of Christ, and of his new covenant, the Lord comprehends in that
same speech to Paul, when he says, that thou may open their eyes: that is
done, when through the working of that king Christ, their conscience is
illuminated through the holy Ghost. (For it is he that makes his ministry
effectual) so as they know both themselves and their sins, and again God,
his holiness and righteousness, to which they must be conformable, that
through faith turning unto him, they may receive in Christ a double benefit,
forgiveness of their sins, and a lot amongst the sanctified, who daily study
(Christ exhorting them) to bring forth the worthy fruits of repentance. For
whom he has chosen, those also has he called: whom he has called, those also
has he justified: whom he has justified, those also he has glorified. First
therefore let us see how Christ our king by calling into his kingdom, does
engender in men a desire of being reconciled to God; then how he offreth unto
them the forgiveness of their sins, or rather the free grace of reconciliation
and justification, and therewithal how he begins, their restoring to
everlasting life and glory: how daily he sets it forward, and at length in
the world to come does fully finish the same.

How Christ the King engenders in his elect the study of reconciling
themselves to God, and how he preserves and increases in them which are
reconciled, the study of holding that reconciliation.
CHrist the King does engender in his elect the study of reconciling them
selves to God: first of all by shewinge that all men are under sin, and in
the kingdom of darkness, especially because that when all men have the
knowledge of God, naturally engraffed in them, and the work of the law by
nature written in their hearts, and by the things created are constreined to
know God, notwithstanding do not glorify him, but do sin contrary to the
law of nature. Romans 1. The which thing they witness in their deeds, and their
own conscience does convince their thoughts, either accusing or excusing
them. Again by uncovering all and every of their wickednesses, and in
accusing them by the law written, and by the threatninges which are manifest
every where throughout the whole prophets, many wickednesses also being
heaped together as plainly may be seen in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap
3. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And also by showing that this is the
unchangeable will of God, whereby he will not only that all men be conformed
to the law of nature, but also to the law written, otherwise that he will so
long accounte them for sinners and enemies til they be converted, and through
faith be reconciled unto God. John. 3 verse 36. Romans 5. verse. 10, 11. Secondly
by showing what a great evil sin is. Such and so great an evil sin is, that it
deserves the everlasting destruction of man, yea verily so great an evil, yt
it cannot by the everlasting destruction of man be cleansed. Whereupon it
follows that sin is a greater evil, then man's everlasting damnation,
seeinge that the damned cannot by everlasting pains cleanse or overcome so
great an evil. To conclude, it is so great an evil, to have offended the
majesty of God but with one sin, that the destruction of all creatures were
a less evil. For certainly neither the destruction of all creatures, yea if
they should be brought to nothing, were a sufficient price for the cleansing
of one only sin: which could not otherwise be cleansed, but by the death of
the son of God. Thirdly by showing that the nature of God is righteous, and
therefore that it does accurse all sinners, to wit as well their bodies as
souls, as well in this world as in the world to come, Deuteronomy. 28. unless
reconciliation be made. For so immutable is this righteousness of God, and will
to judge sins, that not so much as one sin amongst so many thowsandes,
which daily are committed, shall escape unpunished. For either it is punished
in us or else in Christ: in Christ it is once perfectly punished, so that we
repent and amend and believe in him: in our selves it shall be punished, if we
have an unbelieving heart and such a a one as cannot repent, as Christ says:
verily I say unto you, that men shall make accounte for every idle word in the
day of judgment. Also if this be done in ye green wood, what shall be done in
the dry? 1. Peter, 4. verse 17, 18. To be short, god is so righteous; and so
great an evil is sin, yt even when he does forgive sins, he does not yet
allow them: and that he may show this thing he does chastise them, in those
that are converted, yea, after the forgiveness thereof with most sharp
scourges, as in David, yea, after God had spoken unto him by Nathan the
Prophet: The lord has taken from thee thy sins: We see by how sharp whips he
declared that he did not allow ye sin of David, 2. Sam. 12. ver. 11.12.13. also
2. Sam. cap. 24 verse. 10.12. Fourthly by setting forth the execution of the
righteousness and judgment of God, against ye impenitent and unbelieving. First
in ye examples which he has exercised and daily does exercise: as well in the
wringing terrors of conscience, wherewith the vnrepe^tant are afflicted: as also
in those same temporal punishments which although they be great, yet are the
only signs of ye wrath of God to come, far greater, yea most great. For
like as ye patience and gentleness of God is greater then ye gentleness of al
creatures: so also his wrath does exceed ye wrath of al creatures. Secondly by
setting before their eyes ye day of this wrath or the everlasting judgment: as
the scripture does often times set the same as well before the eyes of ye
faithful as of the unfaithful. By these and the like reasons and means taken
out of the word of god Christ the king does enge^der in ye ministry of ye
word through his spirit, in the^ who^ he has first called, that same study of
reco^ciling themselves unto God: and in them which are effectually called and
reconciled, he preserves and increases that same study of holding their
reconciliation, and brings to pass that they greatly esteem so great grace
of reconciliation: and truly so much they esteem it, yt denying them selves and
all ungodliness, they wholly give themselves through faith unto him, who with so
great a price has redeemed them from so many evils.

After that Christ the King and Priest of his Church has engendered in those
whom he calls, the study of reconciling themselves unto God he offers, and
gives also unto them that same reconciliation and that in the form of a
covenant, the sum whereof is contained in the articles of the faith.
NOw as I have said already, that same study of reconciling themselves to
God, in those that are called of Christ the King being wrought, he offers and
gives to them reconciliation it self, and that in the form of a free
covenant, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 18.19.20.21. and chap. 6. verse. 15.16.17.18. Now
the reconciliation of man with God, or rather this matter of salvation in
saving by his merit and power the elect, is therefore called a covenant, and
also set forth unto us in form of a covenant from God, because there is no
apter form or meeter way of doing it, to make mutual agreement between the
parties and to ye establishing of faith. For even like as men after great
enimities are then at length pacified in their minds, when they have bound
themselves by promises and by an oath each one to other, to embrace peace; so
also God, that our consciences might be quiet, has not spared of his mere
goodness even by an oath and covenant to bind himself unto us that are
repentant and believe in him; and to seal the same with the seal of holy
baptism, yt he might adopt us freely to be his children, that he might cleanse
us through his blood from all sin, and being endowed with the holy ghost
might renew us to everlasting life; yea and that freely, that we again being
bound, unto the faith and worship of this true God the son and the holy
Ghost, we might set forth and advance this great goodness of his. Moreover
even like as there are wont to be propounded, in men's couenaunts certain
heads, which they call articles, by which peace is begun and put in
practice, both sides being sworn: so also that same divine covenant, wherein
God does reconcile us unto himself for ever, is contained in certain heads
or articles, which are the foundations of this holy reconciliation and where in
God will have eternal peace between him self and all believers to be
ratified. Now God had promised by Jeremy the Prophet that he would strike a
new covenant with us, not according to that covenant which he had made with
our fathers when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, because they had
made that covenant void: but that this should be the covenant; that he would
give the law in the midst of us, and write the same in our hearts, and that
he would be our God, and we should be his pepple, and that we should know him,
because he is merciful unto our sins and will remember our iniquities no
more. Jeremy, 31, Esai. 53.54. Ozee. 2. This covenant the Lord has made with
us through faith in Christ: and therefore we must know that the articles of our
faith, contain ye sum and as it were ye heads of that covenant which
stands in faith between God and us.

That the covenant between God and us is free and undeserved, and stands only
in faith: through which after that he has put out the remembrance of our
sins, he renueth the believers to his own image.
THat this covenant between God and us is free and undeserved, and leans
upon no condition of our worthiness or merits, but stands by faith alone,
hence it may easily appear. For in respect of God he properly makes the
covenant with us, and he seals in our hearts by his holy spirit, that same
promise of undeserved reconciliation offered unto us in the Gospel. Titus 3.
ver. 5.6.7. 2. Tim 1. ver. 9. Gal. 3. ver. 6.28.29. In respect of v^ this
covenant is received only by faith, whiles that freely and undeservedly the
holy Ghost is given unto us, who brings to pass that both we will and are
able to believe the free promise of reconciliation through Christ. Ephesians 1. Joel.
2. Esaias. 59. If you respect the mediator verily our heavenly father has
received o^ him the price of reconciliation, and we have satisfied in him:
notwithstanding because the mediator is freely given unto us, and imputes also
freely this merit unto us, even by this reason also the covenant is free. And
so this whole covenant is merely free, and consists in faith alone: the
oblation of promise of grace in Christ, and also the giving of Christ himself
in respect of God is free: ye receiving on our part is also free, because it is
the work of God in us, whereby he seals his promise in our hearts, that
being driven we should work, that is to say, that being made believers by him
we might believe. Ephe. 2. ver. 1.5.6.7.8.9.10. All these things are plainly
comprehended in that same promise of the new covenant, which even now I brought
out of the 31. Chapter of Jeremy. Now the end why God would have this same
covenant to be free by all means, is that the glory of God might return to
him alone: the which drift of his counsel he has expressed in plain words
in the same Prophet. Chap. 33. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and
an honor before all the nations of the earth which shall hear all the good
that I do unto them, etc. And to the Ephe. Chap. 1 ver. 5.6. An other end is
the peace of our consciences. Romans Chap. 4. For if they which are of the law
are heirs: faith is become void, and the promise is made of none effect, etc.
Since therefore God says that this whole covenant is free and undeserved, and
that it consists in the knowledge of him, or rather by faith: through which
also after that he has abolished the remembrance of our sins, he will
renew our hearts; which he calls to write his laws in our hearts: it is
plain and evident that in the articles of our faith, such a faith and
knowledge of God is set forth unto us, which embraces the free remission of
sins in Christ, and also thereof engenders the instauration or renewing of
man according to the image of God. Therefore in the meditation of the articles
of our faith we must especially turn our eyes to these two points.

The Articles of faith or that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed.
I Believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ, his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified, dead, and buried:
he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father almighty: from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.

What faith is.
Seeing therefore Christ the king himself in the articles of the Christian
faith, which contain the sum of the Gospel, offreth that same kingdom of
his unto us: and through faith, by the virtue of his spirit does effectually
confederate himself unto us to the end he may reign in us: go to, let us
briefly show what faith is. Faith is to assent unto God, his will being
known, in every word of his, as to the only true and omnipotent God, and so
to give glory to God: and not to consider any thing either in our selves or in
any other of his creatures, that seems to be against him: and in this word,
to behold as the special mark the promise of the Gospel, for that the father
truly offreth himself unto us in Christ, and through his holy spirit freely
justifies us that are engrafted in Christ, and more and more sanctifies us,
and preserves us by the same power, through which Christ was raised from the
dead, whereby he has all things subject to himself, that the hope of
everlasting life being founded in this truth and power, it may be most
certain. This description of faith, first comprehends the whole life of man:
whose singular actions and moments, must needs lean and rest upon faith. For
surely, that which is said to the Hebrews, Without faith it is impossible to
please God, is most true, in all and singular matters that are to be taken in
hand. Romans 14. ver 23. Then after that it sets forth that peculiar grace of
justification offered in Christ, and that restoring to everlasting life, as the
foundation of all believers. Now this same description of faith is specially
taken out of the fourth Chap. to the Romans, from the sixtenth verse, and out
of the first Chapter of the Ephesians, from the 17. verse, to the end of both
the Chapiters. That which is put in the description, of the will of God known,
is therefore done, because Satan is oftentimes wont to faigne another meaning
of the word of God, besides the will of God. Least therefore that faith should
stray from the will of God, we must indeuer, that as the Apostle commands in
the 12. to the Romans, all prophesying or interpretation of the scripture, be
according to the analogy, or rule of faith: least the interpretation fight
with the foundation or with any article of faith. We will show it also more
familiarly after this manner: this is faith, to acknowledge that this is the
unchangeable will of God, and to rest in it, that freely he will give us that
promised salvation by ye Prophets, and that through Christ the same is given in
deed, (as the Articles of our faith witness,) that is, to acknowledge, that
these things which are contained in them, are freely given unto us of God,
according to the testimony of all the Prophets which were from the beginning of
the world, yea, and of Christ himself, and to rest in this constant will of
God, and give this glory to God, that has now already showed his omnipotent
power in performing these promises, fulfilling in deed the most part of the
Articles of our faith: and also as yet does still exercise the same, in the
applying of those benefits: and will certainly show it, in those that remain
yet to be fulfilled in the Articles: neither to consider any thing either in
us, or yet without us in any creature that seems contrary to that same grace
and divine truth promised unto us, and already offered in Christ, and at length
fully to be accomplished.

The partition or division of the Creed.
THere are four principal parts of the Creed. The first contains what we
believe of God the father, who as he has chosen us of his mere mercy, in
Christ before the foundations of the world were laid: Ephe. 1. so there is
set forth in the first part of the Creed the first fountain of the covenant,
or reconciliation: and therewithal is also taught what we must believe of the
creation of all things. The second, what we must believe of Jesus Christ the
son of God: in which part, is comprehended the whole sum of the covenant
and of our reconciliatio^. The third, what of the holy Ghost, who by engrafting
us through faith in Christ, makes us confederates with God, applying unto us
the mercy of the father, and the redemption of the son. The fourth part is
concerning the people, or of the Church with whom God had stricken his
covenant: which part contains ye effects of all the former, and the fruit
of our faith, as well which we enjoy in this life, as also, which we shall
enjoy everlastingly, being fully knitte both body and soul with Jesus Christ
our head.

Rules which shall help both our understanding and faith, in every article of
faith.
THe rules, which we ought always to have before our eyes, as well in ye
expou^ding, as also in the meditating of the Creed, are these. First that a
man's mind know in every of the articles not only the history (which knowledge
alone is not to salvation, forasmuch as the devils have that and do tremble:
James. 2.) but also that the heart it self embrace through true faith the
promise of God, and the performance of the promise in Christ and for Christ,
which lies hid in every of the articles. Acts. 13. verse. 32. and the 39.
Resolve therefore all ye articles into the promises, or into the performance of
them, and so thou shall have in the articles of faith all the kinds of that
wonderful union that we have with the father, with the son Jesus Christ, and
with the holy Ghost, which throughout all the Gospel is promised and given to
the believer. 1. John. 14. and the 15. The second rule; In the applying of the
promise, look upon the counsel of God to wit, that to the son of God a
body and soul was so fashioned and fitted, that those things that were done
in them, were done in the name of all believers: and so done in deed, yt the
obedience, which was offered up to the father in his person, by the counsel and
gift of the father, are as truly thine, as if they had been offered up in thy
soul and body, and yt by the same efficacy, wherethrough that everlasting
word quickened from death that whole mass and glorified it, shall also quicken
and glorify thee. For this is the counsel of God, this is his unchangeable
will, whereupon we may safely lean: now it is made manifest in the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles: to the Hebr, Cap. 10. out of the 40. Psalm.
Wherefore entering into the world he said, Sacrifice and oblatio^ thou would
not, but a body have thou framed unto me, etc The^ I said, Lo I am present
(in the beginning of the book it is written of me) that I should do thy will O
God. And a little after, Through which will we are sanctified, through the
oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once made. Upon this counsel of God also,
leans the reason of the Apostle in the 10. to ye Romans, whilst he says,
the righteousness which is of faith, so he says: Say not in thy heart who
shall ascend into heaven: For this is to fetch Christ out of heaven: or, who
shall go down into the deep? this is to bring Christ from the dead? But
what says he? The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart. This is
that word of faith, which we preach, to wit, if thou shall confess the
Lord Jesus with thy mouth: and shall believe in thy heart, that God has raised
him up from the dead, thou shall be safe. For we believe with the heart to
righteousness, but we confess with the mouth to salvation. See the 1. Corinthians. 1. verse. 30. Luke 1. verse. 10. to the Hebr. 2. verse. 14.15. to the
Romans, 5. verse. 12.15.16 17.18. Also 1 Cor. 15. verse. 20.21.23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
verse. 14. and Chapter. 5. verse 3.

I believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.

Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles of the nature of God, and of the
creation of all things.
EXodus, 34. The Lord of Hoastes, The Lord of Hoastes, a mighty, merciful and
gracious God: long suffering, and much in goodness and says: who show mercy
to thowsandes, pardoning iniquity, and defection and sins: before whom the
innocent is not innocent, who recompencest the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, and upon the childrens children, and upon the kinsfolks. Gene.
1. In the beginning God created heaven and earth. Now the earth was desolate
and void: and darkness was upon the utmost face of the depth, and the spirit
of God moved it self upon the face of the waters. Io. 1. In the beginning
was the word, and the word was with God: and that word was God. All things
were made by it, and without it was nothing made that was made. And to the
Colossians the first, and Psalm 104. Thou shall send forth thy spirit, and
they shall be created, and thou shall renew the face of the earth.

The description of God.
GOD is a spiritual substance, everlasting, good, pure, as well of an
incomprehensible glory as of an infinite wisdom and power, of an
unchangeable righteousness, unspeakable mercy and most constant truth, to be
short the only and sovereign happiness, and the father is everlasting, the
son the everlasting image of the father, and the holy ghost proceeding from
both. The nature of God is shortly and diligently expressed in the description
which is in Moses, Exodus 34. The Lord of of Hoastes, the Lord of Hoasts, a
mighty, merciful and gentle God, long suffering and of great mercy and true.
etc.

The profit of this description of God.
THe use of this description is, that the nature of God being known, we should
embrace by true faith, as our only and most sovereign God, and should fear
to offend him: to the end that through true faith and fear, or amendment of
life, he might be glorified of us. For first when we hear that God, who has
promised by an everlasting covenant that he will be a God unto us, is an
understanding, wise, everlasting, good, righteous and merciful God etc; we
conclude very rightly upon it, of the very form of that free covenant: that
he is not only such a one by nature, but also yt he will show himself to be
such a one to us believers; and that by an everlasting covenant, though all
creatures should seem to persuade us to ye contrary. He that knows this
nature of God, of whom he is received into covenant: he has large matter of
trusting in him, and of framing his life by faith, according to the will of
God. Both of these, to wit how the knowledge of God makes to faith and
repentance, and so to the establishing of the kingdom of God in us, we will
make plain out of some of his attributes. So great and so constant is the
truth of God, that one word of the divine truth, passes the truth of all
Angels and men: because the truth of all creatures, depends upon the truth of
God, and has the original from that, and consists in that alone: so that
the truth of god, is the cause and foundation of all truth both in Angels and
men. When therefore we waver or doubt of any matter, why do we not consult,
whether there be not some word of the Lord concerning that matter, whereof we
doubt? which being found, we may give our minds to rest, knowing assuredly, yt
the least title of the truth is more firm, then the whole frame of heaven and
earth. Ieremi 31. Matt. 5. verse. 18. therefore it is said in the second book
of the Kings, Cap. 10. verse. 10. Know you now, that there shall not fall
any thing of the word of the Lord to the ground. Also his infinite power ought
to encourage us, to trust in him: in him I say, that mighty God, who calls
those things which are not as if they were. To. 4. Like as also, that same
Apostle further speaks of the faith of Abraham: He doubted not of the promise
of God through unbelief, but was made strong in faith, giving glory to God:
Being fully assured that he which had promised, he also was able to perform
it. And surely how greatly distrust displeases God, as which defraudeth him of
his glory and how greatly the holiest men that are ought to beware of it, the
Lord teaches Number. 20. And the Lord of Hoastes said unto Moses and Aaron,
Forasmuch as ye have not believed me, that you might sanctify me before the
sons of Israel, therefore you shall not lead this congregation into the land
which I have given them. And in the 32. of Deuteronomy. 50.51.52. Now he is not only
able to do that, which he will, (as in very deed he wills that thing which
he has promised in his word:) but also in that which he wills not, he
abides no resistance, which is as it were the other part of the omnipotency
of God. Isai. 43. There is none that can take out of my hand: And if I do any
thing, who shall let it? The first is therefore, that in every thing we have
the will of God known out of his word, which being once known, let us not
doubt, but yt Gods truth is most constant, and altogether unchangeable. Moreover
let our minds mount up to ye almighty nature of God, who mightily performs
in deed whatsoever he will, neither abides any resistance Ioh. 10. I give
euerlastnig life to my sheep, neither shall they perish for ever: neither shall
any man take them out of my hand. My father who has given the^ unto me, is
greater then all, neither can any man snatch them out of the hand of my father.
I and the father are one. Here thou have both the most constant truth of the
word of Christ, and also his omnipotency. And so thou must trust: that God
offers himself unto us in Christ, a true and almighty God, in an
everlasting covenant. And further, should not this selfsame nature of God,
wherein he is true and almighty, prick us forward to amendment, and to lead
a life through faith according to his will? For whilst we hear* that his
truth is one and unchangeable, let us know for a suertie, that he will not for
ever approve sins, which he has witnessed to detect by his word. Psalm. 5.
Moreover, that it is more possible that heaven and earth should be ouerthrown,
then that those punishments should not fall out, which he has threatened in
his word, unless we turn from our sins. Mat. 5. verse. 18. For the nature of
God must be changed, if his truth were subject to change. And the same reason
is of his omnipotency. For who would not wholly addict himself unto him, and
altogether depend upon his beck, and frame all things to his will, in whose
hand is life and death, who has power to cast both body and soul into
everlasting fire? As Christ says, Fear not those which kill the body, but can
do nothing against the soul: I say unto you, whom you must fear, even him
that has power to cast both body and soul into hell fire. The infinite
wisdom of God avails much for the establishing of our trust in him, as for
example thus: that faith may overcome whatsoever is objected of the flesh and
of sin against the word and works of God, and that it may at once break all
the broils and assaults of distrustes, and give it self to rest: it must
needs be that the mind ascend up to that infinitenes of the wisdom and
understanding of God, and that it safely rest in that, as doing all things
wisely and well, and be fully persuaded that God is the governor of the world,
and not men: and that he does so govern all things, that we neither can nor
ought to wish them wiselier or better done, then they are or may be done of
God. Paul teaches us to rest in that same infinite wisdom of God, in the 11.
to the Romans, O the depth, says he, of the riches, as well of the wisdom, as
of the knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been of
counsel with him? or who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed
again? for of him, by him, and in him are all things, to him be glory
worlds without end Amen. And Isai in the 40. chapter, verse. 13.14. and in the
104. Psalm. verse. 24. O Lord of hoastes how are thy works multiplied? Thou have
done all things in wisdom. And Psalm. 147. verse. 5. Our Lord is great and
mighty in strength, there is no number of his understanding. When therefore we
hear our most wise, yea, our only wise God, who has promised that he will
show himself such a wise God toward us; who should not receive his words
with high reverence, and have a contented mind in all, and those most daily
works of his providence as done most wisely, an so rest in his wisdom? The
which divine wisdom the Apostle wondering at, does therewithal praise it. To
the only wise God, be glory, Romans cap. 16. verse. 37. Therefore also the
wisdom of God does encourage us to confidence: seeing he has promised to show
himself such a one toward us. Also who knowing his wisdom does not
according to his word, as the brief rule of wisdom, frame his his life? Psalm.
119. Now after that we have by faith laid hold upon the omnipotency and
wisdom of God in all his works, having utterly denied our own wisdom of the
flesh, Romans 8. it follows that he be acknowledged also to be good. Now his
goodness is considered, as well in all effects, as in forgiving of sins.
Concerning the first, whatsoever is done of God, it is good, and thou must
acknowledge it as very good. For how can any other thing but good proceed from
him in whom there is nothing but good? Therefore David gravely and shortly
says, Iehoua is good to all, and his mercy is over all his works. Psalm. 145.
Thou have a singular use and practice of this doctrine in the 107. Psalm.
Furthermore his goodness and mercy, whereby amongst the rest of his works he
takes away iniquity and wickedness, ought so to rear up our faith, that if
the flesh fear, lest he should cast us off, for our iniquity and wickedness,
faith ought fully to be resolved, that this is the nature of God, as Moses
says, to take iniquity and sins, to wit from the believers. Now the
nature of God is unchangeable, wherefore undoubtedly he would take them from
us, so that we believe. This nature of God shines in the face of Christ, when
he says, Be of good cheer my son: Thy sins be forgiven thee. Who
therefore would not trust in him? who also having heard of this so great
goodness, would go on willingly and wittingly to offend him? As the Apostle
says in the 2. to the Romans verse. 4.5. Do thou despise the riches of his
goodness, long sufferance and gentleness, not knowing that his goodness does
provoke thee to repentance? But thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot
repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and of the just
declaration of the righteous judgment of God? Who also having heard of his
mercy, does not fear to do any man wrong, or unjustly to oppress his
neighbor? like as in very deed by this his nature, yt he is merciful, he
turns us away from all hardness of heart, and inhumanitie. Exo. 22.26.27. If
thou take the garment of thy neighbor for a pledge (says he) before the sun
go down, thou shall restore it again unto him, because it is his only
covering, it is his garment to cover his skin, in which he should sleep. And
when he shall cry unto me to hear him, I will hear him: because I am
merciful. Yea also the righteousness of God, does so shine in the face of his
Christ, that also the most just nature of God expressed in the law, may
comfort us in Christ, and confirm our hope, which otherwise in our selves may
worthily terrify us. For seeing that God is most righteous, and has once
called into judgment the sins of all believers, and has punished them in
his son, in the full rigor of his justice; the most righteous nature of God
will not bear, that the same debte once perfectly paid and cleansed, should be
twice or again repaide unto him. Again, forasmuch as God is so righteous,
that an innocent before him is not innocent, that is, he is such an exact
examiner of sins, that even the most righteous in men's judgment, and such as
are not guilty of any thing in them selves, 1. Cor. 4. verse. 3. before him are
not innocent: but does visit the sins of the fathers upon the childrens
children to the third and fourth generation: yea and would rather that his
righteousness should be satisfied in his only begotten son, then that he
would let sins escape unpunished: should not we earnestly repent, thinking
upon the saying of Christ, If this be done in the green wood, what shall be
done in the dry? The righteous nature of God also, does so draw us back^ from
all wrong and violence, to the love of our neighbor, as if we think that God
has the same nature, that cannot suffer unpunished, that thy neighbor should
be oppressed, no more then thou could suffer that any should tread thy
child under his feet, thou behoulding it, Psalm. 103. The Lord of Hoastes
showing mercies and judgments to all those that are oppressed. See the grave
testimonies that are written, concerning this matter, 1. Cor. 6.7.8.9.11. and
the first These. 4.6.7.8. The everlasting nature of God also does confirm our
faith. For seeing yt such a one has promised in covenant to be our God, who is
everlasting, we rightly gather thereof, that not only our souls shall live in
God, but also that our bodies shall be raised up to life: that the everlasting
God, may be indeed their God. And surely upon this foundation leans that
reason of Christ, whereby he proves against the Saduces out of the works of
the covenant, the resurrection of the dead. Matt. 22. verse. 32. Neither that
only, but also concerning this life, of that everlasting nature of God, does a
faithful man gather new courage and strength, Isai. 40. verse. 27.29.31. And
psalm. 103. verse. 5. Also that same everlasting nature of God ought to stir us
up to repentance, 1. pet. verse. 22.23.24.25. So ought also the holiness of God,
which is joined with his eternity. 1. Pet. 1. verse. 14.15.16.17.18. also, 1
John. 3. verse. 3.

I believe in God the father, is his only begotten son, and in the holy
Ghost. Certain testimonies of the divinity of the son, according to those
things that are attributed unto him in the description of God, and order of the
articles of faith.
IT follows that we show, that God has so manifested himself in his word,
that these three persons, the father, the son and the holy Ghost, be that one
only true God, in whom we profess to believe in the Creed, when we say: We
believe in God the father, and in his only begotten son, and in the holy
Ghost. Now a person or (...), is a singular thing, understanding, willing,
that cannot be imparted, or communicated to another, not vpholden of another,
nor part of an other. That God the father who has made heaven and earth, is so
manifest, that even the vngodliest heretics denying the divinity of the
son and holy Ghost, dare not yet deny the divinity of the father. That the
son is a thing by himself subsisting, understanding, willing etc. and by
nature God: although to the Citizens of the kingdom of Christ, it is plain
and at hand throughout the holy scripture: yet it is pr^^^ble that their
memory ever and anon (...) refreshed with some clear and divine testimonies.
Now we will allege first some testimonies according to the order of those
things which are attributed unto God, which we have set down in the
description: then afterward according to the course and order of the articles
of the faith.

(...)
The word or ye Son is a spiritual substance. To ye Romans 1. verse. 3. and 4.
Heb. 9. ver. 14. and 1. Pet. 3. verse. 18.19. Io. 14. Ye believe in God, believe
also in me, he is eternal and incomprehensible as well in glory as in
wisdom: Io, 17. verse. 5. Glorify me thou father, with thy own self, with
the glory which I had with thee before the world was. And Proverbs 8. Also
Apocalip. 1. verse. 8. Hebr. 7. verse. 3. Good, pure, and undefiled. Io. 10.
verse. 11. Isay. 40. verses 9.10.11. Isay. 6. Holy, holy, holy, the mighty Lord
of hoastes: all the earth is full of his glory. These things does John the
Evangelist interpret of Christ. Cap. 12 verse. 41. saying, These things said
Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him, to wit of Christ. And Io.
17. verse. 19. He is also of infinite power, for he creates and preserves all
things together with the father and the holy Ghost: Io. 1. In the beginning was
that word, and that word was with God, and that word was God. Creator of heaven
and earth.
Also, All things were made by it, and without it, was made nothing that was
made. verse. 3. And to the Coloss. 1. By the beloved son, through whom we have
redemption were all things created, verse. 16.
which are in heaven and which are in earth, things visible and invisible:
whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers. 17.
All things were created by him and for him: And he is before all things, and
in him all things consist. To the Heb. the first. He has spoken unto us by his
son by who^ he has made ye worlds. Proverb 8. Iehoua possesses me, verses
22. etc.
from the beginning of his way: I had ye chiefty from everlasting, from ye
beginning before ye earth was. When there were no depths was I fashioned,
before there were fou^taines running with water: before ye mountains were, and
before the hills was I brought forth. He had not yet made the earth, and the
streates, and the height of the dust of the world: when he prepared ye heavens,
I was there, etc. And Io. 5. ver. 17.18. My father works hitherto, and I
work. Therefore the Jews sought ye more to kill him: not only because he had
broken yt sabbath: but said also yt God was his father, and made himself
equal with God. To the Philippians the 3. verse. 21. He works miracles by his
own power: to wit, not as one calling upon God, but as one commanding by his
own auctority. Thou have examples Mat. 8. verse. 26. Luke 5. and 7. For he
commands the wind and the sea, and they obey him, and he rebukes the
fearefulnes of his disciples, Mark. 4. verse. 39.41. he gives power also unto
others to work miracles, but by calling upon his name. Mark. 8. Acts. 3. verse.
6.16. and Cap. 4 verse 10. And he is of an immutable righteousness, Ierem. 23.
And this is the name whereby they shall call him, Jehovah, our righteousness,
Of an unspeakable mercy. Titus the 3. verse. 4. and the 6. and Chapter. 2.
verse. 10. and 12. of a most constant truth. Mat. 24. verse. 35. The heaven and
earth shall pass, but my words shall not perish. And the first of John, Full
of grace and truth. Io. 14. verse. 9 That same word, is the only begotten
son of ye father, and ye coeternal image of ye father. His only begotten
son.
Io. 1. We have seen his glory, as ye glory of ye only begotten of God. To
the Hebr. 1. who being the brightness of his glory, (the light from the light)
and very ingraued form of his person of his substance, and bearing up all
things by the word of his power, Our Lord.
etc. And he is the Lord of all creatures, but chiefly of the faithful or of
the Church, Io. 1. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, but the
world knew him not: he came amongst his own, and his own received him not.
Before he came into the world he was a subsisting person, and David's Lord, from
which Christ maintains his divinity in the 22. of Matthew, saying. What
think you of Christ? whose son is he? they say unto him, Dauides: he says
unto them, how then does David in spirit call him Lord? saying: The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit at my right hand, till I make thine enemies, thy footestoole.
If therefore David call him, Lord, how is he his son? Also Luke verse. 1.
verses 16.17.43. and verse. 76.77. And thou child (John Baptist) shall be
called the Prophet of the most high. For thou shall go before the face of the
Lord to prepare his ways, and thou shall give the knowledge of salvation to
his people. Malach. 4. verse. 5. Io. 1. This is he that comes after me that
was before me, etc. Io. 20. verse. 28. Thomas answers, him my Lord and my God.
Acts 16. verse. 31. and Chap. 18. verse. 10. Who was conceived by the holy Ghost.
So Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, that being before that substantial
word, and by himself subsisting, he took our flesh: Philip. 2. who being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but he made
himself of no reputation, taking upon him the form of a seruante. Hebr. 2. He
took not the natures of Angels upon him, but he took the seed of Abraham.
Io. 6. I am that bread of life which came down from heaven. Io. 16. I went out
from ye father, and came into ye world, etc. and 1. Timot. 3. Great is the
mystery of godliness, God is manifest in the flesh. Borne of the virgin Mary.
The Prophets foretold that this man which is borne of the virgin, should
not be a man, in such sort, as should subsist of himself as Peter and Paul:
but the true God, to wit, the second person, bearing and upholding that
human lump, into the unity of the person knitte unto him. Isay 7. Behold a
virgin shall be with child: and shall bring forth a son and thou shall call
his name Immanuell, God with us. And in the 9. A child is borne unto us: A
son is given unto us: and the principality was upon his shoulders, and thou
shall call his name wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, father of
eternity and prince of peace. Ierem. 23. I will rear up to David a righteous
branch, and he shall reign king, and shall prosper. etc. And this is his
name, whereby they shall call him Iehoua our righteousness. Miche. 5. And thou
Bethlehem Euphrata, although thou be amongst the thousands of Iehudah, out of
thee shall there come forth unto me, which shall be the governor of Israel: and
his generations shall be from old, and from the days of euerlastingnes. Coloss.
2. verse 9. In him dwells all fulness of the Godhead bodily. He suffered under
Pontius Pilate.
He confessed before Pontius Pilate under whom he suffered, that his kingdom
was everlasting, and that therefore he came into the world, that he might give
testimony of the truth. Io. 18. verse. 36.37. and Acts 4. verse. 25.26.27.30.
When the same judge judged him, there is fulfilled that prophecy in the 11. of
Zachary, Mat. 27. And they took thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that
was valued, whom they of the children of Israel valued. And they gave them for
the potters field, as the Lord appointed unto me. That which the Lord
foretold of the children of Israel prising him then, when the covenant was to
be taken away, and the people to be forsaken, (which he signified by the
breaking of the staff, which was called the staff of meekenes, or rather the
staff of joy) But in Christ, God manifested in the flesh, this full
disanullance being at hand, yea in all circumstances it was fulfilled by a
wonderful providence. Crucified
Crucified. Zach. 12. verse. 10. They shall look unto him who^ they have
pierced. This Iehoua says of himself; and John says that this was fulfilled
in Christ. Cap. 19. verse. 37. And the 1. Cor. 2. verse. 8. If they had known,
they had not crucified the Lord of glory. Acts. 3 verse. 15. Ye have slain the
prince of life. Dead. Dead.
The Testament was to be confirmed by the death of the Testator. Now the
Testator was God. Hebr. 9. verse. 16.17. And Cap. 8. verse. 8.9. Acts 20. God
has purchased the Church unto himself hy his own blood.

Buried, descended into hell. Oze. 13.14.15. Buried descended into hell.
God says, I will redeem them from the power of hell, I will redeem them
from death, I will be thy death, O death: O hell, I will be thy destruction. This
was partly fulfilled by Christ, and shall partly be fulfilled hereafter, as
the Apostle teaches. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 55.56.57. Therefore Christ is true God,
he rose also by his own power, He rose from death the third day. Romans 1. verse.
4. Io. 2. verse. 19. Destroy you this Temple, and I will rear it up again in
three days. And Cap. 10. verse. 17. and 18. I lay down my life, that I might
take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I
have power to lay it down, and power to take it again.

That he is the true God that ascended into heaven, The third day he rose
again from the dead.
the Apostle plainly teaches in the fourth to the Ephesians, verses 7.8 9. To
every one of us is grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ:
wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, He ascended into heaven.
he led captivity captive. Io. 3. verse. 13. No man ascends up to heaven
(that is to say by his own power: for others ascend being drawene) but he that
has descended from heaven. And Io 6. verse. 36. and verse. 62. Also in the 16.
Cap. verse. 28.

He sits at the right hand of God the father almighty.
He sits at the right hand of God, and is worshipped of Angels and men.
Hebr. 1. To which of the Angels has he ever said, sit at my right hand? In
the same place, all the Angels of God shall worship him. And 1 Pet. 3. verse.
22. to the Ephesians 1. verses 20.22.23. to the Philippians 2. verses 9.10.
wherefore God lifted him up on high and has given him a name, which is above
every name. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in
heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth. And that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the father.
See the first to the Corinth. From thence he shall come to judge both the
quick and the dead.
1. verse. 2. Acts 9. verse, 14. He has power to judge both the quick and the
dead; and so he is privy to all the thoughts, sayings and doings of men, and
not only that, but also he is most just and mighty to execute sentence. 1.
Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will
lighten things that are in darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the
hearts. Io. 5. He has given all judgment to the son, that all may honor
the son, even as they honor the father. Mat. 3. His fan shall be in his
hand, and he shall purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner,
but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. To discern hypocrites
from the faithful is the only work of God: and to gather these into heaven,
and to thrust down the other into everlasting fire is also the only work of
God.

The holy ghost also, in whom we believe, I believe in the holy Ghost.
Christ himself gives, which is a notable testimony of his everlasting
godhead. Ioh. 1. verse. 23. This is he that baptiseth with the holy ghost. Act.
2. compare the 17. verse, I will power out (says God) of my spirit. etc, with
the. 33. verse. He has shed forth this which you now behold and see. John, 16.
verse. 7. and cap. 20. verse. 22.

He has chosen unto himself a catholic or an universal Church, The holy
Catholic Church.
from among all mankind. John. 13.16. I know whom I have chosen, and in the
15. chapter. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that ye go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain. Also in the 10. Chap. verse.
16. and Chap. 11 verse. 52. He was present with this Church even from the
beginning, as the everlasting king and priest thereof. Heb. 13. verse. 8. Christ
yesterday, to day and for ever. Also the, 1.3. verse. 19.20. and the 1. Cor. 10.
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. and Heb. 7. ver. 3.
To this church from the beginning he reuealeth the father and himself. Mat.
11. No man knows the father but the son, and to whom soever the son will
reveal him. Also 1. Pet. 1. verse. 11. He quickens this Church from
everlasting death. Io. 5. verse. 25. He will have his Church holy unto him and
separated from idolaters and from those which profess not faith and
repentance: and therefore he directly opposes the worship of himself in the
Church against the worship of false Gods. 1. Cor. 10 14. My beloved, fly from
idolatry, that I may speak more wisely, Judge you what I say. The cup of
thanksgiving, whereby we give thanks, is it not the communion of the blood
of Christ? And a little after: Verse. 19 20. What therefore do I say? that the
Idol is any thing, or that which is sacrificed to Idols is any thing? yea this
(I say) that that which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and
not to God: and I would not yt you should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot
drink ye cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the
Lords table, and of the table of devils, Do we provoke ye Lord to anger? Are we
stronger then he?

The communion of Saints.
He communicates himself with the Saints, that is, with all the elect, and
he dwells in them howsoever they are thrown out of the world. John, 14 verse.
23. I and the father will come and make our abiding with him. And in the 15
chap. verse 1.4. Also 1. Cor. 12. ver. 12. For as the body is one, and has many
members, and all the members of the body which is one, though they be many, yet
are but one body: so is Christ. Ephe. 3. That Christ may dwell in your hearts
through faith. Gala. 2. verse. 20. Now I live no more, but Christ lives in me.
Also John, 17. verse. 23. and 26. He enters into league and fellowship with the
Church by the ministry of the word and sacraments: and he is present with it
even from the beginning of the world, and remains present unto the end. 1.
Cor. 10. Let us not tempte Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed
of Serpents. Also 1. Pet. 1. verse. 11. Matt. 28. Lo I am with you always to
the end of the world. He instituted baptism the seal of the covenant, and
would have us no less baptized in his name, then in the name of the father and
of the holy ghost: making promise of salvation to them that believe and are
baptized, Matt. 28. verse. 19. Mar. 16. verse. 16. Collo. 2. verse, 9, 10, 11.
Act. 8. verse. 16. and chap. 19 verse. 5. Now it is both blasphemy to be
baptized in the name of any creature, and it is only proper unto God, to make
promises of salvation, and to fulfill them. Wherefore also Christ is he, which
baptiseth with the holy ghost, Mat. 3, verse, 11. Act. 2. verse. 18 32. He
instituted the sacrament of thanksgiving, for the divine worship of himself,
in the place of the Paschall, as he says: Do this in remembrance of me:
Wherefore also Paul calls it the cup of thanksgiving, whereby we give
thanks: And concerning the seal of the new Testament, he speaks thus: This
is the new Testament in my blood. Now it is the same Lord or Hoastes, that had
promised a new Testament, and who confirms the selfsame by his death. Ierem,
31. verse. 33. and Hebrews, 9. verse. 17.

The forgiveness of sins, which he not only deserves by his death, but also
gives by his own power, is also a notable testimony of the Godhead of
Christ. I believe the forgiveness of sins.
For he justifies all his elect, from the beginning of the world. Act. 15.
verse. 10.11. Why tempte ye God, laying a yoke upon the Disciples necks, that
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? but by ye grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we believe to be saved, even as they do. John. 8. verse. 56. Psalm.
110. The Lord has sworn and will not repent him. Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedeck. By, and for this Priest, were sins always
forgiven to the believers. Now yt he does forgive sins by his own power, he
confirms by a miracle. Matt. 9. But that you may know that the son of man
has authority in earth to forgive sins (then he says to the man sick of
the palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house: And in Ioh. 13. he
says, Unless I wash thee, thou shall have no part with me.

The resurrection of the flesh.
The resurrection also of the flesh is a work of Christ, as also the inward
renewing to everlasting life. John. 5. verse. 2. and 28. As my father raises up
the dead and gives them life, so also the son gives life unto whom he will.
And the hour shall come, that all that are in their graves, shall hear his
voice, etc. Also John, 6. verse. 39.40. and in the 11. chap. I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though that he were dead,
he shall live, and whosoever lives and believes in me, he shall not die for
ever. By Christ shall be fulfilled that of Hoseas, Death is swallowed up in
victory. O death, where is thy victory? etc. 1. Cor. 15. verse. 55.57. and in
the same Chapter, verses 45.48.

And Christ himself gives everlasting life. And life everlasting.
Ioh. 1. Life was in him. Ioh. 10. I give eternal life unto my sheep, neither
shall they perish for ever, neither shall any man take them out of my hand, I
and the father are one. All these things which we have rehearsed according to
the order of the description of God, and the articles of the faith, seeing they
are of that sort, as can agree to none but only to God, they plainly convince
Christ to be God by nature.

What danger there is to be feared, if we believe not in the son, as in the
true everlasting God, of the same substance with the father.
THe truth it self shows a most present danger. Ioh. 3. He that believes
in the son, is not judged or condemned, but he that believes not, is judged
already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten son of
God. And in the 8. Chapter, You are from hell, I am from above. You are of
this world, I am not of this world: therefore I have said unto you, that you
shall dye in your sins. Moreover it is said in the 1. Ioh. 2. verse. 23.
Whosoever denies the son, has not the father. Also in the 2. Ioh. verse.
9.10.11. And in Ioh. 16 verse. 3. Therefore the holy Ghost has forewarned us by
the Apostle Peter, that we should take heed of these deceauers. 2. Epist. Cap.
2. There were also false Prophets amongst the people, as also there shall be
false teachers among you, who shall bring in deadly heresies, denying the Lord
who has bought them, hasting unto themselves a swift damnation, and many shall
follow their condemnation. Now the Lord who has bought us, is Jesus Christ,
very God and man, as the scripture witnesses. Acts. 20. God has redeemed his
Church through his blood. Now therefore if so be that any do not believe, that
he is the true God, that has in man's nature shed forth his blood, he denies
the Lord who has bought him.

Testimonies proving the Godheade of the holy Ghost, that he is a person and
the true and everlasting God, and not any motion or thought, or any other thing
that is created.
(...)
THat the holy Ghost is subsisting and God by nature, first of all it is showed
by the creation, Genes. 1. And the spirit of God moved it self upon the face
of the waters. In which words it is attributed to the holy Ghost, that he
wrought together in the creation of all with the father and the son. The
creation is most clearly attributed unto him. Psalm. 104. Send forth thy
spirit, and they shall be created, and thou shall renew the face of the earth.
Therefore the scripture affirms that ye holy Ghost is Jehovah, which is most
plain out of the 6. of Isay, and the 28. of Acts verse. 25. Isay, 6. And he
said (Jehovah of whom before in the same Chapter, Seraphim had cried, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Jehovah, Lord of hoasts) Go and say unto this people, in hearing
hear you, and understand not: and in seeing, see you and know not. These same
words which the Lord spoke. Paul, Acts. 28. says that the holy Ghost spoke,
Very well (says he) spoke the holy Ghost by Isaias the Prophet unto our
fathers, etc. Therefore the holy Ghost is Jehovah. The same is also plain by
other places, Ierem. 31. This is the covenant that I will make with the house
of Israel. After these days says Jehovah, I will give my law into their
heart etc.

Now the Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 10. verse. 15. affirms that these same
words of the lord proceeded from the holy ghost. The holy ghost also himself
witnesses unto us. For after he had foreshewed, This is my covenant that I
will make with them, etc. The which also Joel affirms, Cap. 2. whom Peter
also cites and expounds, that he may show them as plain effects of the
holy Ghost which are altogether belonging to the power of the godhead: I will,
says Jehovah power out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
daughters shall prophecy.

And these things which are alleged now, to show that the holy Ghost is God
the creator: by them also is showed that he is an understanding essence,
everlasting, good, righteous, merciful, most free, of an infinite power and
most constant truth: nevertheless let us yet see also certain testimonies
severally concerning those things that are attributed unto him: which as they
only agree unto God, so they plainly prove the holy Ghost to be very God.

That the holy Ghost is an understanding essence, everlasting, and which gives
understanding, it plainly appears out of the 61. of Esai: The spirit of the
Lord Jehovah is upon me, for that Jehovah has anointed me: to preach unto the
mild he has sent me. Luke 4. Christ teaches that he is he, upon who^ is the
spirit of Jehovah, for that he anointed him. But to anoint inwardly, as Christ
properly is anointed, and by his own power to send to preach glad tidinges,
and to give power to preach glad tidinges aright, is a work of a person truly
subsisting, understanding, and of the everlasting God. Also it appears by his
effects which are rekoned up in the 5. to the Galathians, that he is also
good, just, pure, merciful, most free, and in deed as God communicating his
gifts unto other. The fruits of the spirit is love, joy, peace, gentleness,
benignity, goodness, faith, softness of spirit, and temperance. And surely
the same Apostle teaches that the holy Ghost is the worker of these, and
therefore God. 1. Cor. 12. There are diversity of gifts, but the same
spirit. And there are diversity of administrations, but God is the same that
works all in all. But the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man
to profitte withal. For to one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom:
and to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit. And a little after,
But all these things works one and the same spirit, distributing to every
man severally as he will. Lo he had said before: There are diversity of
administrations, but God is the same that works all in all: afterward
showing that the same holy spirit is God himself, he says: All these things
works one and the same spirit, distributing to every man severally as he
will. That he is true, and that as God looking into the hearts, and trying the
thoughts, it is taught in the 5. of the Acts. Peter said, Ananias, why has
Satan filled thy heart, that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? and by
and by he adds, Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. And that he
proceeds from the father and the son, not as a created motion or moving,
but as a person existing, understanding, and of the same essence with the
father and the son, Christ teaches in Ioh. Cap. 14. verse. 26. Now that same
holy spirit the comforter, whom the father shall send in my name, he shall
teach you all things, and shall put all these things into your mind which I
have said unto you. But this belongs only to God 1. Cor. 2. verse. 10.11.12.
He justifies and sanctifies the Church as well as the son: 1. Cor. 1.6. 1.
Pet. 1. and renueth it to everlasting life. Ioh. 3. and baptiseth into the same
body. 1. Cor. 12. He dwells in the believers, and raises them up from the
dead. Romans 8. If his spirit who has raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you, he will also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit dwelling in you.
And verily he dwells in us, as in his own temple. Therefore the holy Ghost
must necessarily be the true God. 1. Cor. 3. verse. 16. Do you not know that
you are the temple of God, and that the sptrite of God does dwell in you? etc.
Now in the 2. Cor. cap. 6. he says, Ye are the temple of the living God, as
God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk there. etc.

Out of all which it is understood that the holy ghost is the true and
everlasting God.

What danger there is, if we believe not in the holy ghost.
IF any believe not in the holy Ghost, he neither believes in the father nor
in the son, and so manifestly believes not in God: forasmuch as the father
and the son cannot be known and be believed of us, unless the holy ghost
reveal it, who proceeds from the father and the son, and is of the same
essence with both. 1. Io. 4. ver. 14. So therefore we must determine: that if
any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Romans 8. But if any
know not the holy Ghost, neither also has he it. John, 14. The world can not
receive the holy Ghost, because it sees it not, neither knows it. Therefore
he that knows not the holy ghost, he is not of Christ. But you know him
(says Christ) because he abides with you, and shall be in you.

That the father, the son, and the holy ghost are three distinct persons, and
yet that they are one and the same substance.
THerefore those former being dispatched, to wit that the father, the son
and the holy ghost, are things subsisting of themselves, understanding, etc.
it follows also that we teach that they are inco^municable, or rather
distinct, Gene. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, and
the spirit of God moved it self upon the face of the waters, And God said,
Let there be a light, and the light was made. Mat. 3. The trinity of the
persons is plainly described, to wit the son clad in man's nature and
baptized, then ye holighost in a bodily form as it were a dove descending
down from heaven, and abiding upon the son: Lastly ye father pronou^cing
with a clear voice out of heaven, This is my beloved son in who^ I am well
pleased. Also, Mat. 28. ver. 19. Ioh. 8. verse. 16, 17, 18. Also cap. 14 Now I
will ask the father, and he will give you another comforter, that he may
remain with you for ever. And, 15.26. But when that comforter shall come, whom
I will send unto you from the father, that spirit of truth who proceeds from
the father, he shall witness of me. Also, cap. 16. verse. 7. Further that these
three persons, are one divine essence, these places witness, Deuteronomy 6. Hear
Israel, Thy Lord thy God is one God. And 32. See, I; am one and there is no
other God besides me. Psalm. 18. Who is God besides the the Lord? And who is God
besides our God? 2. King. 5. I know for a suertie (says Naaman Syrus) that
there is no other God in all the earth, but only in Israel. Isai. 42.43.45,
and 48. John, 10. I and the father are one. And the 14. Believe me, that I am
in the father, and the father in me. Esai. 6. Seraphin cried Holy, Holy, Holy,
the Lord of Hoastes. The voice Holy thrice repeated, sets forth the
Trinity of persons: and the word Jehovah, the unity of the essence: Matt. 28.
Going forth, Teach ye all nations, baptising them in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy ghost. It is very certain that we are
baptized into the faith and worship of one God: But that there is mention made
of three, to wit of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost: in the
selfsame is noted the Trinity of persons, in the unity of substance. 1. Cor.
7. verse. 11. 1. John, 5. There are three which bear witness in heaven, the
father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one. Now whatsoever
things have been spoken before of the Godhead of the son, and of the holy
ghost, they do also prove the same thing, to wit that these three persons
are one everlasting God. For neither the father, were an everlasting father,
unless he had a son from everlasting, and coessentiall, or of the same
substance with him: neither were the Son the only begotten son of the
Father, unless he were of the same substance with him: neither were the holy
ghost the spirit of the father and son, proceeding from both, unless it
were coessentiall with the father and the son.

What fruit we receive by this, that we know and believe the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the son and the holy ghost, to be the only true and
eternal God: and that there is no other God.
FIrst of all, forasmuch as this is the true felicity, that we should know the
true God, because God does communicate himself unto us through the knowledge
of himself: and forasmuch as our bodies and souls, were created and redeemed
with a great price to this purpose, that they might be the temples of the
living God in which he might be praised: we know that this is truly and indeed
fulfilled in us, through the knowledge of the true God, of the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, as Christ promises, John 14.16. I will ask the
father, and he shall give unto you another comforter, that he may dwell with
you for ever, to wit the spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither has known him: But you know him, because
he abides with you and shall be in you. Also ver. 23. The father and I will
come and make our abiding with him. 1. Ioh. 1. ver. 3. 1. Cor. 6. ver. 19.20.
Secondly it is profitable and necessary that in our calling upon God, we
should think upon what god we call, to wit, upon that same true God, with whom
we have stricken and entered into a covenant of faith, and who has witnessed in
an everlasting league that he will be a God unto us, and which he has sealed
unto us by the seal of baptism, that so we might separate our invocation,
from the invocation of Ethnickes, Turks, and such like: who call upon those
Gods that are no gods, but are devised of the father of all living. For God
cannot tolerate at any hand that there should be any fellowship with his
confederates, in the invocation and worship of false gods: the which thing the
holy ghost plainly pronounces, 2. Cor. 6. verse. 14, 15. Now the same Apostle
yet further sets before our eyes, the greatness of the danger, unless
through true obedience of faith we cleave unto the true God, whose
confederates we are, and altogether abstain from al idolatrous worship or
invocation, 1. Cor. 10. That which the gentiles offer, they offer to devils and
not to God. Now I would not that ye should be partakers with devils. Ye cannot
drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of devils: Ye cannot be partakers
of the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils. For there follows after
ye fellowship with the devils table, fellowship also in everlasting pains.
Apoca. 14. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. Luke 11. ver. 49, 50, 51, 52.

In God the father.
BY the name of the father, we are put in mind of that same most straight
covenant confirmed between God and us, in Christ his only son, and of his
unchangeable love toward us. John, 17. O holy father, keep them through thy
name, whom thou have given me, that they may be one, even as we are one.
Also, That the world may know that I was sent from thee, and that thou love
them even as thou have loved me.

For albeit he be named father, in respect of his coeternall son: yet we
rightly gather thereof, that he is also in a free and undeserved favor our
father, because he has promised in his son, that he will become such a one
unto us, and has performed it in deed, when he gave his only begotten son
to be our brother, and made us in his son, reconciled unto him self his
members, and so adopted us into his children. Ephe. 1. verse. 5. John, 1. ver.
12 Which thing also (having wrought that same full reconciliation) Christ
witnesses, John, 20. I ascend unto my father, and to your father; to my God
and to your God. Wherefore the true Citizens of the kingdom of Christ have God
for their father embracing them with the same love, wherewith he imbraceth his
only begotten son. Ephesians. 1. verse. 6. 1. John, verse. 3, 12.

Almighty.
I Believe that I am entered into league with almighty God, who also by his
omnipotency works what soever he will in all ye world, and whatsoever things
he will not or has not decreed, he hinders, co^foundeth and scatereth the^;
so as it is impossible yt they should be done. For even like as he is
almighty, in bringing that to pass that he will, so in yt that he will not, he
abides no resistance, which is as it were the other part of his divine power.
Ps. 135. ver. 6, 7.14. Esai. 43.13. and 8. ver. 10. and 46.10. and 19.3.11.12
14. Ioh, 10. verse. 29.30. Now let this omnipotency be always in sight to ye
confederates or rather faithful citizens of the kingdom of God, even as the
Lord from the very beginning has set the same before the eyes of Abraham the
father of believers in his covenant: I am God almighty, and before in the 15.
Chapter, Fear not Abraham, I will be thy shield: Therefore I must not
consider any thing whatsoever seems to be against the divine promises, either
in my self or in all creatures, but I must give praise to the omnipotent power
of God, and must chearefully follow God whither he calls. Romans
4.17.18.19.20.21. Heb. 11.17.19.

Creator of heaven and earth.
THese words make very much for the confirmation of our faith in God almighty.
For first whiles we have a covenant with the creator, who gives substance and
being to all things; we believe that we have a sure help in him against all
creatures, because it is as easy for the creator to destroy them and bring them
to nothing, as it was once easy for him to create them of nothing. Genes. 1.
Psalm. 91. and 104. Secondly forasmuch as the creator with whom we are in
league, does give moving and all things else unto his creatures, so that they
can do nothing but as they are driven of the creator, we must constantly hold
that whatsoever things are sent upon us by the creatures, that they are sent
of God, yea and that for our good, and further in respect of the constant and
everlasting league that we have with the creator, and so consequently with all
creatures, which thing is contained in this article of our faith, and is offered
and described unto us by the Prophet Osee in his 2. Chapter, even to the end
of it. Thirdly, the consideration also of the works of God, does make so for
the confirmation of our faith, whiles that we know that we have league not
with an unknown God, but with him who daily offreth himself unto us to be
felt of us. Acts. 17. As also David says in the Psalms: Taste and see how good
the Lord is. Therefore all ye creatures which we use daily, are so many
testimonies unto us of Gods omnipotency, wisdom, and goodness toward us.

Five chief points of the doctrine of Gods providence.
BEcause we have said that that same omnipotency of God, is not an idle, but a
working and an effectual omnipotency, which continually shows it self in
the conservation and governance of the things which are created; it follows
that we set out that same most profitable doctrine of Gods providence and of
the fruits thereof. Now there are five special points to be marked of every
one that is in league with God for ye obtaining of that same true knowledge of
Gods providence, and sure establishing of the confidence and faith of the heart.

The first point of doctrine concerning Gods providence.
FIrst of all let every faithful man, that is in league with God, undoubtedly
determine with himself, that God by the self same omnipotency, whereby he
has created all things, does also preserve and continue the same, and by his
wonderful providence does govern them. Heb. 1. verses 10.11.12. Coloss. 1.16.
And that not only by some universal reason and motion, but also by a
particular and special, yea which stretches it self even to the least
sparrowes and to the most contemptible hairs of our heads, yea further even
to the direction of lottes, so that all things are done by the dispensation and
appointment of God, and fall not out at adventure or by chance: and therefore
he must have the sight of his mind always bent upon God with who^ he is in
league as the chief cause of all things. Testimonies, Exodus 21, verse. 13 He
that has not lien in wait for him, but the Lord has appointed him into his
hands: Proverbs. Chap. 16. verse. 33. Lottes are cast into the lap, and all
the judgment thereof depends wholly upon the Lord. Act. 1 26. Iam. 4.13.14.15.
Go to now ye that say, to day and to morrow we will go into such a city, and
let us continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain, who know not
what shall come to pass to morrow. For what is your life? It is even a
vapoure that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away. And
therefore ye ought to say, and if the Lord will, and we live, we will do
this or that. Matt. 10.29. Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one
of them falls not on the ground without your father: And the hairs of your
head also are numbered? Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value then many
sparrowes. Also Deutero. 28. Ierem. 10, 23. Proverb. 20. Acts 14. Gene. 25.
Joseph says, Gene. 45.5.
It was not you that sold me into Egypt, but I was sent before you by the will
of God, that I might preserve your life. Joseph knew that he was not sold by
chance, but by the counsel of God, so that he says that he was sent thither
by the will of God, in which also he rests. Job busieth not himself with
complaints against the Chaldeans; but he says, Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Is God therefore the author of sin?
GOd forbid. For God so governs all things by his providence, yt in mean
time he continues free from all sin: first because he puts not malice
into man, but the same is of the devil. John, 8. Although God use the same as
an instrument to the setting forth of his glory. Secondly because all actions
are discerned by their ends: God in all actions has an end agreeable with his
unchangeable and everlasting righteousness. Now men whiles they err from the
mind of God, and from his righteousness revealed in his word, they sin. The
brethren of Joseph have an other end then God. You, says Joseph, Genesis 50.20.
thought evil against me, but God disposed it to good, that he might bring to
pass as it is at this day, and save much people alive. The devil in afflicting
Job, has this end, yt he may cause him to blaspheme God, Job. 1.
and draw Job to destruction. The Chaldeans also have their scope, that they
may wax rich by robbery. But God in all this business so deals as he may
try Jobs faith and patience, 2 Samuel 16.12.
and manifest his own glory, and at length deliver him with Satan's
confusion. So David acknowledges God to deal rightly and justly by Simey, as
he says: Suffer him, for God has commanded him to curse me: When as
notwithstanding the same David pronounces of the same deed that Simey sinned
grievously. 1. King. 2.8. And Simey also confesses the same thing. 2. Sam.
19.19. Because forsooth God used an evil instrument well, to humble David to
the end he might give to God the praise of righteousness and mercy: but Simey
himself had an end and purpose quite contrary from the mind and law of
God. And therefore forasmuch as there is fault in the instrument, at length by
the wonderful providence and just judgment of God he is drawn to punishment.
1. King. 2.36.44. Wherefore al things are so done by the providence of God,
that he in mean time continues free from all sin; which is proper alone to
the devil and to the corrupt nature of man.

Arguments taken out of the new Testament, whereby it is plainly showed that
God does so work, that he remains void of sin.
THe passion of Christ is a notable doctrine of this thing. For there were the
Pharisees, Judas, Pilate, yea and God himself not only permitting but also
working in it and striking his son. Esai, 53. verse. 5 6.7. The Lord cast the
iniquities of us all upon him, and the Lord would bruise him and afflict him.
Also Acts 4. verse. 27.28. Herod and Pontius Pilate with the gentiles and people
of Israel, are indeed gathered together against thy holy son Jesus whom thou
have anointed, that they might do those things, which thy hand and counsel
had before determined to be done. Every one had their diverse ends; God had
this end, that mankind should not perish: Judas that he might gain by
betraying him: the Pharisees together with Caiphas the high priest that they
might provide for their own glory; which they saw to be weakened and shaken
of Christ, and also that the Romans might not come and utterly destroy their
nation, and therefore that it was much better that one should die for the
people: (whereas notwithstanding the high priest of that year unwittingly and
thinking a quite contrary thing, prophesied of the end which God had
determined with himself:) Pilate that he might not incur the displeasure of
Caesar, which the Pharisees threatened. etc. Who will say here that God sinned in
giving his son to the death, in punishing our sins with extreme torments,
both in the soul and body of his son; offering himself thereunto of his
own accord for mankind? Who also will say that Judas, Caiphas, the Pharisees
and Pilate sinned not in killing Christ, whom they knew to have committed
nothing worthy of death, albeit they did not any thing that first, the hand and
counsel of God had determined? Because in doing this they regarded not, nor
set before their eyes that same scope and purpose of God, but had other ends,
altogether strange from the mind and will of God revealed.

The second point of doctrine concerning the providence of God.
WE must not only determine that all things are done by the dispensation and
appointment of God, but also that al and singular things are done for our
good: and therefore thou shall be sure, that every thing that comes to
pass shall be healthful unto thee. First of all because he has bound himself
unto thee (although unworthy) in Christ, whiles he has promised. Now there are
notable promises set forth in the 91. Psalm: He that dwells in the help of
the most highest, etc. Also in Esaias the 49. Will a woman so forget her infant
that she will not have compassion upon the son of her womb? Although she
shall forget it, yet notwithstanding I will not forget thee. Behold I have
written thee in my hands. Zachary, 2. He that touches you, touches the
apple of mine eye, etc. Psalm. 22. and 55. Cast thy care on the Lord, and he
shall nourish thee, neither will he ever suffer the righteous to fleet. 1. Pet.
5. Cast all your care upon God: for he cares for us. Romans 8. We know that to
them which love God, all things shall fall out to their good. Behold these
promises lively painted forth in the creatures, Matthew. 6. For this cause I say
unto you, be not careful for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall
drink: nor for your body, what ye shall put on. For is not the life more worth
than meat, and the body more worth than apparel? Look upon the fowls of the
air, they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barn, and your
heavenly father nourishes them: are not you much better than they? Now which
of you by carcking can add one cubite unto his stature? And why are you
careful for raiment? Learn how the lillies of the feeldes grow, they are not
weary, neither spinne, but I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was
not apparelled as one of these. Now if God so cloth the grass of the field
which is to day, and to morrow is cast into the furnace: will he not cloth
you much more. O ye of little faith? Be ye not therefore careful, saying what
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? Now
because we are fallen from the right of creation: Christ there worthily makes
mention of the father, casting the Ethnickes in the teeth with their distrust
saying: For the gentiles require all these things: But your heavenly father
knows that you have need of all these things. By both which, he calls us
to the free covenant or promises in his son; and in him he establishes our
confidence. In ye second place therefore, look upon ye pledge of all the promises
after this manner: to wit upon his only begotten son, by whom not only
lillies, but all things as well visible as invisible are created, and who yet
vpholdeth and mainteineth them with the word of his power, Heb. 1. Who also is
appointed heir of all things, I say our heavenly father has given this his
son for thee to death, and has freely appointed thee a fellow heir together
with his son through faith. How therefore can it be that any creature should
hurt thee, which without the present operation of the son of God who is thy
pledge, cannot so much as move it self? yea rather how can it be that all
creatures through and for the son, in whom they consist, and of whom they are
governed, and whereof thou art also a fellow heir, should not necessarily be
constrained to serve thee and to work to thy good, yea even then; when they
seem greatliest to be against thee? So Paul looks upon this pledge in the
8. chapter to the Romans: What therefore shall we say to these things, If God
be for us, who shall be against us? Verily he which has not spared his own
son but has delivered him for us all, how should he not also with him,
gratify us with all things?

The third point of doctrine concerning Gods providence.
THou see without thee, partly men and partly also other creatures. Because
therefore thou have to do with both, thou shall not doubt that the providence
of God does govern over both. And first of all, the most high has the
counsels, wills, endeavors, and to be short, all the powers of men, whether
they be good or bad, in his own hand, as well for the mitigating and turning of
their minds unto thee, as also for the brideling of their malice. Of that we
have an example in Gene. 33. where Esau imbraceth Jacob, who notwithstanding
went out against him with a mind altogether deadly. Call also upon the Lord
with the same confidence that Jacob did in the like danger. Also Exodus 3. I will
give this people favor with the Egyptians, and it shall come to pass, that
when ye depart, ye shall not depart empty: of this we have an example in Gene.
35. When they went forth (to wit Jacob and his sons) the fear of God was
upon those Cities which were round about them, so that they did not follow the
sons of Jacob. Moreover the providence of God does so govern over other
creatures, that what so ever can fall out from them to the faithful; being his
confederates, he turns it to their good and salvation. Romans 8.28. Now we know
that all things work together for the best unto them that love God.

The fourth point of doctrine concerning Gods providence.
THe other are creatures which we see not, to wit Angels and devils. Of both
these, let a faithful man so fully persuade himself: First that God uses
Angels themselves as notable and excellent spirits to the ministry and
defense of his confederates, as he has promised, Psalm. 34. and 90. Heb. 1.
Gene. 24. And as for the devils that lie in wait against the salvation of his
elect, albeit he governs them not by his spirit as he does the Angels, yet
notwithstanding he so curbeth them in, by his power, as it were with a bridle
that they can not so much as move themselves, unless so far forth as he
suffers them: yea, and he co^strayneth them, though they resist it, to
perform his will, will they, nil they. Job. 1. Luke 22 Romans 16. 1. Cor. 10.

The fifth point of Doctrine concerning Gods providence.
WE must use the means that God offreth, and they are gifts of his providence,
not for distrust which turns the heart from God, or for confidence in
creatures, but for obedience: that we tempt not God passing the bounds of our
vocation, or despising the means which are instruments of the divine
providence, and prescribing unto him an other mean of helping then yt he will
help us by. Mat. 4. verse 7. When the devil would show the providence of God, to
the end Christ should throw himself down headlong, because God had
commanded his Angels concerning him, that they should bear him up in their
hands, he answers, it is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. And Paul in the Acts. 27. verse. 21. says, O men, ye ought to have obeyed
me, and not to have gone from Creta, and have gained this injury and loss.
Also verse. 30.31.

The first use, or fruit; of that doctrine concerning the providence of God
THe first fruit is the glory of God. For a faithful man will glorify God in all things, as well prosperous as hurtful, from whom, through whom, and to whom,
all things are: and he will undoubtedly persuade himself both morning and
evening, that God shows forth no less power in the preservation and
government of all things, then in the first creation. For verily albeit God
ceased from the creation of all new sorts or kinds on the seventh day: yet
he has not ceased, neither cease he to make singular things daily, neither
does he cease to co^serue and govern al things which are made, and he makes
still, as Christ says, Ioh. 5. My father works hitherto, and I work. Now to
bring forth and fashion all things which grow and spring up daily, by a
present operation: to conserve all creatures, to govern all things yea the
least, to rule and bow all men's wills: add further, to gather the church
daily by the voice of the Gospel, and to raise up the same by the inward voice
of the Son from death everlasting, unto life. John, 5. (All which things
verily he does daily:) is of no less power then once to have created heaven
and earth

Moreover, let us extol and glorify his wisdom, which forasmuch as it is
altogether infinite, let us think daiely that all things that are done or
wrought in the world, are so wisely done of God, as they could not be done
wiselier, Collo. 1. ver. 16. Dani. 4. verse. 22. Esai. 40. verse. 14.15.16.17.
These things are contained in that saying of Paul. O the depth of the riches
as well of the wisdom as of the knowledge of God! And a little after: For of
him, by him, and for him are all things. And being moved by these, he
glorifieth God, saying, To him be glory world without end, Amen. And surely
such is the disposition of the faithful, that the consideration of Gods
providence, whereby the ungodly take occasion to strive with God: has this end
with them, to make them glorify God. And principally in prosperity, in which
we behold more evidently then in adversity the bright face of God, to glorify
God; and this doctrine of the providence of God ought to encourage us to true
thankefulnes of mind. For what soever thing falls out prosperously, and as
we would desire, that, a godly man does wholly attribute to God, whether he
taste his bountifulnes by the ministry of men, or else be helped even by
insensible creatures. For this will he think with himself, in his mind:
Surely it is the Lord who has bowed ye minds of these unto me: it is he
likewise who has inspired his power into other creatures and does still
inspire it, that they should be instruments of his goodness toward me.
Ieremi, 5. Acts. 3.14.

The second fruit.
THe second fruit is patience, as well in our whole life which is full of
miseries, as also in enduring persecutions for the truth of the gospel. And
verily; first we will briefly show how the knowledge of the doctrine of Gods
providence begets patience in us. This brings forth impatie^ce in us,
because we look upon creatures yt are adversaries unto us. But indeed we
look not upon God, when as notwithstanding he does these things, not as an
adversary against us, but as a father. And undoubtedly those same afflictions,
wherewith he exercises our faith and patience; what other things are they,
then instruments wherewith even himself being present works, and that verily
for this end he works; that all things according to his promise, (no not ye
least thing or grief excepted) I say, that all things might work together to
our good. Romans 8. Whatsoever things therefore shall fall out either public or
private, as well joyful as heavy, whosoever is thoroughly persuaded that God
most wisely governs al things by his providence, and is fully reconciled unto
him in Christ, he must needs take them no otherwise then as benifites, yea and
as benifites of God, and which undoubtedly are to his salvation. Unless
therefore we will resist God who is only wise, with the wisdom of our flesh,
and become blasphemers against Christ, as not having reconciled the father
fully unto us: we must not doubt any whit at all, that the infinite wisdom of
God, by and for his goodness works all things for our good, how soever it
seem otherwise unto us. And therefore a faithful man when he once knows the
doctrine of Gods providence, he sticks not in creatures by which he is
afflicted, or in the contemplation of his own evil, but he will rather lift
up his mind to consider the fatherly hand of the most wise God, whereby he is
chastised, and to that same undoubted good, that God through that same
affliction will have wrought, and in his good time, will make manifest. For God
always has the end joined with his own glory, and the salvation of the
faithful. The consideration of either of these must needs be of great force
to imprint, both that same quiet moderation of mind, and patience in his
children. Whereof we have notable examples in Joseph, Gene. 45. in Job. cap 1.
in the people of Israel, Gene. 15. ver. 13.14. Exo. 2.3.4.5. in David 2. Sam.
16. So likewise the knowledge of Gods providence, in suffering persecution for
righteousness sake, does bring forth patience. First because the enemies of the
truth cannot think a thought, no nor move a finger against us, but by God not
only suffering it, but even working it: To be short, because they cannot
exceed that bound appointed from everlasting. For so Acts. 4. the Apostles
being in persecution spoke by the holy ghost: Of truth they were gathered
together against thy holy son Jesus, whom thou anoyntedst, Herod and Pontius
Pilate together with the gentiles and thy people Israel, that they might do
what soever thy hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done. Also
Ioh. 7.30. and the 8. verse. 20. Like as it was impossible therefore, yt Herod,
and Pilate together with ye gentiles and Jews should conclude more, and bring
any more to pass in afflicting Jesus Christ our head, then the hand and
counsel of the Lord has ordained to be done from everlasting: so also it is
as impossible, that the Herod's of our time, the Pilates and the Pharisees
together with the mad and bewitched people, should take more in hand and
bring more to pass, in afflicting the members of Christ, the^ the hand and
counsel of God has first decreed to be brought to pass by them. Now he has
decreed nothing, that is not most healthful for us. The reason of this
consequence is, because ye conformity of the members with ye head Christ,
first in afflictions, and afterward in glory, is founded upon the everlasting
counsel of God; upon which also is founded the passion of Christ himself, as
it is taught. Romans 8.28.29. verses.

The last fruit of the doctrine concerning the providence of God.
THe last fruit is that same incredible security, wherewith ye Christian heart
is ever afterward fenced for when innumerable evils lie upon the life of man,
which threaten as many deaths; when this light of Gods providence shall once
shine forth unto him, then at length is he relieved from vexation, fear, and
in a manner from all care, whereby he fully resolves that he is received into
the faith of God, and is a confederate to him, committed to ye care of Angels,
free from al danger and hurt of creatures: neither yt he can receive any hurt
of the^, but so far as God being their moderator, shall vouchsafe to give
the^ place; who makes that same hurt to work together with him, their good.
Ps. 27.1.3. and psa. 91. He shall cover thee with his wings, and under his
wings thou shall be safe. His truth is thy shield and helmett. Thou shall not
fear for the fear of the night. Also Psalm. 118. verse. 6. Romans 8. verse. 31.38.
So David humbly beholding the nature of God, hops that Simeies railinges
should turn to his good. 2. Sam. 16. verse. 12. Perhaps the Lord will behold
my affliction, and render me good for his cursing this day. By what a
wonderful providence was Paul saved, with all the rest that were in the
ship with him? where even in the midst of the waves of the sea, and in
roaring of the winds, al things to ye show were confused, there appeared
evident and undoubted printes of the divine providence, which drove the ship
thither whence they might safely escape. Act. 27. which thing undoubtedly from
thencefoorth brought great security to Paul against all the hurt of all
creatures, and then especially when he must come before Nero, and should wey
with himself, with how great providence of God, contrary to his own
determination and counsel, he was brought thither. Moreover he conceived
greater security for the time to come by his deliverance, in his first
defense, as he writes in the 2. Tim. chap. 4. No man assisted me, but all
forsook me, the Lord lay it not to their charge, but the Lord was present with
me, and strengthened me: that through me the preaching should be fulfilled; and
all the Gentiles hear: And I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And
the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will keep me to his
heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory world without end, Amen. This is even
that covenant, that the faithful, that are confederate to God the creator,
have also necessarily with all creatures, because without the will of the
creator, they cannot so much as move, whereof Hoseas speaks in the 2. chap.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING THE son, and our reconciliation. And in Jesus
Christ.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Esaias 9. A child is borne unto us, A son is given unto us, whose government
shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsailor,
the mighty God, father of eternity, Prince of peace. Matt. 1. She shall bring
forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: For he shall save his people
from their sins. Furthermore all this is done, that, that might be fulfilled,
which the Lord has spoken by his Prophet saying: Behold a virgin shall be
with child, and shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Emanuell, which is if thou interpret it, God with us. Luke 1. The Angel says
unto Marie, thou shall call his name Jesus. This man shall be great, and shall
be called the son of the highest. And the Lord God shall give him the seat
of David his father, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and
of his kingdom there shall be no end.

Why we believe in Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God.
WE believe also in Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God: First
because the son of God is of one substance and glory together with the
Father. Io. 1. We saw his glory as of the only begotten son of the father,
Therefore in the first Chapter to the Hebrews he is called the brightness of his
glory, and engraven form of his person. Ioh. 10. I and the Father are one.
Further because the Father has commanded, that we believe in the son: Psalm.
2. Kiss ye the son. And in the end of the same Psalm, Blessed are al they
which trust in him. Also, This is my beloved son, in whom I rest, hear him.
Now we so hear the son, expounding the commandment and promise of the
father. Io. 6. This is the will of that my father who has sent me, that
whosoever sees the son and believes in him, should have everlasting life:
And I will raise him up in that last day. And in the 14. of Ioh. he says: Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. And this is so severely commanded, that a
most grievous punishment is denounced against such as refuse the benefit
offered in Christ: He that believes not the son, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides upon him. Io. 3. Also the 8. Unless you believe that I am
he ye shall die in your sins. And the 1. Io. 2. Therefore I confess that I
believe in the son of God, very God, begotten of very God before all
worlds. To the Hebrews 3. Proverb. 8. And that from my heart, I submit my
will to this commandment and promise of the father, that I am thoroughly
persuaded, although I be a wretch, that yet for this eternal son of God, I am
indeed received, neither would he I should add this the greatest sin to my
great and manifold sins, that I should reiecte the son of God freely
offered, but that his desire is that with all my soul I should resist all
unbelief, and should deliver my self altogether deuoide of salvation, to be
saved to this son, forasmuch as our heavenly father has so commanded.

Why the son of God is named Jesus.
THe son of God manifested in the flesh is named Jesus, because he has saved
us, through his desert, and yet still saves us by his power from all our
sins. Mat. 1. Acts 4. Hebr. 7 Now the fruit that comes unto me by this
knowledge, is this: Seeing God, that can not lie, Tit. 1. has given this name
Jesus from heaven, to his son manifested in the flesh, that is to say, of a
savior, I know and undoubtedly assure my self, that he fully and perfectly
saves me, wholly both in soul and body, and in this faith I call upon him. As
often as I hear therefore the name of Jesus, I ought to remember the promise
of the Gospel that lies hid in it: that he through his merit, has saved
me from my sins, and by his power, mortifieth the remnants of sin in me,
until he fully deliver me from them: that he also quickens me through his
holy spirit, and that he everlastingly keeps for me that same salvation
purchased with so great a price, 1. Pet. 1. and so he bears that worthy name
for my sake, which was given unto him by the father from heaven, that he might
show the truth of his name, in truth and effectually as well in my salvation, as
in the salvation of al believers. He is faithful that bears that notable name
of savior, and he that has promised, shall do it.

Christ.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
TO the Son he says, Thy throne O God, Psalm. 45.
is for ever and ever, thy scepter, a right scepter, the scepter of thy
kingdom. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore has
God even thy God anointed thee, with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
Dan. 9. The holy of holy shall be anointed. Afterward he says, The Messiah
shallbe cut of; and then the people shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary,
with that Captain that shall come. The Angel witnessed the fulfilling of this
anointing, Jerusalem yet standing, Luke 2. Behold, I bring you glad tidinges
of great joy, that shall be to all the people: that a Savior is this day borne
unto you in the city of David, which is Christ the Lord. The whole multitude
of the heavenly hosts, witnesses the same thing, praising God and saying,
glory to God in the highest heavens, and in earth peace, and toward men a
good will. Mat. 2. The star and the wise men, witness Christ, or the
anointed of the Lord to be sent: and in the second of Luke Symeon and Anna the
prophetess from the 25. verse, to the 41. where also the prophecy of Esaias
is seen fulfilled, Ca. 8. ver. 14. A notable prophecy of Isaias in the 61.
Cap. is fulfilled. Luke. 4. Jesus came to Nazareth where he had been brought up,
and entered as he was wont upon the sabbath day into the synagogue and rose up
that he might read. Then was given unto him the Book of the Prophet Esaie,
and when he had opened the book, he found a place in which it was written,
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because that he anointed me that I should
preach glad tidinges, he sent me to heal the broken in heart, that I should
preach deliverance to captives, and recovery of sight to the blind, that I
should se^ them at liberty that are distressed: And that I should preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. And when he had restored the book closed unto
the minister he sat down: and the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were
fastened on him. Then he began to say unto them, This day is the scripture
fulfilled in your ears. Also Acts the 10 verse. 38. The uniform prayer of the
Apostles witnesses the prophecy in the 2. Psalm, to be fulfilled in our
Lord Jesus. For so also Luke writes in the 4. of the Acts: The man was above
forty year old, on whom this miracle of healing was showed. Now being let
go, they came to their company, and showed what the chief of the priests,
and the Elders had said unto them. And when they heard it, they lift up their
voices with one accord to God, and said* O Lord, thou art the God which have
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things that are in them: Who have
said by the mouth of thy servant David: Why did the Gentiles rage, and the
people imagine vain things* The kings of the earth stood up, and the
princes were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ? For
they were gathered together in deed, against thy holy son Jesus, whom thou
have anointed: both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the nations and peoples
of Israel, that they might do whatsoever thine hand and thy counsel had
determined before to be done. These are the testimonies out of the Prophets and
Apostles that Jesus is the Christ, or the anointed Messiah.

What we are taught by the name of Christ or anointed.
BY the term of Christ or anointed, is taught that this person came with the
commandment of the father, and that the same was ordained of him, that he
should erect that Priestly kingdom, by the scepter of his word and power of his
spirit in this life, and should finishe it in the life everlasting. For like
as anointing whereby at Gods commandment Kings, Priests, and prophets were
appointed amongst his people, with an outward and visible oil, was a public
testimony, that God would govern and efend his people by this person, and
also keep and uphold his divine worship, and likewise teach his people: and
this person had commandment of this thing, that they might suffer themselves
to be governed* cleansed, and taught: so the son of God manifested in the
flesh, concerning his manhood is anointed, with the holy Ghost without
measure (which is the truth of that outward anointing) and so is ordained and
given of the father to be the king, priest, and prophet of his Church. First of
all therefore the name Messiah, or Christ, serves for a notable confirmation
of our faith, to wit, whilst we understand by anointing, that the son of
God has commandment, in the very same that he is Christ or anointed; by his
kingly power to keep us by his everlasting sacrifice to reconcile us to the
Father, and to open unto us all the will of the father: to be short not to rest,
until he have beautified his Church with glory and everlasting life. Ioh. 6.
verse 27. cap. 10.18. Psalm. 43.6.7. to the Heb. 2. ver. 8.9. Also cap. 5.
ver. 4.5 Heb. 1. ver. 9. And forasmuch as the son of God, that same anointed
of the Lord, has his solemn commandment, it is certain, that he will execute
it most faithfully.

Of the fruit or consolation; which the faithful receive thereby.
THe first fruit is, that our faith has a certain object or matter to
respect, to wit, this same certain person sent, and appointed from the Father
with commandment, which now begins in us that same spiritual and
everlasting kingdom, which is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost,
in the sted of sin, everlasting heaviness and death; and shall finish it
afterward: and seeing that he holds under his government and iron scepter
al things created, both his and our enemies, that is, both wicked men and
devils, that they hurt not either his glory, or our salvation, but rather that
even against their wills, they advance both. Hence peace and joy arise in the
hearts of believers, who are citizens of this kingdom. For as it must needs
be that al they be made sad, that doubt under what Lord they are in this
life, whether under Christ or Satan: so on the contrary it can not be, but
all they must be filled with joy, who by the inward testimony of the
anointing of faith, and by the outward of holy baptism are assured, that
they are under Christ the King of righteousness, and are translated out of the
kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of Christ, Coloss. 1. and have the
kingdom of the son of GOD even begone in them, as Christ says, the kingdom
of God is in you, or amongst you. The Angel exhorts us to this joy* in ye
very manifestation of this king. Luke 2. verse 10.11. Be not afraid: For
behold I bring you glad tydinges of great joy, that shall be to all the
people, to wit yt this day a Savior is borne unto you, in the city of David,
which is Christ the Lord. Hence is the same peace and good will in the hearts
of believers, of which afterward that same multitude of heavenly hosts do
mention in their song: Glory in the highest heavens to God, peace to the
earth, A good will in men. Like as therefore in times past when Solomon by the
commandment of God was anointed, there was public joy amongst the people
of God: because they knew that God would do them good, and defend them by
the hand of a king: so also we when we hear out of the word of God, that
our Lord Jesus is Christ, that is, that same anointed of the lord, we ought
together with the Angels to be filled with an exceeding joy of mind: being
surely persuaded that even in this very thing that the heavenly father, has
appointed, and in very deed given his own son Christ, that is anointed to
be our king, that he does openly from heaven declare, that he by this son
will become the everlasting restorer and defender of his Church.

Why Christ was anointed, not only to be king, but also Priest?
IT follows that we declare, why he was not only anointed to be a king,
but also a Priest. The reason is because the kingdom of Christ was so to be
established, that he must satisfy for ever, the righteousness of God; and so
this begone peace and promised grace might stay upon a sure and sound
foundation. Now the foundation is the everlasting priesthood of Christ, that
is, that same gift which not only by commandment, but also by solemn oath,
in a wonderful wisdom and mercy, is from the father laid upon this certain
person, whereof these are parts. First the prayer of so great a person, most
pure and most holy, together with a sacrifice matchable with the sins and
wickednesses of all believers. Io. 17. Heb. 7. the other, the showing of
himself before the face of the father in the heavens, after this sacrifice is
offered up. Hebr. 9 verse. 24. Because it was ordained of God by an oath, and by
an unchangeable decree of God, which we may surely trust to, that Christ should
show himself (to wit his own body and soul taken into the unity of his
person, in which all our sins were punished) without ceasing before the face
of the father, that always the efficacy of that Sacrifice once offered up,
might flourish and be of force before the father.

Of the profit that we take by this that Christ was anointed to be a priest.
THe chief profit is, that I have a certain person, which has sacrificed
for me, and continually makes intercession for me that ye force of his
intercession made, and sacrifice offered up in earth, might always be of force
in the sight of God, as it is said in the Psalm 110. The Lord has sworn
and will not repent him: Thou art a Priest for ever. Now an everlasting priest
is not without an everlasting use and fruit of his priesthood toward his
faithful. But we will speak more as well of the kingdom, as of the
Priesthood in the article of sitting at the right hand of God.

Why also was he anointed to be a Prophet?
THe reason why he was anointed to be a Prophet, is because that same
priestly kingdom, in which everlasting righteousness and peace should flourish,
was to be established by the scepter of his word, that is by the preaching of
the Gospel, and in the power of the spirit whereby he was anointed. And
truly so was it foretold by Esaias, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me, that I should preach glade tydinges unto the power; he
has sent me, that I should heal the contrite in heart, as our Lord
affirms in the 4. of Luke that it was fulfilled in him. Therefore he says
unto Pilate, that his kingdom was not of this world, that he came into the
world, that he might give testimony unto the truth. I understand Christ
therefore, so to be anointed a Prophet that he being sent out of the bosom
of his heavenly father, in man's nature, was anointed with the fulness of the
holy Ghost, that being full of grace and truth, he might clearly and
manifestly set forth unto us that same mystery hid from the beginning, the
everlasting will and counsel of God concerning the redemption of mankind.
John 1. The only begotten son which is in the bosom of the father, he has
showed it unto us. Furthermore also, that the same Christ may effectually
teach us to the end of the world: For which cause he also has promised his
presence by the office of teaching: Behold I am always with you even to the
end of the world.

Of the fruit of Christ's prophetical office.
THe Lord Jesus is anointed with the spirit of prophecy, to this end, that
we should by no means doubt of the unchangeable will of the father toward us.
Heb. 1. God in times past, at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke unto
our fathers by the Prophets, but in these last times he has spoken unto us by
his son. Further, who dares to say, how shall I know the will of God
toward believers? seeing the son him self to whom the mind, and will of
the father is thoroughly known, has opened the will and promise of the father
in the Gospel. The other fruit is now declared, for that it teaches us
effectually to the end of the world, and transformeth us into that, which we
are taught of him, 2. to the Corinth. 2. verse. 17.18.

How far forth those things which are spoken concerning the office of Christ,
or of the priestly and prophetical kingdom of Christ, agree with the doctrine
of the free covenant.
But same man will say, that same priestly kingdom, that thou have said, to be
established by that same Messiah or anointed of the Lord, by the scepter of
the word and power of the spirit, is it not that same everlasting covenant or
work of salvation that stands in the free forgiveness of sins and
undeserved gift of the holy Ghost and everlasting life? Yes verily. For that
same covenant of salvation made with Abraham, was renewed with David and to him
was promised, out of his seed an everlasting king, who should be the mediator
of this covenant. Psalm 89. And in the first of Luke the Angel says to
Marie, This shall be great, and he shall he called the son of the most high,
and the Lord God shall give unto him the seat of David his father, and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and there shall be no end of
his kingdom. And a little after Zachary the father of John Baptiste, being
full of the holy Ghost, prophesied saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
because he has visited and redeemed his people, and has lifted up an horn of
salvation unto us, in the house of David his servant, as he has spoken by the
mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the world began, that it should
come to pass, that he would save us, from our enemies, and out of the hand of
all that hate us: that he should show mercy toward our fathers, and be
mindful of his holy covenant, of the oath which he swear unto Abraham our
father, that he would give unto us, etc. to the end of the Chapter. Therefore
I understand, that by the title of Christ or anointed the office of the
mediator of the covenant is expressed, to wit by what way and means the
heavenly father leads us, to salvation, promised and sworn in the covenant
by the hand of the mediator, that is to say, by his merit and virtue. Now
the mean is, because the father has anointed this Jesus to be the prophet or
teacher, who can inform us of this free covenant of God: to be the Priest,
who confirms and ratifieth this covenant by his intercession and sacrifice:
and to be a king, who maintains his covenant made, and enricheth and
defends his faithful and confederate ones: and so, that in the whole
business of salvation, we fly by faith unto Christ, as to him whom the
father has signed, as Christ himself speaks of him self. Ioh. 6. And first
for that which concerns the Prophetical office of Christ, I think, that to
pertain to the covenant in such sort: to wit, that first of all, men be
instructed of the free covenant of salvation, and therefore When in times past
God spoke after sundry sorts and ways by the Prophets, now at length he
would speak unto us by his son. Heb. 1. to wit, clothed with man's nature:
For otherwise the son also spoke by the Prophets 1. Pet. 1. We must
therefore fully resolve, that the everlasting Son of God, who is in the
bosom of the father, was sent a legate unto us, and taking our flesh upon
him was anointed with the spirit of wisdom and power, that he might clearly
and fully lay open unto us, that same everlasting Counsel of entering into
league and covenant with us, and might declare yt same good and unchangeable
will of God toward us, whereby he has freely chosen us to himself in ye
son, and might frame us to true ame^dement, and to believe the Gospel: yea
might also confirm his doctrine by miracles, as by healing the blind, by
raising up the dead etc, which neither the devil nor any creature can follow.
That he might also adioyne the sacraments as holy signs to the renewed
covenant, to wit baptism, and the Lords supper. Moreover, concerning the
priestlie officie, I think it so to belong to the covenant: that even like as
the Prophetical office of Christ, instructs us of the covenant and of a
full reconciliation with God in Christ; so the priestly office goes further,
and offers up the very price of this reconciliation, to wit a perfect
sacrifice with intercession, whereby the mediator of Gods righteousness does
perfectly satisfy for our sins, which did let and keep of the covenant,
and without the clensing whereof that same prophetical ambassadge from heaven
had been taken in vain to entreat of the covenant: seeing neither we can
satisfy for our sins our selves, neither would God deny his own
righteousness. Last of all concerning that kingly office, for so much as it was
not enough for a mediator to have taught us of the covenant, and to have
sanctified it by the offering up of his body and blood, unless he likewise
should defend and maintain ye covenant against ye assaults of ye enemy, and
should through his might build up a people in himself day by day more and more
repair and frame the same, being endewed with spiritual gifts to everlasting
life: therefore the heavenly father would that the same mediator should be the
head and giver, both of the conservation of grace gotten, and of an effectual
communicating, and mainteining the same. Ephesians. 1.23.24.

His only begotten Son.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
FOr he received of God the Father, honor, 2 Pet. 1.
and glory, when there came such a voice unto him from the excellent glory:
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And this voice we heard when
it came from heaven, when we were together with him in the holy mountain: and
we have a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well, that you
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne
and the day star arise in your hearts, so that ye first know this, that no
prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. Psalm. 2. I will show out of the decree. The
Lord of hoastes has said unto me. Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give the nations for thy possession; the
ends of the earth, I say, for the right of thy possession. And a little after.
Kiss the son, that he be not angry. And in the end, Blessed are al which
trust in him. Al these things agree not to David, but to the son who is
appointed heir of all things. And to the Heb. 1. He has spoken unto us by
his son, by whom also he has made the world: who being the brightness of
the glory and the engraued form of his person, and bearing up all things by
his mighty word etc. And a little after. Unto which of the Angels said he at
any time, Thou art my son: This day have I begotten thee etc. And in the
same place: And again when he brings his first begotten son into the
world, he says: And let all the Angels of God worship him. Psa. 97. ver. 7.
Io. 1. We have seen his glory as the glory of the only son of God. and ver.
10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him: but the world knew him
not, He came unto his own, and his own received him not: But as many as
received him, to them he gave power that they should be made the sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name.

What the meaning of these words is, His only begotten son.
THe end of these words is, that our faith should be stable, first, that we
believe in the true God, when we believe in his only begotten son, who is
begotten of the substance of the father, and therefore by nature is very God,
as before is showed. Then also, that we be no less undoubtedly persuaded of
the wonderful love of God toward us, surmounting the love of all creatures,
who has so loved the world that he has given his only begotten son, that
all that believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Io. 3.
And so God not only deals with us by promises, and by oath: but also by
giving his son, in whom all the promises are yea and Amen.

To be short, that all things which he has suffered for our salvation, and
whatsoever things follow in the other articles of faith, be esteemed of the
worthiness of this person, which is the only begotten son of God. Galat. 4.
verse 4.5. Mat. 3. verse 17.

Why the scripture calls him the only begotten, seeing all we which believe,
are the sons of God.
THerefore the Scripture calls him the only begotten son of God, that he
may put a necessary difference between Christ and all the faithful. For
Christ is called, and indeed is the only begotten son of God, because he is
ye only everlasting son of ye everlasting father, begotten of the substance of
ye father before al worlds: and therefore is very God in who^ we ought to
believe. Pro. 8. Ioh. 1. Now we are called and are the sons of God, not by
nature, but by adoption and grace, through which, God has vouchsafed to adopt
us to be his children, whilst he has made us, through faith engrafted into
his son, his true and lively members, who otherwise were the members of
Satan, and by nature the sons of wrath. Ioh. 8. Ephesians. 2. But in mean time,
that same adoption, and name of the sons of God, is not only an empty
title; but when we are in truth members of the son of God, we have by his
grace a true communion and fellowship with him, in respect of which he is
called the first begotten amongst many brethren. Romans 8. And surely if the
Adoption made of men be not a vain and an empty title, but such an
acceptance of another man's child, to be a son, whereby in truth all the
right of sons is communicated unto him, as if he were a true and natural
son: certainly by that same adoption of God, whereby we are so engraffed into
his son, that we are governed and quickened by his spirit, we do not only
receive the title, but the full privilege and right of the sons of God. Romans
8. For he has given this privilege, dignity, right, and power to all, as
many as have received the Lord Jesus, that they should be made the sons of
God. Ioh. 1. And in the first Epistle of John the first Chapter. That which we
have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowshippe
with us, and our fellowshippe or communion is with the father, and with his
son Jesus Christ. And these things write I unto you, that your joy may be
full. All the faithful therefore have not a mean and common covenant, but a
most excellent covenant with God, whilst he will have his confederates, to be
in the place of sons, making the^ members of his only begotten Son, from
whom they are never plucked away, and regenerating or rather renueing them
through his spirit; so excelent and notable a covenant, I say, in every
respect, that we may freely say with the Apostle to the Romans 8. that he that
has not spared his own son, but has given him for us all, how can it be,
that he should not together with him give us all things? Yea, but this same
covenant grounded upon so excellent love of God toward us, is so sure and
immovable, that we may farther say, with the same Apostle, I am persuaded,
that neither death; nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

Our Lord.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
THe Lord has said to my Lord, etc. Psalm. 110.
And Matthew 22. verse 42.43. Acts. 2 verse 36. Therefore all the house of
Israel know for a surety, that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this
Jesus I say, whom ye have crucified. The end and drift of these words is, that
being entered into league with so faithful a Lord (who has redeemed them from
the power of darkness, neither with gold nor silver, but with his own
blood, making the^ his own peculiar, and not only he so purchased them, but
he protecteth and preserves them being so purchased, with a special care)
they might safely and with assured confidence of mind commit themselves unto
him, yea; and yield up themselves to be kept for ever.

Again they are also admonished, that they are not in their own power, but
are bought with a price that both in body and soul which are Gods, they may
glorify God. 1. Corinthians 6. And to the end all that are confederate and
believe, should willingly suffer them selves to be governed of such a Lord,
to wit, by his word and by his spirit, who to the end he might have us under
his lordship and government, was appointed of the father head of the Angels,
and of all beleuers.

Conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Genes. 3. I will put enimitie between thee and the Woman, and between thy
seed, and her seed. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. To the Gala. 4. But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his
son made of a woman, etc.

That the son of God must take the nature of man of the stock of Abraham.
GEnes. 22. In thy name shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Gala. 3.
Act 3. in the end, and Luke. the 2.

That the stock was restrained to the tribe of Judah, and here somewhat
concerning the time that the Messiah should be given.
GEnes. 49. The tribe shall not desist from Iehudah, nor the Lawgiuer from the
midst of his feet: until his son come, and obedience of peoples be made
unto him: fulfilled in the 2. of Luke ver. 1. Where the whole world is taxed,
and therefore now the scepter was departed from Judah, when the tribe of Judah
was taxed of Augustus, and therefore also Marie together with Joseph. And
hereunto belong those prophesies, which are to be seen in the 6. of Zachary,
ver. 11. Take therefore silver and gold, that thou may make crowns, and put
them upon the head of Iehoschuhh the son of Iehosadac the high Priest: Thou
shall say unto him after this manner, so says the Lord God of hoastes, in
saying: Behold a man whose name is a slip, who shall bud forth out of his
place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord of hoastes: He I say,
shall build a temple to the Lord of hoastes, and the same shall bear away
comelines, and shall sit and bear rule upon his seat, and he shall be a
priest upon his seat, and the counsel of peace shall be betwixt both. And let
there be crowns for every one, for Hele^, for Tobiah and Iedaiah, and to Hen,
the son of Zephaniah for a memorial in the temple of the Lord of hoastes: and
they that are far of shall come and build in the Temple of the Lord, etc.
And Ezechiel the 21. So has the Lord God of Hoastes said: Remove away the
Diadem and the crown: This which is now, shall not be that. I will advance
the humble, and will throw drown the proud, I will ouerturne, ouerturne,
ouerturne it, and it shall be no more until he come whose right it is, and I
will give it him. Of the time of the coming of the Messiah, note both these
diligently, that he must be borne, when the scepter should be taken away from
Iehudah, as has been showed: and yet notwithstanding whilst the Temple and
Priesthood should yet stand: as Daniel says in the 9. Chapter. After 62.
weeks Christ shall be cut off, and there shall be none to help him, and the
people of that Captain to come, shall scatter that city and that sanctuary.

Of the place of his birth, touching the flesh; and also of his coming forth
from the days of eternity in respect of his divine nature.
MIchee 5. And thou Bethlehem Euphratah art little to be among the thousands of
Judah: yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be ruler in
Israel Whose goings forth have been from the beginning and from everlasting.
With what a wonderful providence of God was this prophecy fulfilled: Whilst
Joseph and Marie by the edict of Augustus, are called into Bethlehem, where
she brought forth Christ? See Luke 2. in the beginning of the chapter, and
with what a wonderful providence the wise men were lead unto the place, being
helped of Herod and of the Scribes. See the second of Matthew.

Of the holiness of his conception.
Jeremy 23. Behold the days come, says the Lord of hoastes. And I will
raise up a branch to my servant David, and this is his name whereby they
shall call him. The Lord of hoastes our righteousness. The prophecy is
fulfilled. Luke 1. verses 31.22.33.35. Daniel in the 9. Chapter foretold that
the holiness of holinesses must be anointed, whereby in very deed he
shows plainly and clearly, that his conception must be holy, and must be
the second Temple yet standing. What, that the Prophet Isaiah, and Haggeus
foreshewed that it should come to pass, that the glory of the second Temple
should be much greater then the glory of the first, it should be everlasting:
was it not truly fulfilled in this most pure conception of the Son of God,
(...).
in which by the power of the holy Ghost, that same everlasting word has
personally united the human nature, and has begone to dwell in it, as in his
own Temple? As also Christ himself names his body a Temple. Ioh. 2. So both
the prophesies are fulfilled, not as in a temple of stone, or a figure, whose
glory was much less then the glory of Salomons Temple, neither did that
Temple continewe everlastingly, but after the Messiah was exalted, to wit, that
same true Temple was taken away into the fathers glory, never after to be
builded again. The prophecy of Isaias is plain in the 60. Chapter, verse 13.
The glory of Lybanon shall come unto thee, the fur tree, the elm, and the
box tree together, to bewtifie the place of my sanctuary: For I will glorify
the place of my feet. And in the same place, I will make thee an eternal
glory, etc. The Prophecy of Haggai in the second Chapter is more notable: So
says the Lord there. Speak now unto Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel,
Prince of Judah, and to Iehosua the son of Iehozadak the high Priest, and to
the residue of the people saying, who is left among you that saw this house
in her first glory, and how do you see it now? Is it not in your eyes in
comparison of it, as nothing? Yet now says the Lord of hoastes, strengthen
thy self Zerubbabel, etc. And a little after: Thus says the Lord God of
hoastes, yet a little while, and I will move the heaven and earth, and the the
sea, and the dry land: and I will move all nations, and the desire of all
nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory says the Lord of
hoastes. Silver is mine, and gold is mine, says the Lord of hoastes. The
glory of this last house shall be greater then the first, says the Lord of
hoastes.

Of the virgins bringing forth a child.
ISay Chapter 7. The Lord shall give you a sign: Behold a virgin shall be
with child, and shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Immanuell. Thou have the fulfilling of it, in the 1. of Matthew verses 22.23. To
which add the Prophecy of Isay. Chap. 9. A little child is borne unto us. A
son is given unto us, and the government was upon his shoulder, and he shall
call his name wonderful, Counsailour, the mighty God, father of euerlastingnes,
Prince of peace. Fulfilled in the 2. of Luke. ver. 11.14.

The meaning of the words: which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
virgin Marie.
THe meaning is, that the everlasting Son of God of the same substance with
the Father, without any putting off, of his divine nature, without any
conversion or commixtio^, was made that which he first was not, to wit man,
which the Scripture enterpreteth. He took the seed of Abraham, that is our
flesh of the virgin Marie, and his very humane soul, and that by the power
of the holy Ghost, that he might be like unto his brethren in all things, sin
only excepted, Ioh. 1. And to the Hebr. 2. and the fourth: 1. Tim. 3. Romans 1.

The consolation which a faithful man conceaueth by this pure conception.
WE conceive hereof this consolation: first, yt we have an undoubted and true
mediator with God, in all things that we have to do with him, as who has not
only the communion of one, but of both natures, to wit divine and humane.
Again that he is such a Mediator, whose body and soul in the very
conception were sanctified: first that he might be a pure and holy sacrifice,
through which all our corruption might be cleansed, that it might not be laid
unto our charge. Heb. 7. verses 26.27. Romans 7. verse 20. and the 8. verse 1.
Moreover to ye end that ye efficacy of his fulness, might by little and little
sanctify this defiled lump of ours, until he deliver us fully from that same
natural corruption, and by the same holy spirit, whereby that substantial
word has sanctified both soul and body, even from the womb, might also
reform our souls and bodies in the time appointed of God, according to his
own image, Io. 1. verse 16. and the 1. Cor. 15. verse 45.47.48.

The drifte and purpose of this article, and how necessary ye true
understanding thereof is.
THis same article concerning the person of Chirst, which consists of two
natures, the humane and the divine, knitte together by a personal union,
everlastingly, and yet the proprieties of either being kept everlastingly,
contains the foundation and pillar of the kingly Priesthood of Christ, and
consequently of his everlasting priesthood betwixt God and men. For it is man's
happiness, to be joined with God, the fountain of al goodness, 1. Ioh. 1.
Contrariwise it is the greatest unhappiness to be separated from God. But man
had separated himself by sin from God, and had entered into covenant with the
devil. Even like as therefore there was a certain person by whom sin entered
into the world, and by sin death, and so became as it were the cause and
foundation of falling away from God, and ending into league with the devil: so
also must there be a certain person appointed of God, that might be the
foundation and cause of reconciliation, and of never breaking that same
conjunction with God, the fountain of all happiness. Now this person is the
everlasting son of God, with all the proprieties of the divine nature, and
very man, with all the proprieties of man's nature. And even like as there must
both these natures, true and sound, the proprieties of either being kept in one
person of Christ to reconcile man to God, and to strike this covenant: so also
to keep this covenant, that according to the promise and oath of God it may be
everlasting, both natures must remain for ever sound with their proprieties,
unless we will have the covenant, in the very pillar and foundation to be
shaken. Therefore Satan has always gone about, and yet does by his
instruments, either altogether to deny one of the natures, in the Mediator of
the covenant, or else utterly to overthrow it. For even like as when the root
of a tree is hurt, the branches also wither, and no fruit can be hoped for:
even so the doctrine being corrupt, concerning the person of Christ, and the
two natures in the same person, together with their distinct proprieties, the
doctrine also of the Priestly, and Kingly office of Christ remains corrupt,
which are, as it were ye fruits of the doctrine concerning the person.

The causes of this foundation, and first, why the mediator must remain very
man, and that everlastingly, keeping the proprieties of the human nature.
THe end of once taking and never putting off again man's nature, was that God
might declare his unchangeable righteousness and wrath against sin, and his
mercy toward us. His justice, I say, and his wrath whilst he will not so
make his covenant, that he be found unrighteous and a liar, who had truly and
righteously pronounced: in what day soever you shall eat of that tree, you
shall die the death. And Psalm. 5. Thou art not a God that wilt iniquity.
Therefore he punished sin, in the flesh of man, yea in the flesh of his only
begotten son: that his high and unchangeable righteousness, truth, and wrath
against sin, might be manifest to the whole world: His mercy, whilst he
punishes not our sins in our selves, which notwithstanding he might justly do,
but deriueth his wrath upon his only begotten son, that he might in very
deed declare his infinite mercy toward us. Therefore wonderfully, and with
great wisdom, the righteousness and mercy of God do meet and agree
together, or rather that same love toward mankind in Christ Jesus. I will
speak more largely that the matter may be more evident. God going about to
enter into covenant with man, or willing to reconcile man everlastingly unto
himself, would yet so show his mercy, yt he denied not his righteousness, which
is esse^tial unto him, and which he can no more deny, the^ he can deny
himself. Now the severe and exact righteousness of God required yt forasmuch as
corruption and transgression cleaued in man's nature, that is to say both in our
soul and body: so also in the same, that is in the nature of man taken of the
son of God, of ye same substance, and like in all things unto us (sin
only except, which neither belongs to the substance nor to the properties of
man as he was created of God) there should be a satisfaction, and repair. For
like as by one man sin has entered into the world (as the Apostle says to
the Romans cap. 5.) and by sin death, and so death has passed upon all men, in
as much as al have sinned: and as by the disobedience of one man many are made
sinners: so by the obedience of one many are made righteous. Also. If by the
sin of that one many are dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift
through grace, which is of one man Jesus Christ, has abounded toward many.
Wherefore Christ must be very man both in soul and body, who by obedience
even to death, and to the death of the cross, might satisfy the unchangeable
righteousness of God, who would not punish that in Angels, because men had
sinned, but in the very nature of man, therefore the son of God took not
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, that is, the very nature of man of the seed
of Abraham. Heb. 2.

Secondly, it behooved the mediator of the everlasting covenant to be
brotherly affected toward us, and therefore he must be our very brother in
deed, and abide so for ever, with all the proprieties of a very brother in
deed, as is plainly taught in the second chap. to the Hebrews: He that
sanctifies, and they which are sanctified are al of one. For which cause he
was not ashamed to call them brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto my
brethren: in the midst of the Church I will sing praises unto thee. And that
we may know, that like as the Son of God was not ashamed, to become once our
brother, with brotherly affection, and other very human properties: so also
yt he is not now ashamed of us, neither that he has put off nature or
affection, and other very properties of man, and of a brotherly nature, the
Scripture says in the end of the Chapter. Wherefore in all things it behooved him
to be made like unto his brethren, yt he might be merciful and a faithful hie
priest in things which were to be don with God, that he might make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he suffered, when he
was tempted, he is able to succor them which are tempted. And least any man
should cauil, that Christ after his ascension into heaven began to be ashamed
of us, and to put off the nature of a brother, that is that very nature of
man, and the properties thereof: Hear what the spirit of truth says farther
in 4. cap. of ye same Epistle. Having therefore an high priest which has entered
into the heavens, even Jesus ye sonnne of God, let us hold fast our profession.
For we have not an high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let
us therefore go with confidence (now he set the foundation of confidence to be
in this, that we have an high Bishop, who not only has the nature of God,
but also of man, a very brother in deed, having not put of the properties of
nature, so yt he can have compassion upon us) to the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in the time of need.

Thirdly, God has confirmed by oath, that the fruit of the loins of David,
should reign for ever. Psalm. 133. and the 89. It must needs be therefore that
Christ this king be of the substance and loins of David: and continue an
everlasting king, and very man; not only in name, but in the very substance
and properties of a natural fruit sprung from the loins of David, and
abiding and reigning world without end, in the throne of Gods majesty in the
highest heavens. Hebr. 1. Which thing brings us exceeding joy in
everlasting life, for that we shall behold our nature, in our brother and head
Christ, to be adorned with so great glory in all eternity.

Causes, for which it must needs be, that the mediator of the covenant, be
very God, with all the properties of God.
THe causes for which it is necessary that the mediator be not only very man,
but also very God, be these. The chief cause is, because God would declare his
infinite love. And this is the meaning of that, So God loved the world (so I
say) that he gave his only begotten son, etc. The second cause is next under
this: because he had received a commandment of the father, that required an
almighty worker (to wit a commandment, by his merit and virtue to save the
elect.) Now there is but one Almighty, even God. Ioh. 10. verse. 18. Out of
this same second cause, which properly belongs to Christ, these ends are
derived: The first concerning desarte. For therefore must the Mediator be very
God, that, that same obedience of Christ, whereby so great a person, which is
equal to the father, humbling himself in the nature of man, that the curse
might be made in it, might be from the beginning of the world for all eternity
to come a matchable price, or rather a price of redemption for the sins of
all the elect of the whole world, even that the price might wey down our
sins. Therefore in the 20. of the Acts it is said, That God redeemed his
Church with his blood. And in the 9 to the Hebrews, Also, grace has abounded
above the fault. This obedience of the Son when it is made a sacrifice for
us, it surmounteth all obedience of Angels, and al other creatures.

The second end is, that seeing he must be a Savior, no less in virtue then
in merit: he must first in himself overcome our sin, the wrath of God and
death* Now that the weight of the infinite wrath of God in the manhood might
stand and overcome, and moreover that he might raise himself from death, it was
necessary yt he that should suffer, should be very man in such sort, that he
might together be infinite, that is the true and everlasting God: that is, that
his manhod should be personally and inseperablie united to his godheade, of
which it should vpholden, that our salvation might not by any mean be in
danger, seeing it is impossible that yt union should be dissolved. For God
alone could not die (as one of the ancient fathers have wittily said) neither
could man alone overcome death. Therefore to the Romans Ca. 1. he says yt he
is declared to be the son of God by the power of his resurrection. Moreover
by his power, it behooved him also to overcome sin and death in us (Ioh. 5.)
to wit by giving faith, whereby that merit might be applied unto us, and the
holy Ghost through, who^ he might restore in us the image of God, and quicken
us everlastingly, and also maintain that salvation so gotten: Now forasmuch as
all these things are of nature belonging to him who is almighty, it was
necessary that he by nature should be God almighty. For who could have
performed that, but he through whom man in the beginning was made after the
image of God? Coloss. 1.3. who could have given the holy Ghost which is God,
but he which is God himself? who could have restored everlasting life, but yt
same word, the son of God, in who^ life is from ye beginning? Io. 1. Finaly
forasmuch as God has said, I am ye Lord, and besides me there is no savior it
was necessary that our savior Christ, which by the decree of God was
appointed, to obtain and bestow salvation, should be very God, with all the
properties of the Godhead, omnipotency, eternity, infinite majesty and
glory, without which he could neither be a Savior, nor abide for ever.

Why those same two natures must be united in the Mediator.
THat the foundation of that same covenant of grace, or rather of that
conjunction betwixt God and us might be firm, GOD would have these two natures
in Christ to be knit together after a wonderful manner, to wit, by the union of
persons. Now when we say yt the divine and human nature of Christ are
personally knit together, we understand yt the son who is God, has taken
man's nature into the unity of his person, and so God is manifested in the
flesh, and made man, but in the person of the son, and so as the proprieties
of both natures remain safe, as well that the salvation of men might be obtained
by that mean, that he had appointed: as also that it might be maintained and
continued for ever. For salvation could not have been obtained, unless man's
nature, and the nature of God had been knit together in a personal union:
First, because it had not been the blood of the Son of God, that was to be
shed: and so it had not been a sacrifice worthy enough, for the sins of the
whole world. Moreover, the humanity could not have been able to sustain the
wrath of God, neither have abolished the sins that were laid upon it,
unless the divinity had been coupled unto it, into the unity of the person,
by a most firm and altogether vnlooseable knotte: both which, that same man
Christ by the power of his divinity, being personally knitte unto him, has
performed. Acts 20. Philip. 2. Hebr. 19.14. Coloss. 1. verse. 14.15. And much
less also might salvation now obtained be maintained, unless they were knit
together, and might so remain for ever. For even like as it was required for
the entry to that priesthood, and for the providing of full satisfaction, that
there should be the body and soul of the son of God, in which there might be
satisfaction: so also that the priesthood might be everlasting, and an
everlasting intercession be made for us, it must be, that that same humane
nature be properly belonging to the son of God, which he must show before
the face of the father in heaven, in which, as our sins are once cleansed, so
it might be the pledge of our reconciliation for ever. Psalm. 110.1. and the 4.
Matthew. 22. verse 44. Moreover that same man Christ, could not by his virtue and
power be a savior, unless also he had the divine nature joined unto him, into
the unity of person, from which, together as also from the father proceeds
the holy ghost, who brings us into the possession of Christ, engraffeth us
into Christ, and begets us again into everlasting life. 1. Cor. 15. verse
21.45. Romans 8. verse 8.9. And surely as they can not any more fall from
everlasting life, which are truly once engraffed into Christ by the holy
Ghost: so that very word, the everlasting Son of God, of the substance of
the Father, to wit, that same very fountain of life, in which life was from
the beginning, (...).
John 1. taken in the nature of man to endure everlastingly, must dwell bodily,
that is to say, personally. For seeing that same high majesty of God, was
most far separated from our wretched condition, and yet notwithstanding, he
had appointed for his infinite love toward us most wretched castawayes,
through grace to join his divinity, which is the fountain of all happiness,
to the end it might endure for ever, it was needful, that he should also
join our humane nature taken out of the lump of mankind unto his divinity
by a personal union. Col. 1. verse 9.10. Otherwise we should not have had
neerenes enough, nor sufficient steadfast kindred (as it were) with God, which
might assure our faith, that God does truly dwell with us, and that Christ is,
and everlastingly should be, Immanuel, that is, God with us. Isai. 7. Mat. 1.

What the personal union is, and wherefore it is that the properties of both
natures must remain whole and sound in it.
THe personal union, is the knitting together of two natures in Christ, to
wit, of the divine and humane: in which, admit that the one be and remain
the maker, and without beginning: and the other be and remain created, and
therefore have a beginning: one be of the same substance together with the
Father; the other be of the same substance with us: one be almighty, because
it is God; the other be not almighty because the creature is not the creator,
neither are there two almighty ones, but one almighty one: one be and remain
infinite, but the other be not infinite but finite, having a finite head,
arms, feet, etc. Admit (I say) that these natures are most diverse, and
remain everlastingly distinguished in their properties (for as much as the
creator will everlastingly remain distinct from all creatures, yea from that
same lump which it has taken) yet notwithstanding, they are so coupled
together, that they make one Indiuiduum, to wit, Christ. All this may be seen
by the conception, in which that same personal union was once perfectly made,
neither was it ever afterward otherwise made. Ioh. 1.3. cap. 14. Hebr. 2.16.
Seeing therefore that the covenant of salvation, between God and men, is
everlasting, it must needs be concluded that in the person of Christ as in the
foundation, these two natures are so everlastingly united together, that in
mean season the truth of either nature, remain for ever with their
properties, and that neither be swallowed up of the other, unless we would
have the covenant to be weakened and plucked up from the very foundations. For
even like as for ye entering into the covenant and reconciliation with God, that
both those natures in the mediator, must be true and sound, keeping their
properties: so also forasmuch as the covenant and conjunction must endure in
all euerlastingnes, that this same our true and very flesh and bones may enjoy
the same happiness, and yt after our resurrection, Philip. 3. it behooves also
that in the foundation, to wit in the mediator, upon whom the office of saving
us, is everlastingly laid, there remain for ever the same whole human
nature both soul and body, flesh and bones. For the nature of any one being
overthrown, or the properties thereof denied, the covenant it self falls,
that is, it can neither be entered into, nor be preserved, as before is showed

Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Testimonies out of the Prophets Apostles, whereby it is showed, that Christ
must not die by tumult: but must suffer under a judge: and that when a strange
magistrate should exercise judgment.
Isai. 53.
HE was reckoned amongst the wicked. Therefore, be must not perish by tumult,
but must be judged or reputed amongst the wicked. Whereto also that belongs:
He was wounded for our iniquities, and smitten for our wickednesses. The
chastiseme^t of our peace was upon him, and in his stripes we were healed. And
in the same place, He was taken away by judgment: Therefore he must come into
judgment. With these Prophetical sayings, agrees truly that Prophetical
explication of Christ, which is extant in the 18. of Luke. Behold we go up
to Jerusalem, and all things shall be fulfilled that are written by the
Prophets concerning the son of man. He shall be delivered up to the nations,
and shall be mocked, and evil entreated of them. And after they shall have
whipped him, they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise again. And
Luke the 24. To those that went to Emaus, he says, O fools and slow of
heart to believe all things, which the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ
to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And beginning
from Moses and all the Prophets; he interpreted in all the scripture, those
things which were concerning him. Acts 4. They gathered themselves truly
together against thy holy son Jesus whom thou anointedst. Herod also and
Pontius Pilate with the nations and people of Israel, to do whatsoever thy
hand and Counsel had first determined should be done. Now that he must suffer,
when a strange magistrate executed judgment (the which thing the very mention
of Pontius Pilate shows) these Prophesies witness: Genes. 49. The Prophecy
of the Patriarch Jacob. The scepter shall not depart from Judah till Schiloh
come, is thoroughly fulfilled when the scepter was translated from Judah, and
when Pilate in the name of Caesar executed judgment. And the Prophecy of
Zachary in the 6. cap. that a branch shall build a Temple, the glory whereof
should become greater, then the glory of the first Temple. And then must
altogether be fulfilled, as Ezechiel also in the 21. Cap. and the 26. ver. has
plainly prophesied, when the golden crowns should be taken from the heads of
the Kings of Judah. But when Pilate was president, the Jews acknowledge that
they have no other king but Caesar: and so they profess that the crown was
taken from the heads of the Kings of Judah: therefore now the time was come,
that they should destroy the temple of the body of Christ, and that that same
branch should reedifie it again, or that he should raise it up the 3. day. The
glory of which temple (namely of the body of Christ raised up from the dead,
in which the Deity dwells bodily) does surpass at this day, and shall do
everlastingly, the glory of the first temple, according to the prophecy of
Haggai in the second Chap.

Why Christ must be condemned by a judge before the judgment seat?
THou must look upon God him self the Judge exercising judgment by the mouth
of Pilate. Christ is set before the tribunal seat of GOD here in earth, laden
with thine and mine wickednesses ready to receive the sentence of the judgment
of GOD, and to bear the pain of condemnation. For seeing that we must have
been set before the tribunal seat of the heavenly judge, and there be
condemned* it behooved Christ for as much as he translated all our guiltiness
from us to him self, to be set in our person, as a wicked person, before the
tribunal seat, and to be condemned by God, exercising judgment by Pilate,
thinking nothing less. Now the end of this is, that all our sins being
condemned at once of God himself, exercising a righteous judgment, and being
punished in his son, with the greatest rigor of righteousness: we might not
be farther called into judgment for them, before Gods judgment seat, and
much less be condemned for them. The scripture teaches us that our minds are
to be lifted up to God himself the president or Judge of this most heavy
sentence, that we might have sure consolation, that we (if we believe in
Christ) are fully exe^pt from the judgment of GOD. And that thing does that
horror of Christ declare, when he cries: Let this cup pass from me, etc.
because he knew that he must appear before the judgment seat of God, and
must drink of that cup of condemnation for us. Isay 5.3. God would by
weakening him bruise him, and tread him under. To the Romans 8. For that which
was impossible to the law, inasmuch as it was weak because of the flesh,
this did God, sending his son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh. And again in the same place. God spared
not his own son, but gave him for us all. And 2. Cor. 5. Him who knew no
sin, God and made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. God made Christ sin, that is to say a sacrifice for sin: Lo,
God made him: And Act. 4 28.

Why Christ by the mouth of the Judge was condemned as an evil doer, and by the
same judges mouth, was pronounced innocent.
BOth these make for a notable confirmation of our faith. For in that he is
condemned and accounted amongst the wicked, our heavenly father does witness
unto us, that he does bear our person, and in the same is made guilty of the
father, for us, to the end that he taking that condemnaon upon himself that
lay upon our heads, he might deliver us from it. Again, whilst he is
declared innocent by the same judges mouth, by which he was condemned, the
father witnesses by the mouth of the judge that he suffered not for his own
faults, but for ours. Ioh. 8. verse 21.24. For the father would not that his
son should suffer in vain: but either for his own, or for others sins, to
wit for ours. But he suffered not for his own which were none, by the
testimony of the judge him self, and by the testimony of the Prophets: Psalm.
69 he paid that which he took not: and Esaias 53. Why therefore do we distrust,
seeing Christ suffered not in his own sins, but in ours?

Crucified.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
CHrist says in the 3. of John out of the 21. of Numbers, As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lifted up, that all
that believe in him, perish not, but may have life everlasting. For so God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. And John 12. Now
is the judgment of this world, and the Prince of this world shall be cast
forth. And if I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw all unto my
self. Now he spoke this (says the Evangelist) signifying what death he
should die. And in the 3. of the Act. verse. 18. Gala. 3. wherein that same
divine sentence is cited out of the 21. chap. of Deuteronomy. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, whilst he is made the curse for us. For it is
written, Curssed is every one that hangs upon the tree, that the blissing of
Abraham in the nations, might appear in Jesus Christ. Mark. 15. They crusified
also with him two thieves, one at his right hand, another at his left. And
that scripture was fulfilled which says, and he was numbered with the wicked.
1. Pet. 3. out of Esaias 52. he that did no sin, neither was any guile found
in his mouth. And a little after, Who bear our sins in his own body upon
the tree, etc. 1. Pet. 1. ver. 10.11.

Why Christ must rather be crucified then suffer any other kind of death.
THe death of the cross was accurssed of God. Gal. 3. Therefore God pronounced
the sentence of a curse, by Pilates mouth against Christ. The end is, that he
might take away our curse and the blessing promised to Abraham might come unto
us. When God said in the law, Curssed is he that hangs upon tree, he knew,
that his son should be hanged upon the tree, Therefore Christ suffered not
this kind of punishment at adventure, or by the only will of the Jews, but
by the singular providence and counsel of God. Acts 2. For seeing that an
execrable and curssed kind of death was due to our wickednesses, and horrible
offenses, and this same death of the cross was accursed, not only by men's
judgment, but by Gods own sentence: Deuteronomy. 21. It must needs be that Christ
our pledge, must undergo this kind of death, that by satisfieng, he might
free us from the curse. So Paul admonishes us, that Christ had taken away
our curse, that he might communicate his blessing unto us, whilst he was
hanged upon the tree. Gala. 3 Wherefore we more clearly understand by the
cross, as the sign of curse, that the burden of the crusse, wherewith we
were oppressed, was laid upon him, which we could not understand by any
other kind of death.

That Christ was truly and in deed made a curse for us, neither yet for all
that, is there any contumely or reproach offered unto him by us, for so saying.
CHrist was truly and not seignedlie made a curse for us, as the holy ghost
speaks. Gala. 3 And that very thing the Apostle proves by that voice of
God: Curssed is every one that hangs on tree. And verily, God did not only
know, what manner of death his son should die, when he spoke that, but also
the death of the cross, which he pronounces there accurssed, was determined
and decreed even then, to the son. For in yt consists all our hope, in that
appears the infinite love of God, that our God has powered forth, truly and
not feignedly, all his wrath upon Christ his son, that he has curssed,
truly and in deed without any figure, that he might truly receive us into
favor, so that indeed, unless Christ had also been God, he had remained in
that curse for ever, whereby it passed from us. For otherwise, if the wrath of
God had been feigned: then also had the obedience of the son been feigned,
and also the hope of glory which we look for, in vain. Neither is it to be
feared, that by this means any reproach is offered to the son of God: For
here Christ is to be considered in these qualities which he has not in
himself, but by imputation in respect of the office of a mediator, which
condition he willingly took upon him, that we again being justified by
faith, might be his brethren, and heirs together with him of the same
kingdom. For we believe, that he did truly bear the curse of an other,
laid upon him, by doing whereof he both yielded high obedience to God his
father; and also by ouercomming that curse which he took upon him,
manifested his divine power.

Dead.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
IT came to pass neither by chance nor at adventure that Christ died, but so
it was foretold of God: Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpents head, and thou shall bite his heel. To this agrees the place of
the Hebrews chapter 2. For as much then as children are partakers of flesh
and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them, that he might
destroy through death, him that had the power of death, that is the devil. The
sacrifices of the old Testament for sin, were shadows, of the sacrifice to
come, of which thing it is so written in the 10. to the Hebrews, and also the
prophecy out of the 40. Psalm is expounded. The law obtaining a shadow of
good things to come, and not the very image of things, can never with these
sacrifices which they offer year by year continually, sanctify the comers
unto it. And a little after: Wherefore entering into world he says, (Psalm
41.) sacrifice and offering thou would not: but a body have thou ordained
me. Burnt offeringes and sacrifice for sin thou have not allowed. Then said
I, Lo I am present (In the beginning of the book it is writien of me) that
I should do thy will, O GOD (which he so expounds there of the voluntary
death of Christ) through the which will we are sanctified by the offering up
of the body of Jesus Christ once made for all.

The sacrifice of Abel, was acceptable to God, and in the sacrifice of Noah it
is said that God smelled a sweet smelling savor. Genesis 9. And why? because
they were figures of the sacrifice of the Messiah. To which place of the 9. of
Gene. Paul had regard in the 5. to the Ephesians, when he says, Christ gave
himself for us an oblation and offering to God, of a sweet smelling savor:
The Paschall lamb contained a manifest and as it were a visible prophecy of
the death of Christ, as John the Euangelist^ teaches in the 19. Chapter, that
that prophecy was fulfilled by the wonderful providence of God, There shall
not a bone of his be broken. Which albeit it was spoken of the boanes of the
Paschall lamb, Exodus 12. yet notwithstanding he says that it was truly
fulfilled in the death of Christ, saying, that when he was dead, his legs
were not broken, as were the thieves. Where also John teaches that an other
prophecy which is written in the 12. of Zachary was fulfilled, They shall see
whom they have pierced, when one of the soldiers, had pierced Christ's side,
and by and by there issued out water and blood. Of the Passover also, thou
have in the 1. Cor. 5. Our passover is sacrificed for us, even Christ. Also
that same daily sacrifice, did set before our eyes, the sacrifice of Christ to
come. Every day morning and Evening a lamb was offered up. Hitherto belong
those same places. John 1. verse. 36 and the 1. Pet. verse. 19. Isay 5.3. He was
cut of, from the land of the living, For the transgression of my people, he
was wounded. To this agrees that of the 9. of Daniel, The Messiah shall be cut
off, and this must be fulfilled before Jerusalem be destroyed. Again, Isay
5.3. When he shall have laid down his soul for a sacrifice for sin, he
shall see a seed that shall prolong his days. And by the knowledge of
himself my righteous servant shall justify many, and he himself shall
bear their iniquities. Zachary 9. Thou also shall be saved by the blood of
thy covenant. I have sent out thy bond ones, out of the cesterne wherein there
is no water.

Christ the head of all the Prophets foresheweth his death in the 12. of
John: Verily, verily I say unto you, except a grain of corn falling into the
earth be dead, it remains alone: but if it be dead it brings much fruit.
And in the 10. chapter 15.16.17.18. verses. And Matthew 20.28. See also a
wonderful prophecy by the mouth of Caiphas. Io. 11. verse. 49.50.51.52. 1.
Cor. 15. I have delivered unto you first of all that which I received: to wit,
that Christ dyed for our sins according to the scriptures. David in the 114.
Psalm prophesies of the stone refused by the builders, and Christ teaches
that that prophecy had an accomplishment in his death, Matthew. 21. in that
parable of the son, the heir of the vineyarde, slain of those same
husbandmen of the vineyarde. verses 38.39. For so he says, have ye not read
in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is made the
chief corner stone? This is done of the Lord, and it is wonderful in our
eyes, etc. And when the chief of the Priests and Pharisees had heard his
parables, they kneewe those things to be spoken concerning them. Hereunto
belongs that same excellent power which showed it self in the 4. of the
Acts, of that reicted stone (by death.) When they had placed them meaning the
Apostles in the midst of them: By what power, or in whose name do you this?
Then Peter full of the holy Ghost says unto them: O ye chief of the people,
and elders of Israel, forasmuch as the question is this day, of the benefit
bestowed upon the sick man, to wit how this man is saved; be it known unto
you all, and to all the people: that through the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, whom you have crucified, whom GOD has raised up from death, by
this I say, does this man stand whole and sound in your sight. This is that
stone that was esteemed as nothing of you builders, which is made the chief
corner stone. Neither is there salvation in any other. And a little after, They
seeing him stand with those that were healed, they could say nothing against
it.

Why Christ died.
THE end of Christ's death, was to satisfy the righteousness and wrath of God
for our sins, and so by dying to destroy and abolish sin, in which all the
power of satan consisted. For in as much as sin by the just judgment of God
raged upon mankind, his wrath was appeased, and satisfied for sin, and all
power taken from it, that it might not reign in the believers. 1. Ioh. 3. To
this end was the son of God manifested, that he might dissolve the works
of the Devil: both which the Apostle plainly joins together 2. Cor. 5.15. and
Romans 5.18.21. and Romans 6.7.8. 2 Timothy 1.10.

Of the fruits, whereof we are made partakers by the death of Christ.
THE first fruit is, that the obedience of Christ is our righteousness before
God. For in the death of Christ faith specially looks upon that same
voluntary, and special obedience of the son, whereby he was made obediente
to the father, even to the death, and to the death of the cross: Philip. 2.8.
Hebr. 5.8. And therefore even as by the disobedience of one man, many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one righteous, many are made righteous.
Romans 5. And because by his death he justifies us from our sins, through
which the devil got the power of death, the scripture says that the son
of God through death abolished him, that had the power of death, that is the
devil, and set free, as many as through the fear of death through all their
life were subject to bondage. Heb. 2. Therefore in this article, there is
contained this promise, which I take by faith, that Christ died for my sins,
the just for the unjust, that I clothed through faith with this obedience,
might be esteemed righteous before God. And surely when Isay in the 53. chap.
had largely set forth that same willing obedience of the death of Christ, as a
lamb not opening his mouth, after wards he expressly sets forth in the
same being laid hold on by faith, our justification in these words: My
righteous servant by his knowledge shall justify many, because he shall
bear their sins. Certainly it must needs be, that the voluntary passion
and death of the son of God be an excellent thing, seeing that there are not so
many and so evident prophesies of any thing, as of that, so that there was no
day passed, but the same in a figure, as in a visible prophecy, to wit, in
that continual sacrifice morning and evening, was set before the eyes; and
seeing without the shedding of blood there could be no remission, it must of
necessity be a most precious thing; and seeing S. Peter says, that the
Prophets have enquired and searched, when or what time, that same forewitnes,
which was yt same spirit of Christ in them, should declare the sufferinges that
should come unto Christ, and the glory that should follow. 1. Pet.
1.11.19.20. Now the worthiness of this obedience even to the death, hangs
upon the worthiness of the person, for that so great a person, to wit, as the
son of God, who was in the form of God, was made so far forth obedient in
his human nature, that he refused not to undergo that same curssed death
upon the cross. By these it is plain that this is the first fruit of the
death of Christ, that he might be our righteousness before God, and unless
that thing be undoubtedly determined of us, we do not worthily enough esteem
the precious death of the son of God.

Of the second fruit of the death of Christ.
THe second fruit is the mortifying, or killing of sin. For he has not
only through his death satisfied the judgment of God for sin, but also has
broken the power of the infection of it, which by the just judgment of God it
had over us. This I open thus: in that Christ died, he died once, and that for
sin. And that he died for sin, I understand thus, that he not only satisfied
for it, by his death: but also so brake the power of sin, which was
altogether and wholly comprehended in ye just judgment of God, by making a
perfect satisfaction, that now it cannot any longer, as before, creep and
rage in the body of Christ, which is ye church, but must by little and little
decay. Heb. 9.14. 2. Tim. 1. ver. 10. For even as when the heart of a man has
received a deadly wound, he is as one for dead, because he cannot escape
death: even so sin has received a deadly wound in Christ, so as we are
said to be dead in Christ. Rom 6. And so the Lord speaks in Hosee the
Prophet cap. 13. I will redeem them from the power of hell, o death, I will be
thy death, says he, even I Jehovah will be thy death, O death; Therefore Christ
who is God, or Jehovah manifest in ye flesh, by hearing and ouerco^ming death,
was the death of death and sin, yt is to say, by satisfying for sin, that it
should not be laid to our charge, and by breaking the force of sin, (which
is the sting of death) that is the power of infection, which the just wrath of
God had gotten over us, to wit the wrath of God being appeased. 1. Corinthians
15. Therefore John says, The son of God was manifested to this end, to
dissolve the works of the devil. Therefore the son of God, which is the true
Jehovah, Iere. 23. dyed, not only that he might satisfy for sin: but also
that by satissatisfying, he might destroy sin as the work of the devil. For
in satisfying he both took away the curse, and also that might and strength
of growing further from sin, all which was contained in ye just judgment of
God, to which he fully satisfied: and this favor he also obtained for us, that
he by his spirit might kill sin in us, who grew up together by one spirit
into one body together with him. 1. Corinthians. 12.

And was buried.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
ISay 53. And he gave his burial, with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death: albeit he had committed no iniquity, neither was there deceit in his
mouth. This prophecy was fulfilled, Ioh. 19. verses 38.39.40. where the Lord
is buried by Joseph of Arimathea. The figure of Jonas is applied also to this
by the Lord himself. Mat. 12. verse 39.40. And in the 13. of Mark, when Jesus
was at Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, when he was set down a woman
came having an alabaster box of Spikenard very costly, and breakinge the
box, she powered it on his head. Now many disdained and were offended
amongst them selves saying, to what end is this wast of the ointment? For this
might have been sold for more, then three hundred pence, and given to the
poor; and they raged against her: But Jesus said, let her alone: why trouble
you her, she has wrought a good work on me. For the poor you shall have
always with you, and when you will you may do them good, but me you shall not
have. She has done that she could. For she came before hand to anoint my
body to the burying. These things has Mark. Where we see that the holy ghost
by a secret instinct through that woman, has in that same visible ointment,
set before the eyes of all, as it were a visible prophecy of the death and
burial of Christ.

To what end the burial of Christ tends: and which are the fruits of it.
BVrial is a part of the humiliation of Christ. For it is the proceeding of his
death. The first fruit therefore of this article is the confirmation of our
faith, that we doubt not, Christ being dead in deed and buried for us, that
he was so far forth humbled, that neither death nor burial can hurt us,
forasmuch as the wrath of the father is truly and and indeed pacified. For
even like as Jonah, who was a figure of Christ, being once cast into the sea,
the storm ceased, and a great calm followed: even so Christ foretold that
he should be cut of from the number of those that lived, and should be placed
in the heart of the earth, that he might reconcile the father unto us, being
angry for our sins. Which thing forasmuch as Christ the mediator of the
covenant, has in deed fulfilled, as is contained in this article, we do
worthily believe it. And this in deed is the first fruit of Christ his
burial. The second: This article also makes to repentance and amendment of
life. For like as Christ dead by sin, rests in the grave: so we by the
virtue of that communion, which we have with Christ dead and buried, we
ought altogether to esteem our old man by the power of faith, and by the
testimony of Baptism, to be buried together with Christ, that true rest being
restored to our consciences, we may rest from our works, that is from our
sins, and so begin here that everlasting Sabbath until by the virtue of
Christ, it be fully accomplished in us. So Paul when he said in the 6. to
the Romans, that we are baptized into the death of Christ, he by and by
adds, that we are also buried with Christ by baptism into death: to wit,
that he might express, that by the virtue of that communion we have with
Christ, it is brought to pass, in a continual course and proceeding that we
mortify our old man. And besides these principal ends and fruits whereof
we have spoken, this is also to be added, that burial is an evident sign,
that Christ was dead in deed. Upon his death depended satisfaction for
sins, and therefore it behooved that to be most certain, and no place to be
left of doubting. Now all doubtinge of his death is taken away, when he was
buried as other dead men are, and that according to the scriptures. Isay. 53.
verse. 9. Notwithstanding the principal and proper ends, are those we have
before mentioned.

He descended into hell.
Testmonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
SAint Peter cites the 16 Psalm in the second of the Acts, of Christ his
descending into hell, saying: This man being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, after you had taken with wicked hands, you
have crucified and slain, whom God has raised up, loosing the sorrows of
death, because it was impossible that he should be holden of it. For David
says concerning him, I beheld the Lord always before me: For he is at my
right hand that I should not be shaken. Therefore did my heart receive
comfort, and my tongue reioysed, and so my flesh does rest in hope. Because
thou shall not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see
corruption. Thou have made the ways of life known unto me, and thou shall
replenish me with gladness in thy sight.

Of the false understanding of this article, where also is entreated of Lymbus,
and of the first beginning of the error thereof.
THat it follows in the Creed that Christ descended into hell, shall we say
that it has has this sense: that Christ descended into Lymbus, in which place
there is neither joy nor sorrow, that he might deliver the fathers from
thence; or else that he descended into the place of the damned? No, not so. For
first it is evident, that the fathers also before the death of Christ had joy
and comfort, as it appears Luke 16. in Abraham and Lazarus. Besides that the
word Hell is not taken for Lymbus in any place of the scripture. Now the
beginning of the error concerning Lymbus, is that many thought and yet do
think, that sins were not forgiven before that Christ suffered. And the
passion of Christ had his effect and power from everlasting. For Christ
yesterday and to day, for ever and the same world without end. Hebr. 13.8. And
Paul to the Romans 4. defines justification by David: Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven. Therefore in the time of David, before Christ had
suffered, sins were forgiven by confidence and trust in that sacrifice of
Christ to come. And in the same Chapter he says, that we obtain happiness and
remission of sins by no other means, then whereby Abraham obtained it who is
the father of all believers. So Math. 8. Many shall come from the East and from
the West, and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
Heaven. Seeing therefore that this same error prevails against the
Scripture, that the Fathers had not remission of sins before Christ suffered,
from thence sprang this other error concerning Lymbus. For it was too hard to
thrust the fathers down into hell: because as they confess, there is no
redemption out of hell: and to place them in everlasting felicity, they dust
not: because Christ having not yet suffered, they thought their sins were not
yet forgiven. They found out therefore a middle place, in which there was
neither felicity nor sorrow, which in the schools they called Lymbus, as if
they should say the porch of hell. And so the devil endeavored to darken the
greatness of the efficacy of Christ's sacrifice, whiles he denied that the
Fathers had remission of sins in the old Testament by faith in the sacrifice
to come: and therefore he devised unto them Lymbus: even like as he feigned
Purgatory for those faithful ones, who were dead after the suffering of
Christ. That to the same end also the power of cleansing from sins might be
withdrawn from the passion of Christ, against the manifest word of God. I.
John. 1.7.

2. Neither is it to be suffered in any case, that we say that Christ
descended into hell, that is to the place of the damned, that there he should
overcome death, and the devil for us, or that he should suffer any new
torments, for that he both overcame Satan, by his death, and after death
suffered no more sorrows by which he should deliver us from the power of
Satan, the Epistle to the Hebrews does witness chapter 2. That he might by
death abolish him which had the power of death yt is the devil, and might set
as many free as by the fear of death through al their life were subject unto
bondage, Also to the Coloss. 2.14.15. And Luke the Evangelist witnesses that
he delivered up his spirit to the keeping of his father. Neither can it fitly
be taken of the showing forth of the victory of Christ in hell, for that
belongs to that exaltation which at length he began in his resurrection: now
the descending of Christ into hell pertains to his humiliation, as Peter
expressly in the second of the Acts teaches by David. These things many of
the ancient fathers more diligently waying, thought that hell was to be taken
here simply for the grave. But if it had been no other thing, it had not been
needful that the same should be repeated in the articles more darkely, that
before now was spoken more clearly.

Of the true meaning of this article, He descended into hell.
THere is no doubt but that the descending of Christ into hell, is the lowest
and extremest degree of Christ's humiliation, whereby he has humbled himself
for us, and as it were put off his glory, making himself of no reputation.
Acts 2. Now we must see what manner of humiliation that is, by the things that
are signified by his descension into hell. The significations are these; hell
signifies the grave, secondly by translation, the place of the damned, thirdly
extreme sorrows. Psalm. 18 1. Sam. 2. fourthly it is taken for the
condition, which is in burial and which follows the same; or else for that
same full state of extreme ignominy, to wit, whiles they that are buried, lie
oppressed and as it were swallowed up of death, Isaias 14.11.15.16.17. Of the
first signification we have said, why the descension into hell must not be
taken simply for burial in this place. The other signification also to wit,
the descension to the place of the damned, we have showed not to agree to this
article. There remains two significations, to wit, the sorrows of mind and
that same state or condition, which follows those sorrows and burying it
self. In the first signification Christ in his whole passion, not only in
his body, but in his soul especially felt those same horrible anguishes
which Peter calls the sorrows of death, Acts 2. In the very entrance of
this most fearful bottomless pit the voice of Christ does witness this very
thing, Matthew. 26. My soul is heavy unto death: in the proceeding into the
same bottomless gulf, the drops of blood do also witness a greater
anguish of the mind, which fell from his face upon the earth, Luke 22. And
from the very bottom of this gulf proceeded yt voice of Christ witnessing
his extreme torments: O God my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27. In
very deed because we have not only sinned in body but principally also in
soul and deserved the wrath of God: it behooved our pledge Christ, before that
righteous tribunal seat of God to feel the wrath of God not only in body,
but also in soul, and to appease it, that he might be the redeemer not only
of the body, but also of the soul. 1. Cor. 6.20. Of whih matter there is a
notable place to the Hebrews Cap. 5. verse. 7. Who (that is to say Christ) in
the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with strong
crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was also
heard in that which he feared, and though he were the son, yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered, and being consecrated was made the
author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey: where also this is to be
observed, that the willing obedience of Christ is seen in that same descending
of Christ. And therefore Saint Peter also 1. Epistle cap. 2 calls Christ the
Pastor of souls. Now although that Christ in his passion did only feel
these sorrows of hell for a time, yet notwithstanding this same humiliation of
the son of God, into those same extreme sorrows of hell enduring only for
a time, is equal with those everlasting pains, which in sinning against the
eternal God, we have deserved: seeing that same person God is everlasting who
has so humbled it self in his human nature, that it felt the sorrows of
hell. Which also is the cause why those same sorrows in Christ, could but
last only for a time, under which the ungodly lie overwhelmed for ever.
Neither is there any cause why any man should think, that these things which
are attributed unto him of the Evangelists, to wit, heaviness, fear, and to
conclude, sorrow, all which do spring of infirmity, to be unmeet for the
person of Christ. First for because Christ not for his own, but for our
cause took these things upon him of his own accord, and therefore they
withdraw nothing from his power and strength. Moreover this infirmity of
Christ was pure and free from all sin, as well because he continued in true
obedience, so that he suffered such great torments without any blasphemy
against God, as also because he left not off, to have hope in God, admit he
were vexed above measure, when he ceased not to call him his God, of whom he
cries out that he was forsaken. Hebrews. 5. verses 7.8.9. This signification
which is the third in order, to wit, of the sorrows of the mind springing
from the curse, does contain a profitable and necessary doctrine agreeable
with the holy Scripture, and this signification were sufficient for the
expounding of this article, saving that two points do let, both that in the
death of Christ which was accursed those same sorrows springing from the
feeling of the curse are comprehended, and that same article of burying is
adjoined. The later signification therefore of hell, is that same condition
which is in burial and which follows the same, that is to say, whiles they
which are buried, lie oppressed and as it were swallowed up of death. And
therefore David says, Who shall confess thee in the grave? Psa. 49.15.16 Esai
14.11.15.16.17. Christ also would humble himself even unto this same very
state, that he might lie until the third day as Jonah in the belly of the
whale, swallowed, and as it were overcome of death. For so the Scripture
speaks of Jonah, the figure of Christ praying out of the belly of the
fish. Chapter 2. verse 2. In my affliction I have called upon the Lord, and he
has heard me, from the belly of hell have I called upon thee, and thou have
heard my voice. And in the fourth verse, But I have said I am cast away from
thy sight, yet I will look toward the temple of thy holiness. And verse 6.
the bars of the earth have shut me in for ever. Saint Peter joins both
significations together in one and the same verse Acts 2. saying, Whom God
raised up loosing the sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he
should be holden of it. For first in those words, those same sorrows of death
without all controversy, are those same extreme torments not only of the
body but principally of the mind, wherewith God would bruise him, Esaie. 53.
and in which he being set and placed he cries out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Moreover Peter adds that then those same sorrows of death
were loosed, when God raised him up from the dead, because that it was
impossible that he should be holden of it: in which words he manifestly
joins that state which followed the sorrows of death, and the burial with
the sorrows themselves. And why so? For although the body lying in the grave
were void of all sorrow and of all sense and feeling (when Christ was truly,
and in deed dead) notwithstanding seeing that death it self, ^^^ch was
continued in the grave, seemed to be nothing else, but as it were the victory
and full triumph over those same sorrows and torments, Christ is then worthily
said to have overcome those same deadly and desperate sorrows, (which are
truly the sorrows of hell) when being dead he overcame death, that he with
his might live everlastingly with God. Seeing therefore that it is certain,
that Peter entreats there of the extremest degree of the humiliation of
Christ, it follows that by his descending into hell, there is noted not only
the sorrows of death, but also that extreme shame, as the victory of
sorrows, whiles being holden in the grave even until the third day, he lay
as it were oppressed of death. Esaie 53. ver. 8. And in very deed although
Christ were greatly humbled upon the cross, and was accounted of the enemies
as one forlorn of God, and also cried out that he was forsaken of God: yet
notwithstanding their mind was not contented, neither had their rage and
madness together with Satan's ben satisfied, unless he had lien wholly shut up
and oppressed in the grave, and so had been holden of death. They show that
same discontentednes, Let him come down from the cross, and we will believe in
him: and albeit they do so triumph over him, whiles Christ truly felt those
sorrows of hell, (as also he witnesses the same by his voice) yet
notwithstanding it was but half the triumph of Satan, or as it were even
begone. For even they by whom Satan had triumphed over Christ as forsaken of
God and now oppressed, they were doubtful and careful to continue the same
victory, and therefore desire that the sepulcher may be kept, and they also
set their seal upon it. Matthew. 27, verse 62.63. And why do they this thing?
even because they saw that it should be an imperfect or rather no victory,
unless also after burial the possession of victory might be continued, that
is the cutting off of Messiah as one altogether forsaken of God. Daniel in the
9. Chapter seems to have expressed this great humiliation of the son of
God: The Messiah shall be cut off, and there shall be none to wit, that shall help
him, he shall be utterly forsaken. yea whiles he does not only foreshewe that,
but also foresheweth an other, that it shall come to pass that he will establish
his covenant: and in the seventh Chapter, that he may establish an everlasting
kingdom, he plainly prophecieth, that he shall after that extreme abasing
of him self rise again a victorious Conqueror.

3. Moreover besides these, Paul shows 1. Cor. 15. out of Osee the Prophet,
that then at length Christ's victory shall be perfect, and the deliverance from
hell in his members, when he shall also deliver their bodies, out of that vile
estate in which they lie buried (for they are sown in dishonor, verse 42.)
and shall join them unto their souls: When this body subject to corruption
shall put on (says he) an incorrupt nature, and this mortal shall put on
immortality, then shall be fulfilled that which is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory, O death, where is thy victory! O hell, where is thy sting!
Therefore as long as the grave holds them in prison, (but it holds them
even till the resurrection) so long it has some victory: and that shall be
fully taken from it in the resurrection of our bodies. So also as long as
death and the grave held Christ dead, and as it were vanquished, so long
continued their power over him: now the same is fully taken from him when he
arose from the dead. Lastly the very order it self of the articles themselves
show that by the descending of Christ into hell, there is noted that same
extreme ignominy which followed his burial, the which thing also is manifest
by the antithesis or contrary comparison of Christ his exaltation. For to
these same three degrees: He is dead, buried, and descended into hell, there are
set these three, he is arisen, ascended into heaven, and sits at the right
hand: against death, is set resurrection into life: against the grave the house
of death, is set heaven it self: against the descending into hell, as the
extremest degr e of humiliation in dishonor, is set the sitting at the right
hand of GOD the Father Almighty, which is the highest degree of exaltation in
glory.

Of the fruit of Christ his descention into hell.
THE sum therefore of either signification of Christ his discending into
hell, (of which the latter agrees more properly to the order of the articles
of the faith) is, that Christ must thoroughly be humbled or rather forsaken of
God, to the end that we might not be forsaken of GOD. First his divine nature
not showing forth his power that he might feel the sorrows of death not only
in the body, but also in the soul: moreover the same word, or rather divine
nature keeping it self in secret, and for a time not quickening that lump of
flesh that it had taken: but permitting the body pulled from the soul for the
space of three days, to be in the hand or power of the grave, that by all
means, Christ might be thoroughly humbled and made of no reputation for us,
to the end we might be assured that not only our souls are delivered from the
sorrows of death; but that also all ignominy, and dishonor, is chased from
our bodies by this Christ, and his merit, and by the efficacy and virtue of
him at the length fully to be taken away, albeit they be holde^ for a time shut
up in the grave as it were conquered of death. To be short, faithful minds do
conceive so much the greater confidence and trust of the love of God, and of
that same full cleansing which is made by the son, as they see Christ to be
made more humble and abject, and that without sin, and so much the dearer
they see that their salvation did cost him.

The third day he rose from the dead.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles concerning the resurrection of
Christ.
Psalm. 16, 20.
Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Acts 2. Men and brethren
(says Peter) I may boldly speak unto you of the patriarche David, that he is
both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with you till this day.
Therefore seeing he was a Prophet, and God had sworn with an oath unto him,
that of the fruit of his loins he would raise up Christ concerning the flesh,
whom he would place upon his throne, he knowing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul should not be left in grave, neither
should his flesh see corruption: This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are
all witnesses. The figure of Jonah (Cap. 2) is manifest and expounded of Christ
himself. Math. 12.^9 40. Esaias 53.8. He was taken out from prison and
judgment, and who shall reckon his age and generation? And in the 10. verse,
when he shall make his soul an offeringe for sin, he shall see the seed
that shall prolong his days, and the will of Jehovah shall prosper in his
hands. There is also cited of Paul, Acts 13. the 55. Chapter of Esaias, and the
2. Psalm. and the 16. to the end he may show that Christ must rise again,
that he might declare himself to be the very son of God (Romans 1.) and that
that same covenant of God made with David might be firm and everlasting. Now
Paul's sermon is on this sort, Men and brethren, you sons of the stock of
Abraham, and those amongst you that fear God, to you is this word of
salvation sent. For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their rulers, because
they knew him not, nor yet the words of the prophets which are read every
Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him, and though they found
no cause of death in him yet desired they Pilate to kill him. And when they had
fulfilled all things which were written of him, they put him being taken
down from the tree into a sepulcher, but God raised him from the dead, and he
was seen many days of them, which came up with him from Galile to Jerusalem
which are his witnesses unto the people. And we preach unto you that touching
the promise made unto the fathers, God has fulfilled it unto us their
children, in that he raised up Jesus, even as it is written in the second
Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. Now in as much as he
has raised him up from the dead, and he shall no more return into corruption,
he has said, I will give you those same firm and good things of David.
Wherefore he says also in an other place, Thou will not suffer thine holy one
to see corruption. Howbeit David after he had served his time by the counsel
of God, he slept and was laid with his fathers, and saw corruption: but he
whom God raised up saw no corruption. Be it known unto you therefore men and
brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins;
and from all things from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses,
by him every one that believes is justified: Beware therefore least that come
upon you which is spoken of in the Prophet Daniel, and other Prophets
foreshewe both: that both the Messiah is to be cut of, and yet notwithstanding
that he shall reign for ever. Therefore he must be quickened again. For
abiding in death, he reigns not. Daniel 7. and 9.

John 2. Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up again in three days,
where also is prophesied concerning the fulfilling of that prophecy in the 2.
of Aggei. John adds when he was arisen from the dead, his disciples
remembered that he had said this unto them, and they believed the scripture and
the word which Jesus had spoken unto them. 1. Cor. 15. does witness at large
the resurrrection of Christ and the fruit of it. And the Evangelists they
bear witness concerning the resurrection, they set it out and confirm it by
the testimonies of Angels. Math. 28. Mark 16. John 20. 21. Luk 24.

The meaning of this article, The third day he rose again from the dead.
I Believe that it was impossible that that same holy Jesus, the Christ and
anointed of God, should be holden of death, which entered into the world for
sin only: Acts 2. as well because he was pure in himself from all blot of
sin, as also because he abolished our sins which were laid upon him: and
also because the humanity being personally united to the divine nature or to
that same substantial quickening word, and that therefore the bonds of death
being loosed that he arose again the third day by his divine power and
appeared again to his disciples in life, deuoide of al passion and mortality,
and so declared himself in very deed, the conqueror of our sin and of
death, Matthew. 28. Mark. 16.

Of the use or fruit of the resurrection of Christ.
THe use or fruit whereof we be partakers of the resurrection of Christ is
fourefold. The first is that the resurrection of Christ is a public
testimony, that by the Messiah, as Daniel speaks, there is brought a perfect
and everlasting righteousness upon all and over all that do believe. For seeing
that he is dead not in his own but in our sins that were laid upon him,
and that out of them he is arisen again to a life that shall never die, hence
there shines to the minds of all believers a wonderful light, that not so
much as one of all their sins remained unwashed or unsatisfied. For if so be
that there had remained but one of all their sins, which (none excepted
Christ took upon him) either not thoroughly punished, or imperfectly
punished: then could not Christ our pledge and truce-maker rise again: for
as much as where there is but one sin, there of necessity must death be: for
so has the unchangeable truth, and righteousness of God decreed, Romans 6. The
wages of sin is death. Neither yet does the resurrection of Christ so make to
our justification, as it is only a public testimony thereof: but also in a
more high consideration, and that sound and perfect, every manner of way, to
wit that that same raising up of the Son, is (as I may say) an actual
remission from the sins of all them which believe. For even as the Father by
delivering Christ to death, has in deed condemned our sins in Christ, Romans
8. verse 3. so also by raising him from death, he has in the same deed
absolved Christ from our sins and us in Christ. There is a most sure
demonstration of this doctrine in the 1. Cor. 15. If Christ (says he) be not
risen again, in vain is our faith, and ye are yet in your sins, that is to
say, ye are yet guilty before God. Therefore because Christ is arisen, we are
not any longer in our sins, that is, we are in very deed absolved from them,
in this very thing that the father has raised him from the dead, that they
might not be laid to our charge. 2. Cor. 5.19. So also is that same place to
be taken. To. 4. For it was written, not for Abraham alone, for that this was
imputed unto him, but also for us, to whom it should come to pass that it
should be imputed, that is to say, to them which believe in him who has raised
up our Lord Jesus from the dead, who was delivered for our sins, and raised
up again for our justification. What has the father done by delivering Christ
to death? He has delivered him for our sins, he has punished our sins in
him. And what has he done by raising him up? He has justified all in him: for
when he had delivered him, that is the believers, so that their sins shall be no
more laid to their charge, but righteousness shall be imputed unto them. For
these words raised up for our justification, are to be understood of
imputation, as by this it is easy to be seen, because that in the last verse
saving one he has said that righteousness is imputed of him who has raised
him up, and in this last verse he names it our justification in him who is
raised up. Lo that which before he had called imputation of righteousness,
this he names now our justification. What, for that the same Apostle in the
1. Timoth. 3. says, And without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh justified in spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory: does he not manifestly show that that same true God who was manifested
in the flesh wherein also he suffered: by the spirit which he opposes
against the flesh, that is by the power of his own divinity whereby he
raised up the flesh from the dead, was justified, and that not from his own
sins, but from ours which he had taken upon him? After which raising up and
justification of him their followed ye testimony of Angels, ye public
preaching of the remission of sins through him unto the gentiles, the belief
which was given unto him, and to be short the receiving of him up into glory:
all which testimonies verily could not have followed, unless he had been
justified from our sins, by rising again through the power of his divinity.
For neither could the Angels give witness of him as of the Savior if he had
remained oppressed in our condemnation: neither remission of sins have been
preched in his name, if from the^ in our name he had not been fully justified:
neither faith have been given to him, if oppressed of sin and death he could
not have given ye holy ghost, which is ye author of faith: neither could he have been received up into glory unless yt same flesh, upon which all our sins had
been cast (Esaias 53.) had been justified from them, when it was raised up from
death, to which by the counsel of death it was condemned. This is that same
power of the resurrection of Christ, whereby ye righteousness which is not of
the law, but the righteousness which is of God, is brought forth through faith,
concerning which Paul Phil. 3. in an undoubted and full persuasion of faith,
glories after this manner: as touching ye righteousness which is in the law, I
was blameless, but the things which were vantage unto me, those things I
accounted loss, in respect of Christ, yea doubtless I think all things loss
for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I deprive
my self of al these things, and accoumpt them for doung, that I may gain
Christ, and may be found in in him not having my righteousness which is of the
law, but that which is of Christ through faith, the righteousness which is of
GOD through faith, that I may know him, and the force and power of his
resurrection. Therefore also Paul, Romans 8. not only opposes death as the
price and redemption against condemnation but also of the resurrection as the
absolution, and as it were a higher degree. For so he says, Who is it that
shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, or rather which is risen again.
Why also does Peter reckon ye resurrection of Jesus Christ to be the covenant
of a good conscience: unless it be because then the conscience is clear and
restored into liberty, when that same light of justification in the
resurrection of Jesus Christ shall shine unto it? Therefore then at length the
covenant of Baptism is ratified in believers, when faith shall have obtained
this victory in our hearts, see the 1. Pet. 3 And hitherto makes that same
course and order of propounding the Gospel, which the Apostles kept in the
Acts, to wit, why they so greatly vexed, that he whom they had crucified,
was raised up again from the dead, and why they set out in him being raised
up from ye dead, justification or rather forgiveness of sins: to wit, because
as our sins are condemned in the death of Christ: so our absolutio^ is in his
resurrection: Therefore when Paul Act. 13. showed forth ye death of Christ, and
proved his resurrection by many reasons, at the length he concludes, Brethren,
be it therefore known unto you, that through this man is preached unto you,
forgiveness of sins, and from all things from which you could not be
justified by the law of Moses, by him every one that believes is justified.
And those same words that went before, do show that Paul does gather that
same conclusion concerning justification, not only of the death, but also of
the resurrection of Christ, which words are in this sort, We also preach unto
you the same promise, which was made unto the fathers, which God has fulfilled
unto their children, that is to say to you, having raised up Jesus. And surely
that same course or manner of propounding of the Gospel, was agreeable to the
commandment. For why, by the commandment of Christ was the full gospel sent
at length after the resurrection, to the gentiles and to every creature, as
Christ says in Luke: For so it behooued that Christ should suffer and rise
again from the dead the third day, and remission of sins be preached in his
name to all nations: to wit because then at the length these things might be
fully published in his name, after he had borne our sins in his body upon
the tree, and had risen again being justified from them. For then was the
Gospel full all manner of ways, (1. Cor. 15.1.2.17.) and the grace of
justification most full and abounding over every fault in all and over all
that do believe. The sum therefore of the first fruit of the resurrection of
Christ, is that our sins can no more be laid to our charge then to Christ
himself: and that in Christ we are accounted as righteous and innocent as
Christ was when he rose from the dead. Forasmuch as by his death going before,
he had taken away our sins through obedience, now hereof it follows
seeing he arose justified, who before as a sinner was condemned, and accurssed
of God in our person, that he was justified in our name from our sins.
Neither is there any cause, that any man should meruell that Christ by rising
from the dead, was justified from our sins, and we in Christ before we were
borne, forasmuch as the Apostle says 2. Tim. 1. that that same grace was given
unto us before all worlds, but manifested in the son and yet also manifested
in the Gospel, see also Ephesians. 1.

Of the second fruit of the resurrection of Christ.
THe second fruit is vivification or quickening: because as Christ, is
justified from our sins by rising again, and therewithal is quickened: so
he that believes in Christ, is both justified and quickened, as the Apostle
teaches Ephesians. 2. until the 11. verse. Therefore Paul Romans 5. calls the
same justification of life, and opposes it to the fault of condemnation; and
makes an antithesis or matching of contraries between sin that reigns to
death, and the righteousness of Christ, which whosoever receive, they reign in
life, verses, 17.18.21. And in deed so, as not only Christ works in us not
only that same new life: but also Christ is that life himself, as him self
says: I am the way, the truth, and the life. John. 14.6. And Gala. 2.20. Now
I live no more, But Christ lives in me. Vivification therefore is the second
fruit of the resurrection of Christ, to wit, for that Christ himself always
living is become our life through faith, and because by the virtue which we
draw from our head Christ through the spirit of faith, we arise in this
life into newnes of life, that by living purely and holily, we might wholly
consecrate our selves to the will of God. This thing the Apostle teaches Col.
3. If ye be risen with Christ* seek those things that are above, where
Christ is sitting at the right hand of God. Care for heavenly things and not
for earthly. For this cause also the self same Apostle says, Romans 6. that We
are planted into the similitude of the death of Christ that being partakers of
his resurrection, we might walk in newnes of life, In which words he not
only sets out the resurrection of Christ, as an example for us to follow:
but also especially teaches that this thing especially wrought in us, that by
the virtue of the resurrection of Christ, we might rise again into a new
life.

Of the third fruit of the resurrection of Christ.
The third fruit which is joined with the second, is the assurance of our
perseverance in faith and of full victory against sin and death. For even
like as Christ dies no more, but lives the life which never can fail, (for
in that he is dead, he is once dead to sin, but in that he lives, he lives
to God, death shall have no further dominion over him. Romans 6.) so they that are
engraffed into Christ through faith, do draw out of him a spiritual life,
from which they can never fall: and which no not in the very separation of the
body and of soul can be extinguished, as Christ says, If any man keep my
word he shall never see death. John 8.51. Therefore seeing the faithful live
this life of Christ in an entrance or beginning, the force and nature whereof
shed into their minds from Christ is such as it can never altogether die: they
are also assured of the full consummation and perfecting of it. The self same
thing also Peter teaches 1. Epist. 1. Blessed be God and the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who of his great mercy has begotten us into a lively hope
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead: And verse 4. and 6. he
lays the cause and foundation of a lively hope in the mercy of ye father and
resurrection of Christ: because as Christ after yt he arose in our name by the
mercy of ye father he always lives: so hope also has a permanent and
indurable life in him, partly regeneration being begone, and partly it looks
for it in that same full consummation and finishing. In the first to the
Ephesians verses 19.20.23. there is a notable place most fit and agreeable unto
this doctrine: to wit that God does show forth yt self same power in us,
whiles he gives us faith, which he wrought and declared in his son, when he
raised him up from the dead, and that same substantial word it self to be
that, which fills all in all things, The same also 1. Pet. 1. verse 3.5. 2
Cor. 4.14.16. And from hence flows that same certainty concerning full
victory against sin, against the assaults of satan and death. For like as
that everlasting word in flesh which it took, and which in it own power it
raised from the dead, John 10. overcame our sin imputed unto him and death:
so also that same everlasting word shall not cease, dwelling by grace in the
faithful, but utterly to abolish in those also the remnauntes of sin and
death, already overcame by his virtue and power. 1. Corinthians. 15. verse.
54.57.58. 1. John 5.4.5. For by no other virtue and power, but by the very
same whereby that everlasting word in that received lump overcame our sin and
death, we know also according to the promise the same word also working in us,
that we shall vanquishe and overcome. Io. 4. Because he is mightier that is in
us then he that is in the world. This certayntie of our perseueraunce in true
faith, and of a full victory through faith brings to pass that we take all
things from his hand, whether they be things prosperous or full of
adversity, being fully persuaded that all those things do hasten the
fruition of that same victory, which now is gotten for us by Christ. 1. Cor.
15. Thanks be to God, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. The same is in the 2. Cor. 4.15.

Concerning the last fruit of the resurrection of Christ.
Seeing yt not only our souls but also our bodies, are members of our head
Christ, through the bond of the spirit of faith: 1. Cor. 6. ver. 5. 15. Romans
8.11. therefore in the resurrection of our head Christ, our bodies have a
certain pledge and seal that they are not only raised up from sins in this
life, as was showed in the second fruit: but also ye self same bodies which
are yet mortal, have both now the right of everlasting life, and through that
same quickening spirit of Christ, are repaired to the fruition of him, and to
true immortality in the end of the world, and that in the self same state and
condition with the glorious body of Christ. Phil. 3. Who shall transform our
vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
that effectual working whereby he is made able to subdue all things unto
himself. 1. Cor. 15.49. As we have borne the image of the earthly Adam, so
shall we hear the image of the heavenly. The last fruit therefore of the
resurrection of Christ, is tha^ immortality is adjudged unto us from God
himself, made in the raising up of the Messiah, and offered unto us by the
Gospel, and sealed by the spirit of Christ, 2. Tim. 1.10. Who has abolished
death, and has brought life and immortality unto light thorough the Gospel.
To the Ephesians chap. 1. In which Christ also you have hoped, having heard the
word of truth, even the gospel of your salvation: in which also after that
ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance whiles we are redeemed into liberty to the praise
of his glory. Although therefore we die, yet we shall rise again into an
immortal life, because both the right of life is adjudged unto us, in the
raising up again of the son, and we are ingraffed into this Christ, raised
up as branches unto the vine, both by the outward testimony of the Gospel,
and also by the inward witness of the holy Ghost, 1. Corinthians. 15. If Christ
be risen again, we also shall rise again. Hitherto also belongs it, that
he calls him the first fruits of them that rise again, because ye whole
harvest of all the faithful, from the beginning of the world was sanctified
unto God, by the raising up of that lump, which the son of God had taken of
us, to a blessed resurrection. Hitherto also it belongs, that he is called
the first begotten from amongst the dead, Colossians 1. as else where it shall
be declared more largely. Seeing therefore, that in raising up of the son,
the right of life is brought to light unto us, and that same quickening spirit
of Christ is given unto us, having heard the Gospel, (that same spirit I say
of faith) through which not only our souls but also our bodies are members of
our head Christ, therefore we have an undoubted pledge in the resurrection of
our head Christ, that our bodies are to be repaired, and restored to
immortality.

He ascended into heaven.
Testimones out of the Prophets and Apostles.
THE Apostle in the fourth Chapter to the Ephesians cites a prophecy out of
the 68. Psalm concerning the ascension of Christ: but unto every one of us,
grace is given according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he
says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. And the prophecy in the hundred and tenth Psalm of the sitting of
the Messiah at the right hand of God, comprehends in it a prophecy of the
ascension into the heavens, as it were an entry of that glorious exaltation at
the right hand of God, the which thing is confirmed by the testimony of the
holy Ghost himself, by the mouth of Peter. Acts 2.34. Since then that he by
the right hand of God has been exalted, and has received of his father the
promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this amongst you, which you
see and hear. For David is not ascended into heaven, but he says, The Lord
said to my LORD, sit at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footestoole. So also Mark^ the Evangelist in the sixteenth Chapter, joins the
entry with the sitting it self at the right hand: so after the Lord had
spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and sits at the right hand
of God. And Christ John 14. foresheweth his ascension into heaven, let not your
heart be troubled ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my fathers house
are many dwelling places: otherwise I would have told you, I go to prepare a
place for you. And seeing I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again
and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be also. The
Evangelists describe a sure and manifest fulfilling of these foresayinges
concerning the ascension of Christ, Mark in the place now aledged, and Luke
in his Evangelical history, chapter 24. Lo I do send the promise of my
father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued
with power from on high. Now he led them out into Bethaniah and lifting up
his hands he blessed them. And it came to pass that whiles he blessed them,
being separate from them, he^ was carried up into heaven, and they worshipping
him, returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple
lauding and praising God. And in the first of the Acts, And when he had spoken
these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud took him out
of their sight, and while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, behold two
men stood by them in white apparel, who said: Ye men of Galilie, why stand
ye gasing into heaven? This Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall
so come as ye have seen him go into heaven. And Peter Acts 3, And now
brethren I know that through ignorance* ye did these things, as also did your
governors, but those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all
his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has thus fufilled. Amend your
lives therefore and turn, that your sins may be put away, when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and when he shall send
Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must contain,
until the time that all things be restored which God has spoken by the mouth
of all his holy Prophets, since the world began.

The meaning of these words, He ascended into heaven.
THE meaning is, I believe Christ who according to his divine nature was
always in the heavens, John 1. and 3. after that he had fulfilled the office
of embassage, and by the space of forty days had instructed his disciples
concerning ye truth of his resurrection, in that same true body of his, that
was taken out of the substance of Marie the virgin, that it hanged upon the
cross, was dead and buried, that being glorified rose again, yt in the self
same body I say together with a very human and reasonable soul, he ascended
into the heavens, where ye seat is of everlasting felicity. The scripture in
the first Chapter of the Acts does set out the matter most lively before our
eyes. And in an other place he says the same things that CHRIST departed from
his disciples, and was lifted up into heaven, Luke 24. that he went from them,
John 14. that he left this world, John. 16. that he was taken away Acts
15. from us, Luke 24. into those same holy tabernacles, not made with hands:
Hebrews 9. into heaven it self, Mark. 16. that he is there continually and
without any interruption, Hebrews 10. that heaven must hold him until the
time of the restoring of all things. Act. 2.

How Christ being absent, is yet present.
BUT if yt Christ went from us, and has left this world, how is that promise
of Christ fulfilled, Behold I am always with you unto the end of the world?
Matthew 28. Surely it is so fulfilled, even like as that same other word of
Christ was fulfilled. Verily I say unto you, that before Abraham was, I am.
John 8. For like as he fulfilled that, by the presence not of his flesh, but
of his divinity, and yet feared not to say, I; admit that he understood it
only of the presence of his divinity: so also according to his majesty,
according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and invisible grace,
that saying was fulfilled of him, Behold I am with you always, even to the
end of the world. For indeed according to the flesh which ye world has
taken on it, Augustine.
according to that that was borne of the virgin, according to yt which was
taken of ye Jews, which was nailed to the tree, that was taken down from the
cross, that was lapped in linen, that was laid in the grave, that was
manyfested in the resurrection, You shall not always have me with you. Why
so? Because he was conversant according to his bodily presence, forty days
with his disciples, and leading them by seeing, but not by following, he
ascended into heaven, and is not here. For he is there, and sits at the
right hand of the father: and is here, for the presence of his majesty has
not departed. And otherwise according to the presence of his majesty we have
Christ always: but according to the presence of the flesh, it was well said
unto his disciples, but me ye shall not have always.

Of the fruit of the ascension.
FVrthermore we must speak of the fruits, which faith does lay hold upon by
the ascension of Christ. And first of all like as our justification is ascribed
unto the resurrection: so the proceeding and continuing of the same
justification is ascribed unto the ascension, and that two manner of ways:
first because in the same body, which was accurssed in our sins, he could
not ascend into heaven, unless first he had been fully in our name justified
from them. For even like as he could not have risen into life, if there had
but one of our sins remained unsatisfied for, and unless all beleuers had been justified in him, whose person took upon him, when he should be
condemned in them: so much less could he have entered into that same high
light whereunto there was no way, and whither no impure thing could attain,
yea where God does show himself to be seen of the blessed Angels, unless
he had been fully justified for our sins, and we in him when he ascended
thither in our name. John. 14 The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of
righteousness, because I go to the father, and you shall see me no more. For
like as it was not lawful for the high priest to enter into the holy of
holiest, without blood for his own sins, and the sins of the people, Heb.
3.27. so that same true sanctuary had not been open to Christ, to wit, that
same entry into heaven, unless first he had satisfied for our sins, which he
had taken upon him. Heb. 1. verse 2. and 9. verse 7.11.12. Therefore whiles
Christ does enter into that same sanctuary not made with hands, heaven it
self, by his own blood: it is a sure demonstration, and thereby the world is
convinced, that everlasting righteousness is brought by Christ as Daniel had
foretold. And surely the Apostle Ephesians. 4. does lay out that same ascension
of Christ as a public testimony of our justification, as it were in a triumph
to be beholden of the eyes, of our faith, When he ascended on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. Surely he led not captivity with
him into ye heavens, that is to say death and sin: for neither is there any
place there for sin and death. What then? That same ascension was as it were
a public testimony of sin overcome, and of damnation taken away, and of
righteousness obtained and of full victory.

Again, that same entry into that high sanctuary, is not only a testimony
of our righteousness; but also that same abiding in the same sanctuary, and
showing of himself before the Father, is an everlasting continuance of the
same righteousness: to wit, whiles by the virtue of his only one sacrifice,
being justified for ever from our sins, he appears there in our name, that
we might be esteemed righteous perpetually in him, and to the end he might
give gifts unto men, to wit the gifts of the holy Ghost, amongst which the
Apostle does specially commend faith, whereby he does engraffe us into him
self as members unto the head, and does apply his benefits unto us Ephesians. 4.
verse. 12.13.15.16. But of this same showing of Christ before the Father, there
will be a more fit place, when we shall entreat of the sitting at the right
hand of God.

How the death, resurrection, ascension, and sitting of Christ at the right
hand of GOD, make to the justification of faith.
But now seeing before mention was made of our righteousness in the death and
resurrection of Christ, some man will demand not without cause, by what way
and means the death, resurrection and ascension, and the sitting at the right
hand of God, does make to the justification of Faith.

I. The obedience of the death of Christ, is the thing it self that is imputed
to us to righteousness. For that satisfies for our sins: neither is there
any thing wanting to this obedience, as Christ says: It is finished. And the
Apostle Romans 5. does set the obedience of Christ, against our disobedience.

II. The resurrection from the dead is a public testimony and demonstration
both of Christ his righteousness and ours, to wit that Christ is justified from
all our sins, and we also likewise in him: for otherwise if there had
remained but one sin unpunished, he could not have arisen. And this is that
same confident demanding which our conscience makes to God through the
resurrection of Christ, whereof Saint Peter entreats in his 1. Epistle
Chapter. 3. But we have spoken more of this matter in his place.

III. The ascension is the proceeding and continuance of his righteousness.
First because in his own body that was accursed in our sins, he could not
ascend in our name, I say into that high glory, unless he had been fully
justified from our sins, and we likewise in him, who are ingraffed into him
through faith. Hebrews 1. verse 7.

IIII. Now that same ascension and entrance into that high sanctuary, is not
only a public testimony of our righteousness, but also the sitting at the
right hand of God, that is that abiding of his and perpetual showing of
himself before the face of the Father, in that same high glory, is the
continuing of the everlasting righteousness of Christ and of ours, like as we
have taught, and shall afterward teach more fully in the article of sitting at
the right hand of God.

Paul sets down all these degrees in the eight Chapter to the Romans, Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God his chosen? It is GOD that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead (lo the matter for
which we are justified from accusation and condemnation, the death of Christ)
yea or rather which is risen again (which is an undoubted token that that same
death of Christ which he took upon him, was sufficient for the full absolution
and forgiveness of our sins: otherwise he must have abiden in death) who is
also at the right hand of God, (which yet is a greater testimony that the
captivity of sin and damnation is vanquished: so that now we are delivered
and justified through Christ from it) which also makes entreatie for us,
whilst he says, for us, which also shows that there is farther a new
confirmation of our faith to be added to the next of the free justification
thorough Christ, to wit, that he also is at the right hand of God, whether
he could not have come, unless he had been justified from our sins: and
that he entreats also for us, to wit whilst by the power of that only one
sacrifice, he appears everlastingly righteous for us. 1. John. 2 1.

And so that same abiding at the right hand of God and showing him self
before the Father, is a continuing of that everlasting justification of ours,
to the end that there should be no place left for any accusation against
believers: so full every manner of way is our justification in Christ, so
everlasting and so underpropped upon most sure foundations, to the knowledge
whereof Paul in the place now alleged, would lead us by those arguments,
as it were by certain steps and degrees.

Of the second fruit of the ascension.
THe second fruit is, that by his ascension into heaven, he has made us to
sit with him in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. So that we do not only in a
naked hope look for heaven: but we possess it in the head, and in Christ our
brother: as well because that same earthly, and bodily pledge, which he has
taken of us, full expiation and cleansing, being made of our sins, does
possess the heavens now in our name: as also because we our selves do
possess a spiritual and heavenly pledge received again from him, to wit the
spirit of Christ dwelling in us: and so by the power of the holy Ghost
through faith in the promise of the Gospel we are ingraffed into him. And
therefore To. 10.6.8. The righteousness which is of faith says thus, Say not in
thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven? That is to bring Christ from above,
etc. But what says it? The word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thine heart, that is, that same word of Faith which we preach.

Surely the spiritual first fruits of this doctrine are most sweet. For it
brings to pass by the power of Christ his spirit, that now in a certain and
undoubted hope in our head Christ, we possess heaven. Therefore let us confirm
our minds in this most profitable doctrine by some most evident oracles of ye
scripture. Christ himself now about to go into that heavenly possession in
our name, speaks on this sort, John. 14. In my fathers house there are many
abiding places, if it had been otherwise, I had told you. I go to prepare a
place for you. The same John. Chap. 20. I ascend to my father, and to your
father; to my God, and to your God. The Apostle also makes us so sure of the
certainty of the earnest and pledge which Christ having of us, has advanced
into the heavens, that he says in the second of the Ephesians, that God has
made us to sit with Christ in heavenly places. Again, of sending that same
earnest or comforter unto us Christ speaks thus in Ioh. 16. I speak the
truth unto you, it is profitable for you that I go: for if I go not, that same
comforter shall not come unto you. Peter also witnesses of this same earnest
already sent in Acts 2. also Paul in 2. Cor. 1. Who has sealed us and given
the earnest of his spirit in our hearts: And most plain of all other places
in the 2. Cor. 5. See also Tertullian in his book of the resurrection of the
flesh, where amongst other things he writes thus, This Jesus called the
Mediator of God and men, of the trust of either part committed unto him does
keep the pledge of the flesh in himself as the earnest of the whole sum.
For like as he has left the earnest of his spirit with us, so also he has
taken of us the earnest of the flesh, and has advanced into heaven the pledge
of the whole sum hereafter to be brought thither. Be quiet therefore O flesh
and blood, you have usurped both heaven and the kingdom of God in Christ, or
if they deny you in Christ, let them also deny Christ to be in heaven, who
have denied heaven unto you.

Of the third fruit.
THe third fruit is, that Christ therefore sits in the highest heavens,
that through his power shed into our hearts, from thence he may draw us from
these earthly and carnal things present, and may quicken them and lift them up
to desire and meditate upon heavenly and spiritual things to come. Philip. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for our Lord Jesus Christ.

He sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Psalm 110. Jehovah has said* sit at my right hand, until I put thine
enemies as a footestoole under thy feet. Jehovah shall send out of Sion the
rod of thy strength* rule in the midst of thine enemies. Also, the Lord
has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. And Christ teaches in Matthew. 22. toward the end, that
this prophecy is to be understood of him. And Christ being adjured of the
high priest, confesses himself to be both the son of God, and that he will
overcome his enemies sitting at the right hand of God. Matthew. 26.63, 64. And
the high priest answering said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that
thou tell us whether thou be Christ that son of God: Jesus says unto him,
thou have said: Nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the son
of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God and coming in the clouds
of heaven. The fulfilling of that prophecy of David concerning the sitting at
the right hand of God is extant in the 16. of Mark, After the Lord had spoken
unto them, he was received up into heaven and sits at the right hand of God,
and Act. 2. ver. 33.36. and 5. ver. 31. and so that same stone refused of the
builders was made the head of the corner. Act. 4. ver. 10.11.12. Which stone
cut from the mountain without hands, goes to the right hand of God to break
all the rest of the kingdoms: but his kingdom shall stand for ever. Dan. 2. ve.
44.45. And Paul in Ephesians. 1.18.19.20. That ye may know what the hope is of his
calling, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints: and
what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us which believe according to
the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
up from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the heavens.

To what end sitting at the right hand of God the Father almighty is added to
his ascension into heaven.
THe scope or principal end of Christ his ascension is already set forth: to
wit, that Christ ascended into heaven not only that he might there enjoy
everlasting felicity, as the Angels do and all blessed men: but that he
might sit at the right hand of God, which far exceeds the dignity of
Angels and of men, as he witnesses in the Epistle to the Heb. Ca. 1.13. For
unto which of the Angels said he at any time, sit at my right hand, til I make
thine enemies thy footstole? Now seeing God is not a bodily substance, and
therefore has neither right or left hand, at which Christ should stand or
sit; it is manifest that these words and manner of speeches, are taken from
men and worldly things: by which holy things answering in some sort, our
infirmity might be lively set before our eyes and explaned. For in very deed
men to whom they grant or give either equal honor, or that which is next
unto themselves, they are wont to place them at their right hand, that in this
very thing they may testify that honor, 1. King, 2. Psalm. 45.

What the sitting at the right hand of God the Father is.
THat same sitting at the right hand of God the Father is the exaltation of
Christ in his kingdom and priesthood: to wit, that now he administreth his
kingly and priestly office, not as before in infirmity and misery, but in a
manifest and heavenly majesty and glory. Therefore then thou do truly
believe in Christ his sitting at the right hand of God the father almighty,
when thou beleeuest that he does entreat for thee in heaven in high glory, and
that he does govern his kingdom with a mighty power, so that he does hear
thee, does more effectually endue and defend thee with the spirit of
consolation and wisdom, then if he were yet in the earth, and should speak
with thee. Act. 5.31. Him has God lifted up with his right hand to be a Prince
and a Savior to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins: And Ephe.
1. He has raised him up from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the
heavens far above all principality, and power, and might, and domination,
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to
come: and has made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him
head to the Church it self over all things, which is his body, even the
fullness of him which fills all in all things. Also to the Hebrews 8. verse
4. 1. Peter 3. verse 22. By these places it is plain that the Scripture names
the sitting at the right hand of God, not that same administration of the
kingdom and priesthood; which for the voluntary abasing of Christ was weaker
and more obscure: but that same perfect government, honor, and glory of
Christ, which was free from all infirmities openly manifested and declared:
into which then the first entrance was, when he arose again from death,
ascended into heaven, and there in an unspeakable glory, declared himself to
be Lord of al creatures in the sight of all holy Angels and men.

What fruit the faithful receive by that same sitting of Christ at the right
hand of God, or rather by that exaltation of Christ in his kingdom and
priesthood.
FIrst concerning that same exaltation of Christ in the priesthood, those that
are in league with God, do reap from thence this consolation: that they know
that this covenant of grace by the intercession of this mediator kept and
maintained everlastingly, as it appears, Hebr. 8. verses 6. and 12. the which
intercession is the showing of him self before the face of the father, that
the efficacy and strength of that sacrifice once offered up for all, might
continually be in force: and this same perpetual will of keeping it, in this
Mediator, is agreeable with the will of the Father, accepting that same
sacrifice once offered up for an everlasting reconciliation, and approving this
endeavor in the mediator of maintaining it according to the oathe: Psalm 110.
The Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a priest^ for ever
after ye order of Melchizedek: or that I may speak a little more largely:
First all the confederates do reap this fruit in the exaltation of Christ in
the priesthode, that they know that the Mediator of this everlasting covenant
is entered into that same sanctuary not made with hands, the very heaven it
self and is exalted to the right hand of God, that continually and without
any interruption, and that every moment he may appear an intercessour before
the father for us: and so may maintein that same covenant once established for
ever, and may confirm it by his intercession in the heavenly throne of his
Majesty.

I. The testimonies of the everlasting conservation of this free covenant,
appear in the eight to the Hebrews, verse 6. But now our high priest has
obtained a more excellent ministry, in as much as he is the intercessor of a
more notable covenant, which is ratified by more excellent promises, etc. Also
in the 7. to the Hebrews, And that not without an oath, for these are made
priests without an oath: but this is made wtth an oath by him that said unto
him, the Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, thou art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech. By so much is Jesus made a surety of a
better Testament, for among these many were made priests by reason that death
suffered them not to endure; but this man because that he endures for ever,
has a perpetual priesthod. By which he is able also perfectly to save those
which come to God through him, evermore living to make intercession for us.

II. Concerning the appearing of Christ in ^he sight of God for us, and the
perpetual ver^ue of the sacrifice of Christ once offered up, it is written
Hebru. 9. verse 24. Christ entered in unto a sanctuary not made with hands,
which ^s a pattern aunswering unto the true sanctu^rie; but into heaven it
self, that he may ap^eare now in the sight of God for us. And Heb. 10. ver.
22. This man, after he had offered one ^acrifice for sins, sits without
any interruption, that (...) for ever, at the right hand of the Father.

III. As touching the will in the son of mainteining it, and of the Fathers
will in accepting of it, the oath does witness, whereof God will not repent
him: and consequently neither will it repent the son of receiving the office
of being an everlasting Savior, Psalm. 110. Romans 8. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God his chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It
is Christ which is dead: yea rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God: who also makes request for us. Out of which words that
same constant will in the son of keeping us before the sight of the Father,
which Paul comprehends in intercession, is understood: and which answers
unto the will of God, whereof he spoke before, It is God who justifies.
Therefore the faithful, they cannot doubt of that everlasting reconciliation
with God, as well because that same everlasting office of reconciling is laid
upon Christ: as also because Christ executes the same with most high power
and glory, preserving it fully and perfectly every moment, without any or the
least interruption that may be; so that worthily enjoying such a patron, we
may undoubtedly trust that none can come forth which either dare accuse or
condemn the faithful, that we may trust I say, that the least accusation that
may be, can not be admitted before that same high priest in so great glory
making intercession for us, whether it be of Satan, of the conscience or of
sin: so that that same glorious intercession of Christ does truly perform
unto us that God has promised by Esaie the Prophet: I have taken away thine
iniquities as a cloud, and thy sins as a little cloud: turn unto me because
I have redeemed thee. Also Chapter 60. verse. 1.

The second fruit whereof we be partakers by this exaltation of Christ in the
priesthood.
THe second fruit is, that we dare both with a full faith, and as I may say,
with a full mouth ask and look for from God all good and healthful things:
forasmuch as we are members of that priest, who with so great power and glory
makes intercession for us, being surely persuaded, that his glorious
intercession will swallowe up all our unworthiness, and get unto us
unspeakable grace: and so that we shall receive for and through this Bishop,
all those good promises which we ask, Hebru. 10. verses 19.20. etc. Seeing
therefore brethren that we have liberty to enter into the holy place by the
blood of Jesus, by the new and living way which he has prepared for us through
the vale, that is his flesh: and seeing we have an high priest governor over
the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, and with an undoubted
persuasion of faith, our hearts being pure from an evil conscience: and our
bodies being washed with pure water let us hold the confession of our hope not
wavering, for he is faithful who has promised. Also to the Philip. 4 verse 6.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let your request be showed unto God in
prayer and supplication with giving of thanks, and the peace of God which
passes all understanding shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
We have therefore this plentiful fruit, that in all things which we have to
do with God, we have such an ouerseer of the house of God, and such an
intercessour, as in whose favor the Father will give us all things, and
therefore he is called, Heb. 2. a faithful Bishop in those things which he
has to do with God: and in the third to the Heb. verse 2.5.6. and Heb. 4.
verse 14.

The third fruit.
THat we offer up our selves, and all good things which we receive for and
by this high Bishop, for sweet and acceptable sacrifices to GOD, in all
things giving thanks unto God by this Jesus Christ: and which by and for the
Son he accepts to his glory, and brings to pass that they serve for it,
Apocalip. 5. verse 8. The four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb,
every one having harps and golden vials full of sweet odours, which are the
prayers of Saints. And Romans 12. I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God,
that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
etc. 1. Pet. 2. verse 5. Ye also as living souls, be ye builded up into a
spiritual house and holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto
God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold I
put in Syon a chief corner stone, elect and precious: he that believes
therein, shall not be ashamed. And Hebru. 13. verses 15.16. also to the Philip.
Cap. 1. verses 11. and 12. filled with the fruits of righteousness which are
in you by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God.

The fourth fruit.
FOrasmuch as the faithful are members of Christ making intercession for them
in high glory, he does not only through his intercession make their
sufferinges holy, but also glorious in the sight of God, Psalm. 116. verse 15.
Precious in the sight of God is the death of his meek ones. Also in the Psalm.
56. verse 9. and Philip. 2. verse 17. Yea and though I be offered up upon the
the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad, and rejoice with you all.
For the same cause also be ye glad and rejoice with me. Therefore the sufferings
of the Church are wonderfully sanctified and made glorious, through this high
Bishop making intercession in glory. To be short, what soever things were
plainly and magnificently instituted of God, concerning the priesthood of the
old Testament, and the sacrifices, and were done according to that spiritual
pattern yt was showed to Moses in the mount, we have ye full truth and perfect
fruit to everlasting consolation in the priesthod of Christ: not only as he
administered it in humility, with so great power, yt by one oblation he made
perfect for ever those that were sanctified: but also in that he lives always
to this end, to make intercession for us, and so brings to pass, that we
always enjoy the fruit of his sacrifice, and the truth of all those things
which were promised of God by the figures of the old Testament. Therefore when
we read the Scriptures of the old Testament, we ought to lift up our minds
hither: I say to this priest, perfourming that unto us every moment in high
glory, that God had promised by the mouth of the prophets, and by those
visible ceremonies. For what so ever things are written, they are written for
our learning, Romans 15.4. For example sake, Exodus 39. that the high priest did
bear upon his shoulders the names of the tribes, and did bear those twelve
precious stones before his breast entering into the sanctuary, in remembrance of
those twelve tribes of Israel, that Christ executes at this day with great
glory: He has us the true Israel always in his breast and fresh memory
before the sight of God as precious stones. To be short we shall know and
perceive the full fruit of the exaltation of Christ in his Priesthood in
everlasting life with wonderful admiration, when in presence we shall behold
that same exaltation of our high priest in glory: even as the high priest
himself prayed Ioh. 17. Father, those that thou have given unto me, I will yt
they be with me where I am, that they may behold that same glory which thou
have given unto me.

What the exaltation of Christ is in his kingdom, which is the other part of
the sitting of Christ at the right hand of God.
THE kingdom of God is the restoring of salvation through the word and spirit
in the elect, descended from a most wise and mighty head Christ, and a
defense against the enemies. This kingdom when it was in this world, began
in humility, as he says, repent and amend, for the kingdom of God is at
hand. The exaltation therefore in this kingdom is that same placing in highest
degree of honor, to the end the son may show himself openly before the
Angels, and blessed men in great light to be the king and head of all the
elect, and by shedding his power even unto us with a greater efficacy then
when he was in his body in the earth, he may restore and repare life and
salvation by the word and spirit in his elect, and may defend the^ against al
enemies. Ephesians. 1.21.22 The father has placed Christ at his right hand in the
heavens far above all power and principality, and might and dominion, and every
name that is named not in this world only, but in that which is to come, and
he has made all things subject under his feet, and has appointed him to be
head over all things to the Church which is his body, and the fullness of
him which fulfilleth al in all things: Ioh. 16.7. I speak the truth unto you, it
is expedient for you that I go away: for unless I go, that comforter shall
not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And this was
because it was so appointed by God his decree, that Christ being exalted in his
kingdom, should send him.

What fruits, we are partakers of by the exaltation of Christ in his kingdom.
LIke as Christ was borne and died for us: so also he sits at the right
hand of God for us. Now the first fruit is, that only Christians do
rightly know God, call upon him, and praise him. For therefore the father
placed Christ at his right hand, that he might be acknowledged, worshipped
and praised, both of Angels and men, as their only God and Lord. And
contrariwise God does abhor all other worshippes which are not directed unto
Christ, in whom only he will be acknowledged, called upon, and praised.
Peter infers, Acts 2. of the sending of the holy Ghost; out of the testimony
of David concerning the sitting of the Messiah at the right hand of God:
Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a surety that God has made
him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus I say, whom ye have crucified: And Phil.
2.9.10.11. Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name, that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the glory of
God the father. And Psa. 97. ver. 7. Apo. 5. ver. 7.9.12.13. 1. Cor. 1. ver. 2.
Act. 7. ver. 59. and cap. 9. ver. 14.

The second and the third fruit.
THE other fruits are known by their ends. For therefore Christ is exalted in
his kingdom, that inwardly he may enrich his Church, and without he may
defend it against enemies, yea and also may bridle those that are deadly and
inward enemies: the second fruit therefore is, that the father for and by
this Christ does assuredly give the holy ghost to them that ask it, does
govern and quicken the faithful by the ministry of ye Gospel, and both
beautifieth the whole Church with diverse gifts: and also gives to every
member so much gifts as are sufficient for the glory of ye head, for the
edificacion of the whole body, and the salvation of that same member: but he
leaves none of them without necessary gifts, or lets them to be empty,
Acts 2.33. Christ exalted to the right hand of God, and having obtained of his
father the promise of the holy Ghost, has shed forth this which ye now see
and hear. And to the Ephesians. 4.7. To every one of us grace is given according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. And a little after, He therefore gave some to
be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors, and
teachers for the repairing of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and
for the edification (I say) of the body of Christ, till we all meet together
in the unity of faith, and that acknoweledging of the Son of GOD unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Also,
Let us altogether grow up in him which is the head, to wit, Christ, by whom
all the body fitly knitte and compact together by all the joints for the
furniture thereof, according to the effectual power which is in the measure of
every part, the whole receaueth increase of the body, unto the edifying of it
self in love. Christ therefore reigns unto us at the right hand of the
father, that pouring out the holy Ghost upon us, he might be effectual by ye
ministry, and through the spirit might make us his members, and might
advance his spiritual kingdom day by day in us, until he might fully join
us unto himself being perfectly regenerate and washed again from sin and
corruption, and so he might be God all in all. 1. Corinthians. 15.

The third fruit.
THE third fruit is the defense of ye Church against all our enemies, sin,
the flesh, the world, tyrants, devils: all which our heavenly father calls
the enemies of Christ: and in very deed he shows daily examples of his
power in overthrowing them, Psalm. 110. The Lord has said to my Lord, sit at
my right hand, until I make thine enemies a footestoole unto thy feet.
Iehoua shall send the scepter of thy strength out of Sion: rule in the midst
of thine enemies. Surely a wonderful consolation that we are his brethren, yea
his members, to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth, without whose
will and power, neither the Turks nor antichrist can devise any thing against
the Church, no nor conclude or move so much as a finger for the executing of
their counsels: so that Christ reigns in such sort in the midst of his
enemies, that he will not be shut out, no not out of their most secret
counsels. Yea we are the brethren and members of that Christ, by whose most
present divine power, all men are governed, and all creatures in heaven and in
earth; so that we may say with full security of mind with the Apostle,
Romans 8. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation?
shall anguish? shall persecution? shall hunger? shall nakedness? shall danger?
shall the sword? (as it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep appointed to the slaughter) yea but in all these
things, we are more then conquerours through him that has loved us. For I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor hight, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separat us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. If when Christ reigned in humility the devils were
constrained to ask him leave, how shall they now dare to attempt any thing
against any member of Christ, after that Christ is ascended on high and has
led captivity captive, unless first they shall entreat the Lord Christ? But
faithful is Christ our Lord, who shall not suffer us to be tempted, above
that we shall be able to bear. 1. Corinthians 10. If then when he governed
his kingdom in humility and great abasement, the sea was still, when he said,
Mar 4. be still; What shall be now done, he reigning in high glory when he will
declare his will, as were but by a beck, against ye storms of persecutions?
But we are the members of so great a Lord, and of Christ, and therefore he
not only can, but also will yt which is most healthful unto us. And do not we
now much more deserve that Christ should vpbrayde no less unto us then unto
the Apostles (a lack for sorrow) that same faintnes of faith, because that in
the tempests of adversities, in the meditation of so great things our faith
does mount up no higher? See an example of defense Act. 18. ver. 8.9.

From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
DAniel 7.13. I did see in a vision by night and behode one like the son of
man came in the clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient of days,
and they brought him before him, and he gave him dominion and honor and a
kingdom, that all people nations and languages, should serve him: his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken away, and his
kingdom shall never be destroyed. And in the Epistle of Jude, verses 14.15. And
Enoch also the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, behold the
Lord comes with thousands of his saints, to give judgment against all
men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds,
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their cruel speakings, which
wicked sinners have spoken against him, Matthew. 25. And when the son of man
comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, Then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory, and all nations shall be gathered before him,
and he shall separate them one from an other, as a sheepehard separateth the
sheep from the goats. And he shall set his sheep on his right hand, and the
goats on the left. Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my father: take the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me to eat,
I thirsted, and you gave me to drink. etc. 2. Pet. 3. verse 9. The Lord is
not slack (as some men count slackenesse) of that promise he has promised,
but is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but all to come to
repentance. But ye day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in ye
which ye heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt
away with heat, and the earth with the works therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in holy couersation and godliness, looking for and
hasting unto that day of the Lord, by the which the heavens being on fire shall
be dissolved and the elements shall melt with heat?

Why this article is added unto the former.
THis article is added unto the former, for the greater confirmation of our
faith. For because Christ sitting at ye right hand of his father, does so
exercise his kingly power of judging, partly by defending his that are in
covenant with him, that yet in the mean while he keeps them under the
cross and wrongs of their enemies, to mortify sin: partly so bridling the
ungodly, Acts 12. that in the mean season he leaves many things
unpunished, to the end his long sufferaunce may exclude all excuse: and
therefore Christ our Lord will to the end that we be not troubled with any
miseries or cruelty of enemies, that we should lift up our heads with true
confidence of mind to look for his coming, that the greater our misery
shall be, the more certain we may be, that the day of our triumph is at
hand, and of the righteous destruction of all the wicked enemies of God.

That the general and last judgment must of necessity be, that we may be
armed against those scorners, whom the holy Ghost has foreshewed should be,
by Peter the Apostle in these last times,
A sure foundation may be taken from the righteousness of God, and the state of
the righteous in this life, as Paul has concluded in the 1. These. 1. For it is
a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you; and to you which are troubled, release with us, when the Lord Jesus shall
show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, etc.
Forasmuch therefore as that recompense is not in this life, which the
righteousness of God requires, and this notwithstanding this righteousness
remains firm and immovable with God for ever, that the wicked may be
punished, the Godly may receive that same promised release, there upon the
Apostle infers, that that is a manifest token of the just judgment of God
to follow of the coming of the Lord; Furthermore this foundation being
laid, the destruction of the city of Jerusalem may be added: which Christ
joined with the prophecy of the last judgment, not without a great and
weighty cause, that is to say, the figure with the thing signified: that we
might no more doubt of his wrath to come upon the ungodly in the day of
judgment, then of the shame of the Jews foreshewed of Christ, which yet they
bear before our eyes. Matthew. 24. Luke 21.

Of the meaning of this Article.
THE meaning of this article is: I do believe that Jesus Christ does not
only now exercise his kingly power of iudgeing, by his virtue from heaven by
diverse examples as well in defending the godly, as repressing the wicked: but
also that he shall solemnly come from heaven from the right hand of the power
of God in a corporal presence, thoroughly to judge all men, as well those that
are departed out of this life from the beginning that the world was created,
whose bodies shall rise again; as those whom that day shall find remaining
yet living in this world, who shall soudenly be changed. Now forasmuch as to
judge is to absolve the innocent and to beautify them, and to condemn the
wicked, and to punish them: I believe that he shall so judge, that he shall
fully deliver the godly, and beutifie them with eternal glory: and
contrariwise that he shall fully execut the condemnation upon the contemners
of so great long suffering and patience, and so shall drown satan (as Pharaoh)
with all his army in everlasting destruction, but he shall bring in his
confiderats fully delivered from al tyranny of the wicked into yt same true
heavenly inheritance, as into the land of promise: to which Paul would have us
to look, when he says, as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup, ye shall show forth the Lords death until his coming again.

Why the coming of Christ is not so fearful unto the faithful.
FIrst ye cause does comfort ye faithful for which he shall come to judge. Now
ye chief end of ye coming again of Christ to judgment, is the glorifying of
the Church, that is to say, that sin and death being fully overcome, and the
enemies of the kingdom being adjudged by ye just judgment of Christ to
everlasting pain, and so all offenses and impediments removed which did let
the glory of the sons of God, God might appear without any let fully and
perfectly glorious in his saints, Ephesians. 5.1. Cor. 15. Christ sets this same
cause or rather end and scope before our eyes, whilst he calls that day the
day of redemption. Secondly ye very person of the judge does take from us al
fear: For even, for this cause the father has delivered al judgment to the
son, as he is the son of man yt he might make our consciences quiet, and take
from us all terror of condemnation. Ioh. 5.22.27. Both because yt now we
believe yt he shall be judge, and also because we shall behold him with our eyes
in whose body our sins are cleansed, and all ye curse taken away. Heb. 9.28.
Tit. 2.13.14. Last of all the commandment and promise of Christ does free and
deliver us from al fear. The commandment is plain in Luke 21. When ye shall
see these things come to pass, be of good comfort, and lift up your heads.
Math. 24. It shall come to pass, that ye shall hear of wars and rumors of
war, but see that ye he not troubled, for these things must be. The promise
is plain in third of Ioh. He that believes in the son, is not judged or
condemned. And cap. 5.24 1. These. 4.14.17. and cap. 5, ver. 9.10. Ioh. 17. ver.
22.24. yea and let yt promise be considered which is in 1. Cor. 6. do ye not
know that the saints shall judge the world? And a little after, be ye
ignorant that it shall come to pass, that we shall judge the Angels? And
surely seeing all the Articles of the faith are delivered for our consolation,
it must needs be that this article also of judgment is delivered, not to
shake, but to confirm and establishe our faith.

How we ought to make our selves ready to judgment.
WE must prepare our selves to the judgment of Christ, by faith and a good
conscience: that is to say, by a faith which leans upon a fast and sure
foundation: and by the fruits of faith which do bear witness of it, and
with which it is exercised: Now the foundation of faith is not our merit,
neither in whole, nor in part: but of Christ alone, who delivers us from the
wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1. For no man can lay any other foundation, then that
which is laid already, to wit, Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 3. The which also is
manifestly understood by the words of the judge himself: For first he says,
Come ye blessed of my heavenly father: Now we are not blessed by, or in our
selves, but by Christ, by whom we are both delivered from the curse, and also
adopted to be sons of the mere good will, and free purpose of God. Galat. 3.
Ephesi. 1.2. The judge further adds, Possess for an inheritance the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. If an inheritance; then no
merit: If prepared from the beginning of the world; then not gotten by us
which yet were not. And these things concerning the foundation whereupon our
faith leans. Now after that I am assured through faith, that I am one of the
sheep of Christ, which he has redeemed not with gold and silver, but with
his own blood: I must endeavor that I may have those same marks where with by
his spirit he is wont to mark his sheep, to wit, fruits worthy repentance:
which are, that I feed Christ being hungry, and give drink unto him being
thirsty in his members: that I receive Christ by hospitality in strangers,
etc. But the faithful rest not upon these works of thankfulness, like as
also they shall say in the judgment, Lord, when saw we thee, hungry and
thirsty, and gave meat and drink unto thee? But they shall only rest upon
Christ, who is made unto them of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption. 1. Cor. 1. To these fruits and exercises of faith, belong
sobriety, calling upon the name of God, and watchfulness. For it is a
precious deceit of satan, whilst he persuadeth men that that same judgment
is yet far off: or that there is no need every hour or moment to look for
it: when as notwithstanding the commandment of Christ, and the doctrine of
the Apostles require special watchfulness, Luke 21. Matthew. 24. verse 44.45.
1. Thessa. 4. verse. 15.17. and chapter 5. verse. 1.2. 1. Pet. 3. Besides these,
the looking for judgment, does admonish the faithful, that above all things
they take heed unto themselves, least they defile their bodies or their souls
with the idolatry of Antichrist or with the like, and that they underprop
their minds with patience, concerning which matter there are extant grave
admonitions Mat. 24. ver. 24.25. and Apo. 14. ver. 7.7.11.12. and chap. 18.
ver. 4. To conclude, we must keep a good conscience in all things, even until
the Lord shall come, who shall make manifest ye secrets of darkness, and shall
lay open the counsels of the heart. 1. Cor. 4.5. So Paul says, Act. 24. In this
therefore I exercise my self that always I may have a conscience without
offense before God and men.

THE THIRD part of the Creed.
I believe in the holy Ghost.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Joel 2.28 And it shall come to pass afterward: I will power out my spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions: yea and upon the
servants and maidens in those days, I will power out my spirit, and I will
show wonders in the heaven and in the earth: blood, and fire, and pillars of
smoke: the son it self shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. And further it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of Jehovah, shall be saved: for
in Mount Syon, and Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. Acts 2.16.17. But this is that
which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall be in the last day, says
God, I will power out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy etc. Esaias 59.20 21. And the redeemer shall come to
Syon, and unto them, that turn from iniquity in Jacob, says Jehovah, and I
will make this my covenant with them, my spirit, that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says
the Lord, from hence forth even for ever. Ioh. 14. verses 16.17.18.19. etc. I
will pray the father, and he shall give you an other comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth whom the world can not
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for
he dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you fatherles: but
I will come to you, yet a little while, and the world shall see me no more,
but ye shall see me: because I live, ye shall live also. At that day shall ye
know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you. Many more testimonies
were aledged, when we entreated of the trinity.

The meaning of this article.
I Believe that the holy Ghost is very true and everlasting God, and of the
same substance together with the father and the son, and yet notwithstanding a
person distinct from both, as proceeding from them both. And therefore
forasmuch as he is very God, I place my confidence and trust in him, as in the
father and in ye son, and I trust in him that he will work al, that in me,
being empty of all good, that he himself has promised in his word, and for
which cause he is sent of the father and the son. Now his effects they are
many and diverse. For first of all he is given, that he may witness the love of
the father in our hearts, Gal. 4. and that he may lighten the eyes of our mind
with the knowledge of Christ: and that through faith he may so engraft me into
Christ as a bra^ch into ye vine and may make me a partaker of Christ, and al
his benefits, Ioh. 15. This conjunction with Christ and his benefits, which the
holy ghost does work in us, ye scripture does express with great force when
he says, yt the holy ghost does sprinkle us with the blood of Christ, 1. Pet
1. does make us members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6. does feed us with Christ, Ioh. 6.
does make us drink of Christ, 1. Cor. 10. and the 12. and does build us upon
Christ. Ephesians. 2. In which the office and end of the holy ghost given unto us, is
showed, yt through faith it may most nearly knit us unto Christ, and may work
ye like things both in ye members and head, seeing it is ye same spirit, yt is
to say, ye very same life and glory, Romans 8. I believe yt the holy ghost as the
true and very God will work these things in me, which he has promised unto me
yt believe; eue^ as these his peculiar epithetons and names do declare: that he
is ye water flowing unto everlasting life, John. 4.7. A water which shall
cleanse me, Ezekiel. 36. 1. Corinthians, 6. An annoynting which shall remain in
us, 1. John. 2. the seal and earnest of inheritance: in all which it is
promised unto us that he is given unto us to comfort us in all adversities, to
help us in our infirmities, to make intercession for us with sighs and groans
that can not be expressed, (forasmuch as we know not to pray as we ought) and
so that he be our true comfort or advocate, who suffers not us to be
destitute of his counsel and help, but handles our cause himself, to the
end he may be in us and remain with us for ever, John. 16. To him I trust, to
him I wholly deliver my self to be governed, comforted, and quickened in the
father, and in Jesus Christ his son, who through the holy Ghost make their
abiding with us.

The applying of this doctrine to the covenant of grace.
THat same everlasting covenant that God has stricken with Abraham, the Son
of God in man's nature, taken of the seed of Abraham has confirmed, by
satisfying the righteousness of God perfectly, in manner as I have confessed in
the former articles of faith. Now it rests that the holy Ghost engraffe us
into Christ through faith the true seed of Abraham, and so power out that
blessing, promised to Abraham and his seed upon us, and by the earnest of an
everlasting inheritance. Paul says in the third to the Galathians, that in
the Gentiles the blessing of Abraham is extant in Christ Jesus, that we might
receive the promise of the spirit through faith. And a little after, Now to
Abraham and to his seed were the promises made, he says not, and to the
seeds, as speaking of many: but, and to thy seed (as of one) which is Christ.
Also, And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs by promise:
And Romans 9.8.2. Cor. 1.21.22.

How the holy Ghost is given, and how we know whether we have it or no.
THe holy Ghost is given by the ministry of the Gospel as by an ordinary
mean. Gal. 3. This only would I learn of you, received ye the spirit by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith preached? Also Ephesi. 1. verse
13. and 1. Cor. 12. verse 13. Now thou shall know by the working of the holy
Ghost that thou art a partaker of the holy Ghost. For even like as thou see
not the wind, but do feel his operation: so the holy Ghost is known by his
working, as Christ teaches John 3. These are the principal and chief works
of the holy ghost in us: faith, invocation, and groans. 1. Cor. 12. No man can
say, Lord Jesus, but by the holy Ghost: and the 2. Cor. 4. because we have the
same spirit of faith, according to that which is written: I believe and
therefore I speak: so we also believe, and for that cause we also speak. To.
8. Because we are sons, therefore God has given the spirit of the son into
our hearts, by which we cry Abba Father. And in the same place; The spirit
makes intercession for us, with groans that cannot be uttered. Besides these,
the being displeased with our selves, and the hatred of sin, or rather the
battle against sin is a sure, and undoubted token yt we have the holy
Ghost, and that we are ingraffed into Christ. For the flesh fights not
against it self. Romans 8. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, which walk not after flesh, but after the spirit.

THE FOVRTH PART OF the Creed.
I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
GEnesis 9. God enlarge Iapheth, that he may dwell in the tabernacles of Sem.
Esaie 54. Rejoice O barren which do not bring forth, break forth into
praise, and rejoice which did not bring forth, because more are the Sons
of the desolate, then of the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge the place
of thy tents, and let them spread out the curtains of thy habitations. And a
little after, For he that made thee, is thy husband (whose name is the Lord of
hosts) and thy redeemer is the holy one of Israel, who shall be called the God
of the whole world. Also to the Galathians 4. verse 27. and Esaie 60. ver. 1.2,
etc. Arise, be enlightened, because thy light comes, and the glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee. For behold darkness shall cover the earth, and thick
darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and the nations shall
walk to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Ezech. 37.
verses. 22 24. and Chapt. 10. And there shall be one sheepeheard, and one
sheepfolde. John 11. verse 52. And not that Jesus should die for that nation
only, but also that he should gather together in one the chidren of GOD which
were scattered, Apoc. 59.10. Thou have redeemed us unto God, through thy blood
out of every tribe, and tongue, people, and nation.

What this part contains.
THE fourth part contains the effect of all that went before. For except we
will that the Father have sent his son in vain, and that his son also has
suffered, and is risen again in vain; that the holy Ghost was promised and
sent in vain: we must needs believe that the effect of all these is, that the
Father in Christ by the power of the holy Ghost does build up a new people
unto himself, whom before he had freely chosen, with whom he does enter into
a free covenant, and to which he does communicate him self and all his
benefits, Esaie 53. When he shall lay down his soul a sacrifice for
transgression, he shall see the seed that shall prolong his days, and the will
of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand, etc. Ephesians. 2. ver. 6.

The meaning of these words, I believe the Catholic or universal Church.
THe meaning is that the son of God, even from the beginning, (Matt. 11. ver.
12.) gathers and builds up a people unto himself, from the whole body of
mankind, elected before all worlds, whom Christ raises up being dead in
sins, and reconcileth unto him self by the ministry of his word, and
renueth by faith to life everlasting, John 5. verse. 8. Ephesians. 2. ver. 1.2.3.
and Chap. 5. verse. 26. which he adioyneth unto himself as his spouse or wife,
that all the true members of this people may have true fellowship with Christ
and mutual amongst them selves, both in this and in the life everlasting, 1.
John. 1. Amongst which people I trust my self to be enrolled and never to be
blotted out from them, John. 10. and 17.

Why the Church is called Holy.
BEcause none can be united unto God, unless he be holy and pure, even as God
is holy and pure: therefore I do undoubtedly believe that God does justify
and also purge those whom he has chosen to this inseparable union to holiness
and innocence of life, that the glory of God may shine in them, Romans 8.
Ephesians. 5. Now the Church is holy two manner of ways, by renouation, and by
imputation. By renouation in it self, that same holiness is only begun: Romans
7. Of this same first manner of holiness, it is said, 2. Cor. 7. Working your
sanctification, and 1. These. 4. ver. 7. But by imputation her holiness is most
perfect in Christ, as he says, I sanctify my self for them. In this second
manner of holiness I believe that there is no sin, no death in the Church,
that is to say, that no fault or punishment is imputed to the true members of
the Church. Because they that believe in Christ, are not sinners, are not
guilty of death, but are simply holy, and righteous, Lords over sin and
death in Christ, and live for ever. To. 5. ver. 8.9. and Heb. 10. ver. 14.
Colo. 2. ver. 10. To. 8.1. These. 5.10.

Why the Church is called Catholic.
THe Church is caled Catholic, or universal, because that like as there is one
head of the Church, to wit Christ: so the universal members thereof scattered
throughout the world, do grow up into one body, by the same spirit. Ephesians.
4.1. Cor. 10. and 12.

Communion of Saints.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
LEviticus 26. and 2. Cor. 6. verse 17. Ye are the Temple of the living God, as
God has said, I will dwell amongst them, and I will walk there, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore (Esaias 52.) Come out from
among them and separate your selves says the Lord, and I will receive you, I
will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the
almighty. Also Joel 2. verse. 32. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 15.16. That thou may know
how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church
of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth, 1. Cor 12. verses 13.14.
For by one spirit, we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews, or
Grecians: whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into
one spirit, 1. Cor. 10.17. Because we that are many, are one loaf, and one
body, who are partakers of one and the same bread, Also to the Heb. 3. verse
13, etc. 1. John. 1. That which we have seen and which we have heard we
declare unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us, and that our
fellowship also, may be with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ: and
these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. Acts. 2.47. And the
Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved.

The meaning of these words.
THe communion of Saints, signifies both that same outward fellowship, whereby
the people as members of the visible Church thorough the ministry of the
doctrine both of the Prophets, and Apostles, and also of the sacraments, are
called into one body, and also that same inward conjunction, whereby those
whom the Lord has always chosen in this visible congregation, that is to
say, the true believers, are knit and united together with the father, with
Jesus Christ his son, and mutuallie one with another amongst themselves.
Concerning that same outward union we must know that the truth of the
prophetical, and Apostolical doctrine is an undoubted token of the visible
Church, 1. Tim. 3. Besides all that profess that same truth, wheresoever they
shall come in the world to any visible company of the Church, they have right
to communicate in hearing the word, in prayers, and receiving of the
sacraments. Esai. 2.2.3. yea all the faithful have commandment that
wheresoever there is a visible assembly of the Saints, that they join
themselves unto it, and by no means separate them selves from that communion.
The Church also is bound to receive them, and to the uttermost of her power,
with a cheerful mind to communicate those means which are committed unto
her, such as all bodily and spiritual helps are to the common salvation. And
as touching that same inward union or fellowship, it has as it were these
degrees. First all the elect have the same right of the children of God, that
is common to all: and so the same Father in heaven, Romans 8.

Secondly, all the elect are endued with the same faith, whereby even from the
beginning, they were engraffed into the son of God, and yet are engraffed,
which is a forcible, and an effectual calling.

Thirdly, the same favor of justification in Christ is common to all under the
old and new Testament.

Fourthly, glorification is also common to the whole body: so yt the
inhabitation of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, was always the
same under either testament: to which scope and end all the gifts of the holy
Ghost tend, bestowed for ye common building up of the whole body, that at
length the glory of the king may fully shine in the whole body.

I believe the forgiveness of sins.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Jeremy 31. I will have mercy upon their iniquities, and I will not remember
their sins any more: and Chapter 33. also Psalm. 103. O my soul, bless thou
Jehovah, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiueth al thine iniquities;
who heals all thine infirmities. And a little after, He has not dealt with
us according to our sins, neither has he rewarded us according to our
iniquities. For as the heavens are high above the earth; so has his mercy
prevailed toward those that fear him. As far as the East is from the West,
so far has he put our offenses from us. And 1. John. 1. The blood of his
Son Jesus Christ has purged us from all our sin. The benefits which
Christ communicates unto his Church, by the virtue of the holy Ghost, are set
out a little more fully in these last articles. Now his benefits are to be
considered two manner of ways. First in respect of the possession which we
have in this life, and in which we stand. Moreover in respect of the full
enjoying and perfection of them, which undoubtedly we shall be partakers of, in
the life to come. I understand the possession of the benefits of Christ which
we now have in this life, thus: that even like as there is no salvation
without the Church, which is the body of Christ, so also all they, which are
his true and lively members now have and do undoubtedly possess true happiness;
all which we comprehend in the Creed, under the forgiveness of sins, as the
Apostle proves Romans 4 out of the 32. Psalm, Blessed are they, whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

The meaning of this Article.
I Believe that whatsoever is sin, and so called, whether it be original, or
by birth, as transgression in the loins of Adam, and the corruption that
followed of it, which I bear about in my flesh: or whether it be actual sin,
as thoughts, words, and wicked deeds, which spring from thence: I believe I
say, that all that through faith, whereby I am engraffed and dwell in Christ,
in the free and undeserved goodness of God, is freely forgiven me, and so
freely, that all memory, as well of the fault, as of the punishment, like as if
I had never sinned, or had no sin, is taken away from before God: and
therefore I trust that I am now already blessed.

Now for as much as nothing is more hard then to believe the forgiveness of
sins, go to, let us see what are the causes of this certainty concerning
the forgiveness of sins. The chief and principal cause is, because the
covenant and oath of God, which contains this article in it, is confirmed by
the death of the testator himself, which is Jehovah, that God will not be any
longer mindful of our sins: of the testator I say, even of God himself,
which had made that covenant. Now what can be a greater confirmation of this
covenant and testament, then when that personal word who is the true and
everlasting God vouchsafes to confirm by his death which he took upon him in
the flesh the same thing that he promised. Now it is plain out of the 31.
Chapter of Jeremy, that it is Jehovah himself that makes that testament or
covenant. And in the eight Chapter of Hebrews verses 15.16. and again in the
9. it is plainly taught, that it is the same Jehovah, which by his death has
confirmed the same testament. Where there is a Testament (says he) there must
be the death of him that made the Testament. In which place, he also says,
that the same Christ which died, was the maker of that same Testament promised
in Jeremy: Also Act. 20. Now what may be said or thought greater in heaven, or
in earth, then that this article; I believe forgiveness of sins; should be
confirmed by the death of God himself?

That sin is forgiven, not that it should not be, but that it should not be
laid to our charge.
But whether may we say that our sins are so forgiven, that no remnants
thereof remain in us? No, in no case: for although sins be in us, and shall be
even until our death: yet notwithstanding, we believe, that they shall not be
laid to our charge, but for the merit of Christ shall be forgiven us. And
therefore Saint Paul with the Prophet, pronounces not them blessed, in whom
there are no sins, but whose sins are covered. The whole matter tends to
this, that we undoubtedly believe that the Church which is the mystical body
of Christ, and every member of it, does possess in this life not an
uncertain and temporal; but a firm and an everlasting forgiveness, not of
one, or another sin, but of all sins, with which they must struggle, which
have joined with it an incredible peace and quietness of conscience, and
therefore happiness it self. For this is the meaning of the Prophet, when he
says, that now God does crown us with mercy and compassion. And John 5. He
that believes in me, has passed from death to life. But God forbid that we
should take occasion hereof to sin, because we believe that our sin is
forgiven us. For as many as are truly engraffed into Christ through true faith,
besides that benefit of forgiveness with which the image of Satan is covered:
we begin to possess therwithal another, to wit the restoring of the image of
God, which consists in the mortification of the old man, and quickening of
the spirit. Romans 6. Now both these benefits are freely given us of the father
for Christ, into whom whilst he does engraft us by his holy spirit, first he
covers our sins by the imputation of the perfect obedience and satisfaction
of Christ, then he does further begin in us by the same spirit that same new
obedience, which is an undoubted testimony of our engraffement into Christ,
and therefore of the forgiveness of sins, Romans 8. in the beginning of the
Chapter. For the free covenant of God does contain these two parts, as may
be seen in the 31. Chapter of Jeremy. And hereof it comes to pass that it
is everlasting: because both he writes his law in our hearts, that is,
through his spirit he begins a new obedience that we depart no more from
God. Jeremy 32.40. and because that being imperfect, he will remember our
sins no more. Where these two are, there is sure friendship, a constant and
everlasting covenant.

The resurrection of the flesh.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
DAniel 12. verse 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. Job
19. verse 25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand in the last
day upon the earth, and I shall be clothed again with my skin, and shall see
God in my flesh. I shall see him my self and none other for me. Paul ( 1. Cor.
15.) as it were with the finger pointing at those same bodies which we carry
about, says on this wife: that this corruptible, that this mortal, this I say
and none other, must put on incorruption, and immortality.

The meaning of this article.
THe articles that follow, contain the consu^mation or perfecting of those
same benefits of Christ, to wit, that same blessed life, which we shall live,
both in body and soul in the kingdom of our heavenly Father, being fully
joined with our head Christ, being fully regenerate and transformed into his
image and glory, 1. Cor. 15. Philip. 3. For our souls, as soon as they shall
pass out of this life, shall enter into the rest of their Lord: for that
which was spoken unto the believing thief, is also spoken to all the
faithful. Now in the end of the world their bodies being taken again, they
shall enjoy full happiness. And certainly the very same bodies, which having
put off al infirmity, shall put on incorruption, incomprehensible power, and
glory, a taste whereof Christ gave unto his Apostles in the mount: Matthew. 17.
for he was transformed before them, and his face did shine as the sun, and
his garments were glistering as the light.

That the dead as well righteous as unrighteous must needs rise again.
THe resurrection of the dead has most sure and certain foundations. First of
all the infinite power of God, whereby he could create our bodies of nothing,
and whereby he can bring all things under subjection to himself, Gene. 1.
Romans 4. Philip. 3. Further his unchangeable will, wherein he has declared his
righteousness, upon which foundation, the reason of the Apostle (2 Thessalonians. 1.)
leans. For it is a righteous thing, with God (says he) to render affliction
unto them which afflict you, and to you who are afflicted, release together
with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with the Angels of
his power. The righteousness of God requires, that not other bodies, but even
the very bodies, of the wicked be afflicted, and that the bodies of the godly
receive that promised release: now whatsoever God can, and will that of
necessity is done.

That the same bodies, which we bear here, shall rise again.
THese very same bodies and none other concerning the substance, shall rise
again. For God is the fountain of life, who has taken into his covenant not
half man, but whole man, and therefore shall quicken our bodies that are
confederats unto him. For the God of Abraham of Isaak, and of Jacob, who is
also our God, is not the GOD of the living, but of the dead, like as Christ
himself proves the resurrection by the covenant. Therefore these very same
bodies in respect of the substance, shall rise again. But if any man will ask
concerning the qualities, there is a great diversity, and so is that same
voice of Christ to be understood, Matthew. 22. that in the resurrection we shall
be as the Angels of God in heaven. And Christ says, Matthewe 13. Then the
righteous shall shine as the sun. For this cause the bodies of the faithful
are called clarified bodies, of the clearenes of the heavenly light wherewith
they are enlightened: and they are called glorious bodies, of that same glory
which appears in that same clearenes, (as in the face of Moses) and spiritual
bodies of the spirit of Christ by which they are quickened and bewtified, not
to return again to nothing. Now the cause of this our glorious resurrection
is set forth in the third fruit of the resurrection of Christ. Indeed the
bodies of the wicked shall also rise again, as I showed before when I set
forth the foundations of the resurrection. And Paul expresses this: Acts
24. But in a condition and quality diverse from the godly. For infirmity,
shame, corruption and misery shall not be taken from the bodies of the ungodly:
but like as they rise in shame, so by the judgment and power of God they
shall be confirmed in shame and corruption: so that they shall be made immortal
and incorruptible in corruption and death it self, not to be consumed with
any torments, but as it were hot burning iron, they shall burn for ever,
Daniel 12. Some shall rise to everlasting shame: and Math. 25. The reason is,
because not only the first death, but also the second, which is everlasting,
is the punishment of sin committed as well in body as in soul against the
infinite majesty of God.

And life everlasting.
Testimonies out of the Prophets and Apostles.
Esaias 64. verse 4. And since the beginning of the world they have not heard
nor understood with the ear, neither has the eye seen another God beside
thee, which does so to him that waits for him. The which place Paul cites.
1. Cor. 1. which the eye has not seen, which the ear has not heard etc. And
in 21. of the Apoc. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying.

The meaning of this article.
THE meaning is: I believe that the same life which is in Jesus Christ, shall
be revealed also in me: Coloss. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God When
Christ our life shall be made manifest, then shall you also be made manifest in
glory. The name of everlasting life comprehends in it all that same
happiness and gladness both of soul and body, which the souls enjoy by and
by after this life through Jesus Christ, and which also the bodies joined to
the souls shall enjoy with them, when they shall be taken up into the air
that they may be always with the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 4. I confess not only
this everlasting life: but I trust that it is prepared and proper to me. Christ
confirms this prorietie and feeling begun thereof, which a full fruition shall
follow, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my words and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
judgment, but he has passed from death to life. John. 5. verse. 24 The Apostle
out of the Prophet Esaias. 1. Cor. 1. does so shadow out the full fruition and
the enjoying thereof, as which can not be comprehended by any thought or
understanding in this life, which the eye has not seen etc. There is a
notable picture of it in the Apocalips, chapter 21. where amongst other
things he says, I have not seen a temple in it: for the omnipotent Lord is
the temple thereof, that is the lamb. Neither does this city need sun or
moon to shine in it. For the glory of God has enlightened it, and the lamb
is the light thereof. For God to whom in Christ we shall then be so fully
joined and knit as the fountain of all goodness, that beyond him there is
nothing to be desired, to the end we might be truly happy, as he says
to the father of all nations, and so to all believers Genesis 15. I am thy
great reward: and Psalm 16. David says, Jehovah is my portion. This
fountain does plentifully power out it self upon us after the resurrection
of our flesh, as the Apostle teaches that God shall be all in all.

The scope or use of this Article.
THe scope is that the faithful may know, that their full and stayed
felicity is not in this earth, and that he that has begune his work in us,
will also perfect it. Of which knowledge there is a threefolde use. First the
remembrance of our departure hence into everlasting life to that same chief
and high good, will not suffer our hearts to be fastened here to these
earthly things as the Apostle says, 2 Corinthians 5. And therefore we are
always of good comfort, and we know, that seeing we are strangers in
body, we are hardely absent from the Lord (for we walk by faith and not
sight) but we trust and rather desire to depart out of the body and to go to
dwell with the Lord. And for this cause we endeavor that both dwelling and
departing hence we may be acceptable unto him. So in the 8. to the Romans we
our selves which have the first fruits of the spirit, do groan with our
selves waiting for the adoption, that is, the redemption of our bodies. 1. Pet.
1. pass the time of your abiding here in fear, he calls it an abiding
here, but not a dwelling.

The second use is patience and constancy. For this same full felicity is
propounded to be believed, to this end that the faithful, when they shall
mark that same taste of happiness, which they feel by the first fruits of
the spirit, and shall perceive that they are far of from the full fruition
and enjoying of it, in respect of the manifold strife which they have with
sundry tribulations, which God uses as instruments to mortify sin and to
conserve them to the head Christ, they should not in the mean season be any
whit at al discouraged, but turning the eyes of their minds to that full
happiness, they should wait with a peaceable mind for the day of the
revelation. For so says Christ Luke 21. Ye shall be hated of al me^ for my
name sake, but an hear of your head shall not perish; possess your souls
through patience. And 2. Tim. 2. If any man strive, he is not crowned, unless
he strive lawfully.

Now this same second use ought specially to arm the ministers of the word,
with an invincible fortitude against the unthankfulness of the world, to
which they do good against the will thereof, against pinching poverty,
banishmentes, and to be short sundry dangers: that if so be that the courage
of their mind, be sometimes pressed down under the burden of calamities,
they remember that that same great weight of the glory prepared be put in ye
other scale of the balance: which without all doubt shall so ouerwey it, that
it shall make that same first to be most light. For this cause we are not
sluggish says the Apostle 2. Cor. 4. but though our outward man perish, yet
the inward man is daily renewed. For our light affliction which is but for a
moment, causes unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of glory.
Let that same promise also brought by the Angel, be always in sight, which
albeit it be common to all the faithful, as all are prophets: yet it specially
is directed to ministers in Daniel cap. 12. And the wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever. Therefore Christ also says, Your
reward is great in heaven. Matthew. 5. Let them also believe this themselves
which teach others to believe.

The third use is ye certainty of perseverance in faith: that is to say, that
we believe that the Lord will never suffer that we shall utterly fall from
grace: because he will have us to believe everlasting life. If I must believe
everlasting life, I trust not without cause also that I shall be kept in the way:
As Peter plainly teaches, 1. Epist. 1.5. which are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last time.
And 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye are called into the fellow ship
of his son Jesus Christ our Lord: to him be honor and glory world with out
end. Amen.

FINIS.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 60 4 read, not enough to salvation. 63 6 read,
embrace him by. 67 27 read, and does. 29 1 living, read, lying 122 17 power,
poor. 124 1 same, some. 137 12 read, be both. 145 7 read, be vpholden. 153 16
5.3. 53. 153 25 read, God made. 159 30 5.3. 53. 160 1 5.3. 53. 185 8 when,
whom. 189 26 vexed, urged. 198 30 world, word. 205 18 read, having received
of us.


