A NEW HANDLING OF THE PLANISPHERE, DIVIDED into three Sections.

IN THE FIRST IS A PLAIN AND sensible explication of the circles of the
Sphere, and such terms as appertain unto the doctrine de primo mobili; after
a Method not heretofore used in any language.

THE SECOND SHOWS HOW UPON any plain, being Paper, Pastboord, or a Latten
plate, having one circle divided into degrees, and crossed with two Diameters
at right angles, most Conclusions of the Astrolabe may for all Latitudes or
Countries be readily and exactly performed only with Ruler and Compasses.

IN THE THIRD, BEING A SVPPLEMENT ORganicall, is contained the making of
certain easy instruments for the perfecter working the former Conclusions, as
to know what degrees and minutes be in any circumference given, with other
necessary matters about the Meridian line and the height of the Pole.

Pleasant and profitable generally for all men, but especially such as would
get handines in using the Ruler and Compass, and desire to reap the fruit of
Astronomicall and Geographicall documents, without being at the charge of
costly Instruments.

Invented for the most part, and first published in English by THOMAS OLYVER.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Simon Waterson and Rafe Iacson.
1601.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR JOHN PETER KNIGHT, at Thornedon in Essex.
KNowing well (right Worshipful) after the dispatch of much weighty business,
which for the good of others you willingly undertake, and, by report of the
shire, with very great discretion, and all vprightnes perform, that as it were
for your recreation, you perused often books of Geographie: some while since I
sent the manner how three or four problemes Geographicall might be wrought
upon a plain with Ruler and Compass only. At my leisure afterward taking that
subject in hand again, I followed it so far, that I devised after the like
way to handle most conclusions of the Astrolabe, or problems Astronomicall
concerning the Primum mobile. When I had almost brought my purpose to effect,
it was my chance to light upon Clauius his Astrolabe, where I found as much
promised, and performed even by Ptolomeis Analomma, the very model of Johannes
de Roias his Planisphere, as learned Guidus Vbaldus has fully proved, and also
the ground upon which I have framed much of my work. Notwithstanding,
perceiving (as by comparison every one may see) that except the 5. and 28.
taken out of Manrolycus, the 14. and 23. out of Commandine and Vbaldus, my
constructions were very far differing from Clauius, amending those defects
which Gemma notes in Roias his work, besides taking the matter to be
commodious, and not unpleasant for travelers, and all such in general as
delight in Astronomicall and Geographicall devises, I set light the
reproachful name of an English Scribler, and took courage by publishing it to
the view of the world, to hazard my self to every readers censuring. Upon this
resolution I am bold to use your Worships name in the front of this book,
testifying thereby the earnest and unfeigned affection which I bear, and long
have borne both to you and yours: in regard whereof making no doubt, but that
this little mite shall be gently accepted, with remembrance of my duty to your
Worship I take my leave. S. Edmunds Bury in Suffolk, 6. Ian. 1600. after our
English account.

Your Worships in all duty most affectionate, THOMAS OLIVER.

To the Reader.
SEeing the matters here entreated of admit no eloquence, but must in plain
attire be simply offered to the view, though I could (gentle Reader) I would
not flourish with thee, in pleading for my self or this treatise: therefore
referring all to thy friendly censure, I will spend this void paper in
aduertisements for the better understanding, and easier performing of that
which is delivered.

The fittest matter, whereupon you may work these conclusions following, will
be a plate of brass, and the Compass, Pritchet, Pointer or Steel, wherewith
you must draw your lines, would be either of the same substance, or else Iron
rather than Steel: for if you make not your strokes very deep, by rubbing
the plate with a wet Pumice, you may easily take all out when you will, and
thereby also tarrish or darken it in such sort, that you may presently at your
ease, and very exactly draw, and work upon it again.

When you begin to practice, it will help very much to work one conclusion by
it self, and to note the lines, as you draw them, with the characters, that
are named in the peculiar construction: but when you are something perfect,
this shall not need.

You may also, having a quadrant divided, make any paper serve the turn for
these purposes. Opening your Compass to the distance of 60. degrees, at that
distance discribe a circle, and subtending four times in it a line equal to
that line, which subtendeth the quadrants circumference, if you join the
opposite points, it shall be crossed with perpendicular Diameters, then
transferring the circumferences given or found from the quadrant to the circle,
or from the circle to the quadrant, you may find the quantity of any
circumference as well, as though your circle were divided into degrees.

Where you desire exactnes, you must rest neither on this way, nor on the
instrument in the beginning of the second section, but use that quadrant which
you are taught to make in the beginning of the third section, by it you may
know the just content of any given circumference in degrees and minutes
exactly, and let this be a general warning for all conclusions.

I have barely set down the constructions without demonstrations, as the
fittest for their capacities, whose good I specially aim at: yet is there
nothing here propounded that has not demonstratiuely been examined: and for
experimental trial the working by these conclusions may be compared with
tables calculated for the same purpose, which, if handines and diligence be
used, will agree.

Since my writing of the second section, I have found how the conclusions
therein omitted may be perfectly wrought without the help of any Elleipsis,
and all contained within the compass of the limb: but at this time I thought
not good to add them.

Thus much (gentle Reader) I thought meet thou should be advertised of: and
so desiring thee to pardon the escapes of my pen, if thou meetest with any, I
commend thee and thy honest studies to our Lords holy direction.

Thine THOMAS OLYVER.

A new handling of the Planisphere.
THE FIRST SECTION, WHEREin is contained a plain and sensible declaration of
the circles of the Sphere, and the terms used in the doctrine de primo mobili,
after another Method than is yet in any other language.
THE circles of the Sphere have more than once already bin written of in
English: notwithstanding I think it will not be accounted labor lost, though it
were only for the better understanding of the conclusions following, here to
handle them again as principles in the beginning of this treatise. Aristotle
and Ptolomey for proof of some matters here propounded, have used many
exquisite arguments, which I mean not to prosecute, but hoping from the
testimony of sense in such manner to deduce the positions, that any mean
capacity may have so reasonable a conceit of them, that with probability they
may easily be admitted, I will refer their exact and more subtle
demonstration, with the reproof of such as impugn them, to some others
handling, or to some other place. Therefore requiring first the reader not to
cast untimely doubts, nor hastily to judge of any part by it self, before he
has considered, and in some manner understood the whole discourse, I will
according to Hippocrates his counsel begin with the notablest and easiest
things. Whosoever does but cast up his eyes unto heaven, presently perceives
that it compasses him round about in manner of half a globe or an Hemisphere:
and if he stand upon some high place, or be at Sea far from land, where
nothing can be seen but water and the Sky, his eye, if he turn himself
about, will represent unto him at the lowest bounds or limits, which he sees,
the fashion of a circle, upon whose plain, as upon a base, this visible
Hemisphere seems to be placed: therefore that Circle was first in Greek, and
is now commonly in English called the Horizon, that is to say, bounding or
limiting, vz. the compass of your sight. The largenes of this Circle, even as
it falls under view, is of so great a compass, as you need not restrain
the center thereof, according to the precise Mathematical definition, to one
determinate, exquisite, indivisible, and very point, or prick, but without
sensible error, as your eye will plainly testify, any one at pleasure may be
taken in the place where you stand. From a center so taken, if there be, or be
imagined, a plumbe line or line perpendicular to the plain of the Horizon
extended unto the heaven, the place, which there it touches, is commonly
called by an Arabian name the Zenith, being in truth the pole of the Horizon,
and the line it self his Axis. By this Axis, and any lines crossing it, if
plainnes be every way exte^ded reaching unto heaven, they mark out their
circumferences, or semicircles, cutting one another in the Zenith: but in the
Horizon their sections are right lines, cutting one another in his center.
Those circles are named Azimutes, and are imagined by Astronomers to be cut by
other circles parallel to the Horizon, which they term Alinicantars and
circles of Altitude, because the portion of the Azimute, which is between the
Horizon and the Parallel, shows how his above the Horizon that point of the
Parallel is, by which the Azimute passes. Furthermore, in a clear night
beholding the bright shining Stars, you shall evidently perceive how they
change their places continually, some to rise and show themselves, other to go
down under the Horizon, and to be hidden from your sight, only if you place
your self so, that your right hand be toward their rising, and your left hand
toward their going down, looking right forth, and somewhat upward, you shall
behold certain Stars, which are all times of the night to be seen, and never
depiction of constallations Charles Wayne.

pole star.

Little Bear

go down; amongst some of which placed after this fashion, there is one
commonly called the Pole star, which being the last in the tail of the
constellation called ye little Bear, lies in manner directly as it were in a
right line, with those two in the hindermost wheels of Charles his wayne. This
Star seems little or nothing to remove out of his place, and indeed not
far from it there is a point, or prick, which remains in one and the same
place always immovable. The Azimute passing by the Horizons Axis, and a right
line drawn from this immovable point, or the pole star, is properly called
the Meridian circle; the common section of it and the Horizon, being a right
line, is the Meridian line, or the line of North and South; the right line,
which crosses this Meridian line at right angles in the center of the Horizon,
is called the line of true East, and true West, or simply the line of East and
West, which points the ends thereof extended directly fall upon. The Arimute
standing upon this line, Ioannes de Roias, and others, specially such as write
of Dyalling, as it were for dignity and pre-eminence, do call the Vertical
circle: which name being common to all Azimutes, because they pass by the
Zenith, in Latin called Vertex. or punctum eregione verticis: for a distinction
Gemma Frosius has named it the Circle of the East. The other Azimutes have no
proper names, but are measured or determined in the Horizons circumference.
That, and so likewise all other Circles, Astronomers do imagine to be divided
into 360. equal parts, which they name degrees, that is to say, every quarter
or quadrant into 90. degrees: every degree they further divide into 60.
minutes, every minute into 60. seconds, every second into 60. thirds, and so
continue sometimes unto tenths, and may go further if they will. By these
degrees, minutes, etc. which are between that point, where any Azimute cutteth
the Horizon, and the Meridian line, or the line of East and West, the Azimute
is determined, assigned, or said to be given. Upon the points where the
Vertical circle cutteth the Horizon, which points are the true poles of the
Meridian, and the precise East and West, if by often and diligent viewing you
shall see two Stars, the one in the East, and the other at the same time
right against it in the West, in winter time even in one night, you may behold
that which is in the East first ascending, and then again descending at length
to come into the West, and that which was in the West being till that time
hidden from your sight, then to appear again rising in the East: all this
while continually the like shape of an Hemisphere being still represented to
your eye, without any change or alteration, whereby you may gather the heaven
to be a perfect Globe, or Sphere, having that part under the Horizon equal
and like to that which you see above it, and that the place where you stand is
the very center thereof. A line drawn from the pole Star, or rather from the
point immovable before mentioned, called the Articke, or North pole, a line (I
say) drawn, or imagined to be drawn from that point to the place of your
standing, is called the Aris of the world, and extended to the other side of
the celestial Sphere, which is under us, falls there upon the South or
Antarcticke pole, which in these our countries never appears. These things,
being but a little heedily considered, be so manifest and apparent, that
neither example nor figure is greatly requisite for the perfect understanding
of them: yet in this beginning to remove all difficulty, and to make every
thing as plain as may be, do thus much: In some plain ground, or rather upon
a post, or stone, or some such like thing made exactly smooth, and lying very
flat, without any manner of leaning or declining, which you must warily and
diligently try by your leuel, and your plumbe line, take the center A, upon
which describe a circle B C D E, representing the Horizon, whose circumference
you may divide, or imagine only to be divided into degrees, and from A, the
center thereof, erect a Steel or wier, standing plumbe upright, or
perpendicular to the flat of the circle A B C D, by trial of your plumbe rule:
then take a board made precise square, having the side somewhat longer than the
semidiameter of the circle B C D E, and set one corner thereof in the center A,
so that one of the sides containing it, may agree just with the Steel or wier,
and the other with the circles plain: then looking along the upper edge, or
through two sights set upon the edge, and continually lifting it up without
swaruing, till the side that lay upon the flat of the circle agree with the
Steel: the line of your sight, or the line drawn from the center (for in
respect of the heavens mighty distance, the difference between them is not
sensible) shall, howsoever the square be placed, describe sky chart an Azimute.
And if staying the edge of the square at one height, the corner be continually
kept in ye center without slipping, by turning it round about the Steel, you
shall describe an Almicantar, parallel to the Horizon. In this manner, carrying
the square about, and lifting it up and down, till you see the Pole star, or
if you can aim at it, the often spoken of immovable point, staying it fast in
that situation, either of the edges without sensible error may be taken for
the Axis of the world, which extended falls on both the Poles, that which is
seen being the Arctick Pole, and the Antarctick that which is under the
Horizon. In lifting it up and down, you shall in the heaven point out the
Meridian circle, and bringing it just to the flat of the circle B C D E, the
edge will there show the right line B D, which is the Meridian line. The line C
E, in A crossing the line B D, is the line of right East, and right West: the
Azimute standing upon C E, is the Vertical circle, or the circle of the East:
the Azimute standing upon G F, is sometime said to be of so many degrees, as
are between B the North point of the Horizon, and G, where the Azimute
standing upon G F cutteth the Horizon, vz. the circumference B G, denominateth
the Azimute standing upon G F, and sometime that circumference G E, which
contains the number of the degrees betweeene the same point, and the line of
East and West E C, which be the very poles of the Meridian. Working by the
Pole star, these things will somewhat vary from exactnes, which some help
by awayting the time, when the star next the wheels of Charles wayne,
commonly called the filler or hill horse, is directly over or under the Pole
star, so that the square, being lifted up and down close by the Steel,
passes by them both. But howsoever, this may suffice for some conceit of these
terms, hereafter shall be taught other most precise ways, to discribe and
take them most exactly. To return again therefore to our principal purpose,
in beholding of the Stars, how they continually rising in the East side of
the Horizon, ascend unto the Meridian, and so from thence descend unto the West
side, you shall observe, that always they keep their distance from the Pole
star, or the true pole unchanged: as if you mark the two hinder wheels of
Charles waine, you shall find, howsoever they be situated in the heaven, that
their distance from the Pole star is always one, and the same not nearer or
further of at one time then an other, and therefore every star or point, by
such motion in a Globe or Sphere, his superficies describes the circumference
of a circle: so that the whole heavens must seem to turn upon the poles, and
make a circular motion or revolution. This motion in diverse respects has
diverse names, called sometime the Diurnall motion, sometime the motion of the
first moveable heaven, sometime Notus captus. Again, every Star or peynt by
this conversion describing a circle, if you take some star, or point, which
lies between the poles just 90. degrees from either of them, that will
describe a circle, passing by the points of East and West, which for some
reasons hereafter to be expressed, is called the Equinoctial. The other
points or stars describe circles parallel to the Equinoctial circle, which
be called circles of declination, because, if from the poles of the world, by
any point taken in any of the parallels, a greatest circle be drawn to the
Equinoctial, that portion of it, which lies between the Equinoctial and the
Parallel, is called the declination of the point so taken. Some of these
Parallels toward the North, described by revolution of the points or stars,
that never set, are whole above the Horizon, and one of them, which some name
the Arctick circle, touches it only: about the Antarcticke pole there be some
wholly under the Horizon, and one, which some call the Antarcticke circle, only
touches it in the South point: other between these two touching Parallels,
which arise and set or go down, cut the Horizon, whose portion lying between
that point and the true East or West, is called the Amplitude or Latitude of
the rising, or the setting of the point describing the Parallel. These things
hitherto rehearsed, travelers may every where and in all countries observe:
and besides, in their iournies Southward or Northward, they shall see sometimes
more, and sometimes fewer stars never to go down: more in going Northward,
fewer in going Southward, yet always without alteration keeping one and the
same distance one from another. Mary the Pole star or the true pole,
proportionablie to the length of the way traveled, alters his distance from
the Horizon, and the Zenith appearing, the further you go Northward, the
higher, and the further you go Southward, the lower, and so accordingly that
portion of the Meridian, between the Equinoctial and the Zenith, which is sky
chart called the Latitude of the country, being always equal to that which
is between the Horizon and the Pole, called his height, or elevation, is of
necessity greater or lesser: so that your situation is apparently changed in
respect of the heaven, but yet still you keep the same distance from it, whereby
you may easily infer the figure or shape of the Earth to be like and
answerable to the celestial Sphere: and that how vast and huge soever it be in
it self, yet in comparison of the large compass of the heaven, it is justly
counted for no more but a small point, or prick: for it never hinders you
from seeing the precise half of the celestial Sphere, which, were the bigness
thereof any thing of account, it would of necessity do. For better
understanding of these matters, imagine the circle B C D E, described on the
center A, to represent the Meridian, and upon the line E C, a semicircle
erected perpendicularly to represent the Horizon, whose Pole, or the Zenith,
the point B is, and let H be the North pole. From H to A the place of your
standing (being the center of the Horizon and the whole Sphere, and so
consequently of all the greatest circles in the same Sphere described) from the
pole H to the center A draw a right line, and extend it unto I: the line H I is
the Axis of the world: the poles be H the North, and I the South, or
Antarcticke pole. Let the point G, taken in the Meridian, be just 90. degrees
from either pole, so that the circumferences G H, G I, be just quadrants: by
the revolution of the Sphere upon the poles H I, which is the Diurnall motion,
the line G A shall describe a circle passing by the center of the Sphere, and
perpendicular to the Meridian: therefore it must pass by the poles thereof
which be in the Horizon, the points of East and West, as the circle set plumbe
upon the Diameter F G will do. Other points, as S, N, V, describes circles
parallel to that standing upon G F, of which that which stands upon C S, does
only touch the Horizon, and is wholly above it: the other beyond it to the
pole-ward, as V, W, be wholly above it, and come not near. So likewise E, T, is
always under the Horizon, and only touches it: the other beyond it toward I,
are under it, and never come near it. Now if in going Northward the pole H
grow higher, the Equinoctial must go further from the Zenith: for seeing B C
and G H be equal, that is the just quarters of the same circle, if you take
away the circumference B H common to them both, the residue G B, the distance
of the Equinoctial from the Meridian, which is the Latitude of the country,
whose Zenith is B, is equal to H C, the height of the pole above the Horizon,
or the elevation of the pole, and as the pole rises higher, so is the circle S
Cremoued from the Horizon further and further: whereby you see, that by that
means more stars never set. The circumferences of the Meridian G N, G S, G
V, are called the declinations of the points N, S, V, taken in the parallels N
Z, S C, V W, and the portion of the Horizon between the point of true East,
and the point, where the parallel standing upon N Z, cu^teth the Horizon, is
the amplitude or latitude of rising of the point L, or any other taken in the
parallel, standing upon the Diameter N Z. These things being well conceived,
let us consider again, that as apparently as any star, the Sun making his
revolution, arises on the East side of the Horizon, and mounting up unto the
Meridian, at which time it is high noone, descends again unto the West side,
which time of his continuance above the Horizon is called the artificial day,
then being hid from our sight, the night begins, which continues till the
Sun, passing by that part of the Meridian, which is under the Earth, when it
is midnight with us, returns again unto the East side, making up the
natural day, which is the space of time from the Sun rising to the Sun
rising again, and may be indifferently reckoned from Sun set to Sun set,
as the Jews do, or from midnight to midnight, which is our common account.
The obscure light before the Suns rising, is called the dawning and break of
the day: after his setting is called the twilight, Crepusculum in Latin is a
common name to both times. Although in the Suns daily revolution we observe
all this, yet is it not without much variety and change: his rising and
setting is not always in one place of the Horizon, nor his height in the
Meridian always the same at noone. In the midst of winter, about the 12. of
our December, when the days be shortest, and the nights longest, it rises and
sets most Southerly, and is lowest in the Meridian at noone: toward the
Spring, as the days wax longer and longer, in rising and setting it
continually grows from the South, and mounteth higher and higher in the
Meridian, till about the 11. of our March, making the day and night equal, it
rises and sets just East and West, coming at noone to the common section
of the Equinoctial and the Meridian: then, as Summer comes on, the days
increasing, it rises and sets more Northerly, mounting still higher and
higher in the Meridian at noone, till in the midst of Summer, the days being
at the longest, about the 12. of our June, it be at the highest in the Meridian
at noone, and rises and sets furthest North: then, as the days shorten, it
returns back again, growing continually lower at noone, and rising and
setting less Northerly, till the days and nights become equal again, about
the 13. of our September, when it rises and sets precisely East and West
again, and at noone will be in the common section of the Equinoctial and the
Meridian. From that point it grows lower and lower at noone, rising and
setting more and more Southerly, as the nights increase, till about the 12. of
our December the days being at the shortest, it becomes lowest again at
noone, and in rising and setting most Southerly, as it was before. Of this
returning from the highest in Summer, and the lowest in winter, the two
Parallels, which it then describes by the Diurnall revolution, be called
Tropickes, and the Equinoctial was so named, because in March and September
the Sun coming to it, the day is made equal to the night. By these
varieties it was easily gathered, that the Sun made a peculiar course beside
his Diurnall revolution, in a greatest circle touching the two Tropicks, and
declining from the Equinoctial, which it divides (as all greatest circles do
one another) into two equal parts, or semicircles. This declining circle,
because when the Sun and Moon either meet or be opposite in it, there
happens an Eclipse, is called the Eclipticke, and sometime the Zodiac: but
the Zodiac properly is a superficies like a fillet or a girdle, laid upon
this circles circumference, comprehending on either side of it six, or (as
some say) eight degrees. The poles of this circle, which decline from the poles
of the world, as the circle it self declineth from the Equinoctial,
describes by the Diurnall revolution two Parallels, which some, in stead of
them before described, take for the Arctick and Antarcticke circles. That
section of the Equinoctial and the Eclipticke, which the Sun comes to in
the Spring time, is called the Vernall section: that which is opposite to it,
by which the Sun passes in the end of Harvest, is the Autumnall section: the
points which touch the Tropickes, be commonly called Solstitiall points. The
greatest circle, passing by the Equinoctial sections and the poles of the
world, is the Equinoctial Colure: that which passes by the poles of the world
and the Solstitiall points, is called the Solstitiall, or Tropicall Colure, the
portion thereof lying between the two Tropickes, is the distance of the
Tropickes, whose half is the Suns greatest declination, otherwise called the
Obliquitie of the Zodiac, which by observation made with large instruments,
is in this our age found by great Artes-men to be 23. degrees and 30. minutes,
whose report it shall be sufficient to accept of, and commit to memory,
without taking or trying it by any small instrument: though some writers of the
use of the Astrolabe have made that one of their special conclusions. The
Equinoctial and the Eclipticke, are circles of chief account: the first being
the rule and measure of the first motion, or the motion of Primum mobile,
otherwise called the Diurnall revolution: and the other as it were the
Standard, whereby all secondarie motions are examined: therefore the degrees of
these circles have peculiar names, called in the Equinoctial Tempora, times,
because they be the first measures of time, every 15. degrees ascending making
an hour, and so the whole revolution of 360. which is performed every natural
day, make 24. hours. Astronomers begin to account the parts or degrees, as
well in the Equinoctial, as in the Eclipticke, from that point common to them
both, which is called the Vernall section: and though in the Equinoctial there
be no change of names, yet in the Eclipticke or Zodiac every thirty degrees
is called a sign, and has a peculiar name. The first 30. immedtatly following
the Vernall section, is called Aries: the next 30. Taurus, the third 30.
Gemini, the fourth 30. (whose first point begin a new quadrant, and touches
the Summer Tropicke) is termed Cancer: the fifth 30. Leo, the sixth Virgo. These
six Signs make up the semicircle of the Zodiac, which leans or declineth
from the Equinoctial toward the North pole. The first 30. after this
semicircle, beginning at the Autumnall section, make the seventh sign, named
Libra: the next or eight 30. is the sign Scorpio: the ninth 30. is
Sagittarius: the tenth 30. (beginning a new quadrant with the first point,
which touches the winter Tropicke) is Capricornus: the eleventh 30. is
Aquarius, and the twelfth 30. is Pisces. There be characters used to express
every Sign with, which are found in every Almanacke. The Sun passes in the
Ecliptic from point to point, making his continual revolution in it, without
swaruing to the one side or the other: other Stars for the most part decline
from it, but yet have their places determined by Longitude and Latitude in
respect thereof thus: By any point or Star, a greatest circle being drawn
from the pole of the Ecliptic to his circumference, the section there made, or
the portion of the Ecliptic between that section and the Vernall section, is
the Longitude of the point, or Star, by which the greatest circle is drawn:
his Latitude is that portion of the same greatest circle lying between the
Star and the Eclipticke. The Sun being in any point of the Eclipticke, and
the point it self, with all other Stars, wheresoever placed besides, are in
like manner compared to the Equinoctial, and in respect thereof, not only
their declination, which has been touched before, but also their right
Ascension is considered. A greatest circle being drawn from the Poles of the
world to the Equinoctial, by any point or Star, his right Ascension is that
portion of the Equinoctial, taken between that point where the greatest circle
cutteth, and the Vernall section. The declination is the portion of the
greatest circle so drawn, which lies between the Equinoctial and the
Star, which (as before was noted) is also determined by a Parallel to the
Equinoctial, passing by the Star. The right Ascension is so called, because
under the Equinoctial, that is, in a Situation where the Equinoctial passes
by the Zenith, and the Horizon by the Poles of the world, the Horizon (by which
once in 24. hours every point ascends) does the office of any greatest
circle so drawn, as is appointed, and agrees with it most exactly. This
Situation is called Sphaera recta, the right Sphere; and the Horizon in that
Situation, Horizon rectus, the right Horizon: but when the Equinoctial
declineth from the Zenith, and the Poles be one above, the other beneath the
Horizon, that Situation is called the Oblique, or Declining Sphere; and the
Horizon, the Oblique Horizon, which never agrees with the foresaid greatest
circle, drawn by the Poles of the world: and therefore with the Star there
is another point of the Equinoctial in the Horizon, between which and the
Vernall section is contained that portion of the Equinoctial, that is called
the Stars Oblique Ascension, and the portion of the Equinoctial between the
ends of the right and Oblique Ascension, is called the Difference Ascensionall.
But for helping the conceit of these things, I will use a linearie example,
taking the former figure, where E C is the Meridian line, and the Diameter on
which the Horizon stands, now in the midst of winter the Sun being lowest
in the Meridian, in the point K, by the Diurnall revolution, describes a
Parallel standing upon the Diameter K M, which cutteth the Horizon from the
East toward the South: it continually grows higher and sky chart higher in
the Meridian pan, and rises in the Horizon nearer and nearer the East, till
about the 11. of March at noone it comes to G, the section of the
Equinoctial and the Meridian, and then by the Diurnall revolution describes a
circle just answering the Equinoctial, which passing by the points of East and
West in the Horizon, stands upon the Diameter G F: from thence, a^ Summer
comes on, it ascends in the Meridian, and rises more Northerly upon ye
Horizon, til about the 12. of our June, being at the highest in N, it
describes a Parallel standing upon the Diameter N Z, in which it rises upon
the Horizon furthest from the East to the Northward: from thence it descends
again by G, to K, and passes in the Horizon by the true East to the furthest
Southward, then it ascends again till it come to N, continually returning
from the highest to the lowest, and from the lowest to the highest: whereof the
two Parallels standing upon the Diameters K M, L N, be called Tropickes. By
these changes it was easily gathered, that the Sun (besides the Diurnall
revolution) made another proper to it self in a circle standing upon the
Diameter K L, drawn from Tropicke to Tropic by A the center of the Sphere: by
reason whereof, this circle, called the Eclipticke, and the Equinoctial,
divide the one the other into two semicircles. The Eclipticke is sometimes
called the Zodiac, though properly the Zodiac be a superficies lying on
either side of it, as you see the superficies O P Q R, parted by the line Z K.
The common Diameter of the Equinoctial and the Ecliptic standing in A,
perpendicular to the plain of the circle B C D E, the points K and L being the
Solstitiall points, the circle B C D E is the Solstitiall Colure. The circle
standing upon I H, and passing by the perpendicular Diameter, or the
Equinoctial section, is the Equinoctial Colure: the circumference K N is the
distance of the Tropicke, the one half thereof G K, or G N, is the obliquitie
of the Zodiac, or the Suns greatest declination, for it grows less and
less as it comes nearer the Equinoctial section: where it has no
declination at al, it never declineth from the Eclipticke or circle standing
upon K Z, but make his motion in it, his place is named of the point wherein it
is. Other Stars or points without the Eclipticke (as for example, S) have
their place determined by a greatest circle B C D E, drawn from X, the Pole of
the Zodiac, by S ^o K, a point in the Ecliptic circumference, the portion of
the Ecliptic between the Vernall section and K, or the point K is the
Longitude of S, and the circumference S K, is his Latitude. In like manner, if
by any star or point Y, and the Poles of the world H I, there be drawn a
greatest circle B C D E, cutting the Equinoctial in G, the portion of the
Equinoctial between the Vernall section and G, is the right Ascension of Y,
and the circumference G Y is his declination. Now if G, the section of the
Meridian and the Equinoctial, be the Zenith of any place, the Horizon must
stand on I H, and pass by the Poles of the world, which situation is called
the right Sphere, and the Horizon the right Horizon, wherein, by the Diurnall
revolution twice in 24. hours, the circle B C D E must join close with it.
But if G, the section of the Equinoctial and the Meridian, decline from B the
Zenith, which situation is called the Oblique Sphere, and the Horizon then
standing on E C, being an Oblique Horizon, by the Diurnall motion made upon the
Poles H I, the circle B C D E can never agreene or match euenly with the
Horizon: therefore of force some other point of the Equinoctial, and not G,
must be in the Horizon with Y: the circumference of the Equinoctial between
that point in the Horizon, and the Vernall section, is the Oblique Ascension of
Y: but the portion that lies between that point and G, is the difference
Ascensionall. That point of the Zodiac, where it is cut off the Meridian, is
called Medium coeli, mid heaven; Culmen and cor coeli above the Horizon, and
Imum coeli under the Horizon, the lesser angle, made by that section, is called
the Meridian angle. The point of the Eclipticke, that is in the East side of
the Horizon, is called the Ascendent, and the Horoscope, the section there make
the angles, of which the lesser is called the Horizontall angle: the quantity
thereof is equal to the Nonagesimus Gradus of the Eclipticke, which is
peculiarly given to that point of it, which is just 90. degrees from the
Ascendent. There be moreover other greatest circles to be considered, which are
called circles of position, or circles of Station, six of them dividing the
heaven in twelve portions, which are called houses or Stations, though many
times those names be restrained only to such parts of the Zodiac, as be
intercepted by those circles. Though the Horizon be always taken for one, and
the beginning of the first house: yet are the rest by diverse diversely drawn.
Some will have them all to have the Meridian line for their common Diameter,
and yet agreeing in this make difference in placing them. Campanus and Gazulus
divide the Vertical circle into twelve equal parts, and by every two opposite
sections draw a circle of position. Regiomontanus divides the Equinoctial into
twelve equal parts, and will have every circle of position pass by two of
those opposite sections: both these ways keep the Horizon and the Meridian
for circles of position. Other divide the Zodiac into twelve equal parts,
beginning at the Ascendent, and two of those opposite sections draw from the
poles of the Zodiac their circles of position: these keep the same Ascendent
that the former do, but must differ many times in the tenth house, or the
Cardo medij coeli, though Gemma writes that all agree about the foruer
Cardines, that is the Horoscope, seventh house Culmen, and Imum coeli: for they
cannot have always the Meridian and the Horizon for circles of position. Other
draw these circles from the poles of the world, and that diversely: but the
three former ways are in greatest estimation. A circle of position differs
from an angle of position, which (after Prolomey) is an angle at the Zenith,
subtended of that portion of the Horizon, which lies between the Meridian and
the Azimute, passing by the Zenith of the other place, unto which the position
belongs. Gemma Frisius makes it a right lined angle in the center of the
Horizon, subtended of the same circumference: by it Topographicall descriptions
are made, wherein sometimes the distance of two places is measured by a right
line lying between them, but in a Sphericall superficies by the portion of a
greatest circle, because that is the shortest that can be drawn in it. These
things may be easily conceived without linearie explication, if the former
matters be well understood: therefore as it were besides the principal
purpose, setting down how by supputation you may readily guess somewhat near
the Suns place, being a thing for many purposes to be had in a readiness, I will
end this first section: the thing is taken out of Clauius, but fitted to our
common, or the Julian year.

Parergon primum. What month, and what day of it, the Sun enters every
sign of the Zodiac.
FIrst tell the months upon your fingers, seeking Innuarie on your thumb,
February on your forefinger, and so the other in order, till you come to your
month, which mark on which finger it falls: in like manner tell the Signs,
beginning with Aquarius on your thumb, Pisces on your forefinger, and so the
rest in order, till you come to the finger, on which your month fell: the
Sign which falls on that finger, the Sun enters that month. Then
learning these two verses by heart:

Inclyta Laus Justice Impenditur, Haeresis Horret
Garrula, Grex Gratus Faustos Gratatur Honores.
In like manner set Inclyta on your thumb, and word by word in order, till you
come to the finger, on which your month fell: then telling from A in the
cross row, till you come to the first letter of your word, take that number
and subtract it from 20. the residue is the day of the month, when the Sun
enters the Sign. For example: I would know what Sign the Sun enters in
October, and what day it enters, telling from January upon my fingers the
meneths in order: at the second going over I find October on my little finger:
then taking the Signs, and telling from Aquarius, at the second going over my
fingers, Scorpio falls on my little finger, so I say that the Sun enters
Scorpio in October: then taking the verses, and setting the words one by one in
like manner on my fingers, I find in the second going over, Faustos on my
little finger: now telling in the cross row the letters from A to F, I find
six: this six I subtract from 20. so rest 14. which the day of October the
Sun enters Scorpio.

Parergon secundum. To know the Suns place in the Zodiac upon any day given.
Find the Sign answering your month, and the word likewise, then to the day
of the month put ten, and the number the first letter shows in the cross
row: if this be less then 30. the number is the degree of the Sign next
before that, which the Sun enters in your month; if more, cast away 30. and
the residue is the degree of the Sign entered in your month. Example, I would
know where the Sun is the 9. of October, I find in October he enters
Scorpio, and the word for it to be Faustos, whose first letter F is the sixth in
the cross row, I take ten and 6. vz. 16. which I put to, 9. there is made 25.
therefore I say the Sun is in the 25. degree of the Sign before Scorpio, which
is Libra. If I would know for the 18. day, putting 16. to 18. there would
amount 34. from which abating 30. the 4. remaining shows me, that the Sun
is in the 4. degree of the Sign belonging to October, which is Scorpio.

Parergon tertium. The place of the Sun being given, to find the day of the
month.
TAke the day and month the Sun enters the Sign given, the number of the
degrees given put to the day, wherein the Sun enters the Sign, that product
being less than the days in your month, show the day: but being more, cast
away the days of your month, the residue is the day of the month following.
Example, I find the Sun in the 4. degree of Scorpio. I would know what day
of the month it is; I find that the Sun enters Scorpio the 14. of October,
I put 4. to 14. there amounts 18. so I say it is the 18. day of October.
Again, let it be in the 25. of Libra, I find that the Sun enters Libra 13.
Septembris: I put 13. to 25. there amounts 38. from which I take 30. the
days of September, and there remains 8. the day of October. These are but
gesses, as you may see much after the way commonly taught by the back of the
Astrolabe. Let him that desires exactnes, seek the Suns place in some
Ephemerides, or in the Regiment of the Sun, published by E. W. painfully
calculated upon his own diligent and exact observations.

The end of the first Section.
THE SECOND SECTION OF THE NEW HANDLING THE PLANISPHERE; SHOWING HOW THE
CONclusions of the Astrolabe may readily and exactly for any Country be
performed only with Ruler and Compasses.
ALthough for working the conclusions following any circle divided, or to
transfer out of any divided quadrant, the given circumferences would be
sufficient: yet for the easier dispatch, I would a plate of Latten to be
provided, according to the figure which you see on the other side. There, upon
one center A, be six circles described one within another, of which the two
outtermost contains the narrowest space, which must be divided into 360.
equal parts or degrees, as the common manner is. At every 30. degrees, in the
space contained under the second and third circles, make diuisious, and
beginning at E write Ari, or Aries: at the next, Tau, or Taurus, and so for the
rest of the 12. Signs: this circle shall be called the Zodiac. The third
space, contained under the third and fourth circle, must be divided sky chart
at every 15. degrees: beginning at B you must set down 12. at the next
division toward C set down 1. at the next 2. and at every division the numbers
in order, till coming to D, you are to set down 12. again: and so in the
other semicircle DEB, set 1. at the division next D, at the second 2. till
coming to the next before B, you are to set down 11: this fourth circle shall
be called the hour circle. The fourth space, contained under the fourth and
fifth circle, must be divided at every 10. degrees: at the first division from E
toward B set 10. at the second 20. and so increasing continually at every
division by 10. till you come again to E, where you are to set down 360. this
circle shall be named the Equinoctial. The space contained under this and the
sixth, or innermost circle, must from E by D unto C, have divisions at every 20.
degrees, and at every division a number set increasing by 10. til you come to
90: in the quarters B C, B E, you must make divisions at every 10. degrees: at
the first, from B toward E, set 10, and likewise at the next unto C toward B,
at the next 20. and so in order, till coming to E and B, you are there to set
90: this inner circle shall be called the limb. If you will set two sights on
the outter edge, so that the line, drawn from lope to lope, be parallel to the
line subtending the arch B C, and hang a plummet from B, you may by your plate
begin.

The first Conclusion. To take the height of the Sun, or any Star, above
the Horizon.
TVrning your plate toward the Sun, lift it up and down, till his beams
shine through both the lopes of your sights, or (if it be a Star) till you
see it through them: the thread shows in the semicircle E D C, how many
degrees the Sun or Star is above the Horizon.

The second Conclusion. To find the distance of the Suns or any Stars
Azimute, from any determinate point in the Horizon.
LEt your plate be fixed level with the Horizon, and direct E to any point:
then a ruler being turned and lift up by a steel or wier, standing plumbe
upright from the center A, till you see the star, by the edge of it, or
rather through two sights set upon the edge, or if it be the Sun, till his
beams pass through the lopes, then without stirring the end next your eye
bring it close to the center, the edge shows in the Equinoctial the distance
of the Azimute from the point respected by E. The Azimute is said simply
without adition to be given, when his distance from the Meridians North end is
given.

The third Conclusion. From a point given in the circumference of a circle, at
any side assigned, to apply or subtend a distance or a right line not greater
than the Diameter.
LEt the point given be C, from which upon the side toward D, I am to apply a
line equal to A Q, draw the Diameter C A E: now if the line A Q be equal to
the Diameter, I have done that which is required: but being less, I take the
distance A Q with my Compass, and setting one foot in C, with the other I
mark Q in the limb, and so under the circumference C Q, I have subtended a
distance equal to A Q, which was required.

The fourth Conclusion. From a point given in any circles circumference, to
take at any side assigned, an arch equal to any arch given in the same, or any
equal circle.
FRom the point given C, draw the Diameter C A E: now if the arch given be a
semicircle, the circumfere^ce C D E, taken at the side assigned D, is the arch
desired: but if it be lesser, as F G, I take the distance F G, and setting one
foot of the Compass in C, with the other toward D, I mark 3 in the limb,
the circumference 3 C is that, which is desired: but if it be greater than a
semicircle, as 6 G, I take in like manner with my Compass the distance 6 G,
and setting one foot in C, on the other side toward B, not on that which was
assigned toward D, I mark in the limb with the other foot L, the
circumference C D L is that, which is required.

The fifth Conclusion. The heights or Almicanters, together with the distance
between the Azimutes of any two Stars given, or taken by observation, to find
the distance one from another.
Upon the center A describe a circle B C D E, and let the Diameters B D, C E,
be perpendiculars one to another. This construction shall be always assumed
herafter without further expressing: from E to H reckon the distance of the
Azimutes, and draw the line A H: then taking the circumference E F, equal to
the greatest altitude, and making E G equal to it, upon F and G laying a
ruler, it will cut A E in N: again, taking H I equal to the other altitude,
make H K equal to it, a ruler laid on I and K, will cut A H in P, take the
distance N P, and setting one foot of the Compass in A, with the other in A B
mark Q: again, taking the distance F N, and setting one foot in A, take the
line A S: again make the line S T equal to the distance P I, opening your
Compass to the distance T Q, setting one feote in C, with the other in the
limb mark 4, the circumference C 4 is the distance sought. This construction
is general, but in some cases may be abridged: for if the Altitudes were
equal, it should suffice to apply the distance N P in the limb without any
more ado: if both were in one Azimute between the Horizon and the Zenith, as
E F being the greater, and F L the lesser, the distance should be L E: but if
the Zenith were between the height, whereof E M were the one, laying a ruler
on M and A, it would cut the limbs beyond A in 6. then toward B, taking the
other height 6.1. the distance shall be E B. 1.

The sixth Conclusion. In any Country unknown to find the Diameter of the
Parallel of the Sun, or any unknown Star.
THree times in one day, or for any Star in the night, take the height and
distance of the Azimute from any certain point, whereby you may have the
distance of every Azimute from other, by the former conclusion: take the
distance of the points observed one from another, which let be C 6. 6 B and B
K of three lines equal to the chords, of those circumferences, make a triangle
C B A, and about it describe a circle A B C, whose Diameter A C is the
Parallels Diameter.

sky chart

The seventh Conclusion. The Diameter of the Suns, or any Stars parallel
being given, to find the declination.
FRom C on either side apply a distance equal to A C, as C 1. C 2. upon 1 and
2 a ruler laid, will cut A C in R: upon R, as a center at the distance A R,
describe a semicircle A B C (a semicircle thus described, having one angle in
the center A, and his Diameter the Semidiameter of the limb, as A C is, shall
hereafter be called the Synicall arch of the limb). Now from C toward D apply
at 12 a distance equal to A C, the Parallels Diameter given, upon C and 2.
laying a ruler it will cut the Semicircle A B C in D, then laying a ruler on A
and D, it will cut the limb in 5.5 C is the declination sought for. In the Sun
you may know, by the time of the year, whether it be Northerly or Southerly,
and to what quadrant it belongs, saving when he is near the Tropickes, or
Equinoctial sections: for distinguishing thereof, make your observations two,
or three, or four sundry days: then the Sun being about the Tropickes,
comparing two observations, if the declination increase, the first observation
was before it came to the Tropicke: but if it decrease, the second was after it
came to the Tropicke, the Tropicke will show North and South, from Aries by
Cancer to Libra North, from thence by Capricornus to Aries South. About the
Equinoctial sections, if the declination increase, the Sun is past the
section: if it decrease, it is not come to it, and so you may know certainly
unto which quadrant the declination belongs. You may find whether the Star
you observe, declineth North or South, thus: Observe two Stars, of which by
marking the situation of Charies wayne, and the Pole star, you may determine
the more Southerly, or the more Northerly: then if you find their declinations
equal, the more Southerly has South declination, and the more Northerly,
North declination: but if they be unequal, the more Southerly, being less, it
declineth Southward: but if it have the greater declination, the more Northerly
declineth North, which is to be understood of observations taken on this
Northside of the Equinoctial: but you may make this doctrine general, thus:
If that which is nearest the bidden pole be less, it declineth toward that
pole: if greater, then that, which is nearer the apparent pole, declineth
toward the apparent pole. This distiction shall not always be precisely
observed hereafter.

The eight Conclusion. The declination of the Sun, or any Star being given,
together with the Azimute and any height, to find the Meridian height.
LEt the circumferences E F, C G, be made either of them equal to the height
given, and laying a ruler on F and G, it will cut A B in P: make the
circumference E X equal to E F, and laying a ruler on P and X, it will cut A E
in Y: upon Y, as a center, at the distance Y A, describe a semicircle R V A (a
semicircle thus deseribed, having one angle in the center A, and the Diameter
equal to the semidiameter of another circle, as R A equal to F P, which is
the semidiameter of the circle, whose Diameter is the distance F G) this
semicircle shall be called the Synicall arch of that line, or distance, as R V
A is the Synical arch of the distance F G. Let the distance of the Azimute from
the East, and that in this figure Southward, be the circumference E W: upon A
and W, laying a ruler, it will cut the semicircle R V A in V, take the distance
R V, and setting one foot of your Compass in P, with the other in the line P
F, mark a point O. Now let K L be the Diameter of the Suns parallel, and
divide K L so in O, as the greater segment O L may be to O G, the greater
segment of F G, as F O, the lesser segment of F G, is to the lesser segment K O
(how this may be done shall be taught hereafter:) then opening your Compass to
the length of the segment lying toward the quadrant E F B, as namely to O K,
set one foot in O, and with the other mark in the quadrant E F B the point K,
the circumference E K is the Meridian height.

A Lemma.
Between F O and O G, by 13. P. 6. take a mean proportional H N, and to that
mean proportional given, in K L find the two extremes, K O, O L, by the
addition of Peletarius to 13. P. 6. but in the English Euclyde the figure is
drawn wrong, and the demonstration distorted: you may help your self in the
same author, where 17. p. 10. you have out of Campane the same matter truly
propounded.

The ninth Conclusion. In any Country unknown, two different heights with the
Azimutes of the Sun, or any known Star being given, to find their Meridian
height, and declination.
LEt the two heights given be E F, and E H, make C G equal to E F, and C I
equal to E H, draw the lines F G, and A I, cutting A B in the points P and N:
let the semicircle R V A be the Synicall arch to F G, and S T A, the Synical
arch to H I. Moreover, let E W be the distance of the Azimute, belonging to the
height E F, from the East South, and E X, the distance of the Azimute,
belonging to the height E H: likewise from the East South, a ruler laid on A
and W, will cut the semicircle R V A in V: take the distance R V, and setting
one foot in P, with the other in P F mark O: again, laying a ruler on X and
A, it will cut the semicircle S T A in T: take the distance S T, and setting one
foot in N, with the other in the line N H, mark a point M: upon M and O
laying a ruler, draw the line K M O L, which is the Diameter for the parallel
of declination, whereby you may know the declination, and E K is the Meridian
height.

sky chart

The tenth Conclusion. The Meridian height and declination of the Sun, or any
Star being given, to find the latitude.
FIrst you must know whether the height be Northerly or Southerly, which
Nonnius thinks the magnetical Index, or Compass will show readily, and
exactly enough: Clauius determines of it, by marking on what hand the rising
or East side of the Horizon is: but in the night it may be certainly known,
by looking upon the stars about the North pole, then must you mark, whether
after the height taken, the Star grow higher, or lower. Now let the Meridian
height being Southward and highest, be E K, from K toward the pole, which the
declination respects not, as if the declination be North, then South ward: if
South, then Northward: and here supposing the declination Northward, from K
toward E, if must be taken, as K Z, the circumference Z K B is the latitude,
if the height bad been lowest, the declination should have been taken at the
other end of the parallels Diameter, between B and C, for so it should have
been above the Horizon wholly.

The eleventh Conclusion. The declination of the Sun or any known Star
being given, in a Country of known latitude, to find the Meridian height.
IF the complement of the Stars declination, or the distance from the Pole be
less then the latitude, there be two Meridian heightes, one highest, and the
other lowest. Let the latitude given, be K Z, and let the declination be Z K,
opening your Compass to the distance B C, keep one foot in B, and with the
other toward K, mark in the lymbe the point E, the circumference E Z K, is
the Meridian height.

The twelfth Conclusion. The Meridian height of the Sun, or any Star being
given, in a Country of known latitude, to find the Declination.
LEt E K be the Meridian height, opening your Compass to the latitude given,
set one foot in B, and with the other from the pole, mark in the lymbe the
point Z: Z K is the declination sought for, taking denomination of that Pole,
between which, and Z, it is placed.

The thirteenth Conclusion. In a Country of known latitude, the declination,
and height of the Sun or any known Star being given, to find the Azimute.
LEt the height given be E H, make the circumference C I equal to E H, and
draw the line H I, and let S T A be Synicall arch of the line H I, let the
latitude given be B Z, upon Z and A laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe on
the other side in Q, make either of the circumferences Z K, Q L equal to the
declination given, and laying a ruler on K and L, it will cut N H in M: with
your compass take the distance N M, and setting one foot in S, in the
semicircle S T A take with the other foot a point T, upon A and T laying a
ruler, it will cut the lymbe in X: the circumference E X is the distance of the
Azimute from East, or West: Southward, because M fell in the quadrant B Z E,
whereas if it had fallen in the quadrant B I C, it should have been Northward,
whether it be to be accounted from East or West, the rising in height, or
decreasing will show.

The fourteenth Conclusion. In a Country of known latitude, the Azimute and
declination of the Sun, or any Star being given, to find the height.
LEt K L be the Diameter of the parallel of declination, cutting A B axis of
the Horizon in Q, and let B D, be equal to the Azimutes distance from the
East, or West toward the South taken in the quadrant B E, if it were
Northward, it were to be taken in the quadrant B C: between D and B take any
point 1, and make the circumference D 3 equal to 1 B, laying a ruler upon 3
and 1, draw the line 2 O, then making A P equal sky chart to 2 O, upon O and
P, laying a ruler, draw the line P O F, a ruler laid on A and D, will cut O 2
4: in P F take a line P 6, equal to the distance A 4, then laying a ruler upon
Q and 6, it will cut the lymbe in H, the circumference E F H is the height
desired. In some cases this construction will not be contained within the
lymbe, but it is generally true.

The fifteenth Conclusion. In a Country of known latitude the Azimute, and
height of the Sun, or any Star being given, to find the declination.
LEt B Z be the latitude given, and let the altitude be E H, make C I equal to
E H, and draw the line H I, cutting A B, in N: let the distance of the Azimute
from the East be E X; and let S T A be the Synicall arche of H I: now laying a
ruler on A and X, it will cut S T A in T, take the distance S T, and setting
one foot in N, with the other in N H, because the Azimute is Southward
(otherwise in N I) take a point M, upon M and A laying a ruler it will cut the
limb in 5, make Q 7 equal to Z 5, and draw the line A 7, make A 8 equal to A
M, upon M and 8, laying a ruler, draw the line K M 8 L, the circumference Z K,
or Q L, is the declination sought.

The sixteenth Conclusion. The Suns declination being given, to find his
place in the Zodiac.
LEt E H be the Suns greatest declination, videl. as I said in the first
section, to be received upon their credit, which by observation made with
large instruments, affirm it in this our age to be 23. degrees, 30. minutes:
draw the line A H, and let either of the circumferences, E F, C G, be equal to
the declination given, upon F and G laying a ruler, it will cut A H in K: in E
M A the Synicall arche of the lymbe, apply from E at M a distance equal to A
K, upon M and A lay a ruler, which will cut the lymbe in O, a circumference
taken in the quadrante, to which the declination belongs, from the next
Equinoctial section, equal to E O, as E O in the quadrante D E, shows the
place of the Sun, accounting from E, the beginning of Aries by B and C, to O.

The seventeenth Conclusion. Another way to find the Suns place by his
declination given.
Upon I, and H, the Suns greatest declination reckoned from E, and C, lay a
ruler, which will cut the line A B in P, upon A as a center, at the distance A
P, describe a circle Q P R: now let either of the circumferences E F, C G be
equal to the declination given, upon F and G lay a ruler, which will cut the
circle Q A R in S, and likewise on the other side in W, but imagining the
declination to appertain to the Quadrant E H B, take S, the point in it, and
upon S and A laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in T, reckoning from E the
beginning of Aries to T, you have the Suns place you sought for.

The eighteenth Conclusion. The Suns place in the Zodiac being given, to
find his declination.
FRom E toward D take a circumference E O equal to the Suns distance from
the Equinoctial section, that is nearest to his place, and let E M A be the
Synicall arche of the limb, E H, C I equal to the Suns greatest
declination, and draw the lines H A, A I, then laying a ruler on A, and O, it
will cut E M A in M: make A K equal to the distance E M, and A V equal to A
K, then laying a ruler on K and V, it will cut the limb in F, and G, either of
the Circumferences E F, C G, are the declination sought for.

The nineteenth Conclusion. Another way to find the Suns declination by his
place given.
Upon T the Suns place, and A lay a ruler, which will cut the circle Q P R in
S: make the circumference R W, equal to Q S, and laying a ruler on S and W, it
will cut the limb in F and G, either of the circumferences E F, or C G is the
declination sought for.

The twentieth Conclusion. The Suns declination being given, to find his
right Ascension.
LEt either of the circumferences E F, and CG, be equal to the Suns
declination given, upon G, and F laying a ruler, it will cut A H in K, and B A
in X, let Y L A be the Synicall arche of the distance F G, and from Y to L
applite in the Semicircle Y L A, a distance equal to X K; upon L and A laying
a ruler, it will cut the limb in N. In the quadrant, to which the declination
belongs, from the next Equinoctial section, a circumference taken equal to
E N, as E N in the quadrant E N D, shows the right ascension from E by B to N.

The 21. Conclusion. The right ascension of any point in the Zodiake being
given, to find the Meridian angle.
LEt E O be equal to the distance of the right ascension from the nearest
Equinoctial section, upon A and O a ruler laid will cut E M A the Synical arche
of the limb in M, in the lines H A, A I take A K, and A V equal to the
distance E M, upon K V, laying a ruler, it will cut A B in X: in Y L A the
Synicall arch of the distance F G apply at Z, from A sky chart a distance
equal to X V, a ruler laid on A and Z, cutteth the limb in 4, the
circumference E 4 is the Meridian angle.

The 22. Conclusion. The right ascension of the Sun being given, to find his
place in the Zodiac.
LEt E O be equal to the right ascensions distance from the nearest
Equinoctial section, and make D 3 equal to D O* and draw the line O 3, let
the Meridian angle taken by the former conclusion be E 4, and make D 5 equal
to D 4 a ruler laid upon the points 4 and 5 will cut A D in 7, open your
compass to the distance A 7, and keeping one foot in A, with the other toward
3, in the line O 3, mark a point 6, a ruler laid on A and 6, cutteth the lymbe
in 2, the circumference C 2 is equal to the distance of the Suns place from
the Equinoctial section, in the quadrant, wherein the right ascension was.

The 23. Conclusion. The Suns right ascension being given, to find his
declination.
FRom D and B toward E, take circumferences D O, B T equal to the distance
of the right ascension from the nearest Equinoctial section, and laying a
ruler on O and T, it will cut the lines AE, A H in the points B and Q: in A B
take A D, equal to the distance B Q, and draw the line D C, in it take a line
C 8, equal to C A, and then taking the distance A 8, set one foot of your
compass in E, and with the other in the quadrant E B, mark a point F, the
circumference E F, is the declination sought for.

The 24. Conclusion. The declination of any star being given, with his
latitude, which never alters, to find his longitude or place in the Zodiac.
LEt L be the pole of the Zodiac, B the pole of the world, and make the
circumferences L H, L I equal to the complement of the latitude given, that
is, let them be equal to that portion of a quadrant, whereby it exceeds the
latitude, draw the line H I. Again let either of the circumferences E F, C G
be equal to the declination given, a ruler laid upon F and G, will cut H I in
K: again a ruler laid on A and L, will cut it in M: with your compass take
the distance M K, and in the semicircle 6 N A, which is the Synicall arch for
the line H I, from 6 apply at N a distance equal to M K, a ruler laid upon ye
points A N, will cut the limb in O: a distance equal to E O, applied in the
quadrant C D, to which I suppose the declination belongs, from C the
Equinoctial section, unto P, shows in the Zodiac from E by B to P the
place of the star.

The 25. Conclusion. The declination of any star being given, with his
latitude, which never alters, to find the right Ascension thereof.
AS before let L be the pole of the Zodiac, B, the pole of the world, L I, L
H, the complements of the stars latitude, E F, CG, equal to the declination,
draw the line H I, and lay a ruler on F and G, which will cut A B in Q, and H I
in K; let the semicircle A R S be the Sinicall arch for the distance F G, and
from S in the semicircle A R S, apply at R a distance equal to the distance Q
K, a ruler laid on R and A, will cut the limb in T, the distance, C T, in the
quadrant, to which the declination belongs, applied from the Equinoctial
section, shows in the Equinoctial the right ascension sought for.

The 26. Conclusion. The longitude and latitude of any star being given, to
find the declination and right Ascension thereof.
LEt the poles and latitude be as before, and let E O be equal to the distance
of the stars place from the nearest Equinoctial section: a ruler laid on A and
O, will cut the Circumference 6 N A, which is the synical arch to the line H I,
in the point N; again a ruler laid on A and I, will cut H I in M, take the
distance 6 N, and setting one foot in M, with the other toward I, if the
place be nearer the pole B, or toward H, if nearer D, but here supposing it
nearer B, in M I mark K, upon A and K laying a ruler, it will cut the limb in
V, make the circumference B W equal to B V, and draw the line A W, and in it
make A X equal to the distance A K, a ruler laid on X and K, will cut the
lymbe in F and G, and the line A B in Q, either of the circumferences E F, C G
is equal to the declination. Now in the semicircle S R A, which is the
Sinicall arch for the distance F G, apply a distance equal to Q K from S to R:
upon A, and R laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in T, the circumference C
T, is the distance of the right ascension, from the Equinoctial section, taken
in the quadrant, to which the longitude belongs.

The 27. Conclusion. The declination and right ascension of any star being
given, to find the longitude and latitude thereof.
THis differs not in working from the former, only change the names, let L
be the pole of the world, B the pole of the Zodiac, H I joins the
complements of the declination given, E O is equal to the distance of the
right ascension, from the nearest Equinoctial section, 6 N A the Synicall arch
for H I, is cut in N by a ruler laid on O and A, make M K equal to 6 N, upon A
and K a ruler laid cutteth the limb in V, ye circumferences B V, B W being
equal, and the live A W drawn, A X must be made equal to A K, a ruler lying
on X and K cutteth the limb in F and G, so either of the circumferences E F, C
G be equal sky chart to the latitude sought for. In the Synicall arch of F G,
which is A R S, a distance equal to M K applied from S to R, and then a ruler
laid on A and R, cutteth the limb in T, so is C T the distance of the
longitude, from the nearest Equinoctial section taken in the quadrant, to
which the right ascension belongs.

The 28. Conclusion. The longitudes and latitudes of any two stars, or any
two places in the earth being given, to find the distance of the one from the
other.
IF they be both on one side of the Equinoctial, or of the Eclipticke what
case soever fall out, you shall take their latitudes, as heights above the
Horizon, and the difference of their longitudes, as the distance of their
Azimutes; by which working, after the 5. Conclusion, you shall find their
distance: but if one be on the one side of the Equinoctial, and the other on
the other, or, of the Eclipticke, then if they differ not in longitude, from E
toward B, take one latitude E L, and make L K equal to the other latitude,
the circumference E K in the Equinoctial shows their distance. If they
differ in longitude a whole semicircle, from E toward D take E M one latitude,
and laying a ruler on M and A, it will cut the limb on the other side in 6,
take 61, the other latitude, and from E to 1, in the Equinoctial, you shall
find the distance: but let the difference of the longitudes be E H; and draw
the line A H, let the circumference F E be equal to the greater latitude, H I
to the less, then making E G equal to E F, and H K equal to H I, upon F and
G a ruler laid, will cut A E in N, likewise laid on I K, it will cut H A in
P. In the line A B take A Q equal to the distance N P, and in A C make A S
equal to F N, and S W equal to I P, in the quadrant C D from C unto 3 apply
a distance equal to Q W, the Circumference C 3, is the distance sought for.

The 29. Conclusion. The Latitudes and distance of any two Stars, or any two
places in the Earth being given, to find the difference of their Longitudes.
LEt the places first be on the one side of the eclipticke, or the
Equinoctial, and let the distance given be C 4, let the greater Latitude be E
F, the lesser E L; make the Circumferences E G equal to OF, and E M equal to
E L, then laying a ruler on F and G, it will cut A E in N, and laid upon L and
M, it will cut it in O, make A S equal to N F, and S V equal to L O, then
opening your compass to the distance C 4, set one foot in V, and with the
other mark Q in the line A B, taking the distance A Q, set one foot in N, and
with the other describe an arch at P, then opening your compass to the
distance A O, and keeping one foot in A, with the other cross the arche at P,
a ruler laid on A and P, cutteth the limb in H, the Circumference E H is the
difference of their Longitudes; when the Circumferences meet in the line A,
they differ not in Longitude, otherwise the construction is general in this
case. But if one be on the one side, and the other on the other, then must you
make S W equal to L O, and opening your compass to the distance given, which
suppose were C 3, set one foot in W, and with the other, in the line A B,
mark the point Q, and then on N, as a Center at the distance A Q, describe an
arch at P, which being crossed with another arch, described upon the Center A,
at the distance A O, a line drawn from A by P to H, shows E H, the
difference of their Longitudes.

The 30. Conclusion. The Longitudes and Latitudes of any two Stars, or any
two places in the Earth being given, to find the angle of Position, or the
bearing of the one from the other.
BY the Longitudes and Latitudes you may find the distance, and first let both
the Latitudes be on the one side of the Eclipticke, or the Equinoctial, and
their distance less then a Quadrant, as B L, and E F the Latitude of the place
from which the other bears; the complement of the other place whose position
is sought C 4, make E G equal to E F, and E M equal to E L, which is the
complement of the distance B L, that is given: laying a ruler on G and F, it
will cut A E in N, in A C take a line A S equal to F N, then laying a ruler on
L and M, it will cut A E in O, make S V equal to L O. Now take the distance C
4, which is the complement of the Latitude belonging to the other place, and
setting one foot in V, with the other mark in A B, a point Q. taking ye
distance A Q. set one foot of your compass in N, and with the other make an
arch at P, then upon A as a center, at the distance A O, describe an arch at P,
crossing the former, a ruler laid on A and P, will cut the limb in H, and so
E H is the angle of position sought for. But if the distance be greater then a
Quadrant, as for example D L, then making E M equal to L E, the excess of the
distance above a Quadrant, upon L and M lay a ruler, which will cut A E in O,
then having taken in A C, a line A S equal to the distance F N, take also in S
C a line S W equal to L O, and the other Latitude being D 3, take the distance
C 3, subtended under the complement thereof, and setting one foot in W, with
the other mark in the line A B a point Q, opening your compass to ye distance
A Q, upon N as a center, describe an arch at P, which crossed with another arch
described on ye center A, at ye distance A O, a ruler laid on A, and the
crossing at P, cutteth from the limb the circumference E H, which is ye angle
of position sought for.

But now let one Latitude be on the one side, and the other on the other of the
Eclipticke, or Equinoctial, and let the distance be less then a quadrant,
the^ must you take the lines A S, and S V, as in the first case, but in steed
of C 4, the complement of the other Latitude D 4, you must take E D 4,
compounded of the Latitude D 4, and the Quadrant E D, and opening your compass
to the distance E 4, set one foot in V, then take a point in A B, and so
prosecute the construction as in the first case.

But if the Latitudes being one on the one side, and the other on ye other of
the eclipticke, or equinoctial, ye distance sky chart be greater then a
Quadrant, then must you, as in the second case, make A S equal to F N, and S W
equal to L O, and taking the distance E D 3, subtended under E D a Quadrant,
and D 3, the Latitude given, and setting one foot of the compass in W, with
the other take a point in the line A B, and so proceed forward as has been
taught both in the first and second case.

The 31. Conclusion. The Latitude of one Star, or one place in the Earth
being given, with the distance, and angle of position, or bearing toward
another, to find the Latitude of this other, and the difference of their
Longitudes.
LEt the angle of Position be equal to the Circumference H E, and let the
Latitude given be E F, and the distance being less then a Quadrant, let his
complement be H I, make the Circumference E G equal to E F, and H K equal to
H I, a ruler laid on F, and G, will cut A E in N: again laying a ruler on I
and K, it will cut A H in in P, in the line A B take A Q, equal to the
distance N P, and in A C take a distance equal to Q V, which being less then
a Quadrant, is the Latitude of the other Star or place, and on the same side
of the Eclipticke, or Equinoctial that the former Latitude is: but if it had
been greater, then a Quadrant as E D 4, then should D 4 the excess above a
Quadrant, be the Latitude sought for, and on the other side of the Eclipticke,
or Equinoctial: thus having the two Latitudes by them and the distance given,
you may find the difference of their Longitudes.

But if the distance be greater then a Quadrant, as 6 B H is, then must you
take H I, the excess of it, above the Quadrant I B 6, and making H K equal to
H I, and E G equal to F E, the Latitude given, lay a ruler on F G, which will
cut the line A E in N, and on I K, which will cut A H in P, then make A Q
equal to N P, and A S equal to F N, and S W equal to I P, then in the lymbe
from C, apply at 3 a distance equal to W Q, the Circumference C 3, being
less then a Quadrant, the Complement thereof D 3, is the Latitude sought for:
but if it be greater then a Quadrant, as E D 3, then is D 3 the excess of it
above a Quadrant, the Latitude sought, but on the side contrary to the
Latitude given, as it was on the same side being less then a Quadrant.

Adnotandum.
PTolomey in the first book of his Geographie, Chap. 3. promises with his
Meteoroscopium, by the Latitudes of two places given, and the angle of Position
to find the difference of their Longitude, which as Nonnius has truly noted,
cannot possibly by any instrument be performed, no nor by any tables, though
Regiomontanus Tabul. prim. mob. Prop. 46. has undertaken it: this 31.
Conclusion expresses a general truth, and Regiomontanus in his treatise de
Meteorosc. quite digressing from Ptolomey, has in like manner expressed it.

A Caution.
IN these four last Conclusions, following the construction here set down,
the circle will not be sufficient to contain the lines required, which you may
help by the Synicall arch of the lymbe, applying your lines in the limb from
the concourse thereof and the Synicall arch, it would be too tedious to
exemplify all particulars, therefore for your better understanding I will
only set down for.

The 32. Conclusion. Another way to find the distance of two Stars, or
places in the Earth, having their Latitudes, and the difference of their
Longitudes given.
LEt the Semicircle A B C be the Synicall arch of the lymbe, and from the
concourse of it and the lymbe C, apply at 7 a distance equal to N P, a ruler
laid on C sky chart and 7 will cut the Semicircle A B C in Z, take the
distance C Z, and setting one foot in A, with the other in the line A B mark
a point X, again making A S equal to F N, and S V equal to I P, apply from
C to D a distance equal to V A, a ruler laid on C D will cut A B C in Y, make
T V equal to C Y, and from C in the arch A B C apply at B a distance equal
to T X, a ruler laid on C B will cut the limb in 4, the Circumference C 4 is
the distance sought for: the other cases may be all handled after this fashion.

The 33. Conclusion. The longitudes and latitudes of any three Stars, or any
three places in the earth being given, to know whether they be in one
greatest circle or no.
TAke the distance between the first and the middlemost, which let be E L, and
likewise between the middlemost and the third, which let be L I, and let the
distance between the first and the third be E G, now if E G be equal to E I
they be in one greatest circle, otherwise not.

The 34. Conclusion. Any unknown star being seen, to find the right
ascension and declination of it.
Having thrice observed the Azimute, and Almicantar or height, you may by the
seventh conclusion find the declination of it, then take the distance of it,
from any known star, by the declinations taken as latitudes and their
distance, you may find the difference of their right ascensions, as the
difference of their longitudes, which added or subtracted accordingly from the
known stars right Ascension, yields the right Ascension of the unknown
Star. Gemma Frisius his chapter answering this conclusion, includes Cometes,
but their Parallaxis being neglected, which he regards not, neither his
working nor this conclusion, no less exact then his working, can duly
perform that he propou^deth. In the Moon besides her Parallar, the swiftnes
of her motion, will be also a let, although Ptolomeye Almag. lib. 7. c. 2.
Regiomontanus in Epit. and Copernicus lib. 1. c. vlt. by their Astrolabe or
Armillae which Pappus Comment in 5. Alm. calls Meteoroscopion, take the place
of the Moon to find the longitude of the stars, and peradventure the method
used of Copernicus lib. 2. c. 2. is fitter for that purpose.

The 35. Conclusion. The latitude or amplitude of the Suns or any known
Stars rising being given with their declination, to know the height of the
Pole.
ON the land it is casie to mark in what points of the Horizon the Sun or
any star rises and sets, and it is a common practice at Sea, to set the
Compass with the Sun, at his rising, and going down, the half of the
circumfere^ce intercepted between those two points, is the amplitude of rising,
reckoned from the Meridian. In the Sun about the Equinoctial sections some
little error may happen, which although M. Digges in Scal. Mathem. thinks
worth the correcting, may in handling these common instruments be nothing
regarded. But to the conclusion: let E F, and C G, be either of them equal to
the declination given, and draw the line F G, let the circumference E H, be
equal to the amplitude of rising, counted from the East, a ruler laid on H,
and A, will cut E I A the Synicall arche of the limb in I, with your Compass
take the distance E I, and setting one foot in A, with the other toward G, or
F, it skilleth not which, take a point K, a ruler laid on A and K, will cut
the lymbe in L, the circumference B L, is the height of the pole.

The 36. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the declination of the
Sun or any Star being given, to know the amplitude or Latitude of rising.
LEt the Circumferences E F, C G be equal to the declination given, and B L
the height of the Pole, a ruler laid on A and L, will cut F G in K, in E I A
the Synicall arch of the lymbe, apply from E to I a distance equal to A K,
and laying a ruler on A and I, it will cut the lymbe in H, the circumference E
H, is the distance of rising from the East Northward, if G F fall between the
Equinoctial and the North Pole South ward, if between the Equinoctial and
the Antarticke Pole.

The 37. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the Amplitude or
Latitude of the Suns or any Stars rising being given, to find the
Declination.
LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and draw the line A L, let the distance of
the rising from the East, be E H, a ruler laid on A and H, will cut E I A, the
Synicall arch of the lymbe in I, take the distance E I, and setting one foot
in A, with the other in the line A L, mark K, then make B M equal to B L, and
draw the line A M, in it take A N, equal to A K, a ruler laid on N and K,
will cut the lymbe in F and G; either of the Circumferences E F, C G are the
declination sought for.

The 38. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the declination of the
Sun or any Star being given, to find the Semidiurnall arch, or half the
time it continues above the Horizon.
LEt the height of the Pole be L B, either of the Circumferences E F, C G,
equal to the declination given, sky chart drawing the line G F, on A and L lay
a ruler, which will cut G F in K, take the distance O K, and from R in R P A
the Synicall arch of G F, apply at P a distance equal to O K, a ruler laid on
A and P, cutteth the lymbe in Q, if the line F G be between the Equinoctial
and the apparent pole, the Semidiurnall arch shall be B E Q, but if it be
between the Equinoctial and the hidden Pole, the Semidiurnall diurnall arch
shall be Q D, you may easily see in the hour circle, what hours they
contain.

A Corollarie.
THe point Q. if the line G F, be between the apparent Pole and the
Equinoctial, shows the time of the rising: but if it be between the hidden
Pole and the Equinoctial, it shows the setting: if from C toward D, you
take in the lymbe a distance equal to E Q, that point will show the setting,
when F G is between the apparent Pole and the Equinoctial, and the rising,
when it is between the hidden Pole and the Equinoctial.

The 39. Conclusion. The declination and Semidiurnall arch of the Sun, or any
Star being given, to find the height of the Pole.
LEt the Circumferences E F, C G, be equal to the declination given, and let B
E Q, or D Q, be the Semidiurnall arch, a ruler laid on A and Q will cut R P A,
the Synicall arch of the line G F in P, make O K equal to the distance R P,
and laying a ruler on A and K, it will cut the lymbe in L, the Circumference B
L is the height of the Pole.

The 40. Conclusion. By two known Stars, whereof the one is in the Meridian,
the other in the Horizon, to know the height of the Pole or Latitude.
LEt the declination of that which is in the Horizon, be equal to either of
the Circumferences E F, C G draw the line G F, cutting the Axis A B in O, and
let R P A be the Synicall arch of the line GF, and let the right ascension of
that, which is in the Meridian, be distant from the nearest Equinoctial
section, so much, as Q is from E; now laying a ruler on A and Q, it will cut R
P A the Synicall arch of the line F G in P, make O K, or ON, it skilleth not
which, equal to R P, a ruler laid on K and A, will cut the lymbe in L, the
Circumference B L is the height of the Pole.

The 41. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the height and
declination of the Sun being given, to know the hour of the day, or what it
is a clock.
LEt the Circumferences E F, C G be equal to the declination of the Sun, and
B L and D T the height of the Pole, make either of the Circumferences L S, T H,
equal to the height given, a ruler laid on S and H, will cut F G in V, in R P
A the Synicall arch of F G, apply from R to W, a distance equal to O V, a
ruler laid on A and W, will cut the lymbe in X. Before Noone the observation
being taken, and if the Axis of the world fall between V and the Horizon, then
in the quadrant C D, taking from C, a Circumference equal to EX, you shall have
ye hour pointed forth, but if V fall between the Axis and the Horizon, then
take in the Quadrant B C from C, a Circumference equal to E X, and the hour
shall be poynted out. The observation being taken after Noone, you must use the
Quadrants E D and E B in like manner.

A Caution.
BEcause when the Sun draws near the Meridian, you cannot perfectly
discern, whether it be before Noone, or after Noone, you must help that
matter thus. Take two Observations with some pretty distance between, and if
the last be greater then the first, thou was the first before Noone, but if the
last be lesser, then was the last after Noone.

The 42. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the Azimute and
declination of the Sun being given, to find the hour of the day.
BY the Azimute and declination given, you may by the 14. Conclusion find* the
height thereof, that being had by it and the declination you shall by the
former conclusion find the hour.

The 43. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the height and
declination of any Star being given, to find the hour of the night.
LEt the Circumferences E F, C G, be equal to the declination of the Star,
draw the line F G, cutting B A in O; let either of the Circumferences L B, D T
be the height of the Pole, and make the Circumferences L S, T H equal to the
height given: on S and H laying a ruler, it will cut F G in V: in R W A apply
from R to W, a distance equal to O V; and laying a ruler on W and A, you shall
cut the lymbe in X, if the observation be taken before the Star come to the
Meridian, which you shall know by the caution of the 41. Conclusion, then take
a Circumference equal to EX on the one or the other side of C, according to
the falling of the point V showed in the 41. Conclusion, and so shall you have
the distance of the Star from the Meridian, or the hour of the Star, which
imagine you find to be poynted out by T: from T toward the point E, take a
Circumference sky chart TEG, equal to the Stars right ascension, and from G
toward B take a Circumference G M equal to the Suns right ascension, a ruler
laid on A and M in the hour circle poynteth forth the hour.

The 44. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, the Azimute and
declination of any Star being given, to know the hour of the night.
THe Azimute and declination being given, you may by the fourteenth Conclusion
find the height, then by the height and declination by the former Conclusion
you may find the hour.

The 45. Conclusion. Any day of the year in a Country of known Latitude, to
find the beginning, continuance, and end of the Crepusculum, that is, the
dawning in the morning, and twy-light in the evening.
LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and either of the Circumferences E F, C G,
equal to the declination of the Suns place for the day given, draw the line
F G, upon A and L laying a ruler, it will cut F G in K, and the lymbe on the
other side in T: from L and T take under the Horzon, that is toward C and D,
the Circumferences L Y, T Z of eyghteene degrees apeece, upon Z and Y laying a
ruler, it will cut F G in 2: in R P A the Synicall arch of F G, apply from R
to P a distance equal to O K, again from R to 4 apply in R P A a distance
equal to O 2, now a ruler laid upon A and P, will cut the lymbe in Q, but laid
on A and 4, will cut it in 6, the Circumference Q 6 in the hour circle will
show the continuance of the Crepusculum. This added to the Suns rising, which
you are taught to know by the 38. Conclusion, Cor. shows, when it begins
in the morning, and added to the time of his setting, shows when it ends in
the evening: I need not tell that it ends in the morning with the rising of
the Sun, and begins in the evening with his going down.

The 46. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude any day in the year at
any hour assigned, to know the height of the Sun.
LEt B L be the height of the Pole, and the Circumferences E F, C G equal to
the Suns declination for the day given, and let E X be the hours distance
from six, on X and A laying a ruler, it will cut R P A the Synicall arch of
the line G F, in W: with your compass take the distance R W, and setting one
foot in O, mark in the line F G a point toward G, if in the morning it be
before six, or in the evening after six, but if it be after six in the
morning, or before six in the evening, then toward F, as here it is supposed
in the morning after six, and therefore let it be V, on A and V laying a
ruler, it will cut the lymbe in 5, make the circumference T 7, equal to L 5,
and draw the line 7 A; in it take a line A 3 equal to A V, and laying a ruler
on V 3, it will cut the lymbe in S and H, either of the circumferences L S,
or T H are the height desired.

The 47. Conclusion. In a Country of known latitude, for any day of the year,
to find in what Azimute the Sun is in.
BY the former conclusion you learned how to find the height for the time
assigned, in the 13 conclusion was taught by the height and declination given
in a country of known latitude to find the Azimute, and so by these two
conclusions you may perform that, which is here propounded.

The 48. Conclusion. In a country of known Latitude any day of the year at
any hour assigned, to know how far any determinate point is distant from the
Meridian.
LEt the hour assigned be M, and from M by B Eastward take a circumference M B
G equal to the sky chart Suns right ascension for the time given, again
from G by E take a circumference G E T equal to the right ascension of the
point or star given, the circumference T D is the distance thereof from the
Meridian, which you desired.

The 49. Conclusion In a Country of known Latitude at any hour assigned any
day of the year, to know the height of any known Star.
TAke the distance of the point or star at the time given from the Meridian,
and so consequently from the hour of six, which let be E X, and let E F, C G
be equal to the stars declination, draw the line F G, cutting A B in O, then
upon A and X laying a ruler, it will cut R W A, the Synicall arch of F G, in W,
with your compass take the distance R W, and in the line F G from O toward G,
if the distance from the Meridian be more then six hours, but if less then
six hours, as here it is supposed, then toward F take V O, equal to R W,
then laying a ruler on A and V, it will cut the lymbe in 5, make the
circumference T 7 equal to L 5, and draw the line 7 A, therein take A 3 equal
to the distance A V, and laying a ruler on V and B, it will cut the lymbe in
the points F and G, either of the circumferences E F, C G is equal to the
height you desire.

The 50. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude at any hour assigned any
day of the year, to know the Azimute of any known Star.
BY the former conclusion you know how to find the height for the time
assigned, and by the height and declination, the 13. conclusion will teach you
to find the Azimute as you desire.

The 51. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, to find the difference
Ascensional, or the difference of the right and oblique ascension of any point
of the Eclipticke or any known Star.
LEt E W be the height of the Pole, and let either of the Circumferences W I,
and W H be equal to the complement of the declination given, draw the line HI,
cutting the Horizon E C in Y, and the Axis of the world A W in 4, let 6 Z A be
the Synicall arch for the line H I, and therein from 6 to Z, apply a distance
equal to 4 Y, upon A and Z laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in 5, the
circumference E 5 is the difference Ascensionall which you require.

The 52. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude to find the oblique
ascension of any point of the Eclipticke, or any known Star.
LEt the right ascension of the point taken by the 20. Conclusion, be the
Circumference E B G, accounted from E, the beginning of Aries, and the
difference ascensionall of the point, whose line of declination is H I, let be
E 5: now if H I be between the apparent Pole and the Equinoctial, take from G
toward E a Circumference G 1, equal to E 5, and E B 1 shall be the oblique
ascension: but if H I be between the Equinoctial and the hidden Pole, then
from G toward C, take the Circumference G 3 equal to E 5, and then shall E G
3 be the oblique ascension sought for.

A Corollary.
IF you add a semicircle to the oblique Ascension found, that is, if you lay a
ruler on 1, or 3 and A, it will in the opposite quadrant E D, point out the
oblique descension of the point, that is opposite to the point whose oblique
Ascension you look.

Another Corollary.
YOu may also find the oblique descension of any point by this Conclusion, if
you add, when here you are appointed to subtract, and subtract when you are
appointed to add.

The 53. Conclusion. The oblique Ascension of any point of the Eclipticke, or
any known Star being given, to find the Latitude.
LEt W be the Pole of the world, W I and W H the complements of the points
declination, draw the line H I, cutting A W the Axis of the world in 4, and let
the difference Ascensionall (which you may know by comparing of the right and
oblique Ascensions) be E 5, a ruler laid on the Center A and 5, will cut 6 Z A
the Synicall arche of the line H I in Z, in the line H 4, take Y 4 equal to
the distance 6 Z; then laying a ruler upon A and Y, it will cut the lymbe in E,
the Circumference E W is the height of the Pole, or the Latitude sought for.

sky chart

The 54. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude, any day assigned to know
what point of the Eclipticke is in the Meridian in the morning.
TAke the oblique ascension for that point of the Eclipticke, wherein the Sun
is that day which is assigned, as for example the point V, then opening your
Compass to the distance B C, set one foot in V, and with the other from the
West toward the East, or according to the succession of the degrees or times
of the Equinoctial mark in the lymbe T, that point is the point of the
Equinoctial which is in the Meridian: now if by the 22. Conclusion you take
the point answerable to that right ascension in the Eclipticke, it shall be the
same that is in the Meridian.

The 55. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude any day of the year, at
any hour assigned, to find what point of the Eclipticke is in the Meridian.
LEt the right ascension answering the degree of the Eclipticke, which serves
the day given, be E B V, accounted from E the beginning of Aries, now take the
hour distance of the Sun from the Meridian, which let be B W: if the Sun
be not yet come to the Meridian, from V toward C, or from West toward East,
according to the succession of the degrees of the Equinoctial, take a
Circumference V 7 equal to B W, 7 shows the point of the Equinoctial, that
is in the Meridian, the place of the Zodiac answerable to the right
ascension, is also in the Meridian with it. But if the Sun be past the
Meridian, you must take a Circumference equal to B W, contrary to the
succession of the Equinoctials degrees, as from V the Circumference B V, and
then the point of the Eclipticke, which answers the right Ascension B, shall
be in the Meridian, and the same is to be understood of the opposite points.

The 56. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude any day of the year, to
know what time any point of the Eclipticke, or any known Star rises or
sets.
TAke the oblique Ascension of the point, which let be E B G, and the right
Ascension answering the point, wherein the Sun is the day given, which let be
E B T, from the hour of the Suns rising according to the succession of the
hour circle, take a Circumference equal to G T, and it shall point out the
hour, when the Star comes to the Horizon.

The 57. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude to know with what point
of the Eclipticke, any known Star comes to the Meridian.
TAke the right ascension of the Star, and then the point of the Zodiac
that is answerable thereunto, and that shall be the point wherewith the Star
comes to the Meridian.

The 58. Conclusion. The oblique ascension being given, to know the situation
of the Equinoctial sections in respect of the Meridian.
LEt the oblique ascension given be E B 1, with your compass take the distance
B C, and setting one foot in 1, with the other mark a point L, which is the
point of the Equinoctial in the Meridian: now for as much as E is beyond the
Meridian, it is in the West quarter above the Horizon, if it had fallen
between L and 1, it should have been in the East, the opposite section is
always in the opposite Quadrant.

sky chart

The 59. Conclusion. In a Country of known Latitude to know the Horizontall
angle, made by the Section of the Horizon and Eclipticke in any point given.
TAke the oblique Ascension of the point given, and by it find the situation
of the Equinoctial section. Now if the Section be on the East side of the
Meridian, take the complements of the oblique ascension, and the point given as
Latitudes; the Suns greatest declination is the difference of their
Longitudes, and by the 30. Conclusion seek the Horizontall angle, as the
bearing of the oblique ascension from the point of the Eclipticke, that is in
the Horizon, and so have you the Horizontall angle, but if the Equinoctial
Section be on the West side, you must take the complements to the opposite
points of the Eclipticke, and oblique ascension, and with them work by the
Conclusion as is aforesaid.

To the Reader.
THere remains for perfecting this Section almost 20. Conclusions more,
whereof many depend upon this problem: viz. In a Country of known Latitude,
any oblique Ascension being given, to find the point of the Eclipticke
Coascending, which yet I have not found how to perform generally, otherwise
then by taking such help of an Eleipsis, as is used in the foureteenth
Conclusion: in which manner of working the construction will very often exceed
the compass of the lymbe, for which and some other causes I omit it and the
rest at this present. Notwithstanding if I perceive hereafter, that those
matters be much desired, they shall be adjoined at the next impression: the
mean while I must entreat the reader to take thus much in good part.

The end of the second Section.
THE THIRD SECTION OF THE NEW HANDLING OF THE PLANISPHERE; WHICH IS A
SVPPLEMENT Organicall.
CHAP. 1. To make a Quadrant, whereby you may readisie know what Degrees and
Minutes are contained in any Circumference given.
Upon the Center A, describe a quadrant A B C, whose lymbe you must divide, as
the common manner is, into 90. equal parts or degrees, and every degree into
halfes; in the lymbe take the quantity of 30. degrees, which let be C D, and
draw the line A D. In either of the lines A D, or A C, take some reasonable
distance from the lymbe, as A E, or A F; and upon the Center A at that
distance, describe the Circumference F E, then enlarging your compass a
little, describe another Circumference, as you see at F and E: again, opening
your compass somewhat larger, describe another Circumference G H, then
extending or contracting the distance of your compass, describe a
Circumference near it, as you see at G H. In like manner describe two other
Circumferences somewhat near together, and distant from sky chart G H, as you
see at I K; and so make between E C, F D 30 such lists, as you see at F E, G H
and I K. Then take an arch of 59 degrees, which you must divide into 60 equal
parts, the sixty part of which division, will divide two degrees into two
unequal parts: take ye two degrees next D, and from that point toward D, take
a Circumference equal to the greater segment you made by dividing 59 degrees
in 60 parts, and upon that point and the Center A laying a ruler, where it
cutteth the list next the lymbe, as that beneath L M is, draw a line, dividing
the list beneath L M, and from that division apply so many degrees in order,
as the circumference will admit, till you come so near 1, as you can. Then
take 58 degrees, and divide that circumference into 60 equal parts, the sixty
part of this division, falling between two degrees deuideth them into two
unequal parts, again taking 2 degrees next D, from that point toward D, take
the greatest portion, and laying a ruler on that point and A, where it cutteth
the second list from the limb, draw a line cutting that list, and from that
division mark so many degrees in that list, as the residue of the
circumference will receive, then divide 57 degrees for the third list, 56 for
the fourth list, and so the degrees in order, till you come to thirty degrees,
and the thirtieth list, although if the limb be divided into half degrees,
the thirtieth list, and the division of thirty degrees is needles. Having thus
divided 30 lystes, in the space without the quadrant to the side A C draw two
parallel lines including two spaces, and extend one circumference of every
fifth list to the uttermost parallel, in the space next the side of the
quadrant A C, at the list next the limb, set one, or 1. at the next
circumference extended from the fifth list set five, or 5 in the same space,
under that which is extended from the tenth, set 10, and so increasing by 5 to
thirty, then descending in the second space, at the fifth list, set 35, at the
tenth 40, and so in order by 5 to 60: then may you thus use the quadrant.

To find what degrees and minutes are contained in any circumference given.
Upon the center A, describe in the quadrant A B C, an arch N P O, having A N,
the semidiameter equal to the semidiameter of the circumference given, and
take from it, so many degrees, that you have a remainder less then thirty,
that is take from it so many times 30 degrees as you can, and if the remainder
less then thirty, have a portion of a degree greater then half a degree,
taking that remains with your compass, set one foot in Q, and take Q P
equal to your remainder; then laying a ruler on A and P, mark the list by
whose division the edge passes most exactlie, then in the utter space, on the
outside of A C telling the numbers answering that list, you shall have the
number of minutes above the just degrees. But if your remainder exceed just
degrees by less then half a degree, then taking that portion with your
compass, set one foot in N, and with the other mark P, making N P equal to
the circumference given, then laying a ruler on A, and P, mark the list whose
division is cut by the edge of the ruler, and then in the space next A C tell
the number of that list from the lymbe, the number so found is the number of
minutes, above the just degrees. If the semidiameter of the circumference given
be greater, then the semidiameter of the quadrant, upon the center of the
circumference given, describe another, having the semidiameter equal to the
quadrants semidiameter, and laying a ruler on the center, and the point given,
mark where it cut the circumference, having the semidiameter equal to the
quadrants semidiameter, and instead of the circumference given, transfer that
circumference into the limb of the quadrant, and then by it prosecute your
construction, as is before appointed. Thus may you make one quadrant serve
instead of many used by Clauius in his Gnomonia and Astrolabe, and supply with
30. divisions those 60. which in his construction of the like quadrant out of
Iacobus Curtius he appoints.

CHAP. 2. To describe a triangle for enlarging or contracting of Scales, and
assigning any parts, or proportion given in any rightline.
DRaw o^ ^he out side of the quadrant, two lines pacallell to A B, and divide
the outward space into what number of equal parts you will, which you may do
at pleasure before you describe the limb of the quadrant, and in the space
next A B at every fifth division write 5, 10, 15, and so forth, according to
your number of deuisions, whereby you may readily tell from A, the parts
contained in the divided space, then drawing the line D B you shall use it thus.

To cut from a right line given any part appointed.
LEt the parts be these, which are contained in A 2, and make A R equal to A
2, draw the line R 2, now the line given is either greater, or less the^ A 2:
first suppose it less, and let it be equal to R Y, make R W equal to R Y,
draw the line W Y, now laying a ruler on R and 1, one of the parts contained in
A 2, it will cut W Y in X, the line X Y is contained in the line W Y, so often,
as the line A 1, is contained in the line A 2. But if the line given be greater
then A 2, then make A S equal unto it, and A R equal to A 2 containing the
parts assigned, draw the lines 2 R, and in 2 R take 2 V equal to A 1, one of
the parts given, then laying a ruler on A, and V, it will cut S 3 in T, the
line 3 T is so often contained in 3 S as 1 A is contained in A 2: and so in
both cases you have cut off from the line given, the part which was required.

A Corollary.
IF any proportion given in a right line as the proportion that is between 1,
2 and 2 A, you may in like manner find in any line given, for both W Y is to X
Y and S T to T 3, as 2, 1, is to 1 A.

sky chart

Another Corollary.
IN like manner you may enlarge, or contract any Scale at pleasure: first
taking the half, third, fourth or what part else you will of it, by this
problem, and then again divide that part so taken into the parts whereinto
the Scale is divided, and by this Scale so contracted you may make a plat,
whose sides correspondent to the sides of the first plat, shall be half or a
third or a fourth part, or any number you first took, likewise by the second
case you may enlarge them at your pleasure.

You may also divide any line given into more parts then are in the side A B,
which how to perform with some cautions for avoiding error in mechanical
practice, I will reserve till another edition.

CHAP. 3. Of the Meridian line, the variation of the Compass and the height of
the Pole.
A lemma About a Circle given to describe a Quadrant.
LEt the Circle given be B C D E, whose center let be A, and let the Diameters
B D, C E be perpendicular one to another, then extending one of them, namely B
D, make A G equal to the distance B C, upon G as a Center at the distance G B,
describe an arch F B H, and from G draw two touch lines G L F, and G M H: I say
that G F H is a Quadrant, circumscribed about the circle B C D E, vz. the lines
F G, G H, and the circumference F B H, do only touch it.

If you make the semidiameter of the quadrant to another line, as D B the
Diameter of any circle given, is to the distance B C, subtending a quadrant of
the same circle, the excess of the Dameter above that line, is the
semidiameter of the circle to be inscribed in that quadrant.

The use and making of an instrument tractable as well at Sea, as at Land,
wherein the shadow of the Sun shall at one instant point out his magneticall
Azimute and height.
Upon the center A, describe a circle B C D E, and by the former Lemma, about
it describe a Quadrant G F H: and draw the lines A L, A M parallel to the
sides F G, and G H, then divide the lymbe F B H into 90. degrees, beginning at
F, this being done, cut out a circle somewhat less then the circle B C D E,
but concentricke unto it. Then take an Isoscheles triangle G H O; having the
angle at H aright angle, and either the sides including it equal to the
semidiameter of the Quadrant, this triangle must be placed upon the line G H,
in such manner, as the point G agree just with the center of the quadrant, and
so that the plains of the quadrant and traingle be perpendicular one to the
other: then must there in some place of the line F G be set a standerd or plate
(it will be best between L and G) so that one of the edges standing just upon
the line G F, be perpendicular unto it, and the whole plate it self parallel
to the forenamed rectangle triangle. On this standard, or some where in the
triangle on that side, which respects F, you must hang a plumbe line, and if
you will set another plate upon F G, some where about F, making his section
with the quadrant in the line G F, and also perpendicular unto the plain of
the quadrant, you may by a plumbe line hanged upon this plate, or standard, and
the other plumbe line hold the quadrant G F H, both at Sea and Land preciselie
level with the Horizon. Besides this you must make a round box, having the
circle in the bottom divided into 360 degrees, or every quadrant into 90, as
you like best, which box must be fastened unto the quadrant in such manner, as
the two Diameters crossing one another at right angles, have the one, one end
directly answering the point L, and the other another end likewise precisely
answering the point M; in the center of this bore, you must set a pin to
bear a needle touched with a very good Loadstone, making the needle of such
length, as it may freely play in the box; this bore must be covered with a
glass to keep it from dust and other hurt, as in dials and compasses is used.
The standards and the triangle may be so shouldered to the quadrant, that you
may take them off, and put them on when you will; the manner how, I need not to
stand upon, every workman can easily devise how, and also supply every
particular circumstance in the making sky chart of this instrument required,
which I very willingly refer to their handines and skill, only I must warn
them very carefully to place the triangle precisely perpendicular to the
quadrant, with the point of the acute angle agreeing with the center, and that
the ends of the Diameters in the bottom of the box, do very exactly respect
the points L and M in the sides of the quadrant, you shall use this instrument
thus. Hold the quadrant by the plumbe lines level with the Horizon, and turn
the triangle toward the Sun, till the shadow of the plate or Standard that
is next G, do fall precisely upon the line G F, or (if you will place it so)
upon some line parallel unto it, the shadow in the lymbe of the quadrant will
cut off, accounting from F unto it, a circumference equal to the height of the
Sun. At the same time if you mark the point M, and the circumference that is
between it and the South end of the needle, that is the distance of the Sun
from the South of the Magnet, or the Magneticall Azimute of the Sun reckoned
from the South.

By the instrument now described, at noone tide in any Country to find the
Meridian line, the variation of the Compass, and (having the Suns
declination given) the height of the Pole.
ALthough it be a matter not very easy to find precisely when it is noone, or
the Sun at the highest, yet may you guess when it comes somewhat near it, as
it is commonly practiced by Seamen, which use at that time with their
Astrolabe or cross staff, to make four or five sundry observations, and
amongst them take the hiest for the Meridian height: in like manner when it
draws to be about nooue, make sundry observations with this instrument,
marking the height of the Sun, and his Magneticall Azimute, as was even now
showed in the use of the instrument, the greatest height is the Meridian
height, and the Diameter A M does precisely answer the Meridian line, the
circumference intercepted between it and the south point of the needle, is the
variation of the compass, whether East of West, is easily determined by the
side of A M, on which the needle rests. Now the Meridian height being given,
with the declination, you have been taught in the tenth Conclusion of the
second Section, how to find the Latitude or height of the Pole. The common
manner of finding it by adding or subtracting of the declination is more
artificially handled by Nonnius lib. 2. cap. 9. de Reg. Nauig. then has to my
knowledge been hitherto published in English, and therefore I think it not
amiss to translate his words, which be thus:

We must observe the sun, when he is highest above the Horizon, which is at
noone, then if the shadows of bodies perpendicular to the Horizon be cast that
away, that the Sun declineth, in the day of your observation, you must add
the complement of his greatest height to the declination so have you the
degrees and minutes of the latitude, North, if the Suns declination be North,
South, if it be South.

But if the shadows be cast to the contrary part, then you must compare the
Suns declination with the complement of his height, which if you find
equal, the Zenith is in the Equinoctial: but if they be unequal, subtract
the less from the greater, and the remainder is the latitude, named of the
declination, if the declination be greater, but if less, of the contrary part
or side.

When the sun has no declination, the complement of his greatest height is
the latitude, and toward that part or pole, toward which the shadows are
cast: you may know by the Mariners Compass whether the shadows be cast North
or South. When the Sun is in the Zenith, the declination, if it have any, is
the latitude: thus much Nonnius.

By the same instrument two observations being taken; when the Sun has equal
altitudes, to find the Meridian line, the variation of the compass, and (the
Suns declination being given) the height of the Pole.
THe Sun does not always shine at noone, and therefore at other times you
may help your self thus. Make an observation with your instrument marking the
height of the Sun, and the circumference intercepted by the point of the
needle, and that diameter, which is perpendicular to that side of the quadrant,
on which the triangle stands, and do this if you will four or five times
before noone: in the after noone mark, when the Sun comes again to the same
height, which it had any time, when you made your observations in the
forenoone, and again how many degrees are between the Diameter that is
perpendicular to the side of the Triangle, and the North point of the needle,
then compare that found in the fore noone, with that you found in the
afternoon: if they be both on the same side of the needle, subtract the less
from the greater, and the half of the residue points forth the right North,
to which if you add the excess of the greater magneticall Azimute above the
less, you have the variation of the Compass, Eastward, if the first
observation were lest, Westward, if the second. But if the one be on the one
side, and the other on the other, then add both the circumferences together,
and of them both take the half, that point determines the precise north: with
this half compare the last observation, and if it be greater, the variation is
Eastward, but Westward if it be less. Now the Meridian line being found, you
know the Azimute, wherein the Sun was at the time of your observation, and
you also took his height, which two being given with his declination, you may
find the latitude, as was showed in the 8 and 10 conclusions of the second
Section.

By the same instrument three observations being taken, whereof two be, when
the Sun has equal altitudes, to find the Meridian line, the variation of
the Compass, the declination of the Sun, and the height of the Pole.
YOur three observations being taken as is required, you have two of them when
the Suns heights be equal, by which you are taught in the former problem
how to find the Meridian line, and the variation of the Compass, the Meridian
line being found, you may know the distance of both those Azimutes from it,
which have different Altitudes, by which two Azimutes and their altitudes, the
ninth and tenth Conclusions of the second Section will show you, how to find
the declination of the Sun, and the Latitude.

sky chart

By the same instrument three observations being taken howsoever, to find the
Meridian line, the variation of the Compass, the declination of the Sun, and
the height of the Pole.
Having taken by your instrument in three observations, the heights and
distances of their Azimutes: from any quarter of the lymbe, whose Diameter you
must account for the first Azimute, number the distance of the second, and from
that point so taken, the distance of the third, and let those points of the
Azimutes be E F G, draw the lines F A, G A; again, let E H be the height
belonging to the Azimute E, and E K the height for the Azimute F, and E N the
height for the Azimute G; now laying a ruler upon B and H, it will cut A E in
I, again laying a ruler on B and K, it will cut A E in L, in A F make A M
equal to A L, again laying a ruler on B and N, it will cut A E in O, in A G
take A P equal to A O, now unto the three points I, M, P, find the center,
which let be Q, on A and Q laying a ruler, it will cut the lymbe in R, that
point R is the right North, or South, and so have you the distance of the
Azimutes from it, that is E R is the distance of the first, F R of the second,
G R of the third, the difference of these Azimutes, and the Magneticall Azimute
belonging to every of them, is the variation of the Compass: by any two of
these Azimutes, so their height be different, in the second Section you are
taught to find the declination and height of the Pole, which two things in the
problem required, Nonnius, from whom thus much is borrowed, Lib. 2. Nauig. c.
16. prosecuteth after a far different manner, yet suitable to the construction
here set down already: but for that his construction will seldom be contained
within the compass of the lymbe, I thought good to omit it: this finding of
the Meridian line, being very ingenious and commodious, though it sometime will
incur the like inconvenience, I thought worthy to be known. Clauius has
another way to perform the things required, but nothing easier then this of
Nonnius. For both of them about the Equinoctial will produce the construction
hugely without the compass of the lymbe, and in Nonnius his way, the Suns
parallel will differ little from a right line, so that you must use a peculiar
instrument for to describe it, and yet are you nothing the nearer for finding
of the center. Therefore if at Sea the Azimutes and almicanters of the Stars
might be taken, Nonnius his construction would be of far more use: for then
working by such stars as be near the Poles, their Parallelles would easily be
described. I have thought of an instrument for that purpose, as to use a
quadrant with an index, and sights, insteade of the triangle, or to fit your
box with the needle, at the lower end of the Mariners Astrolabe, for want of
experience I dare not affirm much, but I think that Art, handinesse, and
diligence might do some thing with such instruments, the better consideration
whereof, I willingly refer to the Seamans experience.

The Suns declination being given with the height of the pole, to find the
Meridian line by one observation.
PLacing your quadrant with the triangle upon any plain made level with the
Horizon, turn it as is appointed for the finding of the height, and by the
side, on which your standards are placed, draw a right line: by the height,
which you then find, in a country of known Latitude the Suns declination
being given, you are taught in the second section Conclusion 13, to find the
Azimute, which being done, describe a circle upon a center taken in the former
line, and from the line taking accordingly a circumference answering the
Azimute, the line which joins that point, and the center, is the Meridian
line. Clauius has two other ways to do this: one Gnomon. lib. 1. cap. 23. the
other in his Astrolabe lib. 3. Can. 12. and a third I have found, but none to
be preferred before that which is here propounded, notwithstanding if this
book be printed again, those three also shall be adjoined.

sky chart

CHAP. 4. Of Mappes or Chartes and Nauticall directions.
Any line being given, to find another line, unto which the line given shall
have that proportion, that the Meridian has to any Parallel.
Upon the center G describe a semicircle F H Y, and let H G be perpendicular to
F Y. Let F B, Y Z be equal to the distance of the Parallel from the
Equinoctial, and draw the lines B G, G Z: let G A be equal to the line given,
and in G Z take G S, equal to G A, laying a ruler on A, and S, it will cut G H
in M, draw the line A M. I say G A, or the line given has the same proportion
to A M, that the Meridian has to the Parallel, whose distance from the
Equinoctial is F B, which was required to be given. I thought good to set down
this exact and ready way, because that, which Mercator describes in the
proeme of his reformed tables for Ptolomey, is more troublesome, and less
exact.

To divide any line, or the side of your quadrant, or your ruler as that line
is divided, which in Gerard Mercators General map, and his directorium does
answer the Meridian.
Divide the line you take for the ground of this work first into 10 equal
parts, and then every one into five parts, imagining every one of the fifth
parts to be divided into twenty: besides take every fifth part for a degree
in longitude: then to find the degrees of latitude answerable unto it do
thus: in G Y the semidiameter of the quadrant GH Y take G I equal to one
degree of longitude, and by I, draw the line I P parallel to G H; then laying
a ruler on G and every degree of the limb, accounting from Y mark where it
cutteth I P, the line intercepted between those sections and G do answer the
correspondent degree: as for example, I take a degree at Z, vz. the 45 degree,
then I lay a ruler on G and Z, which cutteth I P in 2, the line G 2 in the
Meridian answers the point Z, or is the 45 degree: Now having marked these
sections for every degree in the quadrant, transfer them one after another
into your ruler, or the side of your quadrant, that is at one end of your
quadrant, take a line equal to that, which answers one degree, add to it,
that which answers the second, to that put that, which answers the third,
and so till you come to the end of that line, which not being able to receive
all, draw another line, and prosecute the like construction in that, and so in
the third, and forth till you have transferred all the lines answering your
degrees. If in this transferring, your deuisions agree not just with the ends
of your lines, you must take only the overplus of the last division in the
beginning of the next line, and so proceed as is aforesaid. Now having your
lines thus divided, and another divided to the same parts that the side of your
quadrant is, being parallel to them, and all perpendicular to one right line,
you may readily know what equal parts are contained between any two of your
degrees taken howsoever, whereby you may perform all the uses of Mercators
Directorium. Thus for example.

The Longitudes and Latitudes of any two places being given, to find their
direction, commonly called the Rumbe.
TAke the equal parts contained, as well in the difference of the latitudes,
as in the diffrence of their longitudes, and see whether both be less then the
side of your quadrant, or no: first suppose they be less, and let the geater
be X G, the lesser G M: draw the line X M, divide G X into two equal parts in
V, then opening your Compass to the distance V G, and keeping one foot in V,
with the other mark T, in M X; on T and G laying a ruler, it will cut the
limb in 4. Now if the difference of the Latitudes be less then the difference
of the longitudes, 4 Y is the distance of the rumbe from the Meridian, but if
the difference of the longitudes be less, then is 4 P the distance of the
rumbe from the Meridian. But now suppose that one or both the differences, be
greater then the side of your quadrant, then by the rule of proportions, you
must find a line, unto which the lesser is, as the greater is to the side of
the quadrant, or make the side of the quadrant to another line, as the greater
is to the lesser, namely let G Y be unto G Q, as the greater difference is to
the less, and draw the line Q Y: divide G Y into two equal parts in W, then
opening your Compass to the distance W G, and keeping one foot in W, in Y Q
mark R, a ruler laid on G and R, will cut the limb in 3: now as before, if
the difference sky chart of the longitudes be the greater, then is H 3 the
distance of the rumbe from the Meridian, South, if the place respected be
South, North, if it be North, and so likewise East, or West.

CHAP. 5. Of the back of your plate.
To inscribe in the back of your plate the fixed stars according to their
Longitudes and Latitudes, or declinations and right ascensions, as you please.
LEt the utter edge of the back side of your plate be divided into 360
degrees, which you may use for the Zodiac, or the Equinoctial; the Zodiac,
if you inscribe the Stars according to their Longitudes and Latitudes, or the
Equinoctial, if you will place them according to their declinations and right
asce^sions, which is the best, for those are oftnest in use, both are done
after one manner thus. From the beginning of Aries reckon the right ascension,
as from E by B unto T, and draw the line A T, then from B to V, reckon the
declination B V, laying a ruler on V and A, it will cut the Synicall arch of
the limb A S C, in S, in the line A T take A Q equal to the distance A S, and
the point Q is the place of the star according to his right ascension and
declination: this being done, set down by it the name, and S or N, to
signify, whether it decline North, or South. This may be done so slightly,
that you may rub it out when you will with a wet pumice, and yet deep enough
to continue a great while for your use.

To find the longitude and latitude, or the declination and right ascension of
such stars as be placed on the back of the plate.
Upon the center of the plate, and the point of the star lay a ruler, where it
cutteth the limb, is the right ascension reckoned from the vernall Section, or
the longitude, if they be placed for the Zodiac. As for example: sky chart
Place this figure in stead of the figure in folio 35.
lay a ruler on A and Q, it will cut the limb in T, the circumference E B T is
the right ascension of Q. Now if in A S C the Synicall arch of the limb, you
apply from A to S, a distance equal to A Q, and lay a ruler on A and S, it
will cut the limb in V, the circumference B V is the declination of the star
placed at Q, or the latitude, if they were placed according to the longitudes,
and latitudes: by the letter S or N you shall know whether it be North, or
south. And that you may be furnished for these two last problemes, I have set
down on the other side a table out of Clauius, containing certain fixed
stars, both with their longitudes and latitudes, and their declinations and
right ascensions, calculated for this year 1600. And thus much at this time,
for the Planisphere, which hereafter I mean to increase with more conclusions,
and problemes, and could have now enlarged it with handling mensurations,
Synicall calculations and dialling: but those things seemed somewhat far
from my principal purpose, and therefore I will entreat the reader to accept
thus much only as now is delivered, and so for this time I end.

The end of the new handling of the Planisphere.
A Table of fixed Stars out of Cla^^ius, calculated for the year 1600.
complete.
Bigness Names. Place in the Zodiac or Longitude Their Latitude The part The
declination. The part. The righ^ Ascension 3 The Rams former horn. Aries 28 5
7 20 N 17 39 N 23 20 Medusaes head. Taur 21 5 23 0 N 40 5 N 40 55 Bulls eye.
Gem. 4 5 5 10 S 15 56 N 63 6 Orions right shoulder. Gem. 23 25 17 0 S 6 21 N 83
41 The Goat. Gem. 16 25 22 30 N 45 9 N 72 6 The great dog. Can. 9 5 39 10 S
15 ^4 S 97 19 Hydraes bright Star. Leo. 21 25 20 30 S 5 4 S 137 19 Lions
heart. Leo. 23 50 0 10 N 13 44 N 146 19 Lions tail. Virg. 15 55 11 50 N 16 26 N
171 49 The Virgins spike. Lib. 18 5 2 0 S 8 58 S 195 55 Arcturus. Lib. 18 25 31
30 N 21 49 N 209 23 Scorpions heart. Scor. 4 5 4 0 S 24 57 S 241 16 Harp. Cap.
8 45 62 0 N 38 40 N 275 15 Last in Aquarius water. Aqu: 28 25 23 0 S 33 24 S
339 56 Swannes tail. Pisc. 0 35 60 0 N 44 8 N 307 22 Pegasus leg. Pisc. 23
35 31 0 N 25 44 N 341 0

Errata.
Page 3. line vlt. Analemma. p. 6. l. 6. Maurolycus. p. 10. l. 9. Frisius. p.
13. l. vlt. Motus raptus. p. 14. l. 33. Zenith, appearing. p. 16. l. 33. from
the Zenith, which. p. 17. l. 2.5.7. for Z make L. p. 22. l. 1. blot out pan.
and l. 11. N L. p. 23. l 13.25. for Z make L. ibid. l 20 Tropickes. p. 24. l.
26. there mak^th angles. p. 25. l. 12. and by two of those. p. 26. l. 9.
setting January. p. 32 l. 26.27. for Q make 7. p. 33. l. 10. for 3 and 3: make
8 and 8. ibid. l. 13. for G make E. p. 34 l. 4.5. for T make V. l. 13 for F
make E. l. 27. which let be C 1, 1 l, and l K. l.: 8: 29. for B make P. p. 26
l. 2.7. for B make P. l. 5. for 12. make 2. l 8. for 2. and D make P. p. 38. l.
18. and H l, cutting. p. 40. l. 23. for K make B. in the figure of the 39. page
place 3. on the other side of D.


