THE PEARL OF PERFECTION SOVGHT AFTER By CHARLES ODINGSELLS, Doctor of
Divinity.

GENESIS 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect.

LONDON, Printed by M.D. for John Williams, at the sign of the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1637.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in GOD, RICHARD, Lord Arch bishop of York his
Grace, Primate of ENGLAND and Metropolitan; And one of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council.
THere are not a few, who with NAAMAN the Syrian take greater delight in Abana
and Tharpar, rivers of Damascus, than in Iordane, wherein our Savior was
baptized, than in the waters of Israel, the holy waters of Sailo, which run
gently; than in the living waters of the Sanctuary; Ezekiel. 47 9.
which given (...) to them which move therein. These are they who after the
vulgar estimation, preposterously judge the fine meal of pure literature to be
course bran, and their own course bran of humane knowledge and observation to
be fine meal: who with Aesops Cock refuse the pearl, and choose the barley
corn. Such I desire not to please, but those who are meliore luto, of a better
mould and temper, of sounder resolution and judgment. The argument of
perfection, worthy to be entreated of, is handled by me, not as I would, much
less as it requires, but so as by reason of my bodily infirmities and other
defects I could. I have propounded this brief indigest work, as a short
model and brief draught to be curiously polished and embellished by some
others, to whom God has been pleased to give a greater measure of knowledge,
with more health and strength of body, and withal a richer Library, a
special help not in the last place requisite. For surely as in other Sciences
and arts, so also in our transcendent Science of Theology, the Philosophers
rule is true, (...): Arist. polit. li. 3. ca. 12.
He that shall excel in his work, must have excellent tools to work withal.

In the mean time, I am bold to present unto your Grace this imperfect work
of perfection, in token of my dutiful and humble respect to your Lordship, our
most worthy Metropolitan and Diocesan. To whom we under your Graces
jurisdiction do by good right owe all canonical obedience and observance:
unto whom I in particular do earnestly desire and wish all spiritual and
corporal happiness here on earth; and after, everlasting fruition of eternal
glory and felicity in the Heavens.

Your Graces in all humble duty to command, CHARLES ODINGSELLS.

A Table of all the principal things contained in the several Chapters of
this Book.
Chapter. 1. THE Proeme to perfection Folio. 1 Chapter. 2. The etymology of
perfection Folio. 3 Chapter. 3. The diverse kinds of perfection. Folio. 4
Chapter. 4. Of Spiritual perfection. Folio. 5 Chapter. 5. Of perfection in the
state of grace. Folio. 7 Chapter. 6. Concerning knowledge. Folio. 9 Chapter. 7.
Concerning knowledge supernatural. Folio. 12 Chapter. 8. Of the knowledge of
God by affection, and not bare apprehension only. Folio. 15 Chapter. 9. Of the
knowledge of God in Christ. Folio. 16 Chapter. 10. Concerning Christ's
Incarnation. Folio. 18 Chapter. 11. Concerning Christ's Passion. Folio. 20
Chapter. 12. Concerning Christ's Resurrection. Folio. 22 Chapter. 13. Concerning
Christ's Intercession. Folio. 24 Chapter. 14. Of our union with Christ. Folio.
26 Chapter. 15. Of the knowledge of ourselves necessary to perfection. Folio.
28 Chapter. 16. Of the further knowledge of our selves. Folio. 31 Chapter. 17.
Of righteousness perfecting the will Folio. 33 Chapter. 18. Of righteousness
imputed. Folio. 35 Chapter. 19. Of imputed righteousness made ours by faith.
Folio. 37 Chapter. 20. Of the different participating of imputed righteousness
by faith. Folio. 39 Chapter. 21. Of righteousness inherent, and first of
righteousness according to moral Philosophy. Folio. 43 Chapter. 22. How
Christian inherent righteousness differs from moral righteousness. Folio.
45 Chapter. 23. Of the nature of inherent righteousness. Folio. 48 Chapter.
24. Of the fruits of inherent justice. Folio. 49 Chapter. 25. Of the nature and
quality of good works. Folio. 52 Chapter. 26. That no man by his own
righteousness keeps the Law, and is without sin. Folio. 56 Chapter. 27. Of
the growth and increase of inherent righteousness. Folio. 61 Chapter. 28. Of
spiritual sloth, an enemy to perfection. Folio. 64 Chapter. 29. Of three
evil qualities in spiritual sloth. Folio. 67 Chapter. 30. What perfection of
inherent righteousness is attainable in this life. Folio. 70 Chapter. 31. Of
perfect righteousness in this life more punctually and plainly. Folio. 73
Chapter. 32. Concerning Perseverance. Folio. 76 Chapter. 33. Of perfection in
Glory. Folio. 80 Chapter. 34. Of perfection by immortality in Glory. Folio.
87 Chapter. 35. Of different perfection in Glory. Folio. 91
THE PEARL OF PERFECTION.
CHAP. I. The Proeme to Perfection.
THE generations of men had been multiplied upon the face of the earth, above
five thousand years before the mines of gold were found out in the Western
Indies. And no marvel, seeing the spiritual gold of the Sanctuary, the
saving Truth of God in Christ, was not discovered unto the Gentiles, to
Kingdoms, and Nations, until the world had continued in blindness and
ignorance well-nigh four thousand years. But as humane truth, which with
Gollins is temporis filia, Gell. noct. art. lib. 12. cap. 11
the daughter of time, though she be long buried deep below, yet remains not
always in the dark night of obscurity, but comes at length to light. So
the divine and heavenly truth was not always to be concealed from the
miserable lapsed progeny of Adam but by the providence of God was in due time
revealed; even in plenitudine temporis, Gal. 4.4.
in the fullness of time, in the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
in the day of salvation. Then the Messiah, the Life and the Truth came into
the world; then the desire of the Nations, the bright morning Star appeared
in our flesh, full of grace and truth. And He, He set men's hearts on fire,
inflaming them with the love of truth: He excited and stirred up the minds of
men to a diligent enquiry and searching after her, that so having found her,
they might go, and sell all, to buy her, that they might deny themselves and
their own carnal wisdom; that they might renounce the world, lightly
esteeming of transitory pleasures, profits, and preferments, the worlds three
minions and darlings, and all, to purchase the pearl of true perfection, a
pearl most precious and of inestimable value. Which now shines and gives a
bright luster in the militant Church by grace: but hereafter shall be more
admirably polished and adorned by glory in the tryumphant Church, in heaven,
in the Kingdom of God, in that Kingdom, whereof, according to St. Augustine,
Aug. Marcel^no epist. 5.
The King is Verity, The Law is Charity, the measure is Eternity.

CHAP. II. The Etymology of Perfection.
PErfection is in Latin perfectio, and this from the verb perficere,
compounded of per and facere; and it signifies to do a thing thoroughly and
absolutely, to make a thing complete and entire without defect. Perfection in
the Greek is (...) from (...), which is derived from (...), an end: because in
all things agible our understanding first intends and propounds the end,
and then deliberateth of the most apt and direct means tending to that end;
which being found out and put in execution, the desired end is attained, and
the work perfected: whereupon this kind of end is called the end of
perfection, by way of excellency to distinguish it from the end of privation,
consumption, or term. And thus according to the sense of the word both in the
Greek and Latin tongue, we say, Natura facit, (...).
doctrina dirigit, vsus perficit, nature frames, doctrine and instruction
directs, and use or practice perfecteth.

CHAP. III. The diverse kinds of Perfection.
PErfection primarily and originally belongs to God the fountain thereof, in
whom is all virtue, grace, glory, excellency, after a most perfect, infinite
and incomprehensible manner, therefore he only is simpliciter and absolute
perfectus; simply and absolutely perfect. All perfection found in Angels, or
men, or any creature, is from God by communicating, participating of his
perfection: and so are said to be perfect, secundum quid and in suo genere, in
some respects after their several kinds.

Now (to omit transcendentall perfection of metaphysicall speculation) this
derivative participated perfection, really found in the creatures is of three
sorts, natural, moral, spiritual. In natural science the Philosopher
describes perfection in the concrete or subject, saying, perfectum idest,
Arist. de caelo lib. 1. cap. 4.
extra quod nihil eorum qua ipsius sunt, accipi potest. That is perfect to
which nothing is wanting, of those things which belong unto it. That is; which
lacks nothing requisite either in the first, or second moment of nature,
nothing belonging to the essential parts, or natural properties and qualities
flowing from them.

Moral perfection, according to humane morality, is attained by the practice
of intellectual and moral virtues, and is called by the philosopher in his
Ethickes, (...), that is, felicity or happiness, which he says is, (...).
That is, Arist. Eth. 1.6
The operation of the soul according to the best and perfectest virtue in a
perfect life. Natural perfection in the creature is from God as author of
nature. Moral perfection is acquired by frequent actions, according to the
rules of humane Philosophy.

But Spiritual perfection is from God as the doner and giver of grace, and
fountain of all good. For, every good gift, Iam. 1.17.
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights.

CHAP. IIII. Of Spiritual Perfection.
Spiritual perfection, is that precious pearl which God bestowed on man in
the state of innocence, with which he does in rich and endow the Saints now in
the state of grace, where-withall, he will adorn them more abundantly in the
state of glory.

When the Lord God created Adam and said, Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our image after our likeness: man so created was perfect,
not only by perfection of nature, but also of grace, of original
righteousness essential to the integrity of nature. He had a singular light
of understanding to apprehend things easily, clearly, without error,
obscurity, difficulty, yea that which is more observable: when God brought
Eve newly created unto Adam, He said of her proplietically, this is now bone of
my bones and flesh of my flesh, Genesis 2.13.
she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

In the will of Adam was seated original righteousness, the cornucopia or
treasury of all virtues. In his affections resided a perfect love of God, and
virtue, with a perfect delight in them. And it is rightly observed, that the
father of the world was honored of God in Paradise with three eminent
privileges, 1. In intellectu, non errandi. 2. In voluntate, non peccandi. 3.
In corpore, non moriendi. That is; with the privilege of not erring in his
understanding; with the privilege of not sinning in his will; with the
privilege of not dying in his body. Such dignity and excellency had man in
his creation, that his understanding was without error, his will without
prevarication and obliquitie; and so continuing, his body was to be immortal,
Aug. Enchir. ad Laur. cap. 105.
immortalitate minore, as Sr. Augustine speaks, by a lesser and inferior
immortality in that earthly paradise, where feeding on the tree of life he
might renew his strength as the eagle, and never dye. These things considered,
it is no marvel, if the sweet Singer of Israel in admiration hereof cry out:
Psalm. 8.4.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? And the Son of man that thou
visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower then the Angels, and have
crowned him with glory and honor. Thus man created in the jmage and after the
likeness of God, was glorious and perfect, until he transgressed that one
command of his creator. And this the Lord himself, in express terms
intimates by his Prophet Ezekiel saying, Ezekiel. 23.
thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day thou wast created until iniquity
was found in thee. Which the Preacher of Jerusalem explicateth in other words
saying, Lee this have I found, Eccles. 7.29.
that God made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.

CHAP. V. Of Perfection in the state of grace.
ADam by transgression having deprived himself, and his posterity of that
excellent perfection, wherewith he was endowed in the state of integrity; it
remains, that we now search after such spiritual perfection as may be found
here in the militant Church in the state of grace, expecting and hoping to have
the same refined hereafter with a more eminent perfection in the state of
glory. That there is a spiritual perfection attaineable in this life is
evident: by that command of Christ, Be ye therefore perfect, Mat 5.48.
even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. Saint Paul exhorts the
Hebrews hereunto Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ,
Heb. 6.1.
let us go on unto perfection, etc And there be perfect ones in the Church, as
the same Apostle plainly insinuates saying, Howbeit we speak wisdom
amongst them that are perfect. 1 Cor. 2.6.
And again, Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded. Philip.
3.15.
This spiritual perfection attainable in this life is the perfection of grace.
And grace is a divine light flowing down from God into the soul; displaying
the beams thereof in the powers and faculties of the soul, enlightening them
with diverse virtues.

Now though this perfection of grace be of very large extent, yet may it
summarily be comprehended in these three things. First in knowledge, secondly
in righteousness, thirdly in perseverance. For knowledge perfecteth the
understanding righteousness and perseverance perfecteth the will.

CHAP. VI. Of Knowledge.
IN the soul of man there is a double power to receive knowledge. First,
Natural, to apprehend and know things within the compass of nature. The
second, Obedientiall, which being actuated by grace, is apt to apprehend and
know things above, and beyond the circuit of nature. From the first arises
natural knowledge: from the second supernatural knowledge. Natural knowledge
is but an handmaid, waiting and attending on knowledge supernatural, which
after an eminent manner beautifieth and adorneth the understanding.

Now as well-being supposes a being, and grace supposes nature; so
supernatural knowledge finds man furnished with some knowledge of things
natural, before his conversion to God, but this knowledge cannot perfect the
understanding of man with spiritual perfection.

In the Cimmerian darkness of heathenish ignorance, some were famous
professors and admirers of knowledge attained by the light of nature; who by
laborious speculations and industrious practice and observation, made great
improovement of the common notions, and law of nature left in man. Such were
the Priests of Egypt, the Druides of Germany, the Gymnosophistae of India,
the Magi of Persia, and the Philosophers of Greece, who were eminent above the
rest; amongst these were Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, and Pythagoras of
Samos, of whom Marcus Aurelius notes, that at the gates of his school was a
stone, whereon he wrote these sentences: He that knows not, (...) Aurel.
(...) 9.
that he ought to know, is a brute beast amongst men. He that knows no more,
then he has need of, is a man amongst brute beasts. He that knows all that
may be known, is a God amongst men.

Now these great Masters of humane science walked in the owle-light of natural
knowledge only, of whom the Trumpet of grace says, (...); Romans (...)
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. Who so much admired of
them as Socrates? Plato deemed himself happy for being borne in his time: and
the Athenians doisied him after his death; yet from him came that profane
Apophthegme, Quod supra nos nihil ad nos; that which is above us does nothing
pertain unto us. Last. div. in^it. li. 3. ca. 20.
This Lactantius in detestation thereof observed in his divine institutions.

Solomon in the knowledge of nature surpassed all the Sages among the Gentiles,
for by a singular and extraordinary gift from God, he was wiser than all men;
as the Holy Ghost witnesses in these words. (...) 9. etc.
And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness
of heart, even as the sand that is on the Sea-shoare. And Salomons wisdom
excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East Country, and all the
wisdom of Egypt. For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda the sons of Mahol. And verse. 33. He spoke of
trees from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hyssop that
springs out of the wall. He spoke also of beasts, and of foul, and of
creeping things, and of fishes. Such, so great was the wisdom of Solomon in
the knowledge of nature!

But we conceive Adam to have excelled Solomon and other men in largeness, in
certainty, in constancy of knowledge, both by reason of his natural
endowments by creation; and also by reason of his long experience; for he had
indeed (as Aristotle speaks) (...), Arist. (...) 12.
that eye of experience acquired by means of his long age, amounting to nine
hundred and thirty years. Genesis 5
But now there be many things that hinder us, and make us despair of attaining
so great knowledge, and they be especially five: First weakness of body.
Secondly, shortness of life. Thirdly, want of things necessary. Fourthly,
perturbation of affections. Fifthly and lastly, temptations by evil Angels.

CHAP. VII. Of Knowledge supernatural.
ALthough humane knowledge may serve as an handmaid to divine: although it may
whet the understanding, and make it more acute and sharp; and enlarge it for
the apprehension of things of an higher nature, yet can it not perfect it.
Only supernatural knowledge adds true perfection to the mind. The author
or inspirer hereof is God, Job 32.8.
for, the inspiration of the almighty gives understanding. The object thereof
is Holy things, Prove. 9.10.
for, The knowledge of holy things is understanding. Such knowledge comes to
man either by virtue of some extraordinary supernatural light, as in old time
by dreams and visions and immediate inspiration, to the Prophets and Apostles
and holy men of God, or, as ordinarily now it does, by divine revelation out of
the canonical Scriptures, through operation of the Spirit and Ministry of the
Church. For Christ ascending upon high, gave gifts unto men; and as it is
written, Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some
Pastors and Teachers: for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come into the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

The divine Oracles teach us to know two things, that we may be perfect
according to the state of this life. First, God, secondly, our selves. God that
we may believe in him, love him and enjoy him. Our selves, that we may fear
God and serve him in humility, and this humility causes perfection, as St.
Bernard intimates in his thirty-seventh Sermon upon the Canticles. Now there
are two degrees of knowing God: the first is to know him quantum cognoscibilis
est, so much and so far as he can be known. Secondly, quantum nos ejus
cognoscitivi sumus, to know him so much and so far as we are able to know him.

In the first degree, God only knows himself. Quidest Deus? quod ad
universum spectat, finis est. Quod ad electionem, salus; quod ad se, ipse
novit, says St. Bernard. What is God? Bern. de consid. ad Eug. li. 5. ca. 11.
to the world he is the end, to the elect, salvation; what he is to himself,
he himself knows.

Man a finite creature cannot possibly comprehend Him, who is infinite and
incomprehensible. For such apprehension is supra modum receptivitatis suae,
above the measure and model of his capacity. We cannot come to know God a
priori, by the cause, for he only is absolutus a causa; seeing he is causa
causarum, the cause of all other causes; all other depend on him, but he only
is independent, and before all other. But we may come to the knowledge of God a
posteriori by his works and effects. Therefore he said unto Moses, thou shall
see my back parts, Exodus 33.23.
but my face shall not be seen.

Now we attain to the knowledge of GOD five ways. ^jo^r m^in Re. cap. 1.
First, by natural reason; for as the Orator observes, there is no Nation so
savage or barbarous, which does not acknowledge a GOD, Nature dictating this
unto them. Secondly, by consideration of the creatures, for herein is (...), as
it is written, that which may be known of God is manifest in them, Romans 1.19.
for God has showed it unto them. Thirdly, by working of miracles, for he
only can produce an effect above the power of Nature; as the sweet singer of
Israel notes, Psalm. 72.18.
Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things. Fourthly, God makes himself known unto us by infusion of grace,
enlightening us with the knowledge of him by his Spirit; for it is written, The
Spirit searches all things, 1. Cor. 2.10.
even (...), the deep things of God. Lastly, by divinerevelation out of the
canonical Scriptures, which are the mouth of God, speaking unto man. There he
makes himself known, that he is the creator of all things, that he is most
good and gracious, that he is loving to every man, and that his mercy is over
all his works. There we read those words of joy and consolation, which are so
pleasant to our taste, yea sweeter than honey or the honey-combe. St. Ambrose
ravished with the delight he found in the green gardens of the Scriptures,
says, Amb. ep. 31. lib. 4. ep.
Nunc deambulat in paradiso Deus cum divinas scripturas lego, When I read the
divine Scriptures, God is walking up and down in paradise.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Knowledge of God by affection, and not bare apprehension
only.
BY the heavenly Oracles in GODS Book, we learn to know that GOD is one in
nature and essence, but three in personal subsistence; The Father, the Son,
the Holy Ghost. And they are distinguished by personal properties, called
opera quoad intra, the inward works of the blessed Trinity; So the Father
begets, the Son is begotten, the Holy Ghost proceeds from them both. We
distinguish them also per opera quoad extra, by their outward works, when we
say, the Father creates, the Son redeemeth, the Holy Ghost sanctifies.
Although to speak properly, all outward works extending to the creatures are
wrought by all the three persons, but after a different manner of working.

All this theological knowledge of God may be found in them who are altogether
imperfect. For it is not the knowledge of bare apprehension, which adds true
spiritual perfection to the soul; for this is to be found in evil Angels
and wicked men. But it is the knowledge of affection and affiance; Bern. de con
sid. li. 5. ^a. 3
or as Saint Bernard speaks the knowledge of faith whereby we believe in God,
love him, and delight in him. In which sense our Savior says, This is
eternal life, John 17.3.
that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. And the Evangelicall Prophet Esaias prophesying of Christ: Esaias 53.11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear
their iniquities.

CHAP. IX. Of the knowledge of God in Christ.
FRom the precedent discourse, we learn by the testimony of Christ, and the
Prophet Esaias, that the most excellent knowledge of God tending to perfection
and salvation, is to know him in Christ Jesus. To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
Here we see God not as a lawgiver upon his throne of Justice, propounding unto
us the covenant of works, but as a Savior sitting on the mercy-sear, making
with us a new covenant, the covenant of grace and peace in Christ. This
knowledge is the very life of our souls, and joy of our hearts; which
constrained the Trumpet of grace to say, I halip. 3.8.
Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

We do behold the glory of the Deity through the veil of Christ's humanity;
Col. 2.9.
for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Therefore said
Christ to Philip, John 14.9.
He that has seen me has seen the Father: and he himself gives the reason
hereof in another place, saying; John 10.30. Aug. in Psalm. 138.
I and the Father are one. Hence is it that St. Augustine says, Lucerna
sapientiae caro Christi, the flesh of Christ is the lantern of wisdom. And
do thou now O sorrowful sinner desire to know thy Savior Jesus, to find
him out and see him, whom thy soul loves and so longs after? Behold he is
in the flowrie gardens of the Scriptures, Ibi pascit, ibi cubat in meridie,
there he feeds, there he rests at noone day; there he shows himself the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. From thence he graciously invites thee to
seek him, and calls unto thee, saying, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. As if he should have said, O ye careless
children, O ye foolish ones, why wander ye in the crooked paths of sin and
death, why rather come ye not unto me? If ye would not err, lo I am the
way; if ye would not be deceived, lo I am the truth; if ye would not die,
behold, I am the life.

For, I am the way the truth, and the life. John 14.6. Aug. in Ioantract. 22.


Nonest quo eas nisi ad me, non est qua eas nisi per me, there is no whither
for you to go but unto me, there is no way for you to go by but by me. O come
unto me then, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy
and my burden is light.

CHAP. X. Christ's Incarnation.
SEeing Christ does so graciously invite and call us to him, let us earnestly
desire to know him that we may be united to him, and made conformable to his
image, and so perfected in him. For as St. Augustine says; Aug. in praefat. in
Psalm. 54.
Christus perfectio nostra est, in illo enim perficimur, quoniam ipsius capitis
membra sumus: Christ is our perfection: In him we are perfect, because we are
members of him the head.

Now the first thing we are to know concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, is his
Incarnation, or assuming of our nature in the womb of the Virgin.

Which St. Ambrose calls Sacramentum incarnationis, Amb. in Symbot.
the Sacrament of his Incarnation: the first visible foundation of our
redemption. A mystery kept secret, and hidden from the world, from men and
Angels, until it was revealed to the blessed Virgin Marie by the message of
an Angel. And then the Eagle soaring upon high could say, John 1.14.
(...), and the Word was made flesh: And the trumpet of grace proclaiming the
great mystery of godliness, begins with (...), God was manifested in the
flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Thus the Son of God by nature, voluntarily and graciously became the son
of man; that the sons of men might in him become the sons of God by grace.

In this most mysterious work of Christ's in carnation, St. Bernard observes,
Bern. de consid. li. 5. c. 9.
that as in GOD there are three persons and one essence, so by a most
convenient contrariety, there be in Christ three essences and one person.
Which three essences are his reasonable soul, his humane flesh, his Deity.
Now the two former essences make up the humane nature in Christ; for although
there be three essences, yet are there but two natures. And though there be two
natures, yet is there but one person, and not two, as Nestorius the heretic
taught. Now although the humane nature in Christ, be not a person, yet is it
individually and numerically distinguished from the particular humane nature in
Moses and Peter, and each other man. But it is individnum extraordinarium, it
is an extraordinary individual humane nature, which never had any subsistence
in it self or for it self, but in divino supposito, (...), in the Word, in
the Son of God. And it is an extraordinary individual humane nature, because
altogether without sin. First, without original sin, which is propagated
from Adam by the Father; but our Savior had no such earthly Father, and
consequently no original sin. Secondly, without actual sin; in that the
humane nature in the first moment of conception, was by Hypostaticall union of
the Deity perfectly sanctified, and made impeccabilis free from any power or
possibility of sinning. Hence by way of excellency, he is that son of man, 2
Cor. 3.28.
who knew no sin.

Now our blessed Savior in regard of his two natures, was medius inter Deum
and hominem, a mean betwixt God and man, as participating of both: but a
Mediator, in respect of his office of reconciliation and redemption. For there
is one God and one Mediator betwixt God and men, 1 Timothy 2.5.
the man Christ Jesus. And it is to be observed that the Apostle, says not
God, but the man Christ Jesus. For God could not die, unless he had been man:
But God was made man, that he might die for man, and so reconcile man unto God.
Hereupon, Fulgent. sermon. de dupl. nativ. Domini.
Fulgentius says; Conceptus in utero, factus est particeps mortis nostrae,
being conceived in the womb, he was made partaker of death with us. And Saint
Augustine to the same purpose says, Aug. in Psalm. 148.
Accepit exte, unde moreretur prote: He took that of thee, wherein he might
die for thee.

CHAP. XI. Christ's Passion.
SIN according to St. John's description is (...), 1 John 3.4.
a transgression of the Law, a privation of righteousness commanded therein.
Now a privation is minimae entitatis sed maximae efficaciae, of the least
entitie, but of the greatest efficacy. Which is most true in sin: For what
was there in the whole world, in heaven or earth that could cause the death of
the Son of God; or as St. Augustine speaks, Vt aeternus moreretur: that he who
is eternal should die, but only sin? And that not his own, but ours; our
profaneness, our cruelty, pride, luxury, covetousness, intemperance, our
lies, our oaths, our innumerable sins.

All which were made his, not by inherence, but by imputation. And he took
them all upon him not subjective, but expiative, not subjectiuely, but by way
of expiation, to satisfy the justice, and appease the wrath of his Father for
them. For by shedding his blood on the Cross for our sins, he cancelled the
fearful bond, and put out the handwriting against us. And so, as the Apostle
testifies, in him have we redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7.
according to the riches of his grace.

Our most gracious Savior in that bitter agony of his most dolorous passion
upon the Cross, might well complain with Jeremy the son of Hilkiah, Behold
and see, Lam. 1.12.
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. And may not all that by faith
embrace him crucified on the Cross most truly say, behold and see, if there
be any love like unto his love, who so loved us that he laid down his life for
us; who so loved us that he gave himself for us? Here is love without measure;
unparalleled charity without any example. John 15.13.
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Yea but the love of Jesus exceeded the love of men, it passed the love
of Damon and Pythias, of David and Jonathan, it surpassed the love of women.
For as the chosen vessel of mercy notes, God commends his love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.8. and in the
tenth verse following more emphatically he intimates, that when we were
enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. O most wonderful death! O most
meritorious work of supenerogation, wherein stands our righteousness and
everlasting salvation! O most happy death, bringing to man eternal life! Mors
Christi, mors est meae mortis, quoniam ille mortuus est ut ego viverem,
Bernard. ad Milit.rempl. cap. 11.
says holy Bernard: The death of Christ, is the death of my death, for he dyed
that I might live.

CHAP. XII. Christ's Resurrection.
LEt us now pass from the Cross of our Lord Jesus, and walk unto his
sepulcher in the garden of Iosseph of Arimathea, and see whether his most
sacred body be there. But lo we have the voice of an Angel telling us, He is
not here, Math. 28.6.
for he is risen. Here our blessed Saviors resurrection is proclaimed by an
Herald from Heaven, by an Angel. Whereby we know that he is a perfect
Mediator betwixt God and us, tam merito quam efficacia as well by the merit of
his passion, as by the power and efficacy of his resurrection. Satan the
Serpent thought he had strangled the fruit of our redemption by procuring that
ignominious and shameful death of Christ on the Cross: supposing to have kept
him under the chains of darkness. Aug. sermon. 1. in fest. ascens.
But as St. Augustine writes, Muscipula Diaboli crux Christi, esca qua
caperetur, mors Christi, the Cross of Christ was the Devils trap, the bait
whereby he was taken; was the death of Christ. So the deceiver was deceived,
the subtle Serpent was beguiled: for it was not possible, that he should keep
him under death, who is the Lord of life, John 11.25.
who is the resurrection and the life.

And therefore as by the will of the Father, Romans 4.25.
He was delivered to death for our sins, so he was also raised again for our
justification. Here you see that our most gracious and mighty Redeemer was as
Gorran says, Pugil in morte, victor in resurrectione, Gorran. in To. cap. 1.
a Champion in his death, a conqueror in his resurrection. For now He
triumphed over the grave and death: declaring to the world, to men and Angels,
that he was perfectly just: otherwise he could never have risen unto Glory, had
he been unclean, had he been any way polluted and defiled with sin; for
into the heavenly Ierusfalem such shall in no wise enter. Yea, He rose again
for our justification, to show himself a justifier of all that believe in him;
to show that he had taken away their sins, the wages whereof is death; that so
they might at the last day rise again unto eternal life.

The resurrection and glorification of our Lord Jesus Christ, August.
desurrect. dom. and Cant. Allelujah.
according to St. Austine, do show what life we are to receive, when he shall
come to render digna dignis, evil to the evil and good to the good: then all
the members of his mystical body shall rise up in Him their head, and so live
ever with him: Fulgent. sermon. de dupl. nativ. Christi.
for as Fulgentius says, Resurgens e sepulcro fecit nos participes vitae suae,
by rising out of the sepulcher, He made us partakers of his life. And we know
as the Scripture teaches us, 2 Cor. 4.14.
that, He who raised the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus. And when
Christ, Coloss. 3.4.
who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear also with Him in glory.

CHAP. XIII. Christ's Intercession.
WHen the son of God had suffered his most dolorous and bitter agony on the
Altar of the Cross; when he had victoriously triumphed over the grave in his
most glorious resurrection: He ascended upon high, and led captivity captive,
and is set on the right hand of God, continually making intercession for us:
there he ever presents unto the Father his humane nature, wherein He died and
rose again, and performed so great things for us: there we sinners have an
Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins:
whereupon St. Augustine says, Aug. in Psalm. 94.
Sacerdotem si requiras supra caelos est, interpellat prote, qui in terra
mortuus est prote: if thou require a Priest, He is above the Heavens; He makes
intercession for thee who on earth died for thee. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns?
Romans 8. v. 33.34.
it is Christ that died, yea that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. What greater comfort and
consolation have we in our pilgrimage, than to know and believe that the Lord
Jesus is our most faithful Advocate, who intercedeth for us day and night? who
as St. Ambrose speaks, Amh. in. ca. 8. ad Romans
Semper causas agit nostras apud patrem, perpetnally pleades our causes before
the Father. Who as the Apostle says, makes intercession for the Saints
according to the will of God.

He only intercedeth for all Saints, and none of all the Saints intercede for
him. So he is our only true, perfect Mediator. He intercedes with the Father
for us, merito suo, by virtue of his own merit. The Saints on earth intercede
for others, but merito Christi, through Christ's merit; for all their holy
requests for others, all their pious intercessions are offered upon the Golden
Altar, and do sweetly ascend up unto the throne of grace, Apoc. 8.3.
per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. XIIII. Our union with Christ.
WHat will it avail us to know the merit of Christ's death, the power of his
resurrection, the benefit of his intercession, unless we participate of so
great blessings? But participate of them we cannot, unless we have communion
with Christ, unless we be of him and in him, as the branches are in the Vine,
unless we be members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones.
And this is a great mystery concerning Christ and the Church: Ephesians. 5.32.
which to understand in some measure is most necessary, but to have a
spiritual sense and feeling of it, is even an unspeakeable fountain of joy
and consolation.

As we are of and in Adam by nature; so are we of and in Christ by grace. And
Christ who cannot be had by portions, is whole in the whole Church, and whole
in every faithful member of the Church. And thus he communicates himself unto
us by his Spirit, for the same Spirit which gives life unto the Head,
quickens and enliveneth the members also; for if any have not the Spirit of
Christ, Romans 8.9
he is none of his: and therefore in John 14.19. he says to his Apostle,
Because I live, ye shall line also. And all this proceeds from our union with
him, which he insinuates in the twentieth verse following; At that day shall
ye know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. This holy Spirit
whereby we are united to Christ, is the seed whereby we are borne of God, and
the sons of God. Because ye are sons, says the Apostle, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. Obscuro.
For our spiritual subsisting in Christ is correspondent to his personalitie
and subsistence, whereby he is the Son of God; So in him we also are the
sons of God; He is such by nature, we only through him by adoption and grace.

Hence is it that St. Peter says, We are partakers of the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1.4.
which is communicated to all the three subsistences in the blessed Trinity;
and consequently to the Son, and in him to us. This Christ prayed for, and
was heard in that he requested and desired for the faithful, in those words,
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us. John 17.21
And St. John intimates as much, saying, Truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John. 2.3.


Entreating here of the union of the Church with Christ, I was drawn to speak
of our adoption through Christ. For by one and the same Spirit we are adopted
in Christ, and united unto him. He unites himself to us by grace, we are
united to him by faith. And so the whole person of the faithful is united to
the whole person of Christ, first to his flesh, then through his flesh to the
Word, which was made flesh. And this union is wrought after a spiritual, not
corporal manner; after a supernatural, not after a natural manner. And
therefore difficult to understand, and hard to utter. But by this union we are
in Christ, and Christ in us, we live in Christ, and Christ in us, we are made
one with Christ, and Christ with us: that so by degrees we may be conformed
unto him, first, by grace, after by glory.

CHAP. XV. Of the knowledge of our selves necessary to perfection.
THe old precept in the school of the Grecian Philosophers, may deserve a due
place amongst us in the school of Christ, (...), know thy self. For this
knowledge is necessary unto perfection, and directs us to it. Plin. Not.
Hist. li. 2. cap. 1.
Whereupon Pliny the Pagan cries amain, Furor profecto furor egredi etc. it is
madness, it is madness for a man to go out of himself, and as if he knew all
within, to pry and search into all things without, as if he could measure any
thing, who knows not how to measure himself. Now if thou would wisely
measure thy self, take St. Bernards counsel, who advises thee seriously to
consider three things: Bern. de consid. ad Eug. li. 2. cap. 4.
first, Quid sis, secondly, quis sis, thirdly, qualis sis; first, What thou art
in regard of nature; secondly, who thou art. in respect of thy person; thirdly,
What an one thou art in regard of thy manners. Would thou know what thou art
by nature? I will not instruct thee out of the storehouse of nature; no, let
God himself teach thee, let him instruct thee out of Paradise, saying, dust
thou art and to dust shall thou return. Here he who is a and ^ tells thee thy
beginning and thine ending, (...), all is dust; earth the meanest, the lowest,
the basest of all the elements is predominant in tho^: thou come into the
world clad with clay, with tears, and weeping mournfully; thou go on with
labor, and shame, irke somely, thou go our with pain and anguish
dreadfully; A woeful entrance, a miserable continuance, a searfull Ca^ast^ophe.

And would thou further understand what thy life is here on earth? Surely thy
days are no better than Jacobs were, few and evil. Genesis 47. v. 9.


And Ioh tells thee, that thou art of short continuance and full of trouble.
The shortness of thy life is such, as David compares it to an hand breadth; St.
James to a vapor; others to a shadow, to a dream; or the dream of a shadow;
and nothing can be found so transitory to be a perfect Emblem of our short
continuance. Wisd. 5.9.
As soon as we were borne, we began to dram toward our end, says the
Wiseman. Ambr. de voc. gent. li. 2. ca. 8.
Nec prius incipit augeri atas nostra, quam minui; neither does our age begin
to increase, before it begin to decrease, says St. Ambrose. O then let us
consider, let us seriously consider, that this breve suspirium, this short
sigh, this momentanie life is momentum illud unde pendet eternitas, that moment
whereon depends eternity either eternal woe, or everlasting felicity. O thou
creator of men, thou know our frame, thou remembrest that we are but dust; O
teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom;

Our life for the quantity is vain and momentanie; and for the quality
thereof it is evil and full of trouble, afflicted with many perturbations of
mind, wi^^ innumerable crosses from our selves and from others, with infinte
distractions and vexations of spirit. So that Scaliger might well say; Hominis
vita non hac est, sed via ad vitam; this is not the life of man, Scalig. exerc.
205. Sect. 2.
but the way unto life. Here is nothing but labor and shame and sorrow; So
that our life is indeed (...), a weak miserable life, or rather no life, no
time thereof is truly pleasing and delight some to us. Flor. Granat. parre 1.
cap. 15.
Quod praeterijt, dolet; quod praesens est affligit; quod futurum est, turres:
We sigh and sorrow for that which is past; we are afflicted and discontent with
that which is present, and we are afraid of that which is to come. We are
afraid to be unclothed, to put off our tabernacle of clay, to be resolved into
dust; Arist. Eth. 3. cap. 9.
(...), death is a thing most fearful, says Aristotle; this nature cannot
brook, abhorret a non esse, she abhorres a not being; Grace may correct, but
not change and take away nature. Hoc habet humanus affectus; quoniam diligit
vitam, odit mortem: Pet. Lombar. sent. 3. did. 17
man's affection is such, that he loves life, and hates death, says Peter
Lombard. Now consider how many distempers from the elements, from our meats and
drinks are we subject unto; how many casual accidents from evil Angels,
and men, and other creatures are we daily exposed unto, so that we have cause
perpetually to be in expectation of death, yea to complain and cry out with
the chosen vessel of mercy; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death, Who (shall as Gorran glosseth upon it) deliver me
a corpore hoc mortifero, samp; mortali, Gorran. in Romans 7.24.
sub cujus dominio captivus sum, in quo declino ad mortem naturae, per quod
inclinor ad mortem culpae; in quo horreo montem Gehenna? Who shall deliver me
from this mortiferous and mortal body, under whose dominion I am held
captive; wherein I decline to the death of nature, by which I am inclined to
the death of sin; wherein I abhor the death of Hell? Such, so variable and
mutable, so transitory and mortal is the state of man, than whom, as Pliny
notes, Plin. not. hist. 2.7.
nothing is more proud, and nothing more miserable.

CHAP. XVI. Of the further knowledge of our selves.
HAving considered what thou art by nature; if thou will go on to perfection,
thou must also consider, who thou art in person, and what an one in quality.
After our general calling of Christianity, there be many particular callings
and states of men both in Church and Commonweal, whereby they are
distinguished one from another; and hence arises the distinction, and
difference of the persons of men; whereby they are obliged and bound to
perform certmine offices, services, and ministeries for the good of others.

Now thou must consider what person thou art, whether a King, or a subordinate
Magistrate, or an inferior subject; whether a Bishop or a Priest or a lay man;
whether a Divine, or a Physician, or a Lawyer, whether a Soldier, or a
Merchant, or an artificer, or an husbandman, or a labourer, or whatsoever
calling thou art of. And herein thou must employ thy endeavors to the glory of
God, and the common good of men, following that excellent rule of St.
Augustine; Aug. in Joan. tract. 10.
Fac quicquid potes, pro persona quam portas and perficis, zelus domus tuae
comedit me; Do what in thee lies correspondent to the person thou sustainest,
and then thou do perfectly perform that, the zeal of thy house has eaten
me up.

In the next place consider what an one thou art, whether pious or profane,
cruel or merciful, humble or proud, covetous or liberal temperate or
intemperate: in a word, thou must consider wherein thou do swerve from the
rule of obedience, and transgress Gods law. For nisi ad regulam, Seneca ad
Lucil. ep. 11.
pratia non couriges, says Seneca: thou will not correct that which is amiss,
but by the rule. But if thou strictly examine thy self by that rule, it is to
be feared, thou will find thy self a great sinner, a grievous sinner, perhaps
(...), out of measure sinful: thou will see thy prevarications und aberrations
multiplied super numerum, to be as David complained, innumerable, more than the
hairs of thy head. Oh, but the slnggish sinner will not look into that clear
glass, to see his festered sores, his otting corrupting Uicers, least the
sight thereof should trouble and torment him For he thinks it true which the
Preacher says, He that increases knowledge, Eccles. 1.18.
increases sorrow: which St. Jerome expounds thus, Hieron. lib. 2. advers.
Pelag.
he understands that he wants perfection, and knows by that which he does
know, how much it is which he does not know.

But the carnal sinner expounds it otherwise; by searching into the Law and
the several branches of obedience therein contained, he discovers the
multitude of his sins and transgressions, and consequently the guilt of many
foul and monstrous aberrations, for as that holy Father Fulgentius says,
Fulgent. de gra. and incarn. Dum. nosi^^ ^^s. Christi.
Quantum ignorantta peccati minuitur, tantum reatus peccatorum augetur: as much
as the ignorance of sin decreaseth, so much the guilt of sin increases.
Now the guilt of sins increases the sight of God, justice; and the extreme
malediction, or curse of the Law, cause remorse of conscience, and increase
sorrow. But if this sorrow be seasoned and sanctified with grace and faith in
Christ Jesus, it is not that sorrow in moral Philosophy, which is affectus
destructivus subjecti, an affection or passion destroying the subject; but it
is affectus perfectivus and salvativus subjecti, an affection perfecting and
preserving the subject; for it is a pious, a profitable sorrow, or as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 7.10.
a godly sorrow which causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.

CHAP. XVII. Of righteousness perfecting the will.
IN the day when Adam was created, he was perfect in his understanding and
will, but by disobedience he became imperfect in both, and so was cast out of
that earthly Paradise. Now unless we be renewed in Christ after the image of
God, and regaine such or greater perfection than Adam had in science and
sanctity, in knowledge and righteousness, we shall never enter into the
paradise of heaven.

What knowledge is especially necessary unto perfection is formerly discovered.
So that in the next place it remains to enquire what righteousness is
requisite to perfect us and prepare us for the kingdom of heaven. Which before
we come to, let us still remember, that as I intimated heretofore, there is a
double perfection compatible to man.

The first is absolute, proper to the glorified ones in the Church triumphant,
and not to be found in any of the children of men, so long as they be here in
earthly tabernacles and mortal bodies of clay.

The second, not absolute, but correspondent to the state of this life; and
this is that, which by all means we must strive and endeavor to attain
unto, whilst we are members of the militant Church, whilst we are as yet
strangers and pilgrims, and wayfaring men on earth.

This then premised, consider we the righteousness, whereby we are perfected
according to the state of this present life. And it is twofold, the first is
the righteousness of another, but imputed unto us, called therefore imputed
righteousness. The second is our own righteousness, which is wrought in us
by God through the sanctification of his Spirit, called inherent righteousness.

And first we will treat of that righteousness which being without us is
imputed unto us of God, and so made ours: otherwise we could never be perfect
disciples in the school of Christ.

CHAP. XVIII. Of righteousness imputed.
THe righteousness which is without us, and not our own, but imputed unto us,
as being the righteousness of another, is the righteousness of Jesus our
Mediator; now his righteousness is of two sorts: first, the righteousness of
his person, wherewith he himself is clothed and adorned; secondly, the
rightousnesse of his merit, whereby he does cloth and adorn us, poor, naked,
miserable sinners, and that of his mere grace, free bounty and goodness.

The righteousness of Christ's merit is that meritorious obedience which in our
nature he performed for us, to appease Gods wrath conceived against us for our
sin, to satisfy his severe justice: that we being absolved from sin by
his death, might be reconciled unto God, and so become heirs of eternal life.
This meritorious righteousness of our blessed Savior, without which we are
altogether imperfect, is in it self most perfect: and it pleases God to
account it unto us as our righteousness, and to impute it unto us, as done by
us. For Christ sustaining and bearing all our persons in his death, by the will
and determinate counsel of the Father died for us all. So that, that
righteousness which he performed for us in our name, may not unfitly be said
to be ours as done by us. For as St. Gregory says; Greg. Moral. expos in Job.
lib. 24. cap. 7.
Iustitia nostra dicitur, non quae ex nostro nostra est, sed quae divina
largitate fit nostra; it is called our righteousness, not which is ours of our
own, but which is made ours by Gods bounty. ^erem. 23.6.
And in this regard the son of Hilkia by the spirit of prophecy might well
entitle him, Iehovam justitiam nostram, the Lord our righteousness. And thus
much the trumpet of grace proclaims, 1 Cor. 1.30.
teaching us that Jesus christ is of God made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

CHAP. XIX. Of imputed righteousness made ours by faith.
GOD of his mere grace gives unto us the meritorious obedience of his Son,
accounting it unto us as ours, and withal, by the same grace gives us faith to
apprehend it and apply it to our selves. For by this hand of faith we claspe
and embrace, and lay fast hold on Christ's righteousness, and so make it ours.
Now this faith is a principal beam of that grace which enlighteneth all the
faculties of the reasonable foul, and is partly in the understanding, and
partly in the will; for it is not a bare assent given to the object, seeing
that such may be in evil Angels and reprobates; and in that sense St. James
says, Iam. 2.19.
Daemones credunt and contremiscunt, the devils believe and tremble. but it is
Or rather an affiance in Christ the redeemer for pardon of sin, grounded on the
promise of the Gospel.
a fiduciall assent to the promise of saving grace in Christ. And as it is an
assent, it has place in the understanding; as it is fiduciall, it has place
in the will. A bare assent to the object, is too slender a setting forth of the
formal cause of justifying faith, and too weak to support that which is the
life of a Christian, who says with the Apostle, Galat. ^ 20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me.

Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto, Corn. Bitont. apud Whitak. Conc. ult.
upon the first to the Romans says, that faith is not a bare credulity, but a
trust and confidence, and includes some operation of the will. God indeed as
the principal predominant, efficient cause works faith in man; this is the
work of God, John 6.29.
that we believe on him whom he has sent: but man in whom faith is wrought,
formally believes, and that willingly, not against his will. Aug. de Spir. and
lit. ca. 34.
All this St. Augustine plainly insinuates, saying, Voluntas, qua credimus
dono Dei tribuitur; the will whereby we believe is ascribed to the gift of God.
So then it is necessarily inferred out of the precedent grounds, that both the
will, and whole person of a Christian is singularly perfected by the
righteousness of faith in Christ Jesus, whereby we, who were enemies, become
well pleasing, and acceptable to GOD: and therefore the chosen vessel of mercy
desired this, Philip. 3.9.
and only this he desired, that he might be foundin Christ, not having his
own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God through faith.

CHAP. XX. Of the different participating of imputed righteousness by faith.
THE righteousness of Christ's merit, which is the material cause of our
justification, is equally communicated to all that have it; so that in regard
of it, one is not more righteous than another. For it is entirely imputed, unto
whom it is imputed, and entirely embraced by all who participate of it. But
because we apprehend and apply it to our selves by a spiritual instrument or
organ, namely, faith; hence it comes to pass, that all do not equally
apprehend and apply it to themselves, for all have not one degree or measure
of faith. But it is according to one degree, in one, and according to another
degree, in another, in some weaker, and in others stronger: and yet all have
true faith, and sufficient to embrace Christ's righteousness. For if we
consider faith secundum rationem specificam, in the essential form, whereby
it is specified and differenced from other habits and virtues, so it is in all
right believers alike; for every essential form is constituted in
indivisibili, and does not admit latitude, as not being capable of division by
more or less. But if we consider it secundum rationem individualem, as it is
inherent in diverse subjects, so it is in some more, in others less, and does
admit very great latitude. And so there may be one degree of faith in St. Peter
another in St. Paul, and another in St. Luke, and another in Onesimus. Hence
was it that our Savior said to the Centurion in Capernaum, Math. 10.8.
I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. And to the woman of Canaan,
O woman great is thy faith! Math. 15.28.


Aquinas aptly notes, Aqui. 11. ^ae. qu. 112. art. 4.
that an habit is said to be great two ways; First, in respect of the end and
object, as being ordained to sime greaet good; secondly, in respect of the
subject, which does less or more participate of the inherent habit. Now faith,
as all other gifts and graces, comes down from the Father of lights, and is
dispensed and distributed to us by his Son, Ephesians. 4.7.
for to every one is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. So God is said to deal to every ma the measure of faith Romans 12.3. and
in the fixed verse following, He that prophecieth, must prophecy according to
the proportion of faith. Aqui. in Romans cap. 12. lect. 1.
Whereupon Aquinas commenteth, Nonsolum alias gratias gratis datas dat Deus
mensurate, sed etiam ipsam sidem quae per dilectionem operatur; God does not
only give by measura; other graces freely given, but also faith it self which
works by love.

Now although Almighty God does give unto every man in his first conversion a
certain measure of faith: yet does he not always give unto every man that
full measure, which he shall after attain unto; but he shall go on from one
degree to another, and still receive further increase and improvement of his
faith, until that measure allotted him be accomplished. Eor even as plants
when they first bud, and herbs in the garden, when they first put forth, are
not adorned with that beauty, stature, and perfection, which they shall after
have; so neither are graces and virtues given of God to men at the first, such,
so great and perfect as afterward they shall be. Ambr. de voc. gent. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
Semina charisonatum plantaeque virtutnus non in omni agrecordis humani totum
hoc pariter quod futurae sunt, nascuntur; nec facile reperitur in exordio
maturitas, and in inchoatione perfectio. Exerit quidem frequenter potens and
misericors Deus mir abiles istes suae operationis effectus and quibusdam
mentibus, non expectata profectuum mora, totum simul, quicquid collaturus est
invehit: The seeds of graces (says St. Ambrose) and plants of virtues, do not
in every field of man's heart spring up at the first, all that which they shall
after be: neither is ripenes easily found in the beginning, and perfection at
the first. God mighty and merciful does indeed ofttimes show forth these
wonderful effects of his operation, and puts into some minds, at once, all
that he bestows of them, not expecting any delay of proficiencie. Thus some
have their proper measure of faith fully measured out unto them at the first,
but others are to labor and pray for proficiencie to receive further increase
and augmentation of their faith, saying or rather praying with the blessed
Apostles unto the Lord, increase our faith. Luke 9.5.
And with the Father of him that was possessed with the dumb spirit; Lord I
believe, Mark. 9. v. 24
help thou mine unbelief. This man believed, yet prayed he for decrease of
unbelief; the Apostles believed, yet prayed they to the Lord for increase of
Faith. When as our gracious Savior had spoken to his Apostles of his departure
from them, and coming again unto them he says, Joh. 14. v. 29.
and this have I told you before it is come to pass, that when it is come to
pass ye might believe. Now we may not think that the Apostles believed not
before, because Christ said that ye might believe; but as St. Augustine
expounds it, Aug. in Joan. tract. 79.
Creditur autem hoc non ^^de nova, sedaucta: this is believed not by a new
faith, but by says increased. For in every virtue and consequently in faith
there be three things remarkable: First, initium, secondly, incrementum,
thirdly, complementum. First, the beginning, secondly, the growth or increase,
thirdly, the fullness and perfection. Faith is begun in spiritual babes or
infants, grows and increases in proficients, is full and perfect in men of
ripe years, who dare boldly and considently say, as it is written, Let us draw
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Hebr. 10.22.
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water.

CHAP. XXI. Of righteousness inherent, and first of righteousness according
to moral Philosophy.
THat I may treat of this argument, with more perspicuitie to be better
understood; it is not amiss to follow that old Pule, (...), He that will teach
well, must first look into the names of those things, whereof he treats.
(...). Arist. Eth. 2. cap. 7.
For seeing there are more things, than names, and consequently many things
without names; hence it comes to pass, that there be many names equivocall,
signifying more things than one, whereby the understanding is apt to be
deceived.

Wherefore it is necessary to consider what is meant by that righteousness,
whereof I am now to speak.

In the school of humane philosophy we are taught; that there be three
things in the soul, (...), that is, passions, powers, habits. Arist. eth. 2.4
Now it is not of passions, or powers, but of habits, that we are called
virtuous or vicious, good or evil. And amongst habits is ranked
Righteousness, by which men work righteousness, desiring and doing those
things that are just. And this is taken ambiguously, either for a particular
virtue, or a general; for a particular virtue, as when it is made one of the
four cardinal virtues, and so distinguished from prudence, temperance, and
fortitude: Cicero Offic. 1.
as you have it in the Orator, and in St. Bernard, Bern. de confid. ad Eug.
li. 1. cap. 8.
saying, Modum justitia quaerit, prudentia invenit, fortitudo vendicat,
temperantia possidet, justice seeks mediocritie, prudence finds it, fortitude
challenges it, temper ance possesses it.

Otherwhile it is taken for a general virtue, a panarie or cornucopia of
virtues. Whereupon Aristotle says, Arist Eth. 5. cap. 3.
(...), it is not a particular kind of virtue, but an universal virtue,
according to that of Theognis; (...).

In righteousness all virtue is summarily comprised. The consideration hereof
moved the Philosopher to magnific it, and adorn it with that encomium, Arist.
Eth. 5. cap. 3.
(...). Neither is the glorious evening star, nor Lucifer the bright morning
star, so wondered at and admired of men, as the virtue of righteousness;
which if we could behold with mortal eyes, it would ravish and bewitch us
with the love of it. So greatly, so highly did the pagan Philosopher extol the
moral virtue of righteousness.

CHAP. XXII. How Christian inherent righteousness differs from moral
righteousness.
CHristian righteousness excels moral righteousness, as much as
supernatural things, things natural, as heavenly things earthly, as the
spirit the flesh.

Moral righteousness comes short of Christian inherent righteousness two
ways: First, Quoad rectum principium; secondly, quoad debitum finem: first, in
respect of the procreant cause; secondly, in regard of the due end. Out of what
fountain flows humane righteousness? Surely from humane instruction, humane
motives, means and industry. But our inherent righteousness flows from GOD
the only fountain of all true good, and is by him infused into our hearts
through the powerful operation of his sanctifying Spirit. What was the end
which the pagan Philosophers aimed at, in the exercise of moral
righteousness? Was it any other, than that of the vainglorious Pharisees in
the Gospel, the praise of men, and their own glory? But the end which we
aim at in our good works is the true end, Finis ultimus and ultimatus, the
last end even Gods glory, the very butte and mark whereat we shoot the
arrows of all our pious endeavors and holy actions, according to that most
excellent rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink or. what soever you do, do all to the glory of
God.

Again, Christian inherent right cousnesse, is notably distingnished from
moral righteousness, for moral righteousness is acquired by many precedent
acts of ventue, according to (...) Act les Rule; Arist. Eth. li. 2. cap. 1.
(...), habits are gotten by semblable acts and operations. But in
righteousness inherent it is far otherwise; for the habit is first infused
of God, not acquired by man, or humane means; then from the habit so infused,
flow many subsequent acts of righteousness, even all good works. The man must
be righteous before his work be righteous; we must be arbaresy ustitis, Esaias
61.3.
trees of righteousness, before we can bring forth the fruits of
righteousness: Math. 7.17.
the good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree emill fruit; from
hence our Savior inferres this conclusion, Wherefore by their fruits you shall
know them. Now inherent righteousness complies with moral righteousness in
this, that it is some times taken for a partioular virtue respecting only our
neigh bour, as the proper object thereof, and so the Apostle has it, Tit.
2.12. where he says; The Grace of God, that brings salvation, has appeared
to all men, teaohing us that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. There
righteousness toward man is distinguished from prery toward God, and
sobriety in our selves. Sometimes it is taken for a general virtue,
comprehending many virtues in it; so Moses uses it, saying, Deuteronomy. 6.25.
And it shall be our righteousness if we observe to do all these
Commandments, before the Lord our God, as He has commanded us. Where
righteousness has for the proper adequate object thereof, God, man, and our
selves. Thus St. Peter takes it, after he had said that God is no respecter
persons, he adds this proose: Act. 10.35.
But in every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted with him. So our blessed Savior seems to take it, Math. 6.33.
Secke ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof and so St.
John, If ye know that he is righteous, 1 Ioh. 2. v. 29.
you know that we that dath righteousness is borne of him and in the same
Eplistle; He that does righteousness, is righteous, as He is righteous. In
this fense the Trumpet of grace te^^eth the Law, the Law of righteousness,
saying of the Jews, Romans 9.31.
(...) Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained
unto the Law of righteousness. So God by Ezechiel; Ezech. 18.20
The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him: and after speaking of
the reformed penitent, verse. 22. In his rightenousnesse that he has done he
shall live. Where he implies all duties of obedience enjoined in the Law to be
the way unto life, according to that of Moses, Levit. 18.^^.
He that does them, shall line in them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the nature of inherent righteousness.
AS the will of man was depraved, and became imperfect through the loss of
original righteousness in the state of innocence; so it must be in some
measure perfected by inherent righteousness, beforeman be fitted and prepared
to pass from the stare of grace unto the state of glory.

Inherent righteousness (called sometimes by Divines regeneration, or
renovation, or inchoation of a new life in us) is a supernatural gift, and
singular endowment powered into our hearts by God through the operation of his
Spirit. And by means of this habitual endowment, we are inclined and
disposed to do well, to obey Gods will, to do those things that are just, to
be fruitful in good works, and to work all righteousness. And so by
degrees, we have Gods image renewed in us, and put on the coat which Adam put
off, for by this means, we put on that new man which after God is created in
right cousnesse and true Holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.
Now by this righteousness we are truly and really just though imperfectly,
and it is called our own righteousness to distinguish it from the imputed
righteousness of Christ Jesus, which is every way most perfect and absolute. The
chosen vessel of mercy calls it our own righteousness. Zanch. in cap. 3. ad
Philop.
And this he does as Zanchic observes for two causes. First, because it is
really and truly infused into our hearts of God by his Spirit, and so is made
ours. Secondly, because the actions of piety, equity, temperance, and all
righteousness flowing from it are performed by us. For God by his grace gives
us a will and desire to serve him, and fear him, and to do righteously, but
it is we that will and desire, it is we that serve God, and fear him, and do
the works of righteousness.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the fruit of inherent Justice.
IF we would go on still unto perfection, we must bring forth the fruit of
inherent justice, we must walk in the way of actual righteousness, and be
ever found in the practice of virtue and exercise of good works: we must not
suffer the heavenly fire, enkindled in our hearts, to go out and die, but blow
it up daily, by virtuous operations and actions.

Habitual righteousness is that root of grace, the branches whereof are holy
desires and endeavors, and the fruits growing on them are good works, wherein
we must labor to abound, that so as St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.1^.
An abundant entrance may be ministered unto us into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord and Savlour Jesus Christ. Now as we see the Rose growing on the
branches, and crop it, for the fragrant smell, and other uses, but the root in
the ground is hid, and we see it not: So the root of righteousness is hid in
the heart, and seen only of God, who only is (...), the understander of the
heart, before whom all things are naked and bare, even the thoughts of men and
Angels; but the fruit of good works is seen of men, and is profitable to the
doers, and to them that see them. Yea by them we are declaratorily justified
before men, and reputed just in the judgment of the Church, as Zachary and
Elizabeth were in the Synagogue. Act. 1.6.
For this cause our blessed Savior stirs up and exhorts his Disciples to
the practice and exercise of good works, Math. 5.16.
saying unto them, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

If we be living branches, abiding in thetrue Vine, let us give ear unto the
Vine, saying unto us, Joh. 15.7.5.8.
I am the Vine, and ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit. And after, Herein is my Father glorified,
that ye bear much fruit, so shall you be my Disciples. Here Christ
insinuates that if we be in him, we must bring forth fruit, yea much fruit,
many good works, laying up in store for our selves a good foundation against
the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.18.
that we may lay hold on eternal life. We must not verbally only but really
profess Christ, we must not say, Lord, Lord, but do what he bids us.

Marcus Aurelius observes that the old Greeks were wont to speak much, Mar.
Auret cap. 8.
and do little; but the ancient Romans were wont to speak little and do
much. Let not us Christians be like the talkatiue Grecians, but the active
Romans, let not us be good speakers, and ill doers, like unto the Philosopher
in Gellius, (...), A. Gell. li. 17. cap. 19.
factis procul, verbis tenus, all words and no deeds, least we be no better
than the fig treegrowing between Jerusalem and Bethany, which bare leaves
and no fruit, and therefore was accursed of Christ. It is not suitable to be
called Christians, and in our lives to imitate pagans. Non sufficit nobis nomen
Christianum, Amb. in sermon. de ascen. Dom.
quod accepimus, si non opera bona Christiani fecerimus, says St. Ambrose, the
name of Christian, which we have taken on us, is not sufficient for us, unless
we do the good works of a Christian. What shall the name avail us without
works correspondent? Nomenhabes, and factum non habes, says St. Augustine,
Aug. in 1. ep. Joan. c. 3. v. 17
thou have the name, but not the deed; thou say well and do ill, thou
wearest Christ's liverie, and vauntest of the cognizance of his name, but
indeed thou servest Satan, and do the works of the Devil, and do the
works of the Devil, and art unless thou repent to be ranked amongst those
miserable, for lorne hypocrites, of whom St. Paul writes to the Bishop of
Crete, saying, They profess they know God, Tit. 2.16.
but in works they deny Him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate.

CHAP. XXV. Of the nature and quality of good works.
Manual Artists do by a certain rule try and examine their work, whether
it be right or wrong; even so in Religion, we try and examine our moral
actions by the Law of GOD as an infallible rule. If they err from this rule,
they are (...), transgressions, evil works: if they accord with the rule, and
are conformable to the moral Law, they are so far forth to be judged good
works. Now in a good work, two things are remarkable; first, as it is a
work; secondly, as it is good; for as it is a work, it is from nature; as it
is good, it is from grace: and as it is a good work, both from nature and
grace; and all from God, who is the only author of nature, and doner of grace.

God does not only give us our being, and preserve us in it, but supports and
sustaineth us by his concurrence in all our actions. For he as universal and
supreme agent, has his influence into all the actions and operations of
inferior agents, so that in him we both live and move and have our being, and
without him we neither move nor work, we can do nothing; yet in that by
his concurrence we immediately do this or that work, it is said to be from
us; but if it betruely good, the goodness of it is immediately from Gods grace
working in us, both to will it, and to do it of his good pleasure.

We must always lay this for a ground, that good works must flow from the
fountain of faith, without which it is impossible to please GOD; Omne etenim
pietatis opus, Prosp. in Epigram.
nisi semine recto exoritur fidei, peccatum est.
Every pious work is sin, if it grow not out of the right seed of faith.


In the next place we are to consider, that the goodness of a moral act
depends of two things: First, the object; secondly, the circumstances. Pet.
Soto de instit. sac. part. 2^. lect. 4^.
The object is some duty of obedience commanded in the Law, the circumstances
are the end, time, place, etc. but the chiefest is the end intended, for this
according to Aquinas does qualify and specify the act, for actus exterior,
says he, informatur ex voluntate, Aqui. in Romans ca. 14. lect. 2^. Romans 2.14.
the outward act is formed by the will, that is, intending such an end. Now
when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained
in the Law, their works are morally good in respect of the object. But because
they intend not Gods glory, but their own, they fail in the circumstance,
their intention is evil, and consequently their works. Whereupon St.
Augustine considering, that they neither proceeded of faith, nor aimed at the
right end, remoues all goodness from them, saying, Aug. praesas. in Psalm. 31.
Vbi fides non erat, bonum opus non erat, bonum enim opus intentio facit,
intentionem fides dirigit: where there was no faith, there was no good work,
for intention makes the work good, and faith directs the intention. And after,
Non valde aspicias quid facit homo, sed quid, cum facit, aspiciat; Do not
greatly observe what a man does, but what he aims at, when he does it.

And indeed heathens and hypocrites do good works, quoad genus operis, but not
quoad intentionem mandantis, they do the work contained in the Law, but not
according to the intention of the Commander, who intends his own glory. And
so their works, although they seem glorious and specious to men, yet are they
but like an earthen pot gilded over, which seems gold, and is not, or like
grapes curiously painted on the wall which the birds fly to, but cannot feed
on them. Sunt opera says St. Augustine, Aug. in Joan. tract. 25.
quae videntur bona, sine fide Christi, and non sunt bona, quia non referuntur
ad eum finem ex quo sunt bona; there be works which seem good without faith
in Christ, and are not good, because they are not referred to that end, whereby
they are good. Hence is it that according to that trite and usual distinction
both the works of pagans and hypocrites are deemed good sesundum substantiam
actus, non secundum modum requisitum, in regard of the substance of the act,
but not in regard of the manner requisite to such an act. For to honor their
parents, to relieve the poor, and such like, may be good in the substance of
the act, and yet come short in the circumstance, and fail in the manner.
Whereas we know that God looks not so much to our doing, as to our well-doing,
and as it has been observed by Divines; Flor. Granat. part 6. ca. 4.
Deus non tam remunerat verba quam adverbia; God does not so much reward verbs
as adverbs, not so much doing, as well-doing; Romans 2.7.
for as the Apostle says, He will render to them who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for honor and glory, and immortality eternal life.

Moses said unto the house of Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.25.
it shall be our righteousness if we observe to do all these Commandments
before the Lord our God, as he has commanded. Not only that which he has
commanded us, but in such manner as he has commanded: For that which is good
loses the beauty and glory of the goodness of it, when it is not done after
a good manner. Men spend a part of their life idely, doing nothing; another
part carelessly, in doing that which concerns them not, and another part
wickedly in doing ill. But we that are Christians must endeavor to spend all
our days in doing well, and strive to imitate our gracious Savior, of whom it
is said, Mark. 7.37.
He has done all things well.

The son of Amos exhorts us to learn this lesson, saying, Cease to do
evil, learn to do well. Esa. 1.16, 17.
And the Lord God himself in the beginning of times said unto Cain, the second
man in the world, If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? Genesis 4.7.
if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. O let us then be diligent in
well-doing, painful laborers in Christ's Vineyard; let us be fruitful in good
works, committing the keeping of our souls unto God in well-doing, as unto a
faithful creator.

CHAP. XXVI. That no man by his own righteousness keeps the Law, and is
without sin.
THe moral Law, is a rule of obedience, telling us what we ought to do, not
teaching us what we are able to do. As long as we are in this body of death,
the remainder of the old Adam, the part unregenerate, Galat. 5.17.
the flesh fights against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh. So
that we cannot do what we would; and consequently we cannot keep the Law,
as we would.

Upon this unavoidable Supposition I may conclude, that it is a vain and
needless speculation, to dispute of man's possibility to keep the Law; and so
to be without sin if he will. And thus much St. Hierome intimates, Hieron.
li. 1o. adv. Pelag.
Posse hominem esse sine peccato, si velit, aut verum est aut falsum; si verum
est ostende quis fuerit, si falsum est, quicquid falsum est, nunquam fieri
potest: That is, for a man to be able to be without sin if he will, is either
true or false, if it be true, show who it is, if it be false, what soever is
false can never be done. As if he had said to Critobulus, either show me a man
that is without sin and keeps the Law, or else your disputing is de
impossibili, of a thing impossible, and therefore vain and frivolous. It is
said of no man but the man Christ Jesus, who is also God, that he did all
things well; that he did no sin; Mar. 7.37. 1 Pet. 2.22.
in his mouth there was no guile. It was his incomparable privilege and
unparalleled prerogative, to be agnus immaculatus, a Lamb without blemish, and
without spot, as he is called by St. Peter. 1 Pet. 1.19.
As for us, we have all gone astray like sheep, we all have been as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy rags; and there is
none just on earth that does good and sins not. God in the beginning
enriched us with grace, and enabled us to do his will; but we by
transgression are become bankrupts, unable to perform our due obedience. So
that when we look our selves in the glass of the Law, we epsy our manifold
stains and spots of sin, we see our miserable infirmity and disability to
good, which causes us to implore the divine aid, and assistance of grace. And
indeed to this end, as St. Augustine notes, The Law was given, Aug. de Sp. and
lit. ca. 19.
that grace might be sought for; and grace was given, that the Law might be
fulfilled: for it was not through the fault of the Law that it was not kept,
but through the fault of the wisdom of the flesh; which fault, was to be
revealed by the Law, and healed by grace. Whence we gather, that, Romans 8.3.
that same (...), cap. 8. verse. 3. does accrue unto it from us, in quo infrim
abatur per carnem, in as much as it was weakened through the flesh.

So that during the combat of the Spirit and the flesh, and the contrariety of
these two in us, posito hoc, our condition being this, as the Apostle says,
We cannot do the things we would; Gal. 5.17.
but we would keep the Law, Romans 7.22.
for we delight in the Law of God after the inner man. Yet upon a new supposall
of the impediment remooved, St. Augustine grants a possibility of keeping the
Law, Aug. de Sp. and lit. ca. 3.5.
saying, Behold how that perfect righteousness is without example in men, and
yet it is not impossible: for it might be, if so great a will was applied, as
is sufficient to so great a thing. And it would be so great, if we were
ignorant of none of those things which pertain to righteousness, and those
things did so delight our mind, that, that delight did overcome whatsoever
other impediment of pleasure or sorrow. Which that it is not so, it is not in
respect of impossibility, but Gods judgment.

So much St. Augustine grants, upon a supposall which by the judgment of God
shall not be, and he said a little before, Aug. ubi supra.
Neminem tam perfectae justitiae in hac vita fuisse, velesse, vel futurum esse,
that none in this life has been so perfectly righteous, or is or shall be.

When God gave the Law in Mount Sinai, he knew man's weakness, how unable he
was to keep it; Bern. in Cant. sermon. 50.
Nec latuit praeceptorem, praecepti pondus hominum excedere vires, Neither was
the Commander ignorant, that the weight of his commandment exceeds the powers
of men. But he did it to throw down the wisdom of the flesh, which is an
enemy to God and his Law; he did it to cause man to see his own vileness,
his spiritual poverty and weakness. Bern. ubi supra.
For, Mandando impossibilia, non praevaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles: by
commanding things impossible, he made not men sinners but humble, says St.
Bernard. He thought it behoouefull, that man should be admonished of his
insufficiency, that so he might seek and thirst after a Mediator, that he
might more ardently defire grace, by praying to him, who is all-sufficient, who
is nigh to all that call upon him, to all such as call upon him faithfully.

Gods commandments implie perfection, and he commands us to be perfect, but to
this end, that we seeing and acknowledging our own wants and imperfections,
may vehemently desire to be perfected by his grace. And here we are to observe
that golden rule of St. Prosper, worthy to be observed of all.

In Omnibus menitis Dei, atque mandatis, Prosp. ep. ad Demet.
una eademque ratio est and divinae gratiae, and humanaae abedientiae: nec ob
aliud unquam datur praeceptum, nisi ut quaeratur praecipientis auxilium: In all
Gods admonitions and commands, there is one and the same reason, both of Gods
grace and of man's obedience: neither is the commandment at any time given for
any other thing, but that the help of him that commands may be sought for.
So much obedience, as the Law requires of us, so much grace we stand in need
of, and this are we to obtain by prayer from him, who is the fountain of
grace. We and our Fathers have done amiss, we have turned aside, every one
to his own way; we all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, and
so all do greatly stand in need of his grace. Prove. 20.9. Job 25.4.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? or how can
he be clean that is borne of a woman?

We read in holy Writ, that there was one Lot in Sodom, whose righteous soul
they vexed with their uncleanenesse; of two amongst all the thousands in
Israel, who were vouchsafed as worthy to enter into the land of Canaan, the
land flowing with milk and honey, Iosuah the son of Nun, and Caleb the son
of Iephunnch, yea we read of three, who might deliver their own souls from
temporal judgments by their righteousness, Noah, Job, and Daniel. These and
many other we read of in holy Writ, who were righteous in man's judgment, and
in Gods gracious acceptance: but we read not that any one of them did
perfectly keep the Law, and was without sin. Ambr. apol. 1. David. ca. 4.
Whereupon St. Ambrose says; Da mihi aliquem sine prolapsione delicti? Show me
any one without the fault of sin? Such an one would be a rare miracle,
worthily to be admired of all. But alas! such an one is like the mountain of
gold, or the Philosophers stone, or the second intentions in Logic, which
have no real absolute existence; and indeed are nothing, save only in the
theorie, and operation of the understanding: In scholasticall speculation, you
may hear the noise of such an one, but you shall not sooner find him than the
echo in the Poet, Quem non invenis usquam, esse putes nusquam, whom you find
not any where, you may suppose to be no where. For St. Hierome, averreth the
truth when he says, Solus Deus est in quem peccatum non cadit, Hiero. Damaso,
de prod. fl.
it is God only, who is not subject to sin; in like manner, St. Bernard
says, Non peccare, Bern. in Cant. sermon. 23.
Dei justitia est, hominis justitia indulgentia Dei: not to sin is Gods
righteousness, man's righteousness is Gods indulgencie. So that we must all
acknowledge our imperfection, we must confess with St. James, In many things,
we offend all. And with him that leaned on the breast of our Savior, drinking
thence of the streams of grace, with him also we must comesse all, and say; 1
John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the growth and increase of inherent righteousness.
THe vegetative faculty in man, after he is formed never cease to work by
augmenting and increasing the body, until it have attained due dimensions of
length, breadth, and height, in that just quantity, which is allotted as proper
and peculiar to every particular man; whereby he is in that respect perfected.
And this augmentatiue faculty, as Scaliger has it, cease by Law of nature,
Exerc. 282.
the thirtieth year, least she should affect infinitenes. For that was to
usurp the prerogative of her Creator, who is natura naturans, the former and
creator of nature, and who only is actually infinite.

This just quantity is not acquired at once, but by degrees; so we increase in
our infancy, more in our childhood, yet more in our youth, never ceasing,
until we have attained natures perfection. In like manner, in the spiritual
estate of the sanctified regenerate man, there is a measure of perfection
allotted to every particular man by God, which is not ordinarily given at once,
but attained by degrees. First, we are infants, then proficients, and after
perfect men in Christ. We are infants of what age soever we be, when we are
borne a new by the laver of regeneration: for then, Barthol: Car. sum. Council.
Council. Vien.
as the council of Vienna defines, we received informing grace and virtues
infused in respect of the habit, though not of use, in regard of the time.
After that we begin to produce those habits in actual exercising of
righteousness, holiness, and other virtues, profiting and growing up into
Christ who is the head; till at length by degrees we come unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.


Our blessed Savior received the Spirit without measure: John 3.34.
that He as the head might by the influence of grace convey and distill sense
and motion into all the members of his my sticall body. But every member
receives grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7.
Therefore whereas Christ received the Spirit without meafore, Aug. in Joan.
tract. 74.
St. Augustine says, Ceteris ad mensuram datur, and datus additur, donec
unicuique pro modo suae perfectionis propria mensura compleatur: To the rest he
is given by measure, and being given, is increased, until every man's proper
measure be fulfilled, according to the model of his perfection. Now every man's
proper measure of perfection is unknown to him, and known only to God: to the
end that every one of us should strive and contend by all means to attain it,
here in observing that of the Greeks, (...), aspire to the highest, and thou
shall attain a mediocritie, a measure befitting thee.

Now this is not attained at once, but by degrees, Is qui summum locum
ascendere nititur, gradibus, vel passibus, non autem saltibus elevatur: He
(says St. Gregory) who strives to ascend up a most high place, is raised by
degrees, Greg. ep. l. 9. ep. 71.
by steps and paces, not by jumpes and leapes. We must by little and little
aspire with the wings of prayer, and ardent desire of perfection; and although
almighty God delay us and put us off, yet we must not give him over, but
importune him with the Widow in the Gospel; Luke 18. Aug. in 1. op. Joan. 3.
for as St. Augustine excellently notes, Deus differendo extendit desiderium,
desiderando extendit animum, extendendo facit capacem; God by differring us,
extends the desire, by desiring, he enlarges the mind and by enlarging it, He
makes it capable, that is, able to receive such a measure of perfection, as
he is pleased to give us. And we must with all diligence and devotion awaite
the time when he will be pleased to do it. For as he does not presently
reward our works with eternal life, but in due time: so says Aquinas, he
does not presently enercase grace, Aqui. 1^. 2^. qu. 114. art. 8.
but in his time when we shall be sufficiently disposed to the receiving of
increase of grace. And for this (to use the Prophet David's phrase) shall every
man that is godly pray unto him in a time when he may be found; which time,
that we may find, Luke 18.1.
our Savior directs us by a parable, teaching us, always to pray, and not to
faint. And hereunto the chosen vessel of mercy exciteth us in that brief
exhortation, 1 These. 5.17.
(...), pray without ceasing.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Spiritual sloth an enemy to perfection.
Spiritual sloth in Christians is a maine obstacle to their growth in
Christianity, a mighty impediment hindering their proficiency in grace and
virtue. For many are so stupefied and benumbed with a careless negligence of
their estate, that they pass on their days from week to week, from month to
month, and from year to year, never seriously considering with themselves,
whether they grow better or worse in their spiritual estate and course of
virtue, whereas indeed nothing is more true, than that of old, Non progredi est
regredi, not to go forward, is to go backward in the way of piety. And
surely he was never good, who does not desire and endeavor to be better; and
he that endeavors not to be better, will soon grow worse, soon learn to
go backward with the Crab-fish in Pliny: Profecto nolle proficere, deficere
est, indeed to be unwilling to grow better, Plin. not. hist. lib. 9. cap. 31.
Bern. ep. 254. ad Garin.
is to grow worse: with St. Bernard, Let us not delude and dereiue our selves,
for as that holy Father tells us in the same place, inter profectum and
defectum in hoc statu mortalis vitae nihil medium invemitur; In this state of
mortal life, there is no middle course betwixt proficiency and deficiency,
betwixt going backward and going forward in grace. And there the same Father
speaking of the just and righteous says; Bernard. ub^ supra.
Iustus nunquam arbitratur se comprehendisse; nunquam dicitsatis est, sed
semper esurit sititque justitiam; The just man never supposes that he has
comprehended, never says it is enough: but always hungreth and thirsts
after righteousness. So that if he might live always, he would always, as
much as in him lies, strive to be more righteous. But as the emptiest bladders
are most filled with wind, so the poorest Christians have many times the
greatest conceit and opinion of their own sufficiency; they think they have
enough, when as in truth they have a great deal too little. Omnia illi desunt,
Bern. de consid. l. 2. ca. 7.
qui nil sibi deesse putat, he wants all things, who thinks he wants
nothing, says holy Bernard. When our Savior rehearsed the precepts of the
second Table to the young man; he answered presently, All these things have I
kept from my youth up: Mat. 19. v. 20, 21.
what lack I yet? but the wisdom of GOD threw down his pride, and stopped
his mouth with a, Si vis esse perfectus, etc. If thou will be perfect, go and
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven. This was a corrosiue to his stomach, a pill which he could not well
digest. And yet there ought to be in every one of us such a measure of
perfection, as that through effectual charity, and love of God, we should be
ready and willing upon just occasion, actually to relinquish father and
mother, wife and children, our goods, our lands, our lives, and all things, for
the asserting of GODS glory, and for the testimony of Jesus. This history of
that young man in the Gospel teaches us, how forcible a remora the love of
the world and worldly things is, to stay the ship of the Christian soul,
saying on in her voyage unto perfection and felicity. Whereupon the Apostle
St. John cries amain unto us, 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him.

CHAP. XXIX. Of three evil qualities in spiritual sloth.
ACarelesse negligence of our estate in piety, is attended with three evil
properties: First, it is cold and remiss in proficiency; secondly, it is
heavy and dull in going on to perfection; thirdly, it is a waster and
destroyer of grace, and so a maine enemy to perfection: Wherefore this
spiritual sluggishnesse is by Johannes de sancto Geminiano aptly compared to
Saturn, the highest planet, for three things: First, He is infrigidativus, of
a cold quality; Joan. de Sanct. Gem. de exempl. and Simili^ rerum. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
secondly, He is tarde incessivus, of slow motion; thirdly, He is faetuum
mortificativus, a destroyer of young ones.

First, as Saturn is of a cold cooling quality, causing coldness in the
inferior bodies, and exciting melancholy: So spiritual sloth makes a
careless Christian become cold and remiss in charity, in the love of God and
man; for he neither so loves GOD objective, as to will more good to Him than
to any creature, neither does he so love Him appretiative, as to value Him at a
higher rate or price than the whole world, or his own life; Nedum intensive,
much less does he love God with a greater and more ardent degree of love, than
his own life or any other creature. And seeing the love of our neighbor is
the reflection of Gods love in out hearts, this being so remiss, that other of
necessity must be very cool, and so cool as that he neither loves his
neighbor as himself, after the rule of the Law, nor as Christ loved us, which
is the rule of the Gospel. So that whereas inward perfection consists in the
love of God and our Neighbor, says Aquinas, Aquin. in Heb. cap. 6. lect. 1.
the spiritual sluggard must needs come short of perfection, being so cold and
defective in this golden virtue of Charity, which is Vinculum perfectionis,
Col. 3.14.
the very bond of perfection.

Again, as Saturn is of a slow motion, finishing his course through the
Zodiac in no less than thirty years: so the spiritual sluggard, is very
slow in the use of grace, and exercise of good works, going so slowly on unto
perfection; as that he does scarce formicinum gradum movere, move as fast as
the pismire, and stands in need to be brobd with Salomons goade, and set on
his way with a Vade ad formicam piger etc. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, Prove.
6.6.
consider her ways and be wise: which having no guide, over-seer or ruler,
provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.

Lastly, as Saturn is destructive to young ones lately brought forth; so
spiritual drowsinesse and remissness even slay the fruits of grace and
virtue, when they begin to spring up. If any pious motions to good, be lately
engendered in the heart, either by reading the word of life, or hearing it read,
preached or expounded, or by private admonition, or any good means, by and by
this pestilent vice is ready to strangle them in the birth. Children borne
under the dominion of Saturn, are not vital, many times die within a few
days, as the Astrologers say, so good motions begun in the spiritual
sluggard, often die as soon as they be borne, and so never come to perfection.
So that (whereas Fulgentius says of Saturn, Filios vero suos comedisse
fertur; Fulg. Myth. ad Catum. l. 1. in Fab. Sat.
quod quodcunque tempus gignit, consumit; He is said to devour his sons,
because whatsoever time begets, it consumes) this spiritual sloth does it
not in a long tract of time, but in the nativitie or soon after; for this
common pernicious vice is like the red Dragon in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 12.4.
which stands before the woman ready to be delivered, for to devour her
child as soon as it is borne. But we must shake off this pestiferous Viper,
we must be vigilant, and stand upon our watch every hour, least whilst we
sleep the enemy come, and sow tares amongst the good seeds of grace sown in
our hearts. When the fire of the Spirit is begun to be enkindled in us, let us
not quench it, and put it out again with the cold water of careless
remissness and negligence: but as the Trumpet of grace exhorts, let us with
all diligence and holy endeavor, (...), 2 Timothy 1.6.
blow up the sparks of grace already sparkling in our souls, let us by all
means nourish them, but not extinguish them, that so we may grow up into
Christ our head, unto a perfect man, following the most wholesome counsel of
the great Apostle St. Peter, concluding his last Epistle with this heavenly
exhortation, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.

CHAP. XXX. What perfection of inherent righteousness is attainable in this
life.
MOst absolute and infinite perfection of righteousness is only in God, who
is that light in whom there is no darkness at all; of whom the sweet singer of
Israel could say, Psalm. 145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. But that
righteousness which is in man is finite and limited, and such is all the
perfection he can attain in it: and both accrue unto him by participation,
from him who is the fountain of righteousness and perfection. Now that
perfection compatible to man, Aquin. in Phil. cap. 3. lect. 2.
is twofold, first, Viae, secondly, Patriae: the first incident to man in the
state of grace, whilst he is as yet a wayfaring pilgrim and stranger on earth:
the second belonging to man when he comes into his heavenly Country, and is a
member of the triumphant Church in the state of glory. What perfection of
righteousness we may attain in the way of this life, we are now to enquire
of: and in searching it out, we shall find all our perfection attended with
much imperfection. Haec hominibus sola perfectio, si imperfectos esse se
noverint: Heron. adv. Peti. li. 1o.
This is the only perfection in men, if they acknowledge themselves imperfect.

But how shall we know and acknowledge our selves imperfect, but by finding out
in our selves the defect and want of those things whereby we should be
perfected? and by what other means can we possibly be perfected, than by
knowing God, and believing in God, and loving God, and obeying God For by such
knowledge, faith, charity, and obedience, Christian perfection is attained.
But alas, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.9.
we know in part, and so we believe in part, and love God in part, and obey
him in part. St. Gregory therefore knits the four linkes of this chain, by
the first and the last with a tanto quanto, saying, tanto quis operatur, quanto
Deum noverit: Greg. in Ezekiel. hom. 22.
so much as we know God, so much we obey him in our works; such as our
knowledge is of him, such is our obedience to him, such is our righteousness;
and hereupon St. John says, Hereby we know, 1 John 2.3.
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. Now we cannot keep his
Commandments, unless we love him, for this is the love of God, 1 Ioh. 5. v.
3.
that we keep his Commandments; and we cannot love him, unless we believe
in Him, Gal. 5.6.
for faith works by love, and we cannot believe in Him, unless we know him,
and can say with the Apostle, Scio cui credidi; 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed.

That we may be perfect, we must have perfection two ways, Aquin. in Heb,
cap. 5. lect. 2.
says Aquinas: First, secundum intellectum, in our understanding, by being
able to discern and judge aright of things: secondly, secundum affectum, in
our affection, by charity, cleaving wholly to God. For charity is in a sort of
as large extent as inherent righteousness, being the fulfilling of the Law,
the mother of obedience and every good work.

We are perfect in that we have faith, hope, and other virtues truly in some
measure: but in that we have them not in full measure, we are imperfect. and so
our perfection, though true, is still imperfect. St. Paul said of himself he
was not perfected, Phil. 3.12. after in the fifteenth verse he calls himself
perfect: Fulg. de praedestin. ad Monimum. li. 10.
Whereupon Fulgentius says of him; He was perfect by expectation of reward,
imperfect through wearisomenesse of the combat; He was perfect, in that with
his mind he served the Law of God, he was imperfect, in that with his flesh he
served the Law of sin. Thus it was in the chosen vessel of mercy; much more
in us in whom all our perfection is ever attended with many imperfections.

CHAP. XXXI. Of perfect righteousness in this life more punctually and plainly.
AS all the lines in a Circle passing from the Circumference through the
mediate meet in the Center; So all the righteous works of the Saints
proceeding from grace through faith are terminated and mee^e in the Center of
Gods glory; 1 Cor. 10.31.
according to that precept of the Apostle, Do all to theglorie of God: and
surely to do so is true perfection.

Now every thing is perfect, says Aquinas, Aquin. in Philip. cap. 3. lect. 2.
in such sort, as it does adhere to the perfection thereof; but our ultimate
perfection is God and his glory; now to refer all our actions totally and
actually to God and his glory, is perfectio patriae, the perfection of our
heavenly Country, and not to be found in any man on earth, save in Christ
only, who in the days of his flesh was both Viator and Comprehensor, both in
the state of grace and state of glory. But, Aquin. ^b^ supra.
as Aquinas says again, to apply our hearts in nothing unto that which is
against God, and refer our whole life habitually unto God, is perfectio viae,
that perfection of us wayfaring pilgrims,
ad quam omnes tenentur ex necessitate salutis; whereunto all are bound upon
necessity of salvation. No man does actually refer his whole life unto God
and his glory; Eccles. 7.20. James 3.2.
for there is noman just an earth, which does good and sins not: and in many
things we all offend. David and St. Peter, and other holy men of God had their
faults and errors, and yet were habitually righteous; therefore remarkable is
that excellent observation of St. Ambrose, Divina justicia Denitune justi,
Ambr. in Luc. cap. 1.
ex mantir habitu, non aliquo factor (...) God (...) measare the (...) of the
righteous, by (...) mind, not by some event of works. (...) none could be
righteous, none would (...) none could expect the reward of glory: it is the
triumphant Church, which is all fair, and there is no ^^^^^ish in hen. There
fore howsoever the perfectists con^^^iue of it, it is most true which St.
Augustine writes; Aug. de eccl. dogm. cap. 85.
Nullus sanctus and justus caret peceato, thee tamen hoc desinit esse sanctus
and justus, (...): no just and holy man is (...) sildae; never the less he
does nick cease to be holy and just, seting in affection he retains sanctitis.
So that still a man may be habitually righteous, who is not without all error
and actual prevarication.

To love and affect holiness is a degree of holiness; as to desire and
endeavor to be perfect is a degree of perfection according to that in St.
Bernard, Bern. ad Garin. Abb. ep. 254.
Studere perfectioni perfectio est, to study to be perfect is perfection.
Luther writes of one Staupitius, a godly learned man, that he vowed a thousand
times, Luther in Gal. cap. 5.
that he would become a better man; yet after all his vows he perceived no
impreouement or bettering of himself. Now in that he was not better, he was
imperfect, but in as much as be desired carnestly, and endeavored to be a
better man, he was perfect. Bern. uhi supro.
For as Saint Bernard says, Indefessum proficiendi studium and jugis conatus
ad perfectionens perfectio reputatur: An indefatigable desire of profiting and
continwall endeavoring to be perfect is perfection. We desire to be virtuous
holy and good, but are not such as we desire to be, and therefore St. Augustine
says, Aug. 1. cp. Joan. ca. 3.
Tota vita boni Christiani sanctum desiderium est, the whole life of a
Christian is an holy desire; but if there be in us a desire, a ready and
willing mind, God will accept of that from us, which he himself has wrought
in us. If through (...) of Christ sanctifying of us and renew^^^ (...) Gods
image, we bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, Romans 7.6.
walking in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter, then are
we perfect according to the state of this life.

If we walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.16.
striving against sin and the flesh, wrestling with Satan and the world,
obeying the secret motions and sweet invitations of grace; then are we
perfect, Aug. de doct. Christ. 3.39.
quanturn in hac vita, as St. Augustine speaks, with such a measure of
perfection as is attaineable in this life.

If so be then we refer our whole life to God and his glory, if we
endeavor and study to walk in the Spirit, and to bring forth abundantly the
fruits of the Spirit, then are we perfect, for we keep the Law, seeing the
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in them, Romans 8.3.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. And if we do this, what
is it but to do the will of God, but to please God, but to hearken unto the
voice of God speaking to Abraham the. Father of the faithful, and in him to
all that be of the faith of Abraham, Ger. 17.1.
saying; I am the almighty God, walk thou before me and be thou prefect.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Perseverance.
PErseverance is a stable and firm continuance in grace and righteousness.
And it is a singular gift of God not to be acquired by humane means or merits.
It is a rare and admirable virtue, which the old Philosophers and Sages of the
world could not well understand; and no marvel, seeing Adam adorned with such
ornaments of grace did not learn it in Paradise. Now this singular gift and
rare endowment is necessarily required to the consummating of our perfection by
inherent righteousness. This the first Adam wanted, this the second Adam in
whom is the fullness of all grace, freely conferreth and bestows on us; and
therefore Fulgentius says well, Per illum amisimus priorem gratiam, peristum
recepimus ampliorem; Fulg. ferm. de dup. not.
By him (the first Adam) we lost the former grace: by this (the second Adam)
we have received more ample grace.

Although Adam was perfect and righteous in the day he was created, yet for
want of perseverance he became imperfect and unrighteous: whereupon St.
Augustine notes thus much; Etsi peceatum in solo libero arbitrio erat
constitutum; Aug. Ench. ad Laur. cap. 106.
(...) temen retinen dae justitiaesufficie^at solum liberu^^ arbitrium, nisi
participatione immu^abilis boni divinam adintorium praberetur; Although sin
stood in the free will alone; yet the free will alone was not sufficient to
retain righteousness, unless divine aid was aff^^^ded by partaking of the
unchangeable good. So that as without perseverance we cannot hold on our way
and retain righteousness; so neither without it can we be perfected and
consummate in righteousness.

Hell is full of good purposes, but no performances of good be there: therefore
now let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due season we shall reap an
eternal reward. Let us not be like to pope Eugenius, to whom St. Bernard
says, Bern. de consid. ad Eug. li. cap. 1.
Vbi incipis, ibi desicis, where thou beginnest, there thou endest. When we
purpose to ascend up into the tabernacle of the Lord, and climb up the craggie
rock of virtue, we must not delay and confer with flesh and blood, or stand
to parley with the world, (...), it is no fit time to sit down and demurre;
for as St. Ambrose says, Dum cunctaris and dubitas, iter quod ingressus es
perdidisti, whilst thou delayest and doubtest, Ambr. in sest. Cathedrae Sd
Petri.
thou have lost thy journey, which thou did begin.

The traveller by holding on his way with patience, at length comes to his
inn; the little bird carrying at he bill a little clay or straw, and such
like matter, by little and little at length sinisheth her nest; the Merchant
patiently holding on his course amids many stornes and tempests, and other
dangers at Sea, at length comes to the Haven where he would be; the painful
Mason by laying stone upon stone, in continding his labor, at length erects a
stately and goodly building. Now if diligent perseverance be able to do these
things, being assisted by nature, how much more powerful shall he be in
spiritual affairs, being assisted by grace. Oh let us be constant,
immovable, always abounding in the works of righteousness; let us not faint
nor fail in doing well, that we may obtain an inheritance which fails not:
let us by patient continuance in well doing, seek for honor and glory and
immortality, Romans 2.7.
then shall God render unto us eternal life. Christ is the forerunner, Heb.
6.20. we must with the Apostle, Philip. 3. ver. 12. follow after, and that with
all diligence and constant perseverance; Bern. ep. 254.
for as St. Bernard says, Quid prodest Christum sequi, si non contingat
rensequi? What will it avaite us to follow after Christ, if happily we overtake
him not?

Though thou run never so, if thou continuest not unto death, says he, Bravium
non apprehendis, Bravium Christus est: thou layest not hold on the prize, the
prize is Christ. Wherefore if he running on, thou make a stand, thou come
not nearer unto him, but setrest thy self further off from him. Surely the
faithful and zealous follower will run and not be weary; the righteous will
hold on his way, says Job, Job 17.9.
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. But you have
need of patience, says the Apostle, that after you have done the will of God,
you might receive the promise: Vt perseveret is in agone, Amb. in Heb. cap. 10.
v. 36.
do. nec recipiatis coronam condignam labori vestro, says S. Ambrose, you have
need of patience, that ye may persevere in the combat, until ye receine a
crown meet for your labor.

Perseverance immediately begins to attend on grace, the mother of all
virtues, when it is first infused, but is not complete until death, until
the infusion of final grace, which perfectly extinguisheth all evil
concupiscence, and is the utter deletion or taking away of all sin and
sinfulness.

As the Crown on the Kings head gives an eminent splend our and luster to his
royal robes, and other (...) ornaments: so the grace of perseverance is the
glorious complement and crown of all other virtues, and is an infallible guide
to lead us into the kingdom of glory. Therefore our Savior says not, he
that shall begin, Math. 24.13.
but he that shall endure unto the end shall be saved. And to the Angel in the
Church of Smyrna, he says, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee
a crown of life. Apoc. 2.^0.


We are now in our spiritual course and race, we must so run, that we may
obtain, we are now in the combat, we must so fight that we may over come.
Which that we may do, we are to implore and desire by fervent and incessant
prayer, that God would prevent and follow us with grace all the days of our
life; that so at the end of our days, we may confidently and comfortably say
with the chosen vessel of mercy, I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4. v. 7, 8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give me at that day: and not unto me only, but unto them also which love his
appearing.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of perfection in glory.
SAint Paul the chosen vessel of mercy and trumpet of grace, Romans 8.30.
uniteth and makes up the golden chain of our salvation with four linkes.
First, Predestination: secondly, Vocation: thirdly, Justification: fourthly,
Glorification. Where he expresses not our sanctification, as being included
in our glorification; according to the exposition of Aquinas, Aquin. in cp. ad
Romans cap. 8.
saying, Glorificamur in hac vita per prefectune virturis and gratia: in futura
per exaltationem gloria: We are glorified in this life by proficiency of virtue
and grace: in the life to come, by exaltation of glory. And indeed grace is
glory inchoate or begun; glory is grace consummate and perfected: and our
imperfect perfection by grace here is a previous preparing and disposing of us
unto that absolute perfection which we shall have, being clothed and adorned
with the stole of glory. For even in this life we are freed in part from
those four evils which are maine impediments to our absolute perfection: and
this freedom is merely from grace in Christ Jesus.

The first evil hindering our perfection, is error in the understanding, from
which we are freed in part by the Spirit of grace, leading of us into all
truth, and teaching us all things necessary unto salvation.

The second evil, a let to perfection, is sin in the will, from which we
are also partly freed by grace in Christ, and that two ways; First, Romans 6.14.
from the dominion of it, For sin shall not have dominion over you, because
ye are not under the Law, but under grace, says the Apostle; secondly, from
the condemnation of sin, seeing, Romans 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

The third evil hindrance of our perfection, is misery and afflictions, from
which by faith and spiritual fortitude we are freed in part, that they may not
swallow us up, that the floods of great waters, the over-flowings of fear and
despair may never prevail against us, never over whelme us. In the world you
shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, says Christ, I have overcome
the world.

The last evil letting our perfection, is death. And from this also we are
freed in part by grace, not only from spiritual and eternal death, but even
from corporal in two respects: First, from the sting thereof, 1 John 1. v. 7.
which is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. for by the blood of Christ we are cleansed from
all sin. Secondly, in regard of dominion, for death shall not tyrannize over
us for ever; for in the resurrection at the sound of the Trumpet, 1 Cor. 15.52.
we shall be raised incorruptible, and never die any more. Whereas the bodies
of the unjust shall rise, but from corporal to eternal death, wherein they
shall be ever dying, but never dead, which moved holy Bernard to cry out, Bern.
de consid. li. 5. ca. 12.
Alas, says he, quis det illis semel mori, ut non moriantur in aternum? who
might grant them once to die, that so they might not die for ever?

Thus are we freed in part by grace from these four evil impediments of
perfection. But in the stare of glory, we shall be wholly and entirely exempted
from the in for then shall we be free from all darkness of error, obliquitie
of sin, from all of stictive misery and destroying death. Yea, we shall be
free from them after a more excellent mother, than Adam was in Paradise in the
state of innocence. For it pleased the omnipotent goodness and wisdom (who
brings light out of darkness, life out of death, and good out of evil) even
by the fall of man to raise him up in Christ to a more eminent and high state
of perfection.

It is true that Adam in his integrity had power not to err, not to sin,
not to suffer misery, not to die: but it is also true that he had power to
err, to sin, to suffer misery, to die, which by woeful experiment he brought
into act, by disobeying the command of his creator. Ever since the poison and
contagion of disobedience has tainted and corrupted all the veins of his
rebellious children and miserable posterity.

Now in the state of glory in that heavenly Paradise, we shall obtain such a
transcendent degree of perfection, as that we shall have no power in our
understanding to err, in our will to sin, no power to suffer misery and
devouring death.

In that ineffable glory we being perfectly changed into the image of the
Lord, the knowledge of all things shall be seen of us, not by parts, but
wholly and at once, as St. Prosper says. Prosp. de vita contemplat. li. 1.
cap. 6.
We shall see all things clearly without error, by beholding him who is all
truth: Now we see through a glass darkly that incomprehensible light; we
behold him now through a threefold glass; First, of the creatures, secondly,
of his works of justice and mercy, thirdly, of the holy Scriptures: But then
we shall see him perfectly, clearly, face to face, with unspeakeable joy and
delight: and herein confists our essential, alsufficient blessedness,
therefore Philip said unto Christ, Lord show us the Father and it suffices.
John 14.8.


Now we know God but imperfectly, enigmatically; but then we shall know him,
with a perfect, clear Meridian knowledge; we shall know him as we are known
of him, and as he is known of the Angels in Heaven.

The man which was called by the Lord Jesus in a Vision, the man which was
taken up into the third heaven, and saw things not to be uttered, has revealed
this unto us in those words, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now I know in part,
but then shall I know, even as I and known. Aquin. in 2 Cor. 3.18.
What is knowledge, but assimilatio cognoseentis ad cognitum, a making of the
subject knowing, like to the object which is known. So by knowing God
perfectly, we are made perfectly like unto him: and being made perfectly like
unto him, we know him perfectly. So the Virgin-Apostle and Prophet of the New
Testament divinely argues, saying, but we know, that when He shall appear, 1
John 3.2.
we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is.

As touching perfection in the will, the estate of the Saints in heaven shall
far excel that of Adam in Paradise; for he in his innocence there, as St.
Bernard notes, Bern. de gra. and lib. arb.
had but an inferior freedom, Posse non peceare, a power not to sin;
whereas the glorified ones in heaven shall have a superior freedom, Non posse
peccare no power to sin. For they shall always behold God, the chief good,
the fountain of good, who makes all them blessed, who so behold him: and that
blessedness is such as includes all sufficient good, and excludes all deficient
evil from them that have it. Seeing they are now free Denizens and glorious
Citizens of that holy Jerusalem, whereof St. Gregory says, Greg. in sept.
Psalm. paen. in fine.
In eam nullus ingreditur impius, nullus habitat iniquus, nullus intrat
immundus, None that is ungodly goes into it, none that is unjust dwells in
it, none that is unclean enters into it. There is no impiety, no iniquirie,
no impuritie: no evils, no sins approach thither; for as St. Prosper says,
Nec peccata ibi ulla, Prosp. de vita contempl. li. 1. cap. 4.
nec peccatores erunt, and qui ibi fuerint, jam peccare non poterint, There
shall neither be any sins, nor sinners, and they that shall be there, shall
now have no power to sin. For they can will nothing but that which is good,
seeing they be now necessarily good, not by any iron necessity of compulsion
or coaction, for there is no such thing there; but by a golden necessity of
immutabilitie, which never alters, never changes. Such shall be the
ineffable felicity of the glorified Saints in heaven, being now blessed with
Angelical perfection, being made like unto the Angels in heaven.

God is righteous, and therefore blessed, we are now unrighteous, and
therefore miserable: but then being conformed to the image of God, we shall be
righteous, and therefore blessed, and consequently free from all misery, both
in soul and body. For whereas Adam had in this also, Bern. de Gra. and lib.
Arb.
an inferior freedom, Posse non turbari, a power not to be troubled; We shall
then have, as St. Bernard notes, a superior freedom, a non posse turbari, no
power to be troubled, to suffer any afflictiue misery whatsoever. Our souls
shall be free from any distemper, passion, and perturbation. Aquin. in 1 Cor.
cap. 15. lect. 6.
Our bodies shall be qualified with four endowments like to the Sun. First,
claritie, secondly, agilitie, thirdly, subtilitie, fourthly, impassibilitie.
But what did I say, like to the Sun? nay, rather like to the son of God,
for we shall be like him in corporis gloria, Ambr. in ca. 6. ad Roman.
non in divinitatis natura, in the glory of his body, not in the nature of his
divinity, says St. Ambrose. For in the resurrection He will change us in a
moment: then as the Apostle teaches us, Phil. 3.21.
He shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious
body. So that we shall be free from all misery, as he is free in his body. Our
senses and other faculties shall not be subject to any offense or hurt. Our
bodies shall no more be exposed to wounds, maimes, defects, no distemper or
pain, no disease or infirmity shall annoy them. All tarditie and slownes of
the mooving faculty shall be taken away, for the body being now spiritual,
shall go without any delay, Prosp. de vita contemp. lib. 1. cap. 11.
hindrance, or difficulty, Quecunque ire voluerit Spiritus angelicae
beatitudinis aqualitate perfectus, whither soever the Spirit will go, being
perfect in equality, with Angelical blessedness, as St. Prosper says.

Thus where the cause is taken away, the effect must needs cease: the evil of
punishment shall always be absent, where the evil of sin is never present.
For how is it possible that any misery should be there, where there is perfect
charity without dissimulation or hatred, perfect peace without dissension or
discord, perfect health without languor or infirmity: where there is nothing
but eternal happiness and everlasting felicity.

And the reason of all this is given by St. John, saying, for the Lamb, Revel.
7.17.
which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and lead them unto
living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of perfection by immortality in glory.
THe first act of our essence is life, without which, we have no motion or
sense, no understanding, willing, or working. Hereupon blessedness, which
consists in act, is properly ascribed to life, and to that life which is
eternal and immortal. Many of the old Philosophers held immortality of the
soul, but not of the body, that was an idle fancy, gross, and absurd with
them. But we know by the Christian verity, and steadfastly believe, that our
bodies in the resurrection shall rise incorruptible, and live ever. For
although the bodies of reprobates shall me again and live ever, Quead
substantiam vivendi, in respect of the substance of life, yet quoad qualitatem
vivendi, in regard of the quality of life, they being in perpetual horror and
torments, are rightly said to perish and die eternally. Aug. (...) cap. 92.
Seeing as St. Augustine says, Vera vita non est, nisi ubi faliciter vivitur,
It is not true life, but where there is an happy life.

Neither may it seem strange that a body glorified should be immortal, seeing
the body of Adam in the state of innocence in that earthly Paradise was
immortal. For as St. Augustine affirms, that the body of Adam before sin,
was both mortal and immortal; Aug. in Genesis ad lit. lib. 6. cap. 25.
mortal, quia poterat mori, because it had a power to die, and immortal, quia
poter at non mori, because it had a power not to die.

Adam no doubt had temperamentum absolute temperatissimum, a temperament
absolutely most temperate, such as none but he and the Second Adam are supposed
to have: yet that was not sufficient to immortality. And therefore by Gods
gracious indulgence he might freely feed on the tree of life; by means
whereof he might be preserved from decaying by age or any other cause, and that
through some natural virtue in the tree, or rather Gods blessing, or both. And
thus Adam was mortal, Aug. ubi suprd.
condition corporis animalis, by the condition of a natural body, but
immortal, beneficie conditoris, by the benefit of his creator, as St.
Augustine excellently explaineth it. If so be that Adam had not sinned, yet
fuisset mortalis, he should have been mortal; nevertheless, if he had not
sinned, Valles. sacra. Philos. c. 6.
fuisset nunquam moriturus, he should never have died, as Vallesius aptly
notes. So then no sin, Romans 5.12.
no death; By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. Contrary
to the heresy of Pelagius and Augustinus Steuchus, a Pontifician of later
times. Whitak. de not. eccl. ca. 7.


If Adam then had not sinned, he had not died, but should have been immortal,
Immortalitateminori, in qua posset mori, Aug. Ench. cap. 105.
with a lesser immortality, wherein he had a power to die, says St
Augustine-Quamvis major futura sit, in qua non possit mori, although a greater
immortality be to come, wherein he cannot die. And this must be in Heaven, in
the state of glory, where is no disobedience or sin, and consequently, no
death; Romans 6.23.
for as the Apostle says, the wages of sin is death.

Christ Jesus is our life, Col. 3.4.
both here in the kingdom of grace, and there in the kingdom of glory. For
He as head and fountain of life, communicates life to all the members of his
mystical body; He being the last Adam, who was made a quickening Spirit, 1
Cor. 15.45.
enlivening us not only with natural, sensitive, and rational life, as our
Creator, but also with spiritual life, as our Redeemer, and eternal life, as
our Glorifier.

Augustus the Emperor in Romani nominis aeternitatem natus, borne to eternize
the Roman name, Onuph. de imperat. Com. cap. 4.
according to Onnphrius, was wont many times as Suetonius writes in his life,
to pray for (...), Sueton. in vita Augusti. cap. 99.
for his friends and himself, not immortality, but aneasie death without
pain. But our blessed Savior did not only pray for, but does also give unto
his friends, his my sticall members, (...), immortality: for speaking of them,
his Sheep, John. 10.28.
he says, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hands.

Our life consists in the knowledge and love of Christ, says Aquinas: we know
Him, Aquin. in Colost. cap. 3. lect. 1.
and love Him in this world in part, and it is our spiritual life; we shall
know him and love him in the other world perfectly, and that will be eternal
life. As the first Adam brought death into the world, so the second Adam
abolishing death, 2 Timothy 1.10.
has brought life and immortality to light. Aug. in Joan. tract. 22.
Who according to St. Augustine, speaks on this wise to thee, Would thou
not err? I am the way. Would thou not be deceived? I am the truth. Would
thou not die? I am the life. John 14.6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. So may I say unto thee, Would thou
not have thy body perpetually detained under the power of darkness and
dominion of the grave: John 11.25.
Lo, He says, I am the resurrection and the life. Believe on me, let me be
thy spiritual food, feed on me by faith; for He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, bath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

If Christ dwell in us now by faith spiritually, Ephel. 3.17.
he will surely dwell in us hereafter by glory eternally: and that after an
admirable manner, which now we know not; 1 John 3.2.
For now we are sons of God, says St. John, but it does not yet appear what
we shall be. It is not here revealed unto us, we are unworthy to know it, we
are unable to comprehend it. Only thus much we are taught out of the divine
Oracles, that in the stole of glory, we shall see God clearly, face to face,
we shall with unspeakeable joy and delight ever behold Him, who is the blessed
life of man, says St. Augustine; Aug de civit. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 26.
whom to behold is life, and the life is eternal.

CHAP. XXXV. Of different perfection in glory.
Spiritual gifts and graces are diversely dispensed by Christ, and given to the
Saints on earth after a different manner: For to every one is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7.
Thus much the Apostle instancing in some particular graces, insinuates
touching faith, the prime cardinal virtue, he says, Romans 12.3, 6.
God deals to every man the measure of faith: and a proportion of faith: and
entreating of chastity and continency, he said, Every man has his proper gift
of God, 1 Cor. 7.7.
one after this manner and another after that. When as the Apostles said to our
Savior, if the case was such, it was not good to marry; He answered them, all
men cannot receive this saying, Math. 19.11. Ambr. de voc. gent. li. 2. c. 3.
save they to whom it is given. Hereupon St. Ambrose says, Multis modis and
innumer abilibus differentijs, gratia opera and dona variantur; inque ipsis
singulis generibus muneruns dissimiles sunt gradus and impares quantitates: The
gifts and works of grace are varied after many manners and innumerable
differences: and in the several kinds of gifts, there be unlike degrees and
unequal quantities. Now as there are many different degrees of grace in the
militant Church: so there be also many different degrees of glory in the
triumphant Church, Ambr. de bon. mort. cap. 11.
according to that of St. Ambrose, Erit or do diversus claritatis and gloria,
sicut erit meritorum: There shall be a different order of excellency and glory,
as there shall be of merits. Hence it was that St. Augustine upon those words
of Christ, Aug. in Joan. cap. 14. v. 2.
in my Fathers house are many mansions, says, they are diversae meritorum in
una vita aterna dignitates; diverse dignities of merits in one eternal life.
And St. Hierome says, Multae sunt mansiones apud patrem, Hieren. advers.
Pelag. li. 1.
quia and merita diversa; there are many mansions with the Father, because
there are diverse merits.

Here note by the way that St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Hierome, and other
of the ancient Fathers, by merits so freque^tly mentioned by them, understand
good works done of faith, as we do generally take them; So as Bucer professed
in the conference at Ratisbon, Bucer. apud Cassand. Coufut. art. 6.
saying, If by to merit, the Fathers and others understand, to do through
faith of the grace of God good works, to which God has promised and will
render a reward. To use the word in this sense, we will not condemn. Wherein
we wholly agree with St. Bernard, who explaineth the matter thus: Bern. de Gra.
and lib. Arb.
Those which we call our merits, if they be properly called, are certain
seminaries of hope, incentiues to charity, signs of secret predestination,
presages of future felicity, the way to the kingdom, not the cause of
reigning there.

Now correspondent to our good works in this life shall our eternal reward be
in the other life: Math. 16.27.
For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels:
and then shall he reward every man according to his works. This our blessed
Savior, the truth, has taught us; and after him his chosen vessel of mercy
and trumpet of grace, has delivered unto us the same infallible verity,
namely, Romans 2.6.
that God will render to every man according to his deeds. So that such as our
measure of grace is in this life, such shall our measure of glory be in the
other world: such as our virtues and good works be here, such shall our
happiness and felicity be there. Let us then, not be weary of well doing,
knowing that in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. All that shall be
judged worthy in Christ to enter into the heavenly Paradise, shall have
perfection of all parts and essentialls of glory, aque, non aequaliper, one as
well as another, not equally in degree one with weather. All who have
faithfully labored in Christ, Vineyard, shall at the end of the day receive
their penie, aqualem mercedem, vita, non gla^ia, Ambr. in Lus. cap. 15.
an equal reward of life, not of glory, according to St. Ambrose: for suppose,
faith he, there is not grace, one reward, diversum tan^^n bra^iu^^ violeri^^
est, yet the prize of victory is diverse.

It is true that in respect of the object participated, one is not more blessed
than another; all beholding one God the fountain of life. But in regard of the
disposition of the subjects participating, one shall be more happy than
another, because one shall see God more clearly than another, one shall love
God more perfectly and ardently than another, and that in so large and ample
latitude, as we are not now able to comprehend.

The Apostleteacheth us, 1 Cor. 15. ve. 41, 42.
that there is one glory of the Son, another of the Moon, and another of the
^^ines for one star differs from another star in glory. So is the
resurrection of the dead.

They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the fir^^^^ at: Dam. 12.3.
and they that turn many unto rightenasnesse, as the stars for ever and
ever.

Now although every star be perfect in it self, yet in comparison of a
greater it may want perfection, Hieron. advers. Pelag. lib. 1.
as St. Hierome notes: So although every glorified Saint shall be perfect in it
self, yet may such compared to others more glorious want perfection, not of
parts or essentialls, but of degrere of glory: But all shall be perfect, all
according to their proper measure and capacity, shall b^fully f^^led with
glory, none shall want, all (...) enough, Prosp. de vita (...). 1. cap. 4.
all shall have sufficient, Quia singulie prampia suasufficientia erunt, and
capere ampl^^ (...) am perfecti non p^terint. Every (...) shall be sufficient
for them, and being (...) perfect, they shall not be able to receive any more,
says St. Prosper.

As many vessels of diverse quantities dipped into the Ocean will all be filled,
but every one according to their proper quantity. Or as diverse guests at a
feast are fully satiated and filled, yet all do not eat alike, and receive the
same quantity, but every one according to the strength and measure of their
stomach: So shall it be with the Elect in the kingdom of God, in the day of
the Son of man, that day of glory: all shall have satietie of heavenly
delights and pleasures, but every one according to their capacity and measure.
During their pilgrimage on earth, they walked on patiently in the way of good
works; they hungered and thirsted after righteousness; but then shall they be
satisfied with life, righteousness and glory. How (...) redeemed them with his
sacred blood, will now satiate them with the bread of life, and inebriate them
with the wine of his love. And as the sweet singer of Israel speaks, Psalm.
36.8, 9.
He will abundantly satisfy them with the fatness of his house: and will make
them drink of the ^^^er of his pleasures: for with him is the fountain of
life, and in his light shall they see light. They shall see the light which
shall never decay, enjoy the life which shall never have an end. For they shall
ever behold Him, who is the light and the life, who is all perfection, all
glory, all felicity, all eternity, who is all in all.

To that all sufficient being, who is his own eternal being, and the being of
all other (...), who is Alpha and O^^ega, the beginning and the ending, the
first and the last; To the Creator of the world, the glory of the Angels, the
light and life of men; To that infinite fountain of love, which has loved us
with an ever lasting love in Christ the son of his love; To the Father of
mercies, the God of all grace, peace and consolation, be ascribed of us all
goodness, wisdom, power, praise, honor, glory, adoration, thankesgiving,
for all his blessings in Jesus Christ, now and in all ages for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Perlegi Librum h^nc, dignumque judico qui typis mandetur.

Tho. Weeks R. P. Epo.
Land. Capel. domest.

