Onosandro Platonico, of the General Captain, and of his office, translated
out of Greek into Italyan, by Fabio Cotta, a Romayne: and out of Italian into
Englysh, by Peter QWytehorne

Imprinted at London, by Willyam Seres.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum, Anno. 1563.

TO THE HIGH AND mighty Prince, Thomas Duke of Northfolke, Earl Marshall of
England, knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of the Queens
Majesty's priny Counsel, Peter VVhitehorne, wyssheth long life with perpetual
felicity.
What great commoditye and profytte (right worthy Prince) has always
redounded to the weal publykes and governors of the same, which in warlike
discipline have chiefly delited, and taken greatest care, and to what excellent
fame and renowine, it has always brought and exalted (yea from vile and
abject fortune) those that have most trauayled and endeavored them selves
therein, whereby also women, have made notable and wonderful conquestes, of such
as have little regarded Marshiall knowledge, the Historye of the Amazons, with
infinite other, does manifestlye and plainly declare. And specially the same
of the Romans, who first from poor shepeherdes, through their prudent skill
in feats of Arms, so increased their kingdom, and Monarchy, that in short
time, they became Lords, and Emperors of all the world. For by such science
undoubtedly, not only foreign Countries are brought in subjection, but also
their own proper kingdoms are kept from outrageous cruelty, and ravenous
spoil of the ennemies: and good laws there establyshed, are quietly executed
upon offenders, without rebellious disturbaunce. And surely the coming up of
the Turks and the occasion of their marvelous victoryes, is well to be
understand to have happened by no other means, but only, for that there is
no nation in all the world, with whom they have warred, which in all kind of
Marshiall affairs and doings, so much resembles, and imitateth the famous
antiquity, as they: which partlye I am able to witness, by that I have seen,
when I was in Constantinople, and in Turkey. Which thing consideringe with my
self, and of late happening into my hands, the copy of this book, called
Onosandro Platonico. Who many years agon, most excellentlye in the Greek
tongue, wrote of the office of a General Captain, which long agon I did
translate out of the Italion tongue for mine own exercise, and for the great
delight that I have always had in the studiynge of the art of war, I have
thought good at this present, for the common utility of my countrymen, who
delight in warlyke skilfulnes, to sufter the same to be publyshed in printe. In
which book is to be found, as good aduises, and counsels, for a Captain, or
man of war, as can possibly be invented or imagined. Wherefore, for as much
as your Grace, right noblye and valiauntly, has heretofore executed the
office of a General, wherein also the worthy acts of your Noble
Graundfather, is of most shynynge and famous remembrance, I could not devise
with my self, unto whom this my labor and travail, was more meet to be
dedicated unto, then to your Grace, who in Marshiall feats, and in the
profounde knowledge thereof, is thought most expert. And although my
translation herin, be very rude and gross, yet because my good will with the
effect and worthiness of the matter is chiefly to be wayed and considered, my
trust is, that according to your accustomed gentelnesse, you will accept the
same in good part: consideringe that gross phrases, cannot in equitye maime a
good meaning, no more, then the exellent intent of ye laws of this Realm, is
any whit abased through the unsavory language, wherein they are written.

ONOSANDRO PLAtonico, of the General Captain, and of his office, unto Quintus
Veranius, a Roman.
THe Art and manner of rydinge, of hunting, of fyshing, and finally of
tillynge the fields, I judge ought to be written to those, which in such
studies are wont inespecially to delyght. But the way to come to consider the
office of a General Captain, I suppose (O Quintus Veranius) that above al
other, is most conuenyent to the Romans: and chyeflye to those, which of
reputacion, and Senate authority, be superiors to others. And likewise it is
meet for such, as by the judgment of Augustus Caesar, and for the true
knowledge that they have of such an office, and for the singular experience of
thinfinyte and most weighty affairs, and also for the dignitye and worthynes
of their predecessors, have had fortune to succeed the honorable degrees,
as well of consuls, as of Captains: Therefore I judge, that to such manner of
men, ought to be dedicated like work: but not after such sort, as though
they knew not how to rule and govern Armies: For in deed the cause why I am
moved to write, is specially for this respect, seeing that many, the more they
be ignorant, and less expert of things, making of other men's doings seldom
just judgment, so much the more presumptuously, they continuallye perceuer,
both to reprebend and to slander good captains: Where those truly that have
experience and knowledge of things, with good respect, beholdinge the worthy
and honorable enterprises of other, have with high praise, commended them.
Wherefore although I know that ye matter which I have purposed to wrie may
seem to many to have been a great while agon heretofore thought upon and fully
known: yet for all that, I will not leave of to bring to an end my
determination: but rather more pro^ptly I shall persevere to proced forwards, as
he that not only may seem to give instructions profitable to Captains, but
also as one that knows after what sort they ought to command. And I shall
worthily repute my self happy, if I be thought mete to manifest with words,
those things, which the Romans by means of their virtue and of their
industry, most valiantlye brought to pass. For the which thing if I may
understand that this my pains are commended and approved of like men: I shall
then be able to say that in this present work, is contained the counsels of
renowned Capitains in this happy time of peace. For which cause, if no other
thing, at lest wise the same may principally advertise and learn you, for
what occasion has happened unto some, often times most unfortunately to
fayght, and to fall into misery, and how other having brought to good effect
their affairs, have got illustrious fame and immortal glory. As in the end
the same singular ercellencye of the Romans, has clerelye made manifest: for
that never King, nor City, nor yet, never Nation, could not come to obtain
greater, nor to the like equal greatness of their Empire. After such sort,
that now so long time semes, that continual so great largenes of dominion,
they have kept most constantlye, stedfastlye, and sure. Nor I cannot with any
manner of reason persuade my self, that it has happened either by chance, or
fortune, that over passing the confines of Italye, the name and Empire might
have been extended, to the vttermoste parts of the world: but that rather it
has come to pass, by prudence by counsel, and by the feats of war, and also
by the famousnes, and by the glory of acts most valiauntly done. And in deed,
where as we ought to desire to have fortune favorable to our enterprises,
notwithstanding it is not to be judged, that she has rule over every thing,
and that she is Lady in all matters. And as they that attribute all infelicitye
only to fortune, and not unto the negligence and error of Captains, be
fools and ignorantes, so likewise be those, which things directly and with
order done, assign it only unto fortune, and nothing at al unto virtue, and
to the diligence of the Captain. And surely it is a token of a malicious, and
unjust man, either altogether to clear him from every fault that has evil
ministered the publyke affairs, imputinge it to fortune, or to deprive him from
deserved praise, the which valiantly and with industry, has overcome and
brought to good pass his desire, judging that the glory of the enterprise well
and valiauntly executed, ought to be attributed only unto fortune. But almost
every man, being inclined to give confidence to them that declare or write
those things, of the which they be erpert, albeit that it seem they rehearse
things high and difficult to be done, and on the contrary part, cannot be
brought to give credit to those that show them any thing, in the which they
have not ben exercised, although it be neither difficulte, nor incredible:
Therefore I suppose it shall be necessary for me, first to tell you, that what so
ever in this book I have to write of the Captain, and of the aduertysementes
of war, has been approved with most manifest experience of things, and in
especially of those, which were patrons, and Princes, of the name of the
Romans, whose excellent virtue without doubt, amongst all nations, by the
consent of all men, even to this time, has obtained highest dignity. Then in
this my little book, there is not to be comprehended any thing done
unadvisedly, in haste, at all adventures, nor rashelye: but that which in
variety of things, the Romans with sage and firm counsel egregiouslye
wrought and approved. The which not only had true knoweledge of that ye was to
be don against the enemy: but gravely did forsee that they might not in any
manner of wise take harm. Nor it shall never be found, that they have used
other then a sure order, and just occasion to faight. I have therefore gathered
from these fountains every thing ye I have written: Albeit that I am fully
persuaded, that many would desire, that all that which of the^ might be spoken
about such matter, should be esteemed rather their own proper invention, then
taken of other: as they, who believe they should attain to greater praise,
where should appear that of them such things has been first found and
publyshed: then if openly they should confess it, not to be theirs, and to
have n^de of other Authors to attribute it. Notwithstanding for this self
same occasion, I do think to get praise and commendacion: for as much as like
as he the which peradventure went to the wars, where he has written the
valiant Acts of other, ought not to be deprived of glory, he having left
written unto the posteritye, not those things, that with his proper force he
had found and executed, but that which other had done, even so I suppose not
to be a little praised, and commended plainlye confessyng these things not to
be invented by me: yea by such occasion I may seem not unjustly to go
about to excel all other, where I ought to report the praise of other men
without envy, and truth, without disprayse, and without any manner of blame.

Of electynge a Capytayne.
I Say then, that a General captain ought to be chosen without having any
respect unto his stock, or unto his predicessors, or unto goods of fortune: the
one of the which things is the eustome observed in the choosynge of Priests,
the other in creating the presidents of plays, and public feasts. But such
a man is to be sought, who is temperate, continente, sobre, abstinent, and
not excessive in eating and drynking, pacient in travail, of wit prompt, not
covetous, neither young, nor old, and that he have children, if such a one may
be had, and to be a fair speaker, of good name and same, and of much
reputacion. The cause why he ought to be temperate, is, lest being inlured and
given to pleasure, he do forsake the care of things, that be of most great
importance. Continent it behooves him to be, the which has been preferred to
ye gouerninge of so much importance: for that if the vyolence of an
unbridled mind, chaunse to have power and liberty to do what so ever shall
please him, it is after such sort with wilfulness overwhelmed, that it
cannot easily be refrayned. I would have him also to be sobre, to the end
that more commodiously, he might be vigilant in ye affairs of so great weight.
For that in the time of night, by quietness of mind, the counsels of captains
exammed, more perfectly may the^ be confirmed. The cause that he ought to be
abstinent and content with simple fare: is, for as much as the preparyng of
diishes full of delicatenes, and the too much diligence and thought about
meats, corrupts and drowneth the mind after such sort, that the time which
ought to have been spent in the business that is to be done, by the dilicatenes
of the capitaines, most vainly is consumed. The cause why he ought to be most
painful, is, for that principallye it does apperteine to the Captain, that he
in the turmoyles of the war, may be the last to be werye.

He ought to be quick witted, for as much as it behooves him to be swift, and
(as Homer says) flyinge, to thend that with his thought, he may most quicklye
discurse every thing, and with his mind make judgment, and as it were
divine, and a far of, forsee that which is to come. Least whiles there happen
accidents, neither foreseen nor looked for, the Captain be constrained
suddenly, and unprovided for, to take counsel, and the safegarde of things to
commit most fearfully, to the discretion of fortune. It behooves him not to be
couerous nor desireful of gain. For surely of this vice he ought most
principallye to take heve. For as much as, he that is not given to pass much
of gifts, of Silver, and gold, may most honorably have the charge of such
doings. And out of doubt, there be some the which without any whit fearing,
for high courage and lustynes of body, were apt to wythstand the armies and
power of enemies: notwithstanding (they become most vile) whilst they be
drawn with the vnsaciablenes of gold, the which is a weapon of so much
might to take, and as it were with lively force, to pull the victory out of
such men's hands, and to give it to other. I have said that the Capitain must
be neither old nor young, for that the one, is to much obstinate not to believe,
the other is weak in doings, and neither the one, nor the other is mete for
the rule of things. Wherefore, me thinks, that the young man is to be refused,
to the end that by evil chance vndescretelye through he overmuch boldness he
happen not to commit error. On the contrary, it is not fit to admit the old
manne, least he for his natural weakness, be not sufficient. For the which
cause, let us judge it best that age, that is in the mids between the one,
and the other: because that then, there is force and strength, the which is not
as yet spent nor consumed with age: and prudence is found in him, that is not
very young. And surely if any manne in this thing will approve the lustines
and strength of the body, without the prudence of the mind: or likewise the
wit without strength. I am certain he shall do nothing that shall be well: for
as much as like as the body, that lacks prudence, is little worth to
counsel, even so the mind of ye strength of body, as from ministers abandoned
cannot commodiusly take in hand to do any attempt, nor with profit bring it to
effect. But he that has both these qualities, shall be mete to execute every
enterprise. For that to him, as freely beloved of all men, both with inteere
affection of mind, when he shall command, most redely they will obey, geuinge
full trust unto his words, and to what soever peril he shall put them, the
one in trial of the other, will all be ready to help.

We have thought good that he ought to be chosen captain, that has children,
but for all that he ought not to be refused that has none, so that otherwise
he be strong and prudent. If he have children that be as yet but of tender
years, they retain altogether bound the mind of the father, and as ostages
given to his country, have force to kindle in their father a marvelous faith
and benevolence toward it, and as it were with sharp spurs to prick him,
and to inflame his mind against the enemies: and if his children be now come
to fuller age, with weapons, with fidelity, with counsel, with diligence,
accompaniyng him in the trauayles and government, and faithfully seruinge in
secret things, they may unto a commonwealth bring much profit.

Why he ought to be a goodly speaker, is for that of this, concerning the
things that is to be entreated in the affairs of war, we judge there will
follow much utility. Consideringe that either having occasion to set men
in array to the battle, the Captain with fair words comfortinge the
Soldiers, easelye may persuade every one of them to despise al perils, and to
attend to the glorious enterprise: nor the sound of the trumpet, can so
much inflame the minds of men to take their weapons, and constrain them most
valiantly to faight, as the conuenyent, and according to the time, the sugared
talk of the Captain may move them, both unto great acts for the love of
virtue, and incorage them for the desire of glory, or else if need be, to
comeforte the minds afflicted for some overthrow had, his words shall be as a
medicine. Wherefore, for the benefit of the Host, for to lighten the heaviness
of accydentes, the Acomodate speakinge of the Captain, by most reason, is more
to be desired then the industry of surgeons, which follow the camp, only to
the end to heal wounds: for that they take no charge, but to cure the hurts:
But he with sweet and curteis manner of speakinge, comfort and most highly
makes glad the minds of the weak and afflicted. Besides all this, he
confermeth the minds of them that be whole, and retains them that be boldened.
Then how much more difficulte it is to heal the infirmities that is hid,
then those which may be both felt and seen, every manne knows. And like
as no City will never make army, nor send them without a Captain, and
determined government, even so neither ought the Captain to be chosen such a
one, that knows not, nor has not the grace in speakinge, and that lacks
the faceletie and vtteraunce of speech.

Last of all we said that it behooves to chose the Captain, that is esteemed
and of reputacion: for as much as the common people, have a custom il
willinglye to suffer to be subject to them who be of base condition, and that
have never gotten neither honor nor glory. And truly there is none, if by
compulsion he be not made, that will be content to follow that Captain, who he
knows to be of less worthiness then himself. Necessary it is therefore, that
he be famous and noble, and by the opinion of al men to be judged valiant. And
such a man of virtue, of stomach, and of manners, as we above have declared he
ought to be.

But as I hold oppinion, that no Captain is to be elected, having any respect
to riches: even so I judge the poor man is not to be refused, so that he be a
good man, and a valiant. For in deed, I suppose not that any manne for the
defaulte of fortune, whether he be poor or rich, deserves either to be praised
or dispraised. And surely every man that is of abillitie and rich, and besides
that adourned with bountifulness, so much differs from the pore, as an
armor garneshed with silver, and trimmed with gold, excels that which is
made of iron and brass, and that lacks such kind of setting forth. And sure
it is, that the one and the other, may cover and likewise defend the Soldier:
but the one semes to be more excellent then the other, only for the giltinge
and ornament that outward is adjoined.

It is needful likewise, to have advertisement not to chose any, the which
attends to gather money, and continuallye has his mind upon luker, and
altogether is subject to gain, albeit he seem above all other never so
abundant and rich, as does every sort of marchaunts, banckers and such of
like profession: for as much as necessarily, they be death, and of little
stomach, as those that with all their study attend to every small gain, and
gyues themselves in pray to money. Whereby it happens that there can never
grow in them, desire of any honorable, illustreous, or noble enterprise.

Surely in a Captain, I judge that it is to be made account of, the
reputacion and Nobility of his predecessors, if that chance in him to he
found, but where no such thing is, it ought not to be greatly passed upon:
neither for such cause, no man is to be reputed worthy to govern. And as in
horse we will consider their readiness, and not that which appears outwardly,
so I am of opinion, that judgment is to be made of the nobilitye of men. It is
verily, a foolish and strange thing not to consider who and what they be, unto
the which must be given commission to defend and to keep our Estate, and yet
to behold what they have been, and what their predecessors have done: as if
they which now so long agon are dead, might both defend and save us. Moreover,
it is a thing altogether unjust, and that in no manner of wife is convenient,
by order or law of Arms, to determine, that to them, the which have in some
affairs acquitted them selves valiant he given rewards and honors, not for
being borne of most noble parentage: and to judge afterward, that for a
Captain he ought to be chosen, the which only has his original of valiant
and noble progenitors, and not he that does trust in his own proper virtue,
wherein he excels, although he lack the glory and brauenes of his Auncestry
and stock. The which things joined unto virtue, such a captain I suppose
verelye, should be so much the more aduenturous: but where lacks his proper
virtue, I esteem him without any doubt, to be altogether vain and
unprofitable: yea, and by most reason it is to be thought, that they will
become better Captains, the which of illustrious and famous blood, cannot
much boaste, for as much as they, whom in the worthiness of their
forefathers, do trust, think for the self some renown of them, to be
honored, if sometime in their office, they commit any fault: such confidence
they have in the reputacion and name of their Ansetry: whereby it happens, that
oftentimes they more negligently govern. But these that have no manner of hope
in the glory of their Aunseters, and to who^ has not decended any spark of
worthiness, from their forefathers, whilst with their own proper solicitatenes
and industry, they desire unto the contrary of their vnknownes, to put in
light, their own proper acts, more warelye they procure things, and in the
end with more prompt and glad mind dispose them selves to every peril. And
like as they that by inheritance have not had left them great abundance,
nor rich patrimony, more circumspectlye will keep their goods, then the
richer or welthier will do, for as much as they with all diligence and labor,
will enforce them selves to increase always: even so those, which can not
serve them selves of the fame and glory of their fathers, as a thing of
inheritance: by all manner of ways, seek to attain reputacion, which shall be
of their own proper endeavor.

We ought therefore to chose the captain, valiaunte, of noble blood,
aduenturus, rich, but yet nevertheless the poor is not to be despised and
refused, so that he, although he be not borne of illustrious progenitors be
famous, and esteemed, for his own proper virtue. And after that he is elected
and confirmed in such degree, be pleasant, gentle, and chereful to them that
will come to his presence: notwithstanding he ought not in every place to
every man show him self so benign and gentell: least he happen to be despised,
neither so proud, and stout, that he move other to bear him hatred. And that
he do this to the intent that with to much license and benignitye, he cause not
the Army to be dissolute, or with sharpenes and severity, make them alianate
their minds, and to become enemies.

Of chusynge the heads of the Soldiers.
THE Capytayne must elect and ordein the Decurians, A Decurian is a (...)
captain of ten men A Centurian is a captain of a C. man
the Centurians, and ordinatelye the other heads of Souldyers, according as
the thing shall require, and as he shall think to be needful. And of these
to take and chose those, whose virtue is well known: and that be likewise
strong and bold, and faithful to their country. And in making such
election, it makes no matter to take both noble and rich, (for as much as there
is not to be chosen only, one or two) that amongst a few, and those that be
of good and honest manners, the election may be the easier. When specially in
distributinge with order, and lastely the number of the Decurians, of the
Centurians, and finallye of the other heads, the richest, and the most noble,
are most nedeful. And surely it is of much vtility to a commonwealth to set
forward ye nobility at such time when an enterprise is to be taken in hand, in
the doing whereof is required seleretie. Likewise also, the commodity of money
is greatly to be desired, when it is necessary to give some thing to the
Soldiers, and to spend liberallye. For that the liberality of Princes and
leaders, although it be but a little, if with benignity, liberally, and at
time conuentent, it be used, it may get most great benevolence of the
multitude: and from thenceforth the most assured fidelity of the Soldiers
gotten, it does ad unto it securety and constantenes in the enterprise, seeing
in deed every man hopes to obtain greater things, bearinge them selves
valiantlye in fayghtinge, when they know that in little things, the
liberality of the Captain comes of the proper benignitye of his own mind.

Of Counselors.
Besides all this, it is necessary that the Captain have with him some
Counselors and companions, with who^ he may deliberate upon every matter. And
they being made partakers of the counselles, must in time and place tell their
judgments. And let him chose them either before he purpose to do any thing,
that they may follow him, and the army for to do their office, or else after
that he shall be set forward, to call before the day of battle, of the most
noblest, and of greatest grauitye, and to cause them to come unto him, the
which together with him, ought of every thing to debate. For as much as al
those things, that any man of him self has found, he may alone by him
self with study examine, but he ought not straight ways to approve and
confirm it: for that our thoughts and Councels, as a thing unto the which we
have a natural affection, if of others faithful counsel it be not helped,
easily it may beguile us, and many times it is found to be full of errorres:
contrarywyse, those things, that by judgment and opynion of other be aproued,
does assure the mind, and keeps things stable and sure. Notwithstanding, no
man ought so little to trust on him self, that always he be of opinyon
weak and doubtful, nor of him self so much to presume, that he think other
cannot find council better then his. For that it shall be necessary, that he,
which is always subject to the council of other, having altogether
distruste of him self, come to change infinite things, whereby in waightye
matters, both hurt and incomoditie does follow, as likewise he must needs,
either always or often times commit errorre, that not hearing the advice of
other, every thing does atribute to him self alone.

Of the war that is to be taken in hand.
I Judge that the war ought to be begun cyrcumspectly and with prudence, as a
sure foundation of things, whereby to all men, may as it were most clearly
appear, to be for good cause taken in hand. That for the same they may hope
that God will be gracious and fanourable. And then, the soldiers with boldness
more gladlier and more redier will go whether so ever thou list to execute thy
commandments: as they the which does well know, that they ought to do
iniurye to no man of their own will and desire, but when they are provoked and
constrained, to take them to their Armor. For the which thing with all their
force, and (...) stomachs, they will (...) forward (...) have to (...), those
that think peradventure unjustly to have begone the war, will have
suspision that god will be against them displeased and contrary, for which only
opinion although there happen not any thing vnfortunatelye, yet they will
stand with fear and terrorre. Wherefore unto a Captain it is convenient that
of those things, the which he either requires, or being of other required,
that he do not grant them, first by mouth, and afterward by way of
Ambassadors to entreat thereof: to the intent that either demanding just
things, or denying the unjust, he may seem to be provoked to rise in arms.
Finally it is good to call to witness god and men, that he has not undertaken to
make war for despite, and unadvisedly, as though to him there could not
happen those things, which often times are wont to chance to them, that make
war: nor also for that he for an obstinate mind covers to do harms and to
ruinate the people. And in deed where not only in the buyldinge of houses and
walls, it is mete to cast (...) foundation, to the end (...) weak
beginninges, that (...) thou ^^st edefie (...), wise with much more dilygence
and advertisement, greater surenes, and establishme^t, is to be used in the
beginnings of war, before men be co^ducted abroad, and an Army levied. For
as much as the weak beginninges of things, cannot sustain ye weight that is
laid upon them, but easily oppressed, and of every accedent beaten, they will
fall, and altogether go to ruin. And therefore it is needful to take insample
by the skillful master of the ship, who before he go out of the haven to
enter into the sea, does furnishe the ship, of all manner of things
necessary, and as much as he can possible, does arm and deck it, and
afterward settes him self to sailing. Becaufe it is a thing reproachful and
perilous, to make a show of moving war after such sort, for which by sea and
by land, men are conducted, and afterward in a moment in the preparation
thereof to stay, and in the midst of the course, and also in the force it
self, to turn (as the common saying is) the tail, and most shamefully to
retire, or else folishly to put in peril the state of al things, and to be of
every man mocked, not only for lightness, but also being despised, for that ye
people will repute thee of small worthiness, thou shall be esteamed subject to
al kind of injury. After which will follow yt thy enemies (albeit they have not
suffered any harm, thou minding to have hurt them, but having not been able,
both for vileness, and for lack of wisdom) will bear unto thee, cruel and
mortal hatred.

Of conducting forth the Army
Having first purged every public blot and fault, and made clean every
private error and viciousnes, and such purgation of sins being done with
prayers and sacrifices, as by way of religion the holy law has commanded, or
as it is ordained of the priests themselfes, the army may then be conducted
out, which always must be led in battle ray, although it have not as yet to
come to the hands with thenemies: and in like manner when it has occasion to
pass through Countries which are of length many days journey, albeit that they
be quiet and peasable. For as much as, after this sort, the soldiers will
accustom them selves to observe the array, and specially every man will learn
to stand in his place, and to follow their leaders and Co^stables. The which
thing much more carefully must be observed when it shall be necessary to
march through the dominions of the enemies, to the end that by sudden
assaults, thy soldiers be not constrained at every step, to rise in a rumor,
and confusedlye to run here and there; and the one to go contrary to the other,
and finally coming about thee, in diverse manners, not to be able to do any thing
of any profit. For which cause, through every place, thou ought to march
with the army in battle ray, whereby the soldiers may be made more apt and
spedy to make a voyage, and quick and ready to resist if need shall be: they
having learned to follow yt ansignes, to attend to co^mau^deme^ts, and to behave
themselves valiantly, according to their place and order. If thou lead thy army
by such places, thou ought to bring the^ close together, and retire them in
little space, so that by the straightnes, and by ye facilitye of enlarging, thou
be not constrained to extend thy self into too much length. Which fashion of
marching semes to give power to the enemy, to assault co^modiously their
adversaries and according to the occasion to hurt the^, he knowing to be taken
from them the commodity to defend their selves. For as much as, either with
more large order, coming against thee, the which is wont to hapen (both the
horns being compassed) it is like that he shall easly disorder thee, and put
the to flight: or else giving yt charge on ye flank, in ye midst of ye squadro^,
having already broken ye order, suddenly stop thy men from being able to go
forward, being closed in the arays of their enemies. Wherefore minding to retire
into a main battle, and to turn to resist, they shall be able to do little good,
as those that have used such a maine battle, which for having not any
thickenes, is nothing strong, but rather altogether weak. Finally if the enemy
give the assault behind on ye last band, thou shall be brought to the very
same necessitye, after such sort, that not only it shall be seen that he may be
able to take away the power to resist, but also be able to give thee most
manifest overthrow. But if thou tourning backward, have stomach to faight,
thou shall be oppressed of the self same difficulty, which we showed, might be
impediment to them that be placed in the front, for as much as thou may be
suddenly compassed about and taken. Moreover, it is wont to happen whilst the
thing goes not even, that thou can not easelye give succor to that part of
thy men which are beaten and weary. For as much as if thou call the first, to
succor the last, or else contrariwise call the last to give help to them that
be in the front, it semes that the same, vncomodiously, and to late, may be
brought to effect, having need both to these, and to those, to run up and down
by a long space, and distaunce of ground. For the which thing, it is always
better, and more sure, and more easy to govern the bands that march close
and square, then thin and long: inespecially for as much as, to an army that
marches with the bands long, often times is wont to happen, that of something
seen doubtful and uncertain, there grows suddenly fear and terror. Because
sometime it has chau^sed, ye men decending from high places and hilly, in the
plain, to places expedite and open, and the foremost seeing the last of the self
same band, by a very great distance to come after, supposing them selves to be
assauted of some ambushe of enemies, it has been seen that they have suddenly
turned to faight, and afterward: no otherwise then as with enemies, have with
their own fellows gone together by the ears. The victuailes, the caryages,
and all the remnant of provision of thinstrumentes of war, I judge should be
placed in the midst of the army: except the places that are left behind, be so
safe, that without danger such things may be carried and conducted after the
army: but if it shall be otherwise, the hindemost part would be guarded and
defended of the most valiant soldiers, as also is to be don in ye foremost
because ye unawares may happen many things. Likewise there ought to be sent
before, certain men on horsbacke, ye which should go inuestigating, and spiing
where they may pass, inespecially having occasion to make voyages by
mou^tains, by woods, by places enclosed with hills, and by most great deserts.
Because that many rymes, ye enemy having opportunity to lay an ambush priusly
by ye passage, and to assault his adversaries, which little thereof took head
has easily broken and altogether ruinated them. The which ambushes if our
Captain by way of explorators shall forsee, with a little pain having
prevented ye council of the enemy, he may attain a most great name of prudence
and likewise save his army. But the open plains, which because they may be
esely seen without sending before any spy, thou with thine own eyes, may take heed. For as much as in the day, dust moved and lifted up in the air, does
show the stirring of ennemies, and in the night, the fires and the flame,
signifies their camp to be near.

When thy men are to be conducted to make a voyage, and not for to faight, thou
ought to remove by day, if peradventure some thing do not constrain thee,
for the which thou think good to go in have, to come before thenemy, where
in deed for such occasion, thou may remove by night, so that thou know, that
safelye it may be done.

When thou come in place where thou art constrained straight way to come to
the hands with thy enemy, and to faight, lead thy men not in haste, but
softly, and enforce them not to make to long a journey: forasmuch as, labor
taken before men come to faight, is seen most often times, vainly to consume
the force and strength of their bodies. But if thou must march with thy
men in the Country of thy fryendes, it is needful that thou command thy
Soldiers, that in no manner of wise, they touch or mar any thing, but rather
altogether to refrain: consyderyng that Soldiers trustyng in their weapons,
and having liberty to do what shall please them, will favor nothing;
inespecially for that the sight of things that please men, out of doubt are
wont most dau^gerously to lead ignorant, and vnwareful men, to desire them,
and with the sweetness of robbing, to entice them to do al manner of mischief.

Whereunto if thou prouydest not, thy friends and confederates, for every small
occasion will become enemies. Notwythstandyng, the country of thy adversaries,
thou shall suffer thy soul diers openly to ruinate, destroy, burn, and
consume, because by the dearth of victualles, and lack of money, wars are
wont to diminyshe, and to be extinguished: and contrariwise, through abundance
and riches, they are nourished and maintained.

But first before thou suffer thy enemies country to be destroyed, thou
should give advice to thy enemies, threatening them, what thou will do, if
they will not yield unto thee: for that the peril of the misery prepared, and
the fear of the ruin looked for, often times constraines men to grant many
things, the which at the first, by no manner of mean had been possible to
have brought them to do.

But after that they have once received the hurt, they will make little
account of thee, and despise al other things, as though thou could do
them no more harm.

Albeit, if thou know surely, that in the country of thy ennemies, thou
must tarry long with thy army, suffer to be taken, and spoiled only those
things, which thou see not to be greatly prsfitable unto thee: but the same
which is to be thought, may be preserved for thy commodity, command openly
unto thy Soldiers, that they forbear.

Having made ready, and set in order thy men, tarrye not long in thy own
country, nor yet in the same of thy confiderates: lest that consuming al thy
provision, it seem not that thou be of greater hurt to thy friends, then to thy
enemies: but rather conducte quickly thine army, into the adversaries
country, whereby if it be fertyle and abundant, there may be taken at thy need,
most plenteouslye those things that thou list. But if it be otherwise, thou
shall cause to be known, that ye sekest to provide most lovingly, both for
the wealth and profit of thy friends. And where the Country of the enemies is
fertyle, and aboundaunt, there may be taken thereof much commoditye, and great
profit.

Besides this, thou ought to care with all diligence, that in thy camp,
both by Sea, and Land, victual may be safelye brought, for as much as by
such means, the Merchants will endeavor with all dilygence, to bring all
those things, which for the use of an Army shall be necessary.

Moreover, when thou must pass through straight places, or must cause the
Army to march through rough and hilly ways, then it is convenient
principallye for the preservation of thy things, to send before some to take
and keep the highest places, the rocks, the foordes, and other enclosed
ways, to the end, least the enemies goinge before thee, come not to take them,
and so easelye to keep the passage from thee. The contrary thou ought to
enforce thy self to do, when thou understand that thy enemy must pass
through such roughe, and straight places. Seeing that not only, thou have to
take heed not to receive any harm, but also to enforce thy self to turn
against the enemy the very same deceites, whereby he thinks to deceive thee
withal. And like as when thou purposest to go against him, it is requisite to
solicitate the matter, to be able to be before him, and at unawares to oppress
him, even so with all dyligence, thou ought to provide to let him every way,
if thou understand that he entendes to come against thee.

Of lying in the field.
THy tents being pitched in the country of the enemies, although thou have
not delyberated long to tarry in the same place, yet there must be out of hand
made the diches and the tre^ch. Forasmuch as after this sort, thou shalt
stand more fortefied. Whereby the sudden invasions and craftye assaults of
the enemies, may more safelye be withstode.

And moreover, thou may choose soldiers, to whom charge must be given, that
night and day, they keep watch and ward in the Camp, albeit that it be known
that the enemy be far of.

But if thou be not let of the enemies: and purposest longer in the same
place to keep the Camp, either to give the spoil to their Country, or to
watch a more comodious oportunetie, to take occasion to hurt them, then choose
those places where thou intendest to pitche the camp, that it be not durty,
nor through other ocasio^ vnbolsome, for that the nature and the situation of
such places, through the corrupt vapors, and through the stink that they
send forth, diverse infirmyties and pestilence, is wont to be induced, and
engendered: whereby who so ever is infected, is grievously afflicted, and many
may happen to dye, after such sort, that dying always a great sort, not only
every day the Army will diminish, but also through the debelity and melancoly
which they have, that remain alive, they will fall sick and languish beyond
measure.

And therefore wholesome and profitable it is, not to keep the army to long in
one place. Except it be that thou art constrained to remain, for occasion to
winter, and to aunyde the cold and the sharpenes of the air. Furthermore,
most great care is to be had, that the Tents and the Pauilions, be pitched
in order, after such sort, that thou maiste be thought to inhabits a place
like unto a little City. Forasmuch as otherwise, the euacuasions of bodies,
that long is made in one place, send forth corrupt vapors, the
contagiousnesse of which dispersed, comes to infecte the air nere about, and
lightly tourneth it, into a naughty unwholesome quality, by which continual
use, and necessary custom, we take diverse and perilous infirmities.

Of exercisynge the Soldiers.
WHen the Souldyers in the winter be at home, they ought to be excercised, and
with diverse masteris be made apt to fayght: so that neither ydlenes nor
sluggishnes, have at no time any place. Surely the standing in ydlenes and in
slugguishnes, makes the bodies to become weak and languished, and it yeldes
the minds altogether vile and fearful. For that also the minds of them, that
be most stout, do thereby become feeble, whilst they be taken by the flattery
of pleasures, and of continual use of delicatnes. For which thing, men ought
not much to absent them selves from actiuity, and from labor: Because, if
after idleness thou would constrain any to labor, they will not go to the
same very willingly, and going, they will not continue, as those which inured
with long slothfulnes, fear labor, and fly every safe enterprise, not as yet
made, and finally if to any place, they will go to attempt some act, suddenly
they will depart, and altogether distrusting themselves, cannot and will not
sustain labor. And therefore it is the office of a wise Captain, to ordain
quietly, and co^modiously to make ready those things, which he knows to be
profitable for them, whilst he is not compelled of any necessity to faight,
and when it semes that they stand in no manner of peril, nor any impediment
happen them that may let him to comaunde his soldiers, to do those things
for the exercise of their bodies, which the^ is not needful to serve against
the ennemy. Finally, every thing without peril that is committed to the
soldiers to do, as the same that instructs, teaches and makes them apt to
the true manner of faighting, may seem to have many convenient disports, and
recreations, yea and to them which with wearines be grieved.

Soldiers be kept in exercise, in this manner: let some of them be chosen, and
to every one be given the weapons, for such a thing convenient, and armed,
accustom them to keep the order, and learn never to forsake their own
place, and besides that, with taking head the one to the other, and calling
them often, and with familiar practice together to unite and to draw together
the^ selves, after such sort, that every man may learn and know in what
place and rank, every one is placed, and to stand ready to obey without
delay, their captains commandments. Besides this, ye soldiers according as
they shall be taught, must be instructed in knowing how to destend and bring
together the bands, and on the right hand, and on the left hand, to turn
them. Make them learn also according to the order, the tra^sferring of the
sqadro^ from place to place, and the moving the^ selves without confusion, and
the way to enlarge and draw together ye ranks, and finally the going forth,
and the returning now ye one, now the other, and the deuisions and
compartiments made by the Decurians: and the manner also to ingrose the ba^ds in
largenes, and to extend them in length, and to faight, of the one side, and of
the other, with battle divided in.ii. parts, inespecially when the last and
rescuing soldiers, tourning them about, do resist the enemies, who seek to
compass them. Last of all, it is needful, to admonyshe the soldiers, that
they stand attentyue to understand the signs, which by commandment of the
Captain, shall be given whilst they faight: and when the Trompette soundes to
retire, that with good order they do gather together, and a little and a little,
withdraw them from the batraile. And verily to them, which begin to
endeavor them selves to learn music, it is wont to chance, that at the
first where they should set their fingers in the holes of the instruments of
flutes, or in the stops of instruments with stringes, they set them clean
contrary, and use them without art, so that they make no Armonie: and likewise
scant extend them, and slowly move them. But they that by practice, exercise
and reason, be expert in such science, without any pain, either when it is
needful to give a little or much wind, or else with the finger to stop the
stringes, conveniently, and with commoditye, give and withholde the breath, and
with measure and quicknes move the hand, heretofore accustomed.

The very same happens to them that be rude, and that has not the
experience of the fears of war. In the beginning it semes that with travail
and difficulty, through many errors and long space of time it is before they
may be instructed and kept in battle raye. But so sone as they be taught and
made perfect, of them selves they will set them to the place, unto the
order, and to the thing that they have to do, every one of them wonderfully
inforsinge them according to their power, to make a fair and in all points a
well ordered muster.

The Army being learned and ordained after this manner: I would divide them
in two parts, and then without weapon bring them close together to fayght,
distributinge the light darts, and the slite partesans: and if paraduenture
there shall be nere some plowed field, let them faight with the cloddes of
earth, and let the soldiers use harnes of Bulls lether, if they may have it.
But if there were little hills or places, somewhat rougher then plain, and
likewise pendent, by commandment of the Captain, let there be appointed one
part of Soldiers, to every one of which, let there be given such sort of
weapon as is mete, and geuynge them selves to run, take those plates: and to
the contrary, let there be chosen of the other, to whom be given charge, that
with like weapons they enforce them selves from such places to drive away
those, that keep the high ground, and to enter their selves. Finally, the
fayght finished, let the Captain praise those the which without ever being
moved, have their places to them appointed, even to the last defended: or else
to praise them which having driven away the other, have entered their selves.
With this manner of faighting, finally with this emulacion, and with this
diligence, the army is conserved, and the bodies of soldiers purged, and
refreshed after such sort, that every one of them willingly will use every
sort of meats, and swetelye take every drinkinge, not caringe, any further,
to seek things neither greatly fine, or delicate, nor much exquisite.
Considering ye bunger the which comes upon men through the travail of labor,
and the drines that comes to them that through laboring sweet, how simple
so ever the meat and drink be, it will be thought to be a delicate dishe, and a
sweet drinkinge. Whereby the bodies of Soldiers become more lusty and nimble.
For that those which be wont to labor in heat and cold in the open air, as
men glad and ready, do submit them selves to travel, and also lustely
sustain it.

In the very same manner, should be exercised the horsemen. In the presence of
the Capytaine to be ordained the running in trial the one of the other, the
pursuing after, the flyinge, the incountringe, the charginge of their staves,
specially in places plain and large, or else at the foot of hills, as far as
the borses may go for the stepe and stony places: for in deed they ought not
to be enforced to run there, where it is to high and pending, or to much
stepe and downeright.

Of making the spoil.
THE spoil ought moderatelye to be made, and it is not to be borne withal,
that the Soldiers be suffered presumtuouslye to go to rauin and to spoil:
nor to let them go to much wandering, in the Country of the enemies,
inespecially if it be rich and aboundaunte, because by such lyberty, often
times most great hurtes has been seen to ensue. Where the enemy findinge such
occasion, and setting in order his people, assaulting the Soldiers disordered
and straggled for the sweetness of the pray, or else of the same laden and
let, has easily been of power to put them to flighte, and to break and to
oppress them, they being not able commodiouslye to use their weapons, nor to
give succor the one to the other. For which thing, those that without
commission of the Captain, do give them selves to spoil dispersed, let them
be punished with most grievous punishment, and shamed with notable reproach of
infamye.

But when thou determinest to send of thy men to get booties, thou must
togethers with those that shall go disarmed, send also horsemen and footmen
expert and valiant, whom may not a whit be occupied in the pray, but standing
continually in array, be always ready to succor the spoylers, after such sort,
that safely out of danger they may return.

And if peraue^ture sometime thy enemies spies happen to be taken, thou must not
use toward them all, one manner of sentence. If thou know certainly, that thy
men, and all thy preparation, be less then the same of thy enemy, then
command that straight way they may be killed. But if thy army of men be of a
great multitude, and of weapons better furnished, and soldiers more valtaunt,
and more obedient, and having leaders more expert, and more famous, then all
thy Host being set in good order, and as it were to muster, command that the
spies be led through out all, and that they have liberty to behold every
thing diligently, and in the end, let them depart without any manner of
punishment: for that they, reporting the excellency of thy things, the
puisaunce and great number of people, easelye will put in fear the enemies:
like as the scarsitie of things, and dearth, is wont to bolden and to give
them hope.

Of watch and ward by night.
IN the time of night, there ought to be ordained many watchemen: of the
which, some must watch, and some other be appointed in ye places for the
wards, and the hours of the night divided, the one after the other, may sleep
and repose them selves: for as much as the soldiers should not be constrained
to make their ward watchinge, more then that which nature is able to sustain,
although they promise to stand in watch all the night. Where surely ye
sweetness of sleep, may cause a man to forget him self against his will, and not
to have any care for his own person, nature it self, consentinge thereunto.
Therefore, let every man stand on his feet to watch: for as much as,
sitting stretched out, does take a way a little and a little, the strength,
and makes weak and languisheth the body, whereby the sleep lightly ouercomes.
On the contrary, the standinge upright and on the fete, keeps the mind
otherwise wakeful.

Those, which shall be appointed to make the ward, let them go before the Camp,
or else somewhat farther of, and make fyres after such sort, that they may
see those far of, which peradventure shall go in those parts, where the fire
shyneth, and of whom they can not be seen, being set in dark places, and
having the light against them: by which way the enemies unawares may come to
the hands of the watch.

Of removing the Army secretly.
IF at any time thou have determined to move the camp secretly so ye the
enemies shall not know it, thou having need to take some place, or else some of
thine being taken in goinge to defend the same, or finallye to avoid the
necessitye to come to the deed of Arms, first of all, command that there
be kindled, most great fyres, and after cause the army to remove. For as much
as the fyres being seen, the ennemies thinkinge that thou reniemaynest still
in the accustomed place, will be still and quiet. But if the fyres go out in
the darkness of the night, and thou make thee ready to depart, the ennemies
suspecting that thou preparest to fly, will use diligence and speed, to let
thee the passage, and layinge Ambushes according to the occasion, most sharplye
will pursue thee.

Of coming to communicacion with the Captain of thenemies.
IF it happen that thou must come to communycacyon with the Captain of the
ennemies host, and with him, (as oftentimes happens) to entreat of some
matter, thou shall take with thee the valiantest and most noble men of thine
Army, the which be in the flower of their age, tall and lusty, and of goodly
personage, and be also of fair and bright armor furnished. Because many times
it chances, that the ennemy by saying of such men as comes with the
Captain, has judged the remnaunt accordingly. And every manne shall be sooner
moved and drawn of those things that he has seen, then of those which by
report he has understood.

Of Fugetiues.
IF peradventure, any fugetiues, from the Camp of thenemies, being escaped shall
come into thine, for to give thee advise of their power, or else of some
counsel, or if they shall offer to guide thee, to thend that thou may
assault thy enemies at unawares, cause that they be kept in custodye, so that
they may understand to have no liberty to go where they list: but rather
let it be to them manifest, that if thou trustyng upon them, with thy army
shall safely obtain ye victory: they shall have for their rewards most great
plentye of gifts, and most gentely being entreated, shall go free where they
will. But if it shall be perceived that deliberately they be come to betraye thy
Army with deceit, make them know that in the self same peril of the thing,
without any doubt they shall have to end their life's. And it is not to give
credit otherwise to fugetiues, but when they know that they be not masters of
themselves, but thou the which in their counsels assured do see thy self,
may do thereafter.

Of considering the camp of the enemies.
THe wise Capytaine ought with all dilygence, to view the Camp of the enemies:
nor with less forseinge he has to consider the situation of the same. For
as much as, if sometime it be pitched in the plain, in a round facion, we
ought not for all that to think, that therein be but few, because they are
shut up in a little circuit of ground, for that the circular figure, is wont
to seem less in beholding it, then with the mind may be comprehended by
proportioning the measure of a massiue thing. Likewise the largenes, the which
is drawn in compass, is in effect of more capacity, then any man beholding
it, is able to judge. To the contrary, if the sides of the distaunce do extend
in length, and in some place either crooked, or else in many angles turned,
does enclose up, you have not for that cause to suppose, that therein be great
multitude of men, saying that such facion of incampinge, shows a certain
resemblaunce of greatness, and notwithstanding, does not contain in it so
many men as might be within a space made circularwise. But the camps lying
upon mountains and hills, if in all places, they be not closed and joined
together, they may seem bigger, then if they were in the plain, and yet
contain less number of men, then that which some man only beholdinge may
thoroughly judge. For as much as they do leave many places void and forsaken:
as those places be, that have some parts full of diches and caves, or else
roughe and stonye, whereby they be desert, and of no man may be in any manner of
wise inhabyted. But of necessitye it happens that the Camps are always made
after such manner, and the distaunce in like length are extended, according to
the number of people. Wherefore when thou see the Camp of the ennemies, shut
up in a little circuit, having consideration of the place, and of the facion,
do not esteem it a little, but being destended in length, let it not make thee
afraid: for as much as this aforesaid known, trust thou in the
aduertismentes of war, and when occasyon serves, attempt to execute some high
and honorable enterprise.

Of incamping.
When thou must incampe thee, it is requisite that thou bring together thy
men, and in a little space of ground to draw them together. If the enemies do
provoke thee, take heed not to conduct them forth, but rather most closely
retain within the trenche thy Soldiers close together, after such sort,
that it seem, that which thou do, to be constrained of fear. For as much
as, many times the enemy, which lacks experience of things, considers not
the fact, with that prudence, as is convenient in the affairs of war: but
having one only time, dued the Camp, and finally esteaminge the adversaries
to be but few, and they for being afraid to refuse altogether to faight, he
begins to make of them little count, and to stand negligently, and in the
end being come out of his lodgings, and out of his fortification, goes every
where without any head taking, as though that no man were able to incountre
him.

Then he having occasion to assault the enemy in his lodgings, boldly goes to
besege him, not cosidering what great number of men may issue out. For ye which
confidence waxing proud, as though no thing contrary might happen him, he
becomes altogether slothful and retchelesse, having not any manner of care of
chances to come.

The which occasion if thou determine prudently to rake, thy men being put in
order, and they in a sudden taking up a most great cry, thou shall send
them furthe, by the backeside of thy Camp, and by other diverse going foorthes,
and in sundry manners, running on the back of the enemy, thou may assault
and faighte with him most valiantlye. And in deed, if with like policy and
forcastinge, thou shall know how to guide thy men, lightly thou may perceive
if ye enemy be like for to use against thee, such deceites. And not only thou
ought to know that which thou have to do against the enemy, but also that
there come not upon thee some contrary accident. For as much as, with those
ways that thou may beguile thenemy, with the very same, thou must beware,
not to be deceived. For the way of understanding how to beguile other men, may
be unto thee, a guide to be able easily for to inuestygate, if they in thy
preiudis, do work any thing.

How Councels are not to be disclosed.
IF sometime either day or night, thou determine to remove thy Army, or take
some City, fortress, or Castle, or else to get some passage, or for to do
secretlye some other enterprise with celeritie, that the enemies know not
thereof, do not disclose to any thy secret, nor reuele not where thou
intendest to conduct thy men, neither that which thou have to do,
inespecially, if it were not peradventure, a profitable thing, the
communicating it with some of the principals. But when thou art arrived, where
thou know that it is needful quicklye to come to the deeds, command that,
which every man has to do according to the occasion, and give order and
without any delay of time, openly admonyshe the conducters, and soldiers,
and show them to what end the thing goes: and afterward with all speed, go
forward with the enterprise. For surely it is a token of a foolyshe man, and
indiscreet, rashly to every one to manifest his council, and to no purpose to
disclose the secrets unto the multitude. For as much as, the evil disposed
persons, and those that have a naughty mind toward the common weal, attend
like occasions, which when they may take, they fly sodenlie to the enemies,
for to give such advise, whereby they believe to attain rewards and honors.
Nor there has never been any Army, but that out of the same, for many causes
as well free men as servants, has passed to the camp of the ennemies,
specially when they understand that some secret, or matter of importance is
entreated of, or else do know that the time aprocheth, to come to hands to do
the feats of arms.

How that before the army is conducted forth, Sacrifice ought to be done.
Verily thou ought not to conduct forth men, nor put them in array to
faight, if first according as custom requires, thou have not made the
sacrifices: and therefore it is needful, to have the Aruspici, and the
deuiners, the which should follow the Army. But it should be very well done,
and a thing to be much desired, if thou thy self could know the reason to
consider the interiors, and to do the sacrifice, with those ceremonies, that is
requisite, so that thou thy self may well and conveniently forsee thy
things, inespecially, being able with facilety to have knowledge thereof. But
having done sacrifice, if thou have learned thy desire, and shalt know that
the holy things be favorable to thee, with courageous mind, thou should
go to thenterprise. For as much as, the conducters will give knowledge unto
the other, of all that which the holy things declare, and will put them in good
hope, and will give them good courage, when they shall understand, that
being guided by the will of the Gods immortal, go to faight. For the which
opinyon, the Soldiers altogether taking heart, cherefullye unto every peril,
will put them selves, as they which have hope to obtain the vyctorie, and all the signs, and every voice, and every thing diligent lie will observe. Whereby
happens that this worthy C^remonie of public sacrifices, with peticions and
vows may maruelously comfort, and cause better hope to increase in ye minds
of them, which privately moved with fear of religion, be made sorrowful for
things adverse and abominable. But if peradventure after offering of the oste
thy vows happen not to be fulfilled, and the Sacrifices not to go
prosperouslye: thou ought to remain in the self same place, and not to
move thee, although that other occasion seem to constrain thee never so much.
For what thing may happen thee worse, then those that fortune, and the
sacrifices do show thee? so that if that which is to come, might luckely
succeed, thou should by sacrificing, have had it granted thee. For ye
which thing, causinge more ostes to be killed, in the self same day, thou
must sacrifyce them, and renew the sacrifices done: for every little moment of
time, is of great importance, and easelye may both hurt and help, either
taking, or altogether leaving the commodious occasion of things.

Surely to me it seems, that the Art of the Aruspici, by mean of the
beasts, and their interiours, by a certain manner showed, and reason to
consider, gives knowledge, and declares ye mouings of the celestial stars,
and their rising up, and their going down and finally the inclinations of the
figures of the triangles of quadratures and of the measures. For as much as,
some of their little minutes, difference, virtue, and way to divine, in the very
same day, yea in the self same hour have caused oftentimes, that some have
obtained kingdoms, or else being vanquished and taken, have been put in prison.
Seeing then, that at a time it happens that to some, doing sacryfice, is
showed that concerning taking in hand the faight, the thing shall proceed
well, and yet after the faight has followed the conflicte and overthrow:
therefore I have thought it necessary to speak somewhat of this matter.

How it is nedeful to have knowledge of places.
Being (as it apeareth manifestly) both many and sundry countries of the world
and the situasion of places, and the facion of provinces of the land, of diverse
manners, it happens thereby, that for the most part, a man may stand in doubt,
and know not how to determine in what places the fields is best to be
pitched, and how to set the battle to faight. There be some surely that
have knowledge of their own country, but of others, they be ignorant and
nothing skilful. Whereby it chances, that the enemies being distaunt, the
space of a days journey, and craftily faining to be afraid, and not to have
stomach to abide the coming of the adversaries, and making as though they
would fly, causes the capitayn little expert of things, to pursew him no
otherwise but as if he fled in good earnest, and more boldly to molest and
follow him in chase. But when he having been drawn through the fury of
pursuinge, and by vain hope to oppress the enemy, does see him self to be
brought to difficulte passages, and into places enclosed with mountains,
surely in the end, he perceaneth too late, to be compassed about with enemies
on every side, and as it were shut up in a Cage, the highest places, the
straightes, and the ways, whereby might have been some passage to fly being
now possessed of the enemy. Then beholding all about how he has been mocked,
and seeing all his army dispersed to be by the adversary assaulted, does know
him self to be brought headling into extreme confusion, being by the property
of the place deprived for being able to faight or to withstand. And for to
avoid the shame of yeldinge, estemeth to be better, and a more worthy thing
to dye of famine: or else being constrained to submit him self, gives liberty
unto the enemies, to do by him whatsoever shall be their pleasure. For which
thing, the retiring that the enemy makes which has resemblace of flying, is
always to be had in suspicion. Nor it ought not boldly to be followed, but
rather regard should be first had to the places, and their nature diligently
considered.

Therefore in conducting forth the men of Arms, it is specially to be
considered, that by the self same way, that thou enterest, the passage may
be open for thee to return, or else to leave of to enter, if thy return may be
let, or being entered to use means to be able to come forth. Which may
be done in this manner: if the most imine^t and broken places and ways in the
tops of the mountains, be kept with thy soldiers, whereby the passage
whylest the return shall be neadefull, may be open to thee. These things be
said, not only to the intent that thou of council may ercell the ennemy: but
also, that with all diligence thou may seek and forsee, not to be at
unawares of him oppressed. For as much as a fair thing it is, to know with
policy how to oppress the enemy, but it is good and necessary to beware of
being deceived by him.

How no little accoumpte is to be made of him that has brought aduises.
WHo so ever that shall require to come to speak with thee, to give advise of
some thing, whether he be free or bond, coming by day or night, let him be
ge^tly received and not only be brought into thy pauilion: but also if
peradventure in the voyage he shall come to mete with the, or in what so ever
manner whether it be either in time when thou take rest, or eatest or washest,
let his coming never be prohibited. For as much as, in like matters, the
delaying, and taking away the commoditye of men for coming to speak with
thee, or having servants to whom is lawefull to let them, which would come
to speak with thee, is no other, but to lease the occasion of most greatest
importance, and is likewise loss of time, which is dearest above al other
things: and finallye by such negligence to no purpose, to put thy things in
ruin. For undoubtedly, where the Captains be admonyshed and taught by such
messengers, it bath been seen, that shortly after they have been able, to come
to do things, which have been thought to have been of most great help to the
whole state

Of the time when the Soldiers ought to eat their meat.
IF peradventure thou must needs lodge thy men over against the camp of
thenemies, give order, that the soldiers in the break of day, do eat their
meat. For as much as, if thou perceive that it is in thy liberty, to be able
as shall please thee, and when thou list, to put them in array, and bring them
to faight, then according as shall be most commodious for thee, thou may
command every manne, that they eat meat. But if thou happen to be brought to
such extremity, that either through the situacion of the place, or through
the weakness of the trenches and diches, or else for some other cause, whereby it
lies in adbetriment of the enemies to enforce thee to issue forth of thy
fortificatio^s, and to thy loss to bring out thy bands, and to drive thee both
to take thee to thy weapons and to faight. Surely it is a thing not little to be
regarded: but all diligence is to be used, that a sign, being given in the
break of day, thy soldiers dee with meat comfort their strength, lest
that being peradventure assaulted, they be not constrained to arm them selves
and to faight fasting. For the soldiers undoubtedly being refresshed with a
little meat, and not thereby full satisfied and filde, be come in fayghte,
both more lustier, and much stronger. Of the which thing, making no coumpt,
has happened often times, that vnfortuna^ly men through famine, and lack of
meat being clean without strength, have been overcome: and specially when
they come to the battle that is no light skirmishe, but that continues a
whole day.

Of comforting the Army.
IF at a time some malincoly bappe^ to grow as is wont to chance through some
fear that appears to have occupied the minds of fouldiours, or else through
some socours come to the enemies, or through some other cause where by the
power of the adversaries might be thought superior to theirs, then specially
to a Captain it is requiset, to show him self cherefull, and pleasant.
Considering that the countinance and look of the Captain, is wont to make the
minds of the soldiers conformable, for that altogether with his semblaunce,
they are moved. Because he being cherefull, suddenly the soldiers take a good
heart, judging that nothing contrary nor porilous, may fortune. So
contrariwise, if it seem that he be afraid or sad, all by and by lack heart,
no otherwise, then if there appeared some great cuyne at hand. Wherefore surely
it is better, and does more agree with the wisdom of a Captain, with the
semblaunce of the face, to feign cherefulnesse unto men, and with his merines,
to make them glad, then with words and orations to comfort them, whylest they
be afflicted with malincoly. For as much as unto words, often times they do
not give credit.

which according as the condition of the time requires, may most
studiously be feigned: but every man specially beholds the countenance, and
the boldness that appears in the face, and esteaming that there is no
faynednes, al fear set aside, they assure them selves in their mind. And out
of doubt in a Captain, it is to be desired to have the one and the other, that
is to know, when need is, to use to good purpose the facultye of speech, and
to show himself such a man, as the time, and occasion seems to reguire.

When it is meet to put the army in fear and terror.
LIke as it avails much with words and with chereful look to give courage,
and to fill with hope, the army in which is entered some fearfulnes, eue^ so it
is not of small vtility, at a time to put them in fear, when they be given to
idelnes and slouthfulnes, little esteaminge the General Captain, and the other
Captains, rendryng not obedience. Therefore then, with remembringe of perilles,
and making also mention of the diligence of the enemies, it is fit to keep them
in fear, whereby thou shall make thy soldiers not fearful, but warefull. And
like as the sick mind afflicted with malincolie, is to be releued and helped,
with putting the same in good hope, even so lasiuious men, through sloth
unruly, ought with terror to be refained and chastised. By which mean
oftentimes chances, that the Cowardes and Dastardes, setting aside fear,
become valiant, and contrary wise, the bold and courageous, is made prudent
and politic. And both the one and the other, of these two things may happen,
either that thy soldiers, after such sort do fear ye enemies that they have
no stomach to take in hand to do any thing, or else to despise the^ so, and
pass so little of them that they think not that they should take any heed.
And therefore to every one of these two things, thou ought circumspectlye
to frame thy self, and to have regard to the affairs, and to the times, so
that when need shall require, both with words and with look, to show thy
self to have fear, and to forsee that which is to come: or else to seem bold
and hardye, when thou shalt know the same to be like to help thee.

How Soldiers may be encouraged with prisoners of the enemies.
ALitle before that they come to the poincte to faighte, inespeciallye when the
uncertain end of the day of battle that is to be made, causes the Soldiers
to be doubtful and full of thoughts, all diligence and policy is to be used,
either with suddein assaults, or with ambushes, or else with some light
skirmishe, to take some of the ennemies, of them chiefelie, that have left
their places, appointed to the ward, which use somewhat abroad in the fields
to straggle, who, if thou shall perceive to be lusty and bold, cause them to be
put to death by and by, or else give them bound in custady to those that have
the charge of prisoners, that they be diligently kept, and command that no man
be suffered to go to speak with them. But if thou know that they be afraid,
and altogether vile, give commandment then that quickly they may be brought
unto thy lodging, and looking on them scornefully, and with severe and
troubled countenance, and also with thretninges, after such sort to bring them
more in fear, and to make them humbly to beseech thee with weeping, and for
doubt of their lives to be good unto them, thou shall cause them to be brought
in the fight of thy Army, and shall speak unto thy Soldiers, showing them how
simple, vile, fearful, and of no worthynes the enemies be with whom they have
to faight, as these which fear so much the stroke of death, and so much
distrust them selves, that falling down on their knees, with so much
vylenes, and so shamefully do pray to avoid the peril thereof, and to ask
mercy of their adversaries. Therefore a most likly thing it is, that thereby, the
Soldiers will take heart, and of the vituperus spectacle of such made
prisoners, will judge of the vileness, and delicatenes of the enemies. And
surely, if a man who has not as yet seen, does notwythstanding hope, how
much more ought he to be moved by the thing in deed, and with the recompense
of hope, whereby lightlye is taken away fear and difficultye.

How men ought to be set in array.
BEing many and sundry ways of ordering me^ in battle ray, which chau^seth
through variety of weapons, and after the manner as the Soldiers are taught
and accustomed, and according to the situation of the place, and the qualitye
of the enemies: it is needful that the Captain have such knoweledge, that he
may use every one of them, when occasion shall require.

But I will brieflye declare those things, that may be convenient to the
diverse sorts of weapons, at the pitchynge of the field, besides those things
that may be found in the same necessitye of time.

Ordain then thy horsemen, not according to thy desire, but as the time and
the condition of things shall constrain thee. Thou shall put in array thy
horsemen against those of thy enemies: but as much as may be possible, set
them in facion as they are wont to ordeine ye battles with.ii. horns, so
that both on the front, and on the sides, by the commodity of the largenes of
the place, they may more spedely ride and manege their horses, and not to put
other behind them, that may let them. In the main battle place among the
first, the Velitie, the whorlers of darts, and the crosbowes: finally the
shooters in long bows, and the slingers. For that if such kind of men
should be placed hyndermost, they should hurt more their fellows, then any of
thenemies. And if they be placed in the midst, their manner of faighting
should be to no purpose, for that they can not retire backewarde for the
length of their darts and of their shot, nor yet can not with their bodies
move them selves to whorle, being let of them that go before. And much less
the slingers can wild their slinges or throw: being hindered of the Soldiers
that stand about them, in the which, the swinge of ye sling hurting men,
shall be of more damage to their fellows then to ye adversaries. Likewise the
shooters if they shall be before the other, they will hit almost in one mark,
directly in the bodies of the ennemies, but if they stand in the last rank,
or in the midst, they shall be constrained to shoot aloft: in the which manner,
the arowes flying compass, their violence must needs consume in vain: and
while they fall down, upon the heads of the enemies, the blow having now
lost his force, can scarce do any manner of harm.

If it happen that thou must fayght, in places where one partte is plain and
low, and the other by mean of little hills, higher then the plain, then
specially place thy Soldiers, that are light armed, on the most rough and
hyllye ground. But if thou be in the plain, and the enemy on the hills,
conduct the light armed Soldiers, as they which most easily can throw
their darts, and retire them selves, and in runnyng apase and spedilye go
up in the roughe and stepe places, leaving in any wise between the bands
some distaunce: so that if peradventure the enemies abiding to encounter thee,
and to come to the faight, when thy Souldyers have now thrown their darts,
and consumed al their other kind of shot, tourninge back those bands with
order, and without disturbaunce, cause that they may retire them selves for
succor in the hindermost parts of the Army. For undoubtedly, to go about
with the Army, and to turn it upon a corner, is a thing that by no manner of
means is sure. For as much as the enemies, may go before them, and before
they be joined with the other part of the army, by force may break them.
Contrariwise, the passing straightlye between the bands closed together, being
thick, and as it were to fall upon the weapons, may cause confusion, and put
in disorder the ranks. But if the Velity assault the enemies by a wyng, they
may then do exceading great harm, as those that may ouertwhart whorle, and
throw their darts, and consequentlye hurt the naked parts of the enemies.
Finally, the sunges be more pernisius, then all the weapons that the Velity are
wont to occupye. For that the color of lead is like the color of the air,
whereby whilst such bullettes of lead fly in the air, it is not seen
before it wounds the enemy at a sudden: and through the force of the whirle,
and swinge, and violent mouinge thereof, as it were burninge, and fired, does
wound greuouslye, and penitrateth inwardlye, nor it cannot be deserved: for the
lips of the wound sodeinly closes, as one which making a sign with his eyes,
shuts them not fully.

But if thou lack such sort of weapon, and the aides of Velitie, and that the
enemy be aboundantlye furnished of them, command that the foremost of thy
battle, go forward thick and close together, bearing great shieldes, with
which, they may cover all their bodies, and the other that follow after them
in array, even to the last, holding up their targettes, over their heads,
must pass so much forward after this sort, till they come within the whorle
of the darts. For as much as, being covered after this manner, they can not be
hurt in any part by the shot. But if the one and the other army have plenty
of Velitie: then cause thine to be the first, to hurt the enemy, before they
come nere to the hands, or else after the battle is begone, geuinge the
assault ouertwhart to do then what they can to hurt the enemies, the which
shall be enforced to prese together, and to bring them selves into a little space,
and molested of the weapons whorlde from far of, shall be constrained to
disorder them selves.

If thou wylt avoid that the enemies compass thee not about, make not thy
ranks long, after such sort, that altogether they become weak, that the
enemy may casely break them, and thereby attain the passage, and that he
need not foorther to seek longer way to get to compass thee, for as much
as, way being given, and the order of thine broken, he may gene the charge
upon thy men's backs, the which not only thou have to take bid of, that it
chance thee not, but thou ought to use means to do the like against the
enemy.

If sometime thou see the order of thy men to be weak, do not retire nor
draw them together, after such sort, that the enemy may compass them, and
shut them up round about, only it is needful for thee, to maintain
strong the hyndermoste parts, no less, then those, that first he placed in
the head, or in the sides. For as much as the last and the rescuyng
Soldiers, may stop the enemies such way, like as also may they, which
stand in the wings, and in the horns, so that thou be attentive to forsee
for things to come, and inlargyng the hindermoste part of the battle, and
destending both the flanks, set thy Souldyers turned against the battle
of the enemies, and command those that now of the enemies be compassed
about, that they turn their backs, to the backs of them which go before
them, and so to faight on every side.

It appertains to a circumspecte and prudent Captain, when he shall know to
have to fayght with a few men against a great multitude, to use either
dylygence to choose such fytte places, which be either near Rocks of
Ryuers, or else under Mountains, and upon all other things, where thou
may put in array thy battles, and by the quality of the place, be able to
let the ennemies, that they neither compass thee about, nor enclose thee. For
as much as a few, the which have to occupy the high and craggy places, may
easelye withstand the power of the enemies, that should with multitude
attempt to compass thee. In the which thing, it is not only needful the
council and prudence of the Captain, but it requires a great deal more good
fortune. Because that often times peradventure chances, that an Army
happens upon such fit places, and notwithstanding the captain is
ignorant how to choose what situacion of ground is best for him. But of those
that are present to choose the best, and to foresee which to him is lykest to
be most profitable, is surely a sign of a wise Captain.

Some of a custom when they go to faighte, trusting to the great number of
men: have set them in array after the manner of a half circull, supposyng to be
able to intise the enemies after such sort, as though they should come to
fayght man for manne, in the which manner moving them selves, they think by a
little and a little bending the corners of the half circle of their battle,
joining them together in a circle, to enclose in the same their adversaries.
Against whom, it is not mete to go with like facion of battle: but dividing
thy men in three parts, with the two, the charge may be given upon the one and
the other wing of the ennemies: the third thou shalt set against the half
circle, which stand still, and go not forward, and if the ennemies will stand
still in the facion of a semicircle: those inespecially that are in the midst,
shall do no harm: where in deed is taken from them all way to be able to do
any thing. But if they begin to move, whilst they would from the bottom of
the half circle, reduce them selves by right line, pressing the one the other,
they shall break their array. For as much as, standing still, the order of
them, that be placed by the flanks bowed like a horn, and they faighting, the
half circle by no manner of way may be reduced in right order. The array
then broken, and moving them selves, from the half Circle confusedlye, thou
ought with that third part, to assault them so disordered. But if the
enemies stand still in the semicircle, set against them, light armed
Soldiers, and also whorlers of Darts, which may opresse them with multitude
of darts, and with other weapons that may be shot or whorled from far of.
All be it, if with all these force of both thy bands thou assault the
enemies on the side, and so go against this order of half circle, thou do
not err there in one whitt. For as much as they being not able to come to
fayght against thee with all their men, will deuyde them selves, and only they
that were set on the sides, shall be constrained to be the first to come to the
faighte, for consideration of the assault, which thy men have given them on the
sides. But peradventure it will not be a thing of little utility, that some
time putting first men in array, no other wise then if thou would fayghte,
and after as it were for fear retiring back and keeping the raye, thou feign a
retire like to a running away, and then turning thee to come to affronte those
which follow thee. For as much as some time, the enemies thinkinge that the
army of the adversaries for fear be put in flight, through unmeasurable
gladness, breaking their order will give the onset, and every man will strive
and enforce him self to get before his fellow. Against whom by that means,
thou may faight without peril, and through the boldenes of thy staying,
contrary to the opinion of the enemies, thou may easily disconfite them, now
being become fearful, and schattered here and there, although they had before
so proudly persued thee.

Besides all this, there would be in a readiness certain Soldiers elected,
which standing in array out of the battle as Triarii, should give succor to
that part of thine, which are werye and repulsed, and of whom when need
requires, thou may easily have help. Considering that it is the greatest
aid that may be, to join unto weary men, those which are lusty, seeing that
they commodiously may succor their fellows now weary: and fresh and
vigorously assault strongly the enemies despearsed and becommen weak.

And it is not only to good purpose, but rather a thing of great benefit, if
some men of thine be apoincted to lay them selves secretlye in ambusshe in some
place so far of, as may bes thought mete: to whom command, whylest with
thy battaill set in array, thou shall be comen to hand strokes, so soon as
the sign is given, that they discovering them selves, do quickly come unto
thee. Which then is to be done: when succor looked for, semes not to come at a
due time. For that the adversaries, supposing those, to be the same men, that
thou lokedst should have comen in thy succor, perauenture whylest they as yet
march, before they be ready to join with the rest of thy Army, will be afraid
and put them selves in flight, thinking them to be no such number, as in deed
they be, but a great deal bigger, and specially if it be done at a sudden,
when they are about ye feats of Arms. For as much as such chance, is wont
to make a frayde the minds of them, which have not experience of things,
doubting lest there happen them not some worse thing, and therefore with fear
they abide the end of the matter.

The assaulting the enemies behind at unawares, bringes them in exceadynge
great terror, and above all things is of incredible profit. For which thing,
if it were possible to do, there should be sent by night a band of Soldiers,
that traversing ye way, might pass beyond the enemies, and behind them,
place them selves in ambusshe: And when both the armies were affroonted, and
now comen to the faighte, they quickelye marching out of the wait, should
assalte the hyndermoste band of the enemies: whom compassed about on every
side, although that there were left them some hope to save them selves: they
shall not have stomach to go about to fly, but to yield, as they who are not
able to retire back, nor commodiously go forward, being of every side
overtaken.

Whylest the faighte continuallye does increase, and that of neither part they
bear not them selves valiauntly, thou rydinge round about, shall comtorte
thy men, and being on the right wynge: shall cry, that the left is
victorious, and that the enemies now are overcome. If thou be on the left
wyng, declare that the band of the right wyng of thy men has obtained the
victory, not passing whether it be true or false. For that it is not much
amiss, nor of small commodity to use a ly, when the fayghte is greatly moved.
Moreover if the Capitain or king of the enemies, be somewhat far from thee, or
in the other wyng, or else in the midst of the battle, thou must cry with a
loud voice (so that of the enemies thou be also heard) that he is slain. The
which being openly vnderstodde, thy men more cherefully will double their
worthiness to faight, and the enemies will lack heart, and altogether for
desperation will put them selves to flighte. This policy has been often
times profitable, where at one time, is begiled the enemies and thine own men,
to these showing things of sauegarde, and to the other hurtefull and dolorous.

Likewise, it is the office of a wise Captain, in the arayes, to place
together the brothers with brothers, and friends with friends. For that whylest
we see that he is brought in peril, to whom we bear good will, of love
enforced, fearing no manner of danger, more valiauntly we put forward our
selves to defend him. And he seeing him self so louinglye defenved, will be
ashamed, and doubt, that yelding not the like kyndnes, may seem to be
negligente wyllingly, and therefore he will think it a great reproach unto him,
to forsake his friend that so redely has done for him, and shamefully to give
him self to fly.

Of commandments, wauinges, and Signs.
THe commandments, wauinges, and signs, ought likewise first to be given to
the heads and leaders of me^, for as much as to go to find every man and
command them like things, should be a manifest token of a Captain very simple
and inexpert: seeing that whylest to enery one seperatly ye co^mendeme^ts at
given, time co^sumeth and great rumor thereby is made, al asking him at hand,
and sekinge every one to know what the commandments are. There happens
besides this, that certain men to the commandments, will add some thing,
or else through ignorance, diminishe them. Wherefore it is meet that the
commandments, be given first to the heads and rulers, and after they to
refer them to those that are under them, and those likewise to do the same
from hand to hand, to all the other. And in this manner, the signs and
commandments may go from one to another even to ye last. For that not so
soon as they are given, but also without noise, and with order every one shall
come to knoweledge thereof. The which likewise in giving tokens with fire, is
wont to be observed, where the first little firebrande is lifted up, the second
having received the brande, gives it to the third: the third to the fourth,
which gives it to the fifte, the fyfte to the sixth, and so forth, the one
after the other, after such sort, that in short time from a most great
distaunce, the sign had of the first, shall come even to the last ordinarilye
and without disturbance. Likewise that sign which ought to be given the third,
after the commau^dements, should not be given with any thing done by the
voice, but either with iesture of body, or by sign of the head, or with
moving of the hand, or with striking together the arms, or with turning of
the Spear, or else with glittering of the sword: so that peradventure making
tumulte not only the Soldiers ought to stand attentive to take the
wauing, but also the sign. For as much as the enemies might understand the
meaning of the wauing, which they may oftentimes see to be given. But the
sign which besides may secretly be given, after such sort that it cannot
be known of the enemies, semes also to be very convenient and c^mmodious, for
the strange Soldiers to know: whom although they use diverse languages,
notwithstanding they being confederates and serving together with you: and
being not able to speak as they may be understood, nor understand other,
which in other language speak, by making signs, the fredes by friends, may by
such mean deserne their meaning. The which signs ought to be given and
distributed not at such time when they must faight, and make noise with
uncertain voices among the hands, that are to be set in array, but long before
when quietly they remayn at leisure.

Of the order that is to be observed.
BEsides all this command thy Soldiers to go forward, and turn backwarde
with good order: whereby being repulsed, and retyring, they may be less hurt,
as those whom the enemy one by one, can not oppress, being not here and there
scattred, and disorderlye wandering: or if they being conquerers, shall pursue
the enemies out of order, and put to flyghte, they shall overthrow them
easily, and more strongly oppress them, and with more safegarde, if in the
chase united together, and in array they proceade. For undoubtedly many times,
when the enemy fliyng, sees his adversaries, come upon him without any order,
he bryngyng again his men in array, and turning backwarde withstanding them
with violence, crusly ouercometh them. Wherefore men must think that nothing is
better, nothing more safer, nothing more surer, then observing the order, to
stand still in their place appointed: and to the contrary nothing is more
perilous, nor more hurtful, then to break the order, and to forsake the same
place.

Of making ready and setting forth the army to faight the field.
Have care to bring thy Army to the field with bright and shining armor.
which easly may be done by co^forting thy soldiers to make clean their swerds,
headpeses, corcelettes, and every other peese of Armor, for as much as the
cleanes and brightness thereof, makes the Army seem terrible, and puts
fear and travail in the minds of the enemies. Moreover cause thy hands to
go forward with rumors, and showtinges, and sometime running with violence,
for as much as the sembla^ce of such things, the cryinges and noyseof barnes,
and the soundes of trompets, wonderfully troubles and fears the hearts of
the adversaries.

When thou shall come to the point to join battle with the enemy, cause thy
soldiers somewhat before, to florishe often their naked swerdes against the
sun. For yt the glistering swerds and their shining poinctes, through the
brightness, now of the one, and now of the other, against the resplending
beams of the sun, does show a certain horrible terror of war. The which
thing, if as well of the enemy shall likewise be done, aunswering thee with
the very same, thou haste cause to be afraid: and if he do not that, it is to
be thought that thou in any wise must needs thereby put him in dread. Being
set in array, and as well of the one as of the other part, the men being made
ready to faight, thou ought not suddenly to move thee, being drawn with desire
to be the first to give the onset, but stay thee nere thy tre^ch, till that
thou see thy self the redines of the enemies, that is how many, of what
condition, and finally in what place they be disposed to faight, seeing that
after this manner, thou may more co^modiously forsee to thy affairs,
considering which of thine thou have to set against those of the enemy, and in
what manner thy men is to be placed and ordained, doing in like sort as is
convenient for a good Physician to do, the which considering first, and knowing
the infirmity, comes after to give ye remedies. Ordeine thy men accordyndyng
as thou perceiuest to turn most utility to thy business. For as much as the
captain oftentimes having seen the preparation of thenemies, is constrained to
accomodate, and to ordein his soldiers according to the Army, the men, and
manners of the^. If the enemy be more puisaunt of horsemen, and that thou
peradue^tur have commodity, choose yt straight and difficulte places, or at the
foot of mountains, and where the horses cannot easily go: but if thou have
not commodity so to do, proceade so much forward faighting, till thou find
places mete and convenient for thy necessity. But within the trenche, leave
the ward, for defense of the lodgings and of the cariages, lest that the enemy
understanding the place to be forsaken, send his soldiers to take thy camp,
left with out defense, and to spoil al thy cariages.

Some captains destroy their own lodginges, or else pass Rivers, or
deliberately do leave behind the^ hills and deep places, to the end that the
Soldiers standing constantly, may ouercom the adversaries, and attain the
victory, or otherwise altogether to perish. For that if they think to save
them selves by running away, they shall see that by all manner of ways to be
taken from them, the possibility to escape. These manner of men surely I of the
one part can not praise much, nor yet of the other part disprayse: for as
much as deliberately to purpose to do things with peril, is rather reputed
foolish hardines then prudence, and unto fortune, there is more to be
attributed then to good judgment. For as much as where thou art constrained
to do the one of these two things either with all thy power faighting, to
attain the victory, or else being over come, every thing to go to ruyn, in what
manner may I the victory unto prudence, or else the ruin and universal conflict
unto the election and to judge me^t ascribe? Yet surely, I suppose that
sometime to some soldiers, it ought to be permitted that for desire of honor
and glory, perilusly they may faight: when the care is such, that if they
bearing the^ selves valiantly, shall get unto the common weal no small utility,
and if they unfortunately faight, that it can not turn to much hurt. But
fortune being doubtful and uncertain, and doubtful the succes of the battle, I
praise not in any manner of wise, yt hasarding with all thy men, in the hands
of chance. And me thinks they err exceadingly which will faight after such
sort, that if they shall have overcome, it seems them to have little hurt ye
enemies: but if they shall be overthrown and vanquished, to be like to be of
most great hurt to the common weal: and yet they leave not to use like policies
of war. But if now it be seen plainly, and may be taken for a most certain
thing, that great discomfiture is like to follow, if you do not faight, although
it be with perrill, and that if the enemy shall once be ouercom, he is like
altogether to perish, then me thinks, that those captains do not amiss,
which against their soul diers should stop the way for being able to fly.
For that in a thing uncertain, it is better with ma^lenes, not only to avoid
the mischief, but rather to seek to offend ye enemy, the^ to stand in idelnes,
and to behave thy self vile, when thou may be sure, that daring to do
nothing, thy business are like altogether to go to naught.

But not only in like places, where flying has no certainty of safegarde, but
in every place, and in conditions of faightynge, thou ought to admonish thy
Soldiers, and with all reason to show them, that to those that fly, does
follow nothing but death manifest and certain: because the enemies have
liberty to perceuer and pursue them, and being not let of any, may easily
offend their adversaries, scattered and put in flight, and that to them who
faighting, stand still and do defend, there death is doubtful and the peril
uncertain. And if thou perswadest them, that in the battle which is to be
fought, those that give them selves to fly, without fail shall most
shamefullye perish, and he that stands steadfast, in the end if the worst
fall, shall die most gloriouslye: and that to them which forsake their place,
and not to those which keep array, shall ensue the hurt, thou shall perceive
to have them in the self same perils, both bold and valiant. Therefore desire
to have thy Soldiers persuaded and disposed after this manner. For as much as
those that be of this mind, and of such affection, either they attain the
vyctorye fullye, or else suffer little harm.

Surely the Councels found in the instaunt peril while they are a faighting
and the for casts for to put at a sudden against the devise of the enemies,
have without doubt to the Captains and to them that well understand the feats
of war, brought forth more excellent glory, and greater marvel, then those
have d^n that a man would have thought, and by conjecture supposed to have been
exceading good before that men come to the trial, which thing, to show one by
one, and to every man to give several instructions, is very difficult. For
like as ye masters of ships having prepared and disposed by order al things
that ye sie^ce of navigations requires, after departing out of the haven, do put
themselves to the main sea: but if peradventure there happen to rise some
tempest: they do not that they desire, but the same which they are driven to
do, and they do many things boldly, and being round about overcome with
perils, with stout mind, they resist with their provisions, vsyng not so
much the memory and the science of sailying, as the occasion, which unlooked
for, appears before them: Even so the Captains must do: Put in order his
men, and endeavor them, and dispose them in that manner, which he thinks to
turn commodious and profitable to him, and to his affairs: but when the
tempeste ouertaketh him, and the waightenes of the battle, for as much as,
many things by force is wont to change and break, and great variety to
fall, then according to the state of things present, and that is seen before
the eyes, he must find at a sudden, according to occasion, the forecast and
councels, more rather as necessity of fortune, then as the art and wit it
self, shall have offered him.

Of the Captains office, vvhilest the battle is a faightyng.
Unto the captain it is mete rather circomspectly and with wisdom, then boldly
to faight, or to refrain altogether from the faight: Because that faighting
cannot so much benefit the common weal, although he should show force
invincible, as losing his life not a little should indamage the same.

Wherefore, he ought to be much valianter with prudence of mind, then with the
force and lustines of body. For as much as, with the worthiness and strength
of body, the Soldiers may do some great attempt, but the using of prudence
and to foresee things, and deliberating in times convenient to council the
common weal, principally to the Captain, and to no other is requisite. For
that like as if the Master of a ship leauyng the stern, and forsaking the
governing, will do those things that appertain to the other mariners, shall
without doubt give occasion to drown the ship, even so the very same error the
Captain should commit, who setting a part his office of Councellyng, for
prouyding every thing, should defend so low to take ye charge which is mete for
soldiers. And surely the presumtious necligence of ye greater and superiors in
dignity, makes to become vain all aid, wherein necessarily is committed the
conseruacyon of wayghtye affairs. The like I repute ought to be though of that
Captain without any difference, the which when he shall be dead, the common
weal to be in hasard to fall in decay, nor being not dead, no other then he
ought to take thought for the safeguard of the same. And such a one by more
reason is to be blamed as a simple captain, then to be praised as stout. And
surely he that has done the duetye of a Captain, with counsel, and with
discretion, having atchiued felicity, by mean of foresight with reason he may
lawfully glory. But contrariwyse, he that is so arrogant and covetous, that
believes not to be able to do any thing honorable, if he him self go not to
faighte with the enemy, not only is not to be thought valiant, but rather
presumpteous and foolyshe hardy. And that he so does to get him self a name
of the multitude, not to esteem any peril, for to encourage his Soldiers, both
to make them ready and glad, to ieopard them selves in an enterprise. But let
him that will do well, faight warely, and not fear death, and choose sooner to
remain deprived of his life, then having any overthrow, to live with shame.
But the thing being safe, and the army in safeguard, he ought to have regard to
his life. For surely where the death of the Captain chances, there many
times, the reputacion of the happy success is diminyshed. For as much as,
they, who have unfortunately fought, having understood that the enemies are
left deprived of their Captain, taking heart again, have assaulted them,
and these of the other part afflycted with malincolye, have lacked stomach,
that although they have fortunately fought before, notwythstanding for the
death of the Captain, they have then put them selves in despair.

Unto the captain it likewise appertains whilst his men faight, to go riding
about the battle, to show him self to the faighters, to praise those which
valiauntly have behaved them selves, to threaten the fearful, to comfort those
that be doubtful and slow, to give succor to them that are repulsed, to supply
the lackes, and if it shall be need full, to lead men from one place to another,
to observe times, to take occasions, to make conjecture of things to come, and
to command when need is that there be given the sign to retire

Of that which is to be done after the deed of Arms.
AFter that he has revoked the Souldyers from the faighte, let him do
sacrifice, and give order that thanks may be rendered to the immortal Gods,
with solemn pomp, as much as in that time may be done, promysing with
grateful mind, to make satisfaction in those things, so soon as the war is
ended, and the victory obtained, according to the conuenyent custom of
satisfying. After ward let him give honors and rewards to them, which he
shall understand have behaved them selves valiauntlye in the deed of Arms,
and according to the custom, to be toward them benign, and liberal. But
those which have been slack and fearful, let him punnyshe most shamefully.
Unto valiant men let him grant those honors which according to the use of
the country are lowed. The gyfies which the Captain ought to give, be these:
armours, Ansignes, spoils, the offices of Decurians, Centuriaus, prouostes,
conducters and other like offices. But to the most valiant, and to those that
are already in authority, there would be greater honors distrybuted, and to the
private Soldiers, to be given the less. Although these things have been
accustomed to be given liberallye, and with gentelnes, according to the
deseruinges of every man, nevertheless it does provoke moreover other unto
virtue, which of like honors are desirous.

And without doubt, when rewards are given to the good, for their merits, and
the ill not scaping without punishment, of necessitye the army is put in
most excellent good hope. For that some for fear of punishment, do abstain
from doing ill, and other some drawn with the desire of honors, embrace
virtue.

Of the Victory.
Having obtained some victory, thou ough test not only to every Soldier
particularly ^o give rewards for the act well executed, but also to all the
Army, thou ought benignely to give some general reward for their labors.
Thou shall grant license to thy Soldiers, to put to sack the lodginges
of the enemies, the cariages, and the Castles, if any by reason of war happen
to come into thy possession, and finally also the city: saving that if
peradventure of the same there should not be had more consideration of
deliberting some thing. For that this to al such affairs, is of much utility,
in especially, when the war is not as yet finished. Because the soul diours
by such profit and gain allured, will she we them selves much teddier and
more courageous in other occasions: if thou be not of opinion that it is
proffitable for the hunters with the blood and interiours of the wild beasts
which they have killed, to teach their hounds to hunt, but think it hurtful to
give in pray to the victoryous Soldiers the goods of them which have been
overcome.

Of putting things to sack.
Grant not license to thy Soldiers neither always, nor in every place, nor
al to put to sack: and permit not the^ to come to lead always the people: who^
thou may cause to be sold (if need require) for the common profit, and to
maintain great expenses. In which case, thou should command openly that all the goods be brought and conveyed unto thee: Because most excellentlye well,
thou may deliberate thereof, having regard to the time, and to the state of
things, whether thou have need to retain all the pray, or part of yt same,
or else none at al. And it is not convenient, that making war the common
treasure be left without money, for Soldiers being deprived of the gaynes,
which from day to day they make, especially when by the abundant riches of
them who are overcome, and by the fertelity of the places, the gaynes more
amply, or largelye, and with more benignity may be distributed to them.

Of prisoners.
SO long as the war continues, kyl not thy prisoners, and inespecially
those, against whom the war is made at the first, although it happen that
the confederates shall have opinion to cause them to be put to death. But above
al things thou ough test not to put them to death, which about ye enemies be of
great aucthority and of fame well known, and notable, remembryng that fortune
is uncertain and doubtful, and chance variable and mutable: the which most
oftentimes loves greatly to bear envy to the happy successes, and to
minister shame to glory attained. But seek to exchange them, or by rendering
them, to get some Castle, or else to redeem thy friends taken prisoners whom
thou desyrest greatly to have again, but if the enemies shall refuse such
permutacion, then likewise with reason thou may make reuengement of their
injury.

Of feasts, and triumphs, after the victory.
Dangers being past and overcome, and with great trauayles having gotten the
victory, let there is be for thy Soldiers, made ready solemn feasts, and
the places with good order to be appointed, and give such order, that plays
and triumphs be made, so that having now the certain end of the victory
accomplisshed, and the Soldiers knowing those things, which after the
victory they have to inioye, may for such cause, learn to sustain at another
time, the difficulty of the turmoyles of war.

Of buriyng them which in the battle have been slain.
THou must after provide, and with great diligence procure, that ye obsequies
be made most worshypfullye to them which have been slain in the deed of
Arms, nor thou should make excuse, neither of time nor of hour, nor of
place, nor of perrill, whether thou overcome, or be ouercomed. For that like as
it is a godly thing, to perform the obsequies, and according to ye ryghts to
do sacrifice for the dead, even so it is very profitable for the^ that remain
alive, and rather altogether necessary to show to the living, this thy pity
to wards the dead. For surely, when every man sees the dead bodies, as it
wtere for outragiousnes and despite of the Captain, not to be buried, they
judge and presuppose the very same of them selves, and take displeasure of such
things, knowing that if they faighting for their country, happen to be
killed, are like not to be buried.

Of revenging the overthrow.
IF in fayghting, thou happen to receive some overthrow, meste diligently thou
should give attendau^ce, to find occasion to make reuengement, and to take
away the shame received, having need after this manner, to comfort thy
Soldiers, which shall be left thee safe. And surely most often times, those
that newly have obtained the victory, are wont here and there to straggell
negligently, and to keep their things without forecast or any ward. And he
that passes little on yt enemy, becomes with all, sloth full and recheles. For
the which thing many times, the happy success of the Act, has been of
greater harm then the received ruin. For that whosoever has once been beaten
with contrary fortune, by the success of the thing being taught and
admonyshed of his error, from that time forward, more warely does gonerne him
self. And contrariwyse, he that has not made proof of adversity, ra^not
uprightly in prosperous affairs maintein himself. And if he be a co^queror, as
one that is become proud, he passes little of other nor uses not discression
after such sort, that no manner of hurt be taken, the which he should have
vsch for to offend the vnwarefull and idell enemies. For surely to fear where
is needful, and where the time requires, is token of a man, which wisely
provides for his business. But without good consideration, to despise and make
little account of every thing, is the sign vndoubtely of an arrogant man, and
therefore such a one, becomes subject to every sort of peril.

Of Truce.
IF thou have made truce, do not in any wise all that time, assault the
enemy, nor yet stand unprovided. Although toward him thou should be in
quiet, no otherwise then as if thou had peace. But in as much as
appertains to thee, beware after such manner as if thou made war, that
there happen thee not any thing contrary.

And undoubtedly, it is a convenient thing in time of Truce, that thou first
move not against the enemy, further then honesty and reasonablenes, nor to
stand altogether without order and disarmed, but rather show thy self to
take head, and to have suspicion of hydden hatred, and of the deceytes of the
adversaries.

Forasmuch as ye minds of the^ with who^ thou haste made truce, be secret and
uncertain: for the which thing thou should steadfastly observe, not to do
any inturie, for the oath that thou haste made in the couenauntes: but for
fear of untruth, trust not upon the enemies, wherein declare thy self
withal, heedefull and prudent, not breaking the agreement, and leauinge not
occasion to be assaulted.

Surely those, which of the iniurye that peradventure they are like to
receive, do remytte the revenge to the immortal Gods, although they be of a
godly oppinion, notwithstanding me thinks, they put not their things in
safeguard, where it is very strange and a foolyshe thing, not to defend thy
self from perilles, and to take no heed, because thou haste hope, that for
their falseheade, and breaking of faith they are to be punished, which
unmercifully have offended and indamaged thee, as though it were like to turn
thee to profit and safetye, so soon as the enemies shall have suffered pain
for the same, specially when with safegarde of thy things, it is lawful for
thee, to make proof, and to come to knowledge of the impietye of the enemies.
In which manner thou being falselye and trayterouslye assaulted, shalt not be
hurt, and the enemy shall show himself to be disleal, which had thought to
have hurt thee, if he had been able.

How the Captain should behave him self, to cause Cities to yield.
VSyng benignity and gentelnes toward those Cities, which of their own
mind, have yielded themselves unto thee, and by couenaunts being rendred-shall
come into thy possession, thou shall thereby incline other so to do. For ye they
intised of hope to attain the very same that the other have, will easily
yield. And surely that manne, which so soon as he has obtained a City, shows
himself sharp and cruel, putting it to sack, tearing and cuttyng to pieces al
things, gives occasion to other Cities, to alienate their good wills, and to
take upon them selves the war, and the difficulte victory. For as much as,
every man which is assured, that the conqueror is unmerciful and cruel
toward them whom he has overcome, does choose much rather to do and to
suffer all extremity, then willinglye to yield. And questionles, no one thing
fills so much the mind with valiantness, as fear of the imminent peril,
which every man knows to suffer when so ever they yield. And the fear to
suffer misery, is wont to put in the minds of men great desire both to make
resistaunce and to faight. And all proof which is made against desperates, is
difficult and perilous. And they who yelding them selves cannot hope to be
intrered more gentlye, nor to have used toward them more benignity then as if
faighting, they were overcome, much rather making resistance, will suffer all
mischief. Whereby the unwise and cruel Captains, gives occasyon that the
siege of a City is prolonged, and some also to become vain, and are never
brought to good end, and be likewise dangerous and perilous.

Of keeping promise with Traitors
Unto them which at thy request, shall have committed some treason, thou
ought to observe the faith and promises made them, not so much for their
cause, as for the time to come, whereby other may understand, that those
which will follow thy part, shall be rewarded, and so the easelier they will be
brought to such services. For questionless he that gives to tratours, may
thereby receive great benefittes. Wherefore be ready to give thanks to such
sort of men: conlideryng, that thou art not chosen revenger of the betraide
city, but Captain of thy country.

Of treasons by night, and of understanding the course of the Stars.
FOr to give an assault, and to take occasion to oppress the enemies by
night through treason, it is neadefull, that you have some knoweledge of the
course, and mouinges of the Stars, seeing that through the ignorance of such
things, the determination of them, which would commit treason, most
oftentimes becomes vain: where the Traitor having sometime appoincted with
thee, the third or the fourth, or what so ever other hour thou list, the
which he has thought to have been fytte, either to open the gate, or to kill
some of the ward of the City, or finally to oppress at a sudden some ambushe
of the enemies, not knowing the determinate bower, of necessity it is like in
one of these two things to commit error, either going sooner then is
needful, and before the Traitor has procured the thing, whereby thou may
be taken of the enemy, or be hindered to bring to effect yt, which thou have
determined upon, or else going latter, then the time apoincted, give occasion
that the Traitor be caught and killed, and so be an impediment to thy self,
to bring to pass the thing that you go about. Wherefore it is requisite with
judgment, to make consecture, and diligently consider, in what space of time,
how many voiages thou have to make: and then considering the courses of the
stars, thou must with thy self, most diligently remember how far thou
have gone, and how much there is to go: so that thou aryue not sooner nor
later, then the hour of the time appointed, and that thou be within the wall,
before the enemy understand of thy coming.

Of taking by day, a City or Castle by treason.
BUt if thou must needs by day go to take with treason a City or Castle,
whylest thou art a marching, send before a part of thy horsemenne, to take
all those which be found by the way, to the end, that none stirring from the
field, do run to the City, to give advise that thy men come to assault
the^: but rather make that in a moment at a sudden, thou be present with the
enemy with thy army in good array. But after that sudde^ly, you have assalted
him, he having not thereof any whit of suspision, if it be not good, the thing
to be done by treason, command thy men to faight without further delay,
withal force, and to go with most spedy celeretie, to the intent to prevent
the enemy, thou having occasion to approach either to a Castle or to a forte,
or finallye to a City, and this inespecially, when thou shall have few men,
and inferior to those of the enemy. And in deed, where the sudden brunt and
unlooked for, comes upon them, contrary to their opinion, it is wont
grievously to trouble the enemy, although he be of greater power. But if he
seeing the men that assault him, have leisure to deliberate, taking heart
again, he will then begin to pass littell, and more boldly will faight:
whereby it chances most often times, that the first salies, and the
beginninges of the enterprise, are wont to seem more fearful, then when
slowely and with delay they proceade. For the which thing, to many it has
chanced, that with a sudden larum, the enemy now astonished and made afraid,
they have with little labor constrained to submit him self of his own mind or
else against his will, to render obedience.

Of besieging a City.
IN layng the siege to a City, above al things, the virtue of the captain,
is nedeful, and the policies of war like wise is to be required, and the
preparation of ordinance. Where also ought to be foreseen and taken head of,
that those, which thou kepest besieged, in no place at a sudden offend thee.
Because that they who see them selves to be besieged know, if they shall be
negligent, what grievous hurtes, will come upon them, for which cause, more
circumspectlye they take heed, and observe by what way, they may indamage the
enemy that besieges them. And surely, he that thinks to be in no peril,
death some of those things, which he has determined, when it pleases him: but
without doubt, who so ever considers him self to be in danger, seeks
every occasion, which found, inforceth him self to take it, and to use it
against his adversary. wherefore he that does besiege must fortify his camp
with stakes, with trenches, and with watches and wards. For as much as the
enemy a far of, sees that which you preparest, and the same which thou art
about to do: against which, those whom thou kepest besieged, being covered of
ye wall, at times issuing out at unawares, and out of the gates running abroad,
may burn al thy artifices, and Ingins, and oppress thy souldsers, and ruinate
whatsoever shall come to their hands. The which thing they will not attempt to
do, if nere to the gates, as well to the great, as to the littell, where
appears, that they may issue out of the City, thou have placed for watch,
some hand of thy Soldiers, who may let such sudden salies and incursions:
otherwise, the enemies issuing out secretly, may many times, be able to do
like things.

Very comodious and profitable it shall turn thee, if the enterprise which thou
would do, shall be done by night. And verily if the thing be done by night,
considering the darkness to the^ which be assaulted, it is wont to seem more
terrible, for that they can not diserne, what is done. Whereby it happens,
peneth, that the suspicion is more grievous, and in the minds increases
greater ferae, then if the thing might be seen. Whereof does rise, such
vproares and tumultes, that there is no man, which is not at his wits end.
Yea and they will say, that the enemy does many things, which in deed he does
not, seeing that for respect of the night, it can not well be understand, of
what part the assault is given with the ladders, and that which is done.
Moreover through all the City, they will run up and down here and there, and
in every place raise rumors and fear, and terrible brutes or tales, for as
much as false fear, deuines of things to come, and estemeth it to be ye same
which suspicion imagines.

And every thing that thou do by night, although it be but little, to them
which thou kepest beseged, may seem horrible and fearful. For as much as none
tells that which he sees: but every man, particularly rehearses that,
which in the dark he has heard. And if it be understood that of some
part, one or two of the enemies, have got upon the wall, thynkyng those to
be all the men, puttyng them selves to flyghte, leauyng their defense, and
forsaking their fortifications, they will depart.

If thou wylt that speadelye some work be dispatched and done, see thou be
the first to put to thy hand to the same work. Because the multitude, not so
much with threatenings, is enforced to do that which thou would, as they are
moved by shame, and of the reverence of their superiors. And undoubtedly when
every manne shall see the Captain before any other, put his hand, to the
work, and to travail him self therein, then they know the thing to have uede
of spedenes, and they be ashamed not to labor, and fear to draw backward,
and now not as servants and soldiers subject to the commaundemet of other,
and of an ill will, but driven of shame, they will come, and (as well as though
they were called) offer them selves to bear equally the burden of the labor.

Although there be many and sundry instruments of war, and diverse the
inventions to batter and to ruinate a eitie, notwithstanding thou nedest not
use them all, but only those which thou may commodiously. And without doubt,
if I should undertake to teach thee, I were not able to name all those, which
are to be occupied, I mean the Aries, the Testudini the Vinie, the Balistes,
the Bridges, and such like work and Ingins: for as much as such things,
appertain to the riches and power of them that make the war, and also to
the wittines of the Architecturres, and Artificers, and unto the cunning and
subtilnes in artificially making them. But that which above all thing, agrees
with the prudence of a Captain, me thinks is specially to chose some part of
the city, or castle, where like works and ordinance may be brought unto.
For that thou can not caselye compass all the city about, and assault all
parts thereof, with works and Ingins, except the castle were very small and
little. Then having divided thy men into sundry parts, and disposed them by
order, thou shall commau^d that larums be given to ye other places of the
city, and that schaling ladders be also brought to the wall, so that the
citezins may know to be oppressed on every sde, and through such difficulty
to be constrained, that they can not well deliberate to what part of the City
they ought to give succor. Seeing that if the other parts be aba^doned and
that they shall attend to the same, whereunto the Ingins are planted, the
Soldiers being made ready to the schallyng, not let of any man, with
facelety may get upon the wall: or else if the towns men dividing them selves
through al places, will every one according to his strength, do the best they
can to defend: those which shall be placed against the violence of the Ingins,
and instruments of war, can not being but a few, sustain the wayghtines of
the fayghte, nor repulse the fury of so hot and terrible assault.

Wherefore it shall be to very good purpose and profitable, to make as though in
diverse places thou would assault the city, so that through the sundry
preparations, and for the diverse manners to overcome it, thou divide in many
parts the force, and the Counrels of the Citezins, and keep their minds
troubled, and here and there to draw and retire them. Whereby thou in this
mean while, of that part, which with all thy power shall stand intentive to
faight, more easily may oppress the City, and take it, as it were a
certain body.

But if thu make haste, and inforcest thy self speadely to win some Castle
or City, or else some Forte, and that thou see now thy Soldiers through
labor to be weery, and that it should not turn thee well to defer the
enterprise, nor to remove the Soldiers from the fayght, then it is needful
for thee, to deuyde thy men into sundry orders, having respect to the number
of them, and to the greatness of the City.

And beginning in the first watch of the night, the time to fayght being
equally divided between them, the squadrons with equal space put in order,
boldlye undertake the enterprise. And after the first ward, cause the second,
to succeed, and the third next the same, and the fourth, and the fifte also,
if so many shall need: relyuing now the one, and now the other. So that
whiles ye one squadron faighteth, the other may ordinarely repose them selves
and sleep. Finally the night ended, in the beginning of the day, return the
very same order: and so returning from time to time, continue the enterprise,
distributing the hands and deuidyng them, course by course. In which manner,
shall happen two things, which is, that day and night without any delay of time,
they shall faighte, and those which are weary, shall be reliued of the lusty,
refreshed through rest, which by their turn they have taken. Nor let no man
think, that citizens besieged, can use the self same council, and that
disposed with the same order, although they be many, may with like manner and with
exchau^ging now the one, now the other, without disturbance and most great
labor, defend the^ selves. For as much as every man, which remembers to
stand in peril, albeit he supposes that the commodity is given him to
sleep, nevertheless he can take no rest. For that considering the danger that
stands him upon, he is constrained to watch, as though the City wers like
to go in ruin in ye mean time that he slepeth and reposeth himself

But peradventure some will say, what? thynkest thou that the Captain is made
of a Diamant, or else of Steal? Which in all those things, that by the
space of course be to all the army divided, he only continually ought to
stand vigilant, and never him self to take rest. Surely I do not seek this of
him, nor forbid not that at a time he give himself to quietness and to sleep,
so that he do it moderately, and that the sleep be short: and in that while, do
choose some faithful and valiant manne, which for reputacion and authority,
has the second place, after the Captain, and the charge of governing to be
given him.

Sometime those parts of the City which be of some high rock, and
dau^gerousnes, or else otherwise fortified of nature, has been seen to have
given to those who have overcome them, greater occasion to take and win the
city, then such walls have done, which with art, and with hands have been
made sure and strong, and therefore they are reputed, to be more weak. And in
deed those places that be fortified by nature, are wont to be kept more
neglige^tly, with none, or but with a small garrison of Soldiers: And in this
case the wise and witty Captain trusting in such occasion, may study and
find out, that which is to be done: and with rewards and with promises, seek
to induse some of his men which are most bold, that they enforce them selves
either with ladders, or otherwise, to get up on that part, where is most ado
to clime. And if peradventure they shall be gotten up, and secretlye entered
within the wall. Let them take some gate of the City, whether it be great or
little: and enforce them selves to open it, and to keep it open. And to this
thing shall be of most great help, if in some manner, they shall from without,
draw up to the wall, some trumpet, the which in a sudden should begin to
sound. For that the enemies hearing the trumpet from the wall, and inespecially
by night, it shall put great fear in the minds of the Citizens, thinking now
ye city to be taken, and them selves altogether to be ouercom: whereby being
made afraid, they will forsake the gates, and the places of watch and ward,
and take them to their heles, that way, which they shall think most mete.
Wherefore to thy other Soldiers, which look for the end of the thing, it
wylbe easy, having no manner of encounter, either the gates being broken to
enter, or else with ladders to get upon the wall. In this manner with one
trumpet, and the same unarmed, thou may take and win a City.

Of the City taken.
IF thou take a city which for the number and worthiness of ye citizens, are
thought puisaunt, whereby is to be feared, least they drawing together with
often turning back, setting them selves against thy men, do make
resistaunce, or else keeping the highest places, and afterward from thence sore
hurt thy Soldiers, or else at the end retire in some hold, from whense after
according to occasyon they may issue out to give thee the assault, whilst the
thing shall be in such case, thou must openly cause to be understood, that who
so ever shall lay down their weapons, and willyngly vnarm them selves, by no
manner of wife shall be killed of thy soldiers. Because every man sekes first
to do to other that, which he thinks, shall happen to him self, when so ever he
is taken, and therein he does enforce him self, to prevent other. Whereby has
happened, that some often times by force, have driven out the ennemies now
dispersed in the taken City, or else, if they were not able so to do, they
have retired in some exceading strong Rock, so that a new they have had
power to give travail and labor to their enemies, after such sort, that the
adversaries have been driven to a new siege, and sometime much longer and more
difficult then ye first, passing through many perils. And may chance, by
publishing thy decree in every place, al or at lest wise ye greater part, will
cast down their weapons. For ye those which are so dysdainfull against the
enemy, that they desire with force of arms to attempt fortune, having
suspicyon whether the other Citizens be of the same disposition or not, will
come also to lay down their weapons. And by this it happens, that albeit
that every one of them would use their weapons, and try their strengthes,
notwithstanding particularly, the one having suspicion of the other, they will
all make haste to lay down their weapons, every man douting to remain himself
only armed seeing that the shortness of time, and of things does not permit that
they may manifest a new their minds, and then to take council.
Nevertheless, those which have desire to save them selves, and that all
manner of ways do attend to their own safeguard, till such time as some hope
of the same be offered and showed them, although with veruent mind for their
safety they would yield, yet constrained of very necessitye, they resist
those that come to hurt them. Albeit when they find but little hope of
safegarde, then of proud enemies, becoming humble with prayers, they will be
glad to seek thee. Whereby with like decree thou shall induce also to lay
down their weapons, those which by force of arms have determined to defend
themselves.

Of staying the revenge against those which are overcome.
THe death which chaunseth to soldiers faighting, in no manner of wise has
need, neither of comfort, nor of compassion, as the same which has happened
through love of virtue and for desire to ouercom. But after ye obtained
victory, having now won and taken the city, the kylling in every place the
ouercommed, is to co^querours a thing most miserable, and rather then virtue,
a testimony of cruelty and foolishnes. And although thou be angered and made
cruel against the ouercommed and subdued, you must not therefore think, to
suffer harm, either of thy reputation, or of thy affairs, if the enemies so
sone as they are oppressed, have not been siayne. For that leysurely at thy
commodity, all perril of faighting taken away, thou may deliberate, what
thou will do with the ennemie that thou have conquered.

Of the City which by force of Arms can not be overcome.
IF thou have not hope to be able to overcome and take by force of Arms, the
same City that thou haste besieged, and that for such occasion, thou must
prolong the siege, and that nevertheless it is to be judged, that by length of
time, and by famine thou may get such a City, thou shall cause to be taken
in ye Country, and in the fields, as many as thou find, and of these
choose them, which for valiauntnes of mind, for iustines of body, and for
florishingnes of age, shall seem unto thee apt for the war, whom thou may use
where shall turn thee to commodity, and when thou know them to be
profitable in thy affairs. But the women, the children, the old folk, and
those which by other occasion be weak, and not mere to faight, thou shall
enforce to enter into the City, as those which can not work, nor help in
any thing the same, which for the defense of a City is desired, so that they
much sooner consuming the vittailes, may be of so great harm to the besieged
citizens, that they may be reputed a great deal sooner ennemies, then friends,
or neyboures.

Of the behavior, which the Captain ought to use, after the War is ended.
AFter that the affairs of war, under thy government is done and ended, so
that, the same acclomplished, thou have liberty to make an end of all
things, show not thy self proud and severe, but rather humble, pleasant, and
gentle, and consequently, loving to almen. For as much as the first things,
bredes envy, and the other induces emulacion and affection. Envy, is the
having grief and sorrow at the prosperity of other: and emulacion is the
desire to follow the virtue of other. But they be between them so contrary,
that he which has envy, desires that none have any good. And he that has
emulacion, has desire to bring to pass in like manner, such things, as other
by them selves have honorably attained.

Then a man of a good mind shall not only be a good guide of armed men: and
of a country, but also a wise Captain, a diligente preserver and governor, in
augmenting his honor and in conseruing the same perpetuallye without any
peril.

The end.
THE TABLE OF the principal things which in this book are contained.
FOr what occasyon men faight unfortunately. fol. iii.

The Romans through prudence, by council, and with the feats of war,
obtained the Empire of the world. fol. iiii.

They, which attribute all infclicity only to fortune, are fools and very
sunple. fol. iiii.

It is the property of a malicious and unjust man, to excuse him from every
fault, which has ministered evil the publyke affairs. fol. iiii.

In choosyng a General Capytaine, no respect ought to be had, neither to his
stock, nor to his predecessors, nor to his fortunatnes in riches. fol. vii.

The qualitye which ought to be in a General Captain. fol. viii.

He that is not given to covetousness of gold and silver, may honorablye have
the charge of the affairs of war. fol. x.

The Captain ought to be neither old nor young. fol. x.

He that has children, is meet to be chosen Captain. fol. xii.

The Captain ought to be a fair speaker. fol. xii.

More difficulte it is, to cure the infirmities that stands hid, then those
which both may be felt and seen. fol. xiii.

The Captain that is to be chosen, ought to be a man well esremed and of
reputacion. fol. xiiii.

The poor Captain, so that he be good and valiant, is not to be refused.
fol. xiiii.

The Captain intentive to gain money, is not good. fol. xv.

In a Captain, his reputacion, and the nobylity of his predecessors is to be
esteemed. fol. xvi

By reason it is to be thought, that he is more like to be a better Captain
that is no gentelman borne, then some of noble pare^tage. fol. xvii

The Captain should be chosen valiant, of noble blood, aduenturous, and
rich. fol. xviii

The headdes of the Soldiers would be strong, bold, and faithful to their
country. fol. xx

It is much vtility to the common weal, to set forward the nobility, when an
enterprise must be done, and in doing the same, is required spedines. fol. xx.

The Captain ought to have with him some Counselors and companions. fol. xxi.

He often tunes committes error, which not minding to hear the advice of
other, does attribute every thing to him self alone. fol. xxii.

The weak beginninges of things, cannot sustain ye burden of yt is said upon
them. fo. xxv

Of the manner that is to be used in the bringing forth the army. fol. xxvi.

Through every place, the army ought to march in battle raye. fol. xxvi^

Always it is better and more sure, and much casyer, to govern the battle
which marches close together, and square, then thynne and long. fol. xxix.

The victuales, the cariages, and all the remnaunt of provision, ought to be
pleaed in the midst of the army. fol. xxx.

Through dearth of victuales, and for lack of money, wars are wont to
abate, and to extinguishe. fol. xxxii.

It would be cared for, with all diligence, that to the Camp, both by sea and
land, the victualles may safely be brought fol. xxxiiii.

The lodginges being placed, diches and trenches must be made. fol. xxxv.

It is a wholesome and a profitable thing, not to keep an army to long in one
continual place. fol. xxxvi.

The standing in ydlenes, and in slothfulness, causes the bodies to become
weak and languished, and disposes their nundes altogether vile and fearful.
fol. xxxvii.

The army instructed, and set in array, ought to be divided into.ii. parts.
fol. xli.

The Captain must praise them, the which have always defended their places.
fol. xlii.

Souldyers ought not to be suffered, which presumpteously go to rob and
spoil. fol. xliiii

Every manne must stand on his feet to keep watch and ward. fol. xlvii

The army mindyng secretlye to depart, ought to make many fires. fol. xlviii.

The fugetiues are to be kept in ward. fo. xlix

The wise Captain ought with all dilygence to view the Camp of the euemies.
fol. l.

With those ways, which may beguile the enemy, with the very same it is
to be taken head of, not to be deceived. fol. lv.

Councels are not to be disclosed. fol. lv.

It is a sign of an indiscreet and foolish man, arrogantlye to manifest his
council to every man. fol. ivi.

Before the Army should be brought forth. Sacrifice would be done. fol. lvii.

Knowledge of places must be had. fol. ix.

In conducting forth men of Arms, it is to be foresene, that by the self
same way where they entered, it may be open to return. fol. lxii.

Soldiers refreshed with meat, become more strong and lusty. fol. lxvi.

The countenance of the Captain, is wont to make the minds of the Souidyers
conformable. fol. lxvii.

When the Army ought to be put in terror. fol. lxix.

How Soldiers may be encouraged with the prisoners of the enemy. fol. lxxi.

How men are set in array. fol. lxxiii.

To avoid, that the enemy compass thee not. fol. lxxviii.

Of that, which appertains to a prudent Captain, when he has to faight
with a few men, against a great multitude. fol. lxxix.

The assaulting the enemies behind at unawares, puts them in most great
terror, and is of incredible profit. fol. lxxxv.

The office of a wise Captain is, to place to gether in the ranks, ye
brethren with brothers, and feendes with friends, fol. lxxxvi.

Of Commandments, wauinges, and signs. fol. lxxxvii.

Of the order that ought to be observed. fol. xc.

Nothing is better, more safer, nor more surer, then for men to observe order,
and to stand still in their place. fol. xci.

The cries, the noise of armor, and the sound of trompettes, wonderfullye
troubles and fears the minds of the enemies. fol. xci.

The Captain often times, seeing the prepatation of the enemies, is
constrained to accomodate, and to ordain his men according to the armours, the
men and manner of the same. fol. xciii.

It is not a laudable thing for a Captain, to cast him self with all his
men, into the hands of chance. fol. xcv.

In a thing uncertain, it is better with boldness, not only to avoid the
overthrow, but also to seek to hurt the enemy. fol. xcv.

The office of the Captain whylest the battle is a faightyng. fol. xcviii

Many times the death of the Captain happening, the reputation of fortunate
successes do upayre fol. Ci.

Of that, which the Captain has to do after the deed of Arms. fol. Ciii.

The Soldiers ought to be partakers of the gain. fol. Ciiii.

So long as the war lasts, the prisoners ought not to be put to death. fol.
Cvi.

The feasts and triumphs, after the victory. fol. Cvii.

Of burying them which in the battle have been slain. fol. Cviii.

Often times the happy succes of the act, has been of greater damage, then the
received overthrow. fol. Cix.

To fear, where is needful, and when the time requires, is the property of a
man, which politikely foresees his business. fol. C. x.

It is a strange, and foolish thing, a man not to defend him self from
perrtiles. fol. Cxii.

How the Captain ought to behave him self to bring a City to yeide. fol.
Cxiii.

Nothing fills the minds of men so much with vakantnes, as the iminente
fear of peril. fol. Exiiii.

All profes, which is made against desperate men, are difficult and perilous.
fol. Cxiiii.

Fidelity is to be used with traitors. fol. Exv.

Of treason by night, and of understanding the course of the stars. fol.
Exvi.

A way to take by day, a City or castle by treason. fol. Exviii.

The sudden invasions, and not looked for, coming upon men, contrary to their
opinion, are wont grievously to trouble ye enemy. fol. Cxix

In laying sege to a City, above all things, the virtue of the capitayn is
most nedeful. fol. Cxx.

The thing that is done by night, is wont to seem most terrible. fol. Cxxi

The multitude, not so much with threatninges is compelled to do things, as
they are moved with shame, and of the reverence toward their superiors. fol.
Cxxiii

The Captain ought when time requires, to make such a trustye man his deputy,
which for reputation and auctority is next to him. fol. cxxviii.

The revenge, is to be forborne against those that have been overcome. fol.
Cxxxii.

The way yt is to be used to take a city, which by force of arms cannot be
overcome. fo. cxxxiiii

Of the behauior which the Captain ought to use after the war is ended. fol.
Cxxxv.

How envy is to have grieft of ye prosperity of other: and how emulation, is
the desire to imitate the virtue of other men. fol. Cxxxv.

The end of the Table.
Imprynted at London, by Wyllyam Seres, dwellinge at the West end of Paul's, at
the sign of the Hedgehogge.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno. 1563.


