LIFE'S BREVITIE AND DEATHS Debility.

Evidently Declared in a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of that Hopeful and
Uertuous young Gentleman EDWARD LEVVKENOR Esquire, etc. In whose Death is ended
the name of that renowned Family of the Lewkenors in Suffolk.

By Tymothy Oldmayne Minister of the Word of God at Denham in Suffolk.

Our days on Earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding. Also an Elegy
and an Epitaph on the death of that worthy Gentleman, by I. G. Dr. of D.

LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Oaks dwelling in little S. Bartholmewes near the
Hospital gate. 1636.

FLECTAR NON FRANGAR


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND Of high Desert, the Lady MARY Lewkenor and Mris
Elizabeth Lewkenor, the Mother and sorrowful Widow of this Deceased
Gentleman: together with the right worshipful and truly noble Lady, the Lady
Anne Le-strange Wife to Sir Nicholas Le-strange Baronet: As also to her two
virtuous and worthy sisters, Mistress Katherine and Mistress Mary Lewkenor,
Eternal Happiness, etc.
Loath I am (right Worshipful and truly Honorable) that this rough and
unpolished discourse of mine, should unfortunately renew Your former grief, or
fill those Eyes again with tears, which were never fully dried sithence this
heavy Accident befell this Noble Plant, so near, so dear unto you. For sorrow
(I know right well) is of a quick and apprehensive nature, and that the least
touch makes the Vessel easily overflow. How ever, I humbly entreat, that
mine innocence herein, may answer for me: my aim being chiefly this, to strew
only some few flowers upon the Hearse of this my honorable friend, such as in
his life time, his own Hand gathered, pleasant unto the Eye, and of a most
odoriferous Sent. Neither is this Treatise of mine otherwise intended, but to
be a true Remembrancer, to tell succeeding Ages the greatness of the loss;
when your renowned Family, was by the Untimely Death of this so Hopeful a
Young Gentleman, thus fatally smitten, if not quite overturned. This Town
which now affords me my being, formerly afforded me my first breath. And
four generations of your honorable Family, have I seen here upon the Stage,
successively acting their several Parts. Angels and Men were the lookers on,
and with great applause, highly commended their true Action, and generous
demeanor. But now alas, the Theater is wholly empted, and all the Actors quite
gone, the Stage hourly expected to be pulled down; and if it stand, yet little
hope there is that ever our eyes shall see such Actors any more upon it, to
play their parts so commendable, as those Ancients did. The consideration
whereof, as it carries with it not only trouble, but indeed a kind of
amazement, so is there much wisdom required in censuring and patience in
enduring what is happened. My humble request therefore (unto you right
Worshipful) is, as those that have the greatest share in this unvaluable
loss, that in the midst of so many differing Thoughts in searching out the
true cause and end that the Almighty has in doing this, you would be pleased
to remember these three Things: First, that there is in God an unbounded will,
that his Judgments are Unsearchable, and his Ways past finding out. Secondly,
that You would be pleased to look back upon the happiness, and glory of
your Family, which formerly, You have both seen and tasted. Believe me, right
worshipful, the sight thereof will be a Sovereign preservatiue against
Repining. Lastly, that seeing it was determined, by an eternal, and inevitable
decree (that the Sirnames of your Family, should here fatally end) that you
would be pleased to solace and cherish your Hearts, that it is done without
the least spot and blemish to the same. And that this young Gentleman so
honorably concluded, and closed up all so happily, as He has done, to his
immortal praise.

But I desire not to tell the Travailer the way he knows so well already; or
light a Candle when the Sun is up, or lead the hand of the skillful Artist.
Here therefore I do humbly take my leave, desiring You to accept of what is
done herein, as the Fruit of that unfeigned Love, and dutiful Respect which
was always borne by him, to your Honorable and worthy Family, who still
remains

Yours in the Lord to be commanded to the uttermost of his power until Death:
Tymothy Oldmayne.

Perlegi concionem hanc cui titulus est (Life's brevity) in qua nihil reperio
quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur.

Ex aedib. Fulham. decimo die Septem. 1625. SA: BAKER.

LIVES BREVITY, AND DEATHS DEBILITY.
ISAIAH 26. VERSE. 19. Thy dead men shall live; with my dead body shall they
arise: awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust; for thy dew is as the dew of
Herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.


IT would have brought much ease and comfort to our sorrowful hearts, if we
had only heard of this sad accident, (the death I mean of this so noble a
Plant, this Honorable young Gentleman) and not been Eyewitnesses of the
same. And that the same Country which received his last breath, had likewise
embraced his honorable Ashes: his living presence how welcome would it have
been unto us? But coming thus amongst us shrouded under the black mantle of
death! we tremble at it: For this is one of the miseries of man (when death
seizes on him) that he that was nearest unto him in affection; then desires
to be farthest from him in action: and that living face, that affoorded
greatest joy; when once dead, carries with it greatest terror, neither can
the conclusion of all this sad Catastrophe, but add vinegar to our bleeding
wound, that whilst we were seriously bethinking with our selves, in what sort
we may best express the inward grief and trouble of minds for this our
loss, in doing all the honor that possibly we could unto him, in this his
Funeral obsequies: Lo, the tediousness of the way, and terriblenesse of the
disease, had so shattered and crushed that tender, and delicate body of his
coming along to us, riding in that dolfull Chariot of death; that no sooner
had a few tears given him a sad welcome, but we were enforced to give his body
to the earth, and we to him a sorrowful Adieu.

But in all this, patience must possess our souls: And seeing he is now
already entered into the house of his age, and sweetly sleeps upon his bed of
honor, amongst the rest of his noble. Ancestors: let us I pray you turn our
thoughts awhile from him, and look a little upon the hand of God; in doing
this to him: and with him in cutting off (as it were with one stroke) the name
and glory of so renowned a family amongst us. To that end it must be remembered,
as a thing not wholly past the memory of man: how the Grandfather of this young
Gentleman (of high repute) joining himself in marriage with a Right
Worshipful family in this County, left that former feate and dwelling of that
ancient family of his own in Sussex, and building up his name amongst us, by
his noble and virtuous demeanor, became a grace and ornament, both to this
obscure Village wherein we now live, as also to the whole Country round
about. And so like a glorious star shining long amongst us, at length yielded
to nature in his old age and fullness of days: Him a blessed Son succeeded,
an Heir to his Fathers Lands, and an inheritour of his Fathers best and
choysest virtues: Prove. 3.16
Such being the ornaments and rich endowments of his mind, that had the right
hand of wisdom been as bountiful to him, as her left hand was: we
questionless should have deemed him borne to be admired. But (alas) he dyed in
the midst of his days, and chiefest of his Honors. Last of all, this
hopeful young Gentleman, in time, followed: a Phoenix in our days, but
crushed in the shell: a pleasant Flower, but killed in the Spring; a noble
plant, but of yesterdayes continuance, and sent for a time amongst us, only to
be loved, desired, and lamented. Here you see are three generations only; and
those three are al: for with this latter, the fountain dried, and with his
death the name of the Lewkenors in Suffolk, is quite extinguished.

A lamentable thing to behold so flourishing a Caedar so suddenly to fade,
and within the memory of man, so worthy a family to be both begun and ended. 1
Cor. 29 15 Job. 8.9.14. and 14.1.11
But here we see the frail condition of all human flesh: A Breath: a
Bubble: the house of the spider; frailer then the grass, and more uncertain
then the flower of the field: according to that 1 Pet. 1.14. All flesh is
grass, etc. 1 Pro. 1.14
And here again we see what the houses and habitations of the mighty are if
the angry breath of God blows on them: today mine, to morrow thine, and the
next day God knows whose. Here, lastly we see the reason why Solomon the
wise, making choice of the rarest and chiefest flowers here below, most
delightful to the heart of man (as Honors, Riches, large Fields, fair
Possessions, young years, and youthful days, intending with the same (as it
seems) a wreath or garland, to adorn his Crown and Scepter) whilst he
houldeth them in his hand, he loatheth them, and casting them from him, he
cries out as he does; Eccles. 1.2
Eccl. 1.2. Vanity of vanities all is vanity. And no marvel, for all these
cannot keep off the stroke of death, or preserve a man from the power of the
grave. Psalm 49.15


Oh that all sorts of men, of what degree so ever, high or low, that ever heard
of this Gentleman's untimely death, would likewise harken to him, whilst with
deaths dreaded Trumpet set to his pale (yet blessed) lips, he thus calls to
them.

First my honorable friends and equals, my sociats and companions: Lo here in
me you see your selves: my lot to day; Psalm. 52.7 Job 30.25 Pro. 31.30 Jere.
9.23 Eccl. 1^.10
yours perhaps to morrow: trust not (I beseech you) in Riches, Beauty,
Strength, or in the morning of your Age: for they are things more brittle then
Ice. I had them al, and lo ye see how suddenly I have lost them. I leaned a
little too hard on them: and see like an Egyptian-reed; 2 King. 36 6
how treacherous in the end I found them. Sweet companions are they in the time
of health; Job 16.2
but miserable comforters at the hour of death. Ioh. 16.33
Hasten therefore your peace with God, and as soon as may be make him your
friend: so when all things else do fail you, he will not forsake you: for he
has said it (and by joyful experience I have found it) I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee. Yea, Josu. 1.5 Heb. 13.6
when all friends leave you, then will he be nearest to you. Holding you by the
right hand, and saying: Isa 41.13, 14.
Fear not, fear not, thou worm, Jacob, I will help thee says the Lord, thy
redeemer, the holy one of Israel.

And you my loving friends, men of lower rank, Psalm. 146 3, 4, 5
my sorrowful neighbous and the rest, to you I only say: Trust not in man,
nor in the son of man: 2 Chro. 32.8 Ier. 17.5
neither build your hope upon the arm of flesh: for the greatest Prince his
breath is in his nostrils, and when he dies his thoughts perish. Had you
trusted more in God, and less in me; God it may be, would have trusted you
longer with me: but you robbing him of his right, he has justly deprived you
of your comfort. He only is the blessed man: Jer. 17.7, 8
That trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a
tree planted by the waters, that spreads her roots by the river, and shall
not see when heat comes, but his leaf shall be green, and shall not fail
in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

These with many other; the like necessary, and profitable instructions, this
sweet young Gentleman with his dying breath, proclaims to us: the which for
brevities sake I am enforced to omit, leaving them wholly to the due
consideration of every Christian: And come now to take the short survey of his
life and death, full of grace and exceeding commendable. The which before I can
with any convenience do, I must here stay a while and answer a maine
Objection, which like another wounded Amasa lying tumbling in our way, 2 Samuel
20 12
hinders us from prosecuting our intended course with that cheerfulness that
otherwise we might.

Pro. 12.7
For Wisdom says. Prove. 12.7. The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but
the house of the righteous shall stand. Psalm. 112.2, 3
And David says, Psalm 112.2, 3. His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the
generation of the upright shall be blessed. Wealth and riches shall be in his
house: and his righteousness endures for ever. And Eliphaz says, Job. 22.
ver. 23.24. If thou return to the Almighty, Job. 22.23 24.
and shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles. Then shall thou lay up
Gold as dust, and the Gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks: Yea the
Almighty shall be thy defense: and thou shall have plenty of Silver. But here
we see the quite contrary: for in stead of gathering here is scattering: in
stead of building up, here is pulling down: in stead of plenty, here is
scarcity: in stead of fullness here is emptines. Again we read in holy writ
of a reward of the rightuous, Math. 6. Yea here in this life, Math. 19.29. They
shall receive an hundred fold. And is this the reward of the righteous, 1 Cor. 3
to have their names written in the dust, and their glorious Lamp quite put
out? what is become of all the Prayers, Alms, and many pious and charitable
actions, performed by his honorable Ancestors? their gracing of true Religion
with a most holy life and conversation? what is all come to this? All lost and
gone?

For answer of all these, Ecles. 2.16
As the wise man dies, so dies the fool: neither, Is love and hatred to be
discerned by any outward thing whatsoever. Ecles. 9.2


Secondly, that as there are periods of Kingdoms: so are there of private and
particular families. It was a question, that Pompey once propounded to a
certain Philosopher, a sage wise man of those times (having lately before
received by Caesar an unrecoverable loss and overthrow) why Caesar having so
bad a cause in hand, and himself so good; yet Caesar should so mightily
prevail as he did, and he fall in his righteous cause more and more under his
adversaries victorious sword? My Lord (answered he) Sunt periodi Regnorum there
are periods of Kingdoms; and it is probable that the period of the Roman State
is come to an end; and that the manner of the present government will suddenly
be changed; as not long after it came to pass. And so may I truly say by
experience of particular families that they have their periods and one family
passes, and another comes in the place thereof. Show me else what is become
not only of those holy families of which we have such honorable mention in
holy writ: but also of those families of whom Heathen records speak so
honorably? The Syrgij, Appij, Fabij, Valerij, Bruti, and the like, that stood
so much upon their Gentility, and eminents of blood, contemning all others, as
Novi homines, new upstarts in comparison of themselves? If Families have not
their periods: when we see it hourly before our eyes, this family cut off, and
another coming in the place thereof: one ending and another beginning: so that
what is come to this, is befalne to millions before; neither is it a new thing
under the Sun. Eccles. 1.9


Thirdly, it must be remembered, that Almighty God passes none of his promises,
but upon a twofold condition.

1. His Glory: then 2. The good of the party.
Now God always glorifies himself two ways: 1. In his Mercy. 2. In his
Justice.


First, in his mercy, in showring down his richest blessings upon the House
and Family of the righteous man; Pal 85.10
so that within the walls thereof, mercy and truth do daily meet, righteousness
and peace do kiss and embrace one another. Yea, those that by continuance in
well doing, seek glory, and honor, and immortality: Eternal life is (says
the Apostle.) Glory and honor, Romans 2.10
and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

Secondly, in Justice in visiting of sin with an unpartiall eye; not only on
the Fathers, but likewise on their children: yea oftimes so hotly, that the
Father sins, Jer. 31.22
and the child suffers. The Fathers eat sower grapes: and the childrens teeth
are justly set on edge.

Secondly, for the good of the party.

And here it must be remembered, that it is a thing most usual with God our
heavenly Father (intending the good of his servants: partly for their bodies,
but principally for their souls) in disposing of these outward things, for
special reasons best known unto himself, to seem after a sort to cross his
own word and promise made unto them. So that whereas he promises health, they
meet with sickness, length of days, shortness of Life: the Sun shine of
prosperity, and behold they meet the sad and gloomy days of adversity: yea,
it is ordinary with him to dispose of all sublunary blessings, as Queen Hester
for a time bestowed her chiefest favors, not upon them she loved best; but
upon him she hated most. For whereas Mordecay, her Uncle, and other her
kindred, and nearest alliance were seldom named, or it may be hardly looked
on, (as may without wronging the text, Hest. 2.10 20
not unprobably be gathered) Haman that cruel Tiger, and bloody enemy to her
stock and Nation, has in the mean while, what heart could wish; and all the
honor done him, which so mighty a Princess could possibly bestow upon one
that was her vassal and inferior. Or like old Isaac's dealing with his two
sons, Esau and Jacob, making on a Lord, and cockering him under his Wing: and
the other (the true heir of the promise) he turns out of his doors with his
staff in his hand, to seek him a service, Genesis 28.1, 2, 3.
upon which he might afterward live by the sweat of his brows.

Many more instances of Gods dealing with his children in this kind I could
produce, which for brevity sake I do here omit: only I could wish we
finding Almighty God walking in this ordinary way and course of his, that we
should not by our uncharitable surmises, and rash conclusions, either too
rigidly censure his righteous actions; or measure at all his blessed steps,
by the rule and compass of our shallow reach; remembering that there are Arcana
Providentiae, secrets and mysteries of Divine providence, into which, with the
strength of our dazzled eye, we are no way able at all to pierce.

So that we may think, yea, verily believe this or that to be the true cause
and reason of this, or the like heavy accident, and yet be nothing so, but a
mere fantasy of our own. And truly this have others done before us,
(standing upon Record in holy writ) who verily believed they had as sure a
ground to walk upon; and as much reason to judge in diverse cases, as we
possibly can have, and yet when matters came to scanning, were miserably
deceived. For instance, to take 2. or 3. examples (amongst many) who would not
have judged the blindness of that poor man, John. 9
who wanting sight from his birth, and never beholding the Sun walking in his
strength, had bin either for his own, or the sin of his parents? and this was
the opinion of most, as may appear by the Disciples words after. Ioh. 9.2, 3
Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blind? But
Christ tells another reason in the verse following. Neither this man, nor his
parents: but the true cause (says he) is this: that the works of God should
be made manifest in him.

Or secondly, who would not have thought that the true reason, why Almighty God
shortened (as he did) the days and life of that young noble Prince, the hope
of the ten Tribes, and honor of the house of Jeroboam, had been the
fierceness of his wrath bent against that ungodly Family, for the horrible
abominations daily therein committed; but it is not the reason, that is
alleged by the Prophet, but it is the goodness of the virtuous Prince (as
he affirms) that occasioneth his untimely death: For so says the Prophet
Ahijah to the wife of Jeroboam, masking her self in the weeds of another. 1
King. 21 13.
Get thee to thine own house, and when thy feet enter into the City, the
child shall dye, and all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he
only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him is found some good
thing toward the Lord God in the house of Jeroboam.

Lastly, who would not have thought but some one or other sin committed by
himself, or some of his Ancestors, had been the cause why Josiah the mirror
of Kings, fell in battle in the flower of his days by the sword of Pharao
Necho, King of Egypt. True it is, that sin was one cause, and a maine one, for
sin causes every calamity, (as the distemper of humors, every ordinary Ague)
but this was not the true cause, 2 Chro. 35.25
and end that God aimed at, in his sudden death: but that by this means he
being the sooner freed from trouble and vexation of heart, might enter his
grave in peace, Isay. 57.1
and might not see the evil to come. From all which examples, two things by
the way offer themselves unto us, worthy of our due consideration.

The first is, that men in censuring Gods heavy chastisements, lightning on the
backs of the righteous, do usually miss the true, and right end, in inflicting
of the same, taking them as fiery Scorpions of his wrath; when as they are
indeed, the fruits of his Fatherly affection toward them.

2 That when Almighty God performs not his promise to his children, in regard
of outward blessings; then his usual manner is to provide Heb. 11. Better
things for them. For instance, when he denies them this outward trash, and
transitory riches, to give them Riches never fading, but always blossoming.
He denies them outward comfort, and fills their souls with glee and mirth.
They weep for a time, and laugh eternally.

Lastly, hence we may learn, to be very wary how we do rashly pass our
Verdicts in cases of this nature, for fear, least missing Gods aim, we
overshoot our selves, and highly offend. But above all, that we take heed of
playing the Cantharides or stinking fly, where we see the least skin off,
there to be sucking and opening again the skars and blemishes, that were long
since healed with the blood of Christ: Crying out with those clamorous Jews,
Men of Israel, Act 21.28
these be the men: so we, these are the sins; that have procured wrath, and
undone this Family. Nay brethren, let us rather hearken to David's blessing,
Psalm. 41.1.2. Blessed is the man that considers wisely of the poor, the
Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Colo. 3.14.
And to that sweet counsel, that the Apostle gives, Above all things my
brethren (says he) let us put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. So
shall we with her fair mantle, not only cover a multitude of sins: but
construe things in a better sense, 1 Peter 4
drawing our conclusions, not from hatred, but from a far milder Root: namely

From the love of God, 1. To this young Gentleman himself. 2. In him, to us
all.


1 1 To him. 1 1. In taking this noble plant, from the evil to come. 1. Of
sin. Isay 57.1
2 Of punishment.

2 2. In providing for him a Richer, and more noble inheritance, even the sure
mercies of David. Isay 55.3. Isay 55.3



2 2. To us all; if fairly we can draw honey out of the Eater; and wholesome
instruction out of the dead carcass of this dead Lion: as God grant we may.

Fourthly, it must be remembered, that though the name of the Family in
Suffolk, be quite extinguished, yet that the Family it self is not (blessed
be the name of God) utterly destroyed. It is fallen here; but it flourishes
elsewhere. For amongst many other outward blessings, wherewith Almighty God
marvailously enriched the Grandfather of this young Gentleman, he added that
of Joseph's; Gen 49 25
namely, Vbertatem uberum and vulvae: the blessing of the breasts, and of the
womb: So that he had Numerosam prolem, plenty of children, two Sons, and
seven daughters, a goodly off spring; and which increases more the blessing,
not one of them but was the choicest shaft of a thousand. Certainly, Psalm. 126.
he need not be a shamed: For he might speak boldly with his Enemy in the gate.
Now in the younger son of that honorable Knight (younger) I mean, then his
Brother, but deserving indeed the Elders place in any Family of his degree) is
the ancient and Worshipful name of this Family still continued: and being
rich in Sons, with the Favor of the Almighty is like, for many ages so to
be. And besides, it is the masculine, and manly blood of the Lukenors only
here in Suffolk; which by the untimely fall of this flourishing branch, is
thus perished as we see, and quite dried up: otherwise much of that honorable
blood runs yet along (although in a milder strain) through the pure veins
of those three truly virtuous Sisters, no ways inferior to those daughters
of Zelophehad: yea, Number. 27.1
besides these, there is a little Ruth left, a pledge of his love to his dear
wife, and now sorrowful widow, who, although a daughter, yet by the pious and
religious education of that wise and virtuous Gentlewoman (her mother) we are
to hope, will in Gods good time, build up again this decayed and shattered
family of Elimelech.

Fifthly, and lastly, to close up all in a word, we must not be ignorant, how
that most of the richest promises which our heavenly father has in his great
love and free mercy made to his dearest children, are not usually and
ordinarily fulfilled here in this life. Sometimes they are, but commonly they
are not: and if they be, yet but in part, for the full recompense is reserved
till afterward. 1 Cor. 15.
And if it were not so, of all others (says the Apostle) we are most
miserable, as the truth is, they had bin. Their holiness and piety being
accounted no better then madness and folly, and their whole religion,
Exitiabilem superstitionem, unde cuncta atrocia et pudenda confluunt: A
damnable superstition; and the mother of all villainy.

And that we may see this yet the better, let us, I pray you, look a little
into the lives of some few (omitting multitudes) of the choysest servants of
God, and see their reward here in this world. And first John the Baptist, a
great Prophet, and one of a most austere life, and unspotted conversation, the
forerunner and bright morning star, making way for the Sun of
righteousness arising in his full strength: what was the reward he reaped for
all his preaching, and pains taking in the Church of God, his thundering out of
judgments against the wicked, without all partiality, and promising mercies to
the true penitent and afflicted soul? surely to have his head struck off from
his shoulders at the command of an arrant strumpet, and his body to be cast
forth as dung upon the earth: only here was his comfort, Mat. 10.40
that at the last he should not loose the reward of a Prophet, Mat. 10.40.

Again what was the reward of them of whom we have such honorable mention
Heb. 11.38
whose names deserve golden letters, persons of whom the world was not worthy,
surely after all their fruits of a lively faith, their love, their zeal,
their constant confession of the name of Christ; was it not to be tried with
cruel mockings, and scourgings, to be tortured and horribly tormented, to be
sawne assunder and slain with the Sword? Only here was their comfort, that in
the end they should obtain a joyful resurrection.

What lastly was that reward of that good Emperor Hen. 7. after he had with a
deal of care and trouble, not only reformed many disorders and abuses in the
Church and public state, but also had mightily daunted and brought under, the
haughty courage of the Guelph's faction. But at last, to be poisoned (at the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament) with an invenomed Host, which a traitorous
and detestable monk of the order of St. Dominicke gave unto him: the which
Fact of this bloody Monster, as it ought of every Loyal heart to be abhorred
and detested, so ought the Patience, and assured confidence of this most
Christian Emperor, to be highly Magnified, and to the Heavens extolled: who as
the story says, finding the poison (immediately upon the receite thereof)
working in his bowels, and thereupon death approaching, commanded instantly the
Villain to be brought before him; and thus without all passion spoke unto
him: Tu calicem vitae invertisti mihi in mortem: quare o Domine fuge celeriter;
nam si inimici, etc. O faith he, thou have turned to me, the cup of Life, into
the cup of Death: Wherefore fly; for if our Friends lay hold on you, you are
sure to dye a most miserable death: and repent you. Ego enim moriar secundum
voluntatem Domini: tu vas ira fuisti, etc. It is the will of God, that I should
die this kind of death; but thou have been the Vessel of his wrath unto me,
etc.

By all which examples (omitting thousands) it appears plainly, that the
principal reward is reserved till afterward: and hitherto serve these and the
like comfortable promises. Rev. 2.10
Be faithful unto Death; and I will give thee a Crown of Life. And again, To
him that overcommeth, will I grant to fit with me in my throne, even as I
overcame, and sit with my Father in his throne. And Chap. 22.12. Behold, I come
shortly, and my Reward is with me. Romans 2.6
And, Who will render to every man according to his works. The truth of all
which, apprehended by a lively Faith, makes the blessed Apostle Paul, to cry
out with that plerophory, and full assurance that he does. 2 Timothy 4.7, 2 Timothy
4.7.8
8 Certamen illud praeclaru^ decertavi, cursum consu^mavi, fidem servavi.
Hactenus, etc. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith. Hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: And not to me
only, but to them that love his appearance. And to that end our blessed and
gracious father daily gives to all those that are his chosen sons and
servants, not only the eye and hand of faith, whereby they both see and also
apprehend the precious promises of bliss and happiness made to them, but
withal he gives them the sure Anchor of hope: by which (it being fastened upon
that mighty rock the Lord Jesus Christ) they stay themselves with an assured
expectation of the fulfilling and fruition of them, either here, or in heaven;
in this life, or that to come.

And for the further clearing the truth of this, I shall not offend (I trust) if
I show unto you how near the Heathens come to us in this point, by relating
unto you a story which I have formerly read in one of their writers; who though
a Heathen, Plutarch. co^solat: ad Apolonium.
yet of honorable esteem to this day amongst us. The story then in a word is
this.

Upon a time (says he) a complaint was sent from the Islands of the Blessed,
to the judges of the Superior Courts, about certain persons sent thither, who
formerly had lived impiously; humbly entreating, that this abuse thus offered
to them, might speedily be redressed, whereupon these unpertiall judges taking
the business into their serious considerations, found not only the complaint
to be true, but withal the reason and cause thereof: which was, that judgment
and sentence was passed upon men here below in their life time. Whereupon it
often fell out, that many persons clothed with honorable carcasses, riches,
nobility, and other like dignities and advancements, brought many witnesses
with them, who solemnly swore in their behalf, that they deserved to be sent
into the Islands of the Blessed; when the truth was, they deserved the
contrary: to avoid which inconveniency, it was decreed by an eternal doom,
that for time to come, no judgment should be passed until after death; and
that by Spirits only, who alone do see and plainly perceive the spirits and
naked souls of such, upon whom their Sentence and Uerdict was to pass. That
so of what estate and condition soever they were, they might receive according
unto their works.

By all which, it plainly appears how far the Divine eye of this natural
man led him; surely unto the true finding out of a Divine and heavenly truth,
which is, that neither definitive sentence is to be passed upon any here
below, nor that any whatsoever shall receive his full reward of that he has
done, whether it be good or bad, till after this Life.

And so much in way of answer to the Objection. And now a word or two of his
Life and Death.

Neither must it be imagined, that entreating of the same, I intend any large
Discourse of him, as of one going to his grave in a full age, Job. 5.26
as a ricke of corn coming in due season into the Barn (and the glass of
his life being fully run,) but I must measure my self, by that short life of
his; a minute, a shadow, yea, the dream of a shadow quite vanished and gone,
before one can scarce tell twenty. For if the holy Prophet David living the age
of threescore years and ten, compares his life unto a shadow. Psalm. 108.28
Psalm one hundred and eight, verse twenty eight. I am gone like a shadow
(says he) that declineth, and am tossed up and down like a Grasshopper. Then
surely the Life of this young Gentleman, scarce attayning to one of the three,
cannot be so much as a shadow, but must needs be (...) the mere dream of a
shadow, of no long continuance. According to which, my purpose is to abreviate
and shorten my Discourse without multiplying many words, or telling you wonders
and strange miracles: showing you rather what he was like to have been, then
what he was; and by a small taste, giving you to understand how precious this
Wine would have been, had it by age and continuance been thoroughly purified
and refined.

Briefly then will I show unto you, his honest, devout, holy and Christian Life,
and condition, was somewhat above the ordinary garb and fashion of Gentlemen
of his age and quallity, which may appear not only by Religion truly
implanted in his breast, but by many morrall Uertues and Uertuous morallities;
like so many sparkling Diamonds, spreading their light abroad, and shining
clearly in his path of Life.

And first for his Religion, my only desire is, that all may know that (which
he himself would by no means hide) that the religion he embraced, was the
Protestant-religion, which himself sucked in with the milk of his Nurse: and
which most of his Ancestors these many ages constantly professed.

And as with his mouth he confessed unto salvation, Romans 10.10. So with his
heart he believed unto righteousness: neither crossing, much less condemning
by his contrary course, the blessed way wherein his Fathers formerly walked:
but upholding rather, and continuing their honorable memory, by his own
virtuous life and conversation; as may appear by diverse instances, which I
will rather number, then insist long upon.

And first, his exceeding great delight that he had in those holy exercises of
Prayer, and reading of the Word, morning and evening in the family where he
lived, from which he seldom exempted himself, except it were upon urgent
occasion.

Secondly, his high esteem that he had, as of private prayers, so of public,
giving precedence to the same, before the other, as having more precious
promises annexed to them.

Thirdly, his Assiduous and dilligent resorting to the public preaching of
the word of God; wheresoever wisdom was pleased to open the gates of her
fair beautiful Temple unto him.

Fourthly, his religious and Christian behavior, when he was present at the
Church; not carrying of himself as a severe censurer, but as a devout Auditor,
not as though Almighty God was beholding to him (as most imagine) for his
bodily presence, but as one infinitely indebted to him for his divine and
sacred ordinance.

Fifthly, his love and hearty affection to all good Christians in general, as
fellow heirs and copartners with him in that rich inheritance.

Sixthly, his reverent regard that he had of such ministers as he knew to be
faithful and diligent in their places: honoring the Elder as Fathers, 1 Timothy
5.1
and the younger as Brethren.

Seventhly, in avoiding (what he could) the Society of wicked and deboished
persons, or if he were by occasion driven amongst them, then in the speedy
freeing himself from them, as soon as conveniently he could, without giving
offense or show of incivility.

And thus could I go on in numbering many more; but I will stay a while: And
the reason is, for that me thinks I hear some of the spider-catching rowt,
whose religion principally consists in searching the lives of those in whom
they see any eminency (above themselves) thus secretly, and underhand
whispering together.

This that has been spoken already of the virtuous life of this young
Gentleman, is something, but no great matter: for we looked for far greater
things then those, and more flourishing fruits of his Faith. Just Naaman like.
What no more but this, wash in Jordan seven times, and be clean? I had thought
(says he) he would have surely come out, and called on the name of his God;
and have stroaked his hand upon the place, and so have recovered the Leprosy,
2 King. 5. verse 10.11. Now to answer such as these, in a word or two, as
persons not deserving many.

First, it cannot be denied by the most malicious detractour, but that the
things before mentioned (if there were no more) do sufficiently manifest, that
this Gentleman's faith was not vain, Iam. 1.26
nor his religion verbal.

Secondly, it must be considered, that circumstances do usually much alter the
state of the question, in things (otherwise) of the same nature and condition,
for instance: A River to have the springs open, and the waters running with a
full stream, when the time of the year serves fit, and all other streams are
likewise full, is no great matter, nor is much regarded: but to have a River
like to Nilus in Egypt, when all other Rivers are flattest, then to rise most,
and swell, is a matter of great admiration; and calls for the clear eye of
the naturalist to find out the true cause thereof. Again, for a Tree to
flourish in the Spring, and be fruitful in Summer, when all other Trees
besides have on their best and richest Robes, is not worth the mentioning: but
for a tree in the dead of winter, when all other trees do fade and cast their
leaves: then to hold her color, her sap, and fruitfulness, is a glorious
sight; and carries with it (...) a kind of wonderment and admiration. And so
for a young Gentleman, being under the Ferula of a sharp Tutor, or the frown
of a severe Father: his whole living depending upon his fathers love: for him
to walk smoothly (and it may be religiously) is a commendable thing: and yet
not greatly to be trusted; seeing it may spring from a bitter root, and to
be done to a sinister end. But for this young gentleman, having no Father to
threaten, or Master to be controled; borne unto a great estate, and part
thereof already in his own possessions: being in the lust and vigor of his
youth, and living in a royotous and licentious Age: For him (I say) to walk as
formerly I have showed, cannot, (I trow) considering these and many other the
like circumstances, but be judged of him that has the least spark of charity
in his breast, as the fruits of a religious heart, and worthily deserving
highest praise.

But leaving these, and so return back again where first I met this
clamorous generation, I will add unto the former fruits of faith, four other
noble and commendable virtues.

The first whereof was, his humble and courtious carriage, and demeanor toward
all, even those of the meanest and lowest degree, not looking on them, as the
fashion of the Gallants of our Age is (as upon dogs) not upon men and women;
of the same nature, flesh and blood, reasonable souls, wrought and framed
after the same glorious Image; but whatsoever he was, he had a courtious
welcome from him, the hat gently veiled, and the hand of respect and love
reached forth unto him: Showing herein not only a fruit of the Spirit
Galathians ^.22. but himself a right Gentleman; seeing that Humility or
Courtisie is Soror nobilitatis: the Sister of Nobility: and as one of the
ancients further speaks, Matter nostrae philosophiae; the breader and mother
of Christians Philosophy, or rather true wisdom and religion.

The second was his modesty, appearing not only in his maidenlie countenance,
but in his whole carriage and conversation an excellent virtue in him, and much
to be desired in these impudent days of ours, wherein blushing is held the
essential mark of a base and ignoble Spirit: and an whores forehead is
reputed the only rare feature and especial grace: Phil. 4.5
whereas St. Paul in the 4. of the Phil. 5. teaches the Phillipians another
lesson, willing them to cloth themselves, as with other virtues, so (says
he) with modesty. And an ancient Father says, that modesty is Ornamentum
nobilium, and nobilitas ignobilium: the noble man's beauty, and the poor man's
dignity. Yea, the Lacedemonian state, and Commonwealth, received it as a
Maxim and maine principle from Lycurgus their Lawgiver, that above all
things, they should accustom their youth to bashfulnesse and modesty. He only
by the light of nature finding, that which daily experience teaches us: that
impudency and boldness in youth, is an evil sign, and the breeder of much
vice and vanity.

The third Virtue was his temperance, fit to be joined with the former, not
only for that modesty and temperance (as the heathen could say,) in eodem
choro sunt) are companions in the same rank: but for that the Apostle
describes them as loving sisters, daughters of the same Spirit, walking hand
in hand together. Gal. 5. Now this temperance of his appeared (as in other
things) so likewise in these two.

First, in his ordinary habit and attire, which although it were far from
baseness, so was it usually much lower then the highth of his means, he
rather respecting that indumentum fidej, the inward clothing of the mind, then
the outward clothing of the body, and himself to be an ornament to his
clothes, rather then his clothes to be an ornament to him.

Secondly, it appeared in keeping himself free from three raging sins,
overflowing the banks of Modesty and Temperance in this age of ours, viz.

1. Swearing, or blasphemy. 2. Ebriety, or Drunkenness. 3. Venery, or
uncleanness.
In regard of all which three, his innocent and spotless life, was such, as
the blackest tongue can no way soil or blemish his blessed memory. Yea, let it
be written in Cedar tables, or in golden letters upon his Tomb or Hearse, to
his eternal and immortal praise, that when these sins most raged, then was
not he with them, the least way touched; but like a blessed River, kept
himself in his pure stream, from being infected with this brackish and
overflowing Ocean, which to too many are overwhelmed in, in these our sinful
days, and perilous times.

The fourth and last Virtue of his (wherewith I will bound my discourse this
way) was his liberal and bountiful disposition, witnessed both by many
charitable actions of his, to diverse whom he knew stood in need of his present
help: as also by many worthy and cheereful promises of his future help and
favor, both to his tenants, and also his poorest neighbors. The consideration
whereof, together with his hopeful life begun, and so untimely ended, causes
this general sorrow which we see in all, especially in those formerly
mentioned: it being a received opinion (as well it might) that through the
Almighties help, he would suddenly have raised again the name and honor of
his ancient Family: not suffering his Fathers house to stand, (as most of our
Gentlemen's houses do now a days) like a painted Mercury in the way, to tell
the Travailer whose formerly it was: Or else like a wrack upon the Sea, to
discover only where that noble Lady Hospitality fatally perished.

And this shall serve to be spoken of the first act of his Life: I will now
come to the second, and therein speak a word or two of his Death (the which
being briefly done) I will then draw the Curtayn, and so conclude this sorrowful
Scene.

In the very entrance whereof, me-thinkes I find a wonderful correspondency and
agreement, betwixt his, and the death of other of his next and honorable
friends: as for example, 1. His Death was paynefull, and somewhat contagious,
occasioned by the small pox, a disease fatal to that Family. 2. His death was
sudden, and very dolorous. 3. His Death was full of Piety, and exceeding
Religious.
1. In the first, you have the Death of his grand father, and grandmother. 2.
In the second the death of his Father. 3. And in the last, the death of all
three: or if you will, the death of the Righteous.


So that a man may safely say, of his Life and death, compared with theirs, as
that holy King David long since spoke of Saul's and Ionathans (the Father and
the son) 2 Samuel 1. 2 Samuel 1
They were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their deaths they were
not divided.

But leaving this, and looking yet more narrowly into his Christian end: we
cannot (if we do but hearken to the credible report of those who were
continually with him, from the beginning of his sickness, to the delivering up
of his last breath,) but take special notice amongst many other, of these two
things right commendable in him: 1. His admirable patience. 2. His true and
hearty repentance.


The one, in enduring; the other in desiring: the one in performing; the other
in promising.

And first for his Patience, it was such, that considering the tenderness of
his Age, the frailty of Youth, and want of experience in sickness, that (as it
is generally reported) it was a matter of great admiration to all about him.
For however our heavenly Father gave way (as it seems) to the disease to
fan and winnow him, as Corn is fanned and winnowed to the utter-most: yet
did he in the mean while so support and stay him with the hand of his Mercy,
that neither his hope lost her hold, or his faith failed. So that howsoever the
outward man suffered, yet the inward man was renewed daily. 2 Cor. 4.16. 2 Cor.
4.16
How ever his body was not his own, being under the hand of a sharp
Chyrurgion, Luke. 21.1
yet in patience he did possess his soul: of all which he gave sufficient
testimony, both by his mild and sweet behavior; as also by his comfortable
words, and Christian language. For here were no impatient speeches, no
murmurring and repining, no crying out upon the disease: no accusing of
secondary causes, but a patient silence, interrupted, now and then, with short
prayers, and Divine ejaculations: wherein he craved at the hands of God, either
mitigation of his pain, or supply of strength, either to be eased, or
graciously to be supported.

And here we have an Emblem or a pattern of true Magnanimity appearing
plainly in this, that when the storms of temptation and trouble raged most,
and these sharp cutting winds blew lowdest; yet he carried himself, so close
under the shield of Faith, that he was not at all daunted, or driven from that
obedience which he did owe to God; or his duty toward his neighbor. The
which, as it is a noble and excellent virtue and quality of the spirit; so was
it (questionless and without doubt) much helped: 1. By the true sight he had
of sin. 2. By the true sense and feeling of the Love of God toward him.


And first for sin, if a man do but seriously (as I doubt not, but this
Gentleman did) weigh and ponder in his heart, both the number of his sins
(being indeed without number) as also the nature of them, not only crossing,
but also, violating the pure Law of an infinite God, and so deserving an
infinite punishment: he surely cannot but with a patient and contented mind
bear and endure these short and light afflictions: how ever bitter for a time,
yet bringing with them in the end, the sweet fruits of righteousness: Crying
with the Church, Micah 7.9. Mich. 7.9
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.
And Lam. 3.22. Lam. 3.22
It is the Lords mercy that I am not consumed. And again, Patior domine quia
peccavi, and patior ut non peccarem: (as a holy man speaks) I know sweet
God, that I suffer for that I have sinned. And again, I know that I suffer,
that I might not sin. These are the files, whereby thou do labor to
scowre my heart, and cleanse me from my sins: and this is the Gall and
Worme-wood wherewith thou do strive to weane me from the pleasant pappes of
this world, and make me wholly distaste the pleasure of this wicked and sinful
life.

The second is, the sense and feeling of the love of God, which questionless,
had a main and principal stroke in putting this Gentleman on (as he did)
to drink so willingly of this bitter cup. For, as soon as ever the love of
God does but once diffuse, and shed it self abroad into the hearts of any his
faithful servants, then presently such abundance of heavenly strength, and
vigor, joy, and comfort does enter with it, that he feels not at all the
burden of affliction; or if he do, he finds it very light. He fears
not the fiery trial, for well he knows, that though the hardest comes;
yet will it in the end work out for his good, as a Fatherly correction, no
final destruction: yea, triumphing in a glorious manner, he says to Death:
Where is thy sting; or what have thou to separate me from the love of God? 1
Cor. 15 Romans 8.35 Ioh 5.22
For as for destruction, I laugh at it, neither do I fear the Beast of the
field. Job. 5.22. And hence is it, that Daniel was so courageous and bold for
the service of God, Dan. 6.10
that he durst open his window at the time of prayer, though the den was open
to swallow him, and the hungry Lions ready to devour him.

Hence again was it, that the three children with such magnanimity and spirit
so slighted the Tyrants ungodly command, saying as they did. Dan 3 16. We are
not careful to answer thee in this matter, neither do we care what thou
can do unto us: For our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, and he
will deliver us out of thine hand: Dan. 3.16
But how ever assure thy self o King, we will not serve thy gods, nor worship
thy golden Image which thou have set up.

Lastly, hence was it, that those most noble confessors Dionysia and
Victorianus so constantly, and with such an undaunted courage, endured those
unmercifull torments and scorching flames of Martyrdom. The one crying out, De
Deo sum secura, cruciate ut libet. I am sure of Christ, a fig for your
torments. The other, securus sum de Christo Domino me^^haec dicite regi vestro,
etc. I am resolved of the love of Christ my Lord and my God: and therefore tell
your King from me, that I weigh not his torments a rush. If then the love of
God was so strong in these, no marvel then, that this young Gentleman feeling
the same in his tender heart, so patiently and with such contented mind, passed
through not only the bitter Symptoms of his cruel malady, but also through
the shadow of death it self: For Love (says the Church, Cant. 8.6, 7.
speaking by her own experience) is so strong, that death it self cannot quell
it, nor all the water in the Ocean quite drown it.

But leaving this, let us come to the second, namely, his true and hearty
repentance.

For the clear demonstration whereof, it must be considered how the Spirit of
God in the holy Scriptures, mentioning true repentance, does commonly use two
words in themselves very significant and full of divine expression.

1. (...). 2. (...).
The first whereof signifies an after wit.

The other an after sorrow.

By the one, understanding a poor penitent looking back upon his former
course of life, and then finding how he has been guld by Satan, deluded by
the World, and beguiled by the deceitfulness of his own heart; he cries out
Heu miser! quot mala feci? Alas wretch that I am! What evil have I done? and
thereupon looks for time to come more narrowly to himself.

By the other setting forth a sorrowful creature striking on his thigh,
grievously vexed for his sins past, asking pardon, and promising a new life.

In the first of these we have (...), Iame. 3.17
That wisdom from above. James 3.17.

In the second we have (...), that sorrow toward God; and in both together
(mixed with faith) (...) that repentance never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10
2. Cor. 7.10.

An example of both these meeting together in one, we have in this young
Gentleman, as may appear plainly by the circumstances following.

The first was his speedy and timely casting off the world upon the first
arrest of his sickness, together with the vain pleasures and delights
thereof; speaking by his practice unto her, as that Heathen Philosopher spoke
unto his rich treasure, when he was about to cast it into the Sea: Abite a me
pessimae voluptates, ego vos mergam, ne mergar a vobis. Away from me ye
bewitching pleasures, I will drown you, that you drown not me: or rather as
they are foretold to speak to their Idols, Isa. 30.22
throwing them away with a kind of detestation. Isa. 30.22. Apage cuique
eorum, etc. Away, get you hence fawning world. Thou painted Iezabel, and
flattering Harlot, now do I see the conquest of thee in Christ is exceeding
easy; my blessed master tells me that he has already overcome thee: Ioh
16.33
willing me to be of good cheer, and so I am: My soul magnifying the Lord,
and greatly rejoicing in God my Savior, being fully resolved that I at the
last in him shall obtain the like noble victory over thee, that this young
Gentleman has done before me.

The second was, the exact surveigh that he took of his former life, wherein
however (blessed be God) he found not those Damnabilia peccata, as St.
Augustine calls them, from which (says the holy Father) youthful age is
seldom free; yet those that he found (although they were but aberrations
only, and no impieties, delicta non facinora: weaknesses and infirmities; no
flagicious offenses; yet was he much troubled at the sight of them; often crying
out with righteous Job: Paenitet me: and with that holy Prophet David Psalm.
45.7. peccatum pueritiae mea ne recorderis Domine. Lord remember not the sins
of my youth.

Observe next his careful providing of his Viaticum or things necessary for
his departure; his preparing and fitting of his Lamp with oil, and patient
expecting of the Bridgroomes call.

In all which (as is the general report) his care was more then ordinary:
neither was there any one thing in Heaven or Earth, which he so much desired,
as he did that full assurance of his reconciliation with God, and to understand
what that love of Christ was, that passes all understanding; not that he
doubted at all thereof, for he found the beginnings and fruits of the same (as
formerly I have showed) already in his soul, mightily cheering up, and
comforting thereof: only he desired yet more, that he might at the length be
filled with the fullness of God. Ephesians. 7.19.
Ephesians. 7.19. (...) like the little infant that having but once tasted of the
milk of the mother, is never contented, but mourns, and cries until it be
fully satisfied, and the belly filled therewith: or like the hunted Stagge in
Summertime, who finding a pleasant stream, having once tasted of it, is never
satisfied until he has sounded the bottom, and duckt himself overhead and
ears therein: or rather like that fair Bride, (the Church I mean) Cant. 2.6.
Cant. 2.6.
who thinks her self never sure of her spouse and love, until his Left hand
be under her head, and his right hand does embrace her.

Life he simply desired not, and death he slavishly feared not, for he knew
right well that which came first, should be his gain and great advantage. And
because for want of sleep, and the malignant, and fiery working of his
Disease, he feared much, least any disorderly, impatient, or profane speeches
should pass from him, to the dishonor of Almighty God, and grief, and sorrow
of his Friends about him: His request therefore was hourly to God, for Christ's
sake, to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep the door of his lips. And
if at any time it happened (as seldom it did) that his brain being somewhat
overheated, he a little swarved from the right rule, and so forgot himself:
his manner was, after the violence of the fit was over, (upon inquire made, and
the truth thereof found) humbly to beg pardon for the same, and with tears to
bewail it.

All the time of this sharp trial, and visitation of his, was, for the most
part, daily spent, either in holy conference with such grave Divines as were
continually about him for his souls health, or in hearty prayers presented
before the throne of grace, and powered into the golden Censure of the son of
God; wherein earnest request was made unto the Father, that though this young
soldier of his, were thus strongly assaulted, yet that he might so keep
himself upon the legs of his Faith, that he might neither be foiled, Ioh.
23.10
nor yet led into temptation, and that though he were tried unto the full, yet
that he might in the end come out like pure Gold. Job 23.10. Neither did this
blessed servant of God, hold it sufficient to have others pray for him, except
he likewise performed the same duty himself; remembering well, that he that
has but once drunk a full draught of the River of Grace, it cannot be, John
7.38
but out of his belly must needs flow rivers of water of Life.

The which prayers of his, were delivered with such contrition of heart, such
Faith resting it self upon the promises of God, such patient and humble
submission of himself to the will of his gracious Father: that it was an
admiration to all about him, to behold so tender a plant to bring forth such
delicate and precious fruit. And thus while his body is here below, his soul
is seeking after things above: his body a prisoner laden with gyves and fetters
of his disease, his soul is at liberty, soaring up on high, and sweetly
conversing with that blessed society in Heavenly places. The which it did
diverse days together going and coming, till at last (like another Noah's Dove)
it quite left his troubled Arc, and this tempestuous World, mounting up a loft
above all earthly things, and seated it self upon the pleasant Mount Syon,
Vbi moritur omnis necessitas: Vbi oritur summa faelicitas: where all want
cease; and all bliss increases: even that place where are those fragrant
and delightful fields, replenished with all the trees of Myrrh, Frankincense,
and Alloes, with sweet beds full of the richest and chiefest spices, Cant.
4.12, 13.
where he daily feeds, and so shall do till that blessed day break, and all
shadows fly away. Cant 4.6
And thus have I as briefly as I could, without either wringing or churning
(being loath to lie for him, as a man lies for his friend, Pro. 30.33
Job 13.9.) set forth to you, the Life and Death of this young Gentleman. The
which the more I think of, the more I cannot but highly commend that true
honor of Wedlock, and mirror of widow-hood, the noble and virtuous Lady (his
sorrowful mother) for her religious and Christian educating of him, all his
young and tender years; dropping then grace into his heart, and filling the
same with Heavenly liquor, the pleasant scent thereof, never left him unto the
last hour and minute of his life.

Her extraordinary care this way, I shall not need at large to relate unto
you, since the whole Country round about, can sufficiently witness the same, to
her immortal praise; only this I will say, that if the holy Scripture (as we
know it does) makes such honorable mention of Bersheba, and Evnice for their
diligence in teaching their Sons, Solomon and Timothy, in their tender age,
the trade of their way. And again if holy Augustine ascribes to his mother
Monacha her tears and prayers (next under God) the ground of all the good,
that after so many wanderings and wanton actions of his, at length appeared in
him. And lastly, if Cornelia be so highly remembered in the Roman story, for
bringing up those famous Gracchi her sons so carefully as she did in their
infancy and growing years, making her the mother not only of their natural
lives, but also of their virtuous living, and Heroicke demeanor: I cannot see
why his worthy Lady should not have the like honor, and high respect at the
hands of all, for the religious care over this her son, from his birth to his
last breath. And therefore being so, however Almighty God, for causes best
known to himself has thus (as we see) taken away the subject of her desired
and chiefest care, not suffering her lips scarce to taste the fruit of that
which she with a deal of pains had so many years together carefully sown:
yet may she herein comfort her self, that neither was her labor spent upon a
barren or unfruitful soil, neither is her blessed son lost, whom Heaven
has found, but is there, whether we are daily travailing; resting himself
under the tree of life, and satisfying his soul with endless pleasure: To
which most sacred place, the Lord in his good time for his Christ's sake bring
us all, Amen.

And thus have I at the length finished the first part, of this my intended
discourse, wherein (I must needs confess) the unfeigned love I did always
bear to this noble plant, has, I know not how, put words into my mouth, and
thrust me on to a unwilling tediousness. Leaving him therefore in the arms of
Christ, I will now with what speed I can proceed to the handling of that portion
of Scripture: whereof (by Gods gracious assistance) I mind to treat of, the
latter part of the time allotted me.

And this you shall find written Isa. 26.19. The words are these.

Thy dead men shall live: even with my body shall they rise. Awake, and sing,
ye that dwell in dust: The text.
for thy dew is as the dew of Herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.
FOr the more orderly handling of which words, my purpose is to observe this
order.

First, to speak something of the Chapter in general.

Secondly, having once cleared the Text, to take it in pieces, and to speak of
every particular part by it self.

Now, in speaking of the Chapter in general, I will,

First, briefly touch the manner, that the prophet uses in indighting of it.

Secondly, speak a word or two of the matter or subject thereof.

And first for the manner: it is not the same with most of the former Chapters;
but is expressed and set down in a differing style, they in prose and this in
verse: For in all the former Chapters (save only the first) we find (as he
that has the least skill in the Text knows) the holy Prophet delivering his
matter in prose; however, full of divine trops, and heavenly expressions. And
in this Chapter together with the first, we find him so possessed, and rapt
up with the unspeakable love of God toward his Church, that he thinks the
highest strain low enough to express the same. And therefore delivers his
mind, not after his wonted manner in plainness of speech, but in a high and
stately verse: that so divine consolations might come like the sweetest Nectar,
carried along in Golden pipes to the hearts of his hearers: For things
delivered in verse,

First, work better on the fantasy, then such as are delivered in prose.

Secondly, come neetlier, and more richly apparrelled unto the understanding.

Lastly, take a great deal surer hold upon the memory.

And therefore the blessed servants of God, and holy Prophets and Prophetesses,
Exodus 15.1 etc. Judges. 5.1 etc. 1 Samuel 2.1
Moses and David; Debora and Anna, etc. when they would preach and set forth to
the World those Magnalia Dei, those wonderful deliverances and favors of GOD
to his Church: that they might take the deeper impression in the hearts of all,
expressed them in sacred Verse, whence questionless, those Sybills likewise:
and those ancient Lawgivers in elder days, borrowed their mould, and pattern
in penning their Laws, and prophetical conjectures in Verse, not in Prose.
The greater shame therefore it is, for many in these days of ours, to abuse
that divine gift as they do: fitting David's Harp to every fidling tune: and
abusing the Bowls of the Temple, to the service of Bacchus, and drinking
healths to Abaddon.

But leaving the manner, let us come unto the matter, or subject, of this
heavenly song, from the 1. verse to the end of the 19. In all which is
contained much variety, and matter of great discourse: For there we have to
mention some two or three things, amongst others very remarkable.

First, a description of the true Church of God: namely: 1. A City full of
power. 2. Citizens full of piety. 3. City, and Citizens, full of all felicity.


Secondly, we have spiritual boastings.

1. Of the faith of the children of God. 2. Of the holy use that they made of
their afflictions above wicked and profane worldlings.
Lastly, a spiritual cordial, or rather unspeakable comfort, afforded to all
the true children and servants of God, that the Lord will when time seems
fittest, deliver not only them, but theirs, not from light afflictions, but
from the greatest: yea the whole Israel of GOD out of all his tribulations.
Psalm 25.22


And this latter, is that which the Prophet principally delivers in this 19.
Verse (which I have read unto you): The true meaning whereof, that we may find
out the better; it must be remembered that the Children of God; members of the
true Church, apprehending by the eye of faith, that great trial and sore
affliction, namely the Babilonian Captivity, so universally proclaimed, by all
the holy Prophets of the Lord now approaching, and near at hand, were at this
time in great dolor and perplexity of mind: And blame them not; for what one
outward trial can be imagined, of a more cutting and corrosiving nature, to
the heart of man, then Captivity is? fith by the means thereof; a man is
usually at once deprived of all his joy; and of a freeman turned to be a
slave: Those dulcia arva and native soil, where first he took his breath,
he sees no more: and if he does, it is with an heavy heart; yea, Riches,
Wealth, Honor, together with religion (dearer then his life) are straightway
lost, whilst he himself like the basest abject, imbraceth the feet of the
proud and disdainefull conqueror. The horrid sight whereof, puts the
Prophet Jeremy into such a bitter passion, that he cries out, as you may see,
Ier. 14.22. Ier. 14.22
Viscera mea: Viscera doleo, etc. My Bowels, my Bowels: I am pained at the very
heart, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard o my soul the sound of
the Trumpet, and alarm of War. And our Prophet Isay likewise, as may appear
by those his words Chap 22.4. Look away from me I beseech you, for I will
weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, Isa. 22.4
because of the sp^^ling of the daughter of my people. If then such mighty and
valiant Captains as these, began at the sight thereof to quake and tremble;
what shall we then say of the common Soldiers? certainly, their fear must
needs be Panical, and they exceeding affrighted.

To help and cure which, it pleased Almighty God, not only to inspire the
breast of this sanctified and holy Prophet of his, with the clear light and
understanding of his diterminate Counsel, and decree herein: but also to fill
his pen with sweet and comfortable predictions, all tending this way; that this
great affliction and trial of theirs, should only be but for a time, and
that after the space of 70 years, they should shake off the yoke of captivity
and bondage from off their shoulders; now for that this was a thing hard to be
believed, and altogether impossible in their weak conceits, as may appear by
their words. Behold, Ezekiel. 37.11.
(say they) Our bones are dry, our hope is gone and we are clean cut off: we
find not only the Prophet Ezekel in the forenamed chapter; but our Prophet Isay
in the verse that I have read, laboring from God to settle and stablish their
wavering and doubtful hearts in the truth thereof, both by a strange vision,
as also by an invincible argument taken from the Resurrection of the dead. The
which, as it is a main principle in true Christian Religion, being an Article
of our Faith, a Maxim in Divinity, embraced of all the whole Society of Gods
faithful servants; so being certainly believed, and by the arm of Faith
embraced, as an infallible and undoubted truth, it will so strengthen and
cheer up the heart of him that is the servant of God, that he shall neither
fear the most fierce and fiery trials: nor yet question any of the promises of
Almighty God, how difficult, and even impossible soever they appear to a
carnal eye.

For instance: whence was it that Abraham, that blessed Patriarcke, with such
constant Resolution expected, that in time he should embrace a son, how ever
the course of nature cried loud against it: Romans 4.17
was it not (as it is plain, Romans 4.17.) for that he that promised, was He
that raised the dead, and calls things that are not, as though they were!
Whence again was it, that holy Job, that meek and humble servant of Christ,
with such admired patience endured the stripping of all his goods; the loss of
his children, and the remooving of his hope from him like a Tree: was it not
(as he himself acknowledges, Chapter 19. Job. 19.15.26.
verse 15.26.) For that he was resolved that his Redeemer lived, and that at
the latter day, he should see God in his flesh? Whence, (lastly) was it, that
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater then all the treasures of
Egypt: was it not the fight he had. Heb. 11
Hebrews the eleventh Chapter: of him that was Invissible, and assured hope of
the recompense of reward, after this life.

No marvel then, that our Prophet (as I said) labored to settle the minds of
this dejected people, with an argument taken from the same: It being full of
comfort, as also forcible to persuade; drawn (as you see) a maiore ad minus,
from the greater to the less: The nature of which, that we may find out the
better, we will in this verse consider these two things.

1. A Consolation. 2. A Reason.
First, the Consolation, is no other then a joyful conclusion, taken and
drawn (as formerly was showed) from the resurrection of the dead; in these
words: Thy dead men shall live, even with my body shall they arise: awake and
sing ye inhabitants of the dust.

The reason is laid down in way of Fortification, or strengthening of the
consolation, in these words. For thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall give up her dead.

In the Consolation we find, 1. That there is a resurrection of the dead. 2.
The manner of the same.


In speaking of the first, we will observe two things:

1. The truth of this Article; that there is a Resurrection.

2. The quality of the persons that are said to arise, in these words: Thy dead
men shall live.

For the manner of the Resurrection, we find it, 1. Very beautiful. 2. Very
Joyful.


The first in these words, With my body shall they arise.

The second, set forth by a kind of Rethoricall passage or Apostrophe, or
turning of his speech to the Dead, willing them to awake and sing.

Secondly, the reason is no other then a forceable argument taken and drawn
from the virtue and power of the Resurrection of Christ, which in the end will be
the same to the dead, that the Dew is to the herbs, filling and enforcing the
earth to cast up her dead.

Of all these things in order, and very briefly.

And first of the consolation in general: that there is a Resurrection of the
dead, in these words: Thy dead men shall live, etc. The which as it is a
comfortable proposition, so it is delivered by him, not (as Tully delivered his
conclusions of the contempt of Death) faintly and doubtfully, but with great
confidence and fullness of assurance. And justly, whether we consider the
universallity of this truth, it being constantly embraced of the whole Church
of God, throughout all ages: but likewise the antiquity of the same, it being
infolded in that first, and gracious promise made to Adam our Father in
assuring him, Gene. 3.15. That the seed of the woman should break the
Serpents head. And hence it was, that Heva the Mother of us, Genesis 3.15
and all the living, having brought forth Seth, speaks (as she does) Genesis
4.25. Genesis 4.25
Reposuit mihi Deus Semen alterum, etc. Oh (says she) God has given me
another Abel: He has kept him for a time, and now at length has restored him
to me again.

The like divine consolation, possessed (questionless) the believing heart,
not only of Abraham, but of all the holy Patriarchs besides, as may appear
both by their servent and longing desire after the Messiah, whom they knew, was
ordained by the Father to be the Resurrection and the life: as also, by the
honorable testimony, that the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews gives of
their faith herein. Cap. 11.13. Heb. 11.13.
when he says that They all dyed in the Faith, not having the promises, but
having seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them;
and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, And
therefore (says he) verse 16. God is not ashamed to be called their God: for
he has prepared for them a City. This was likewise the comfortable doctrine,
Exodus, 3.6
which Christ our blessed Savior preached in the bush to Moses Exodus 3.6, as
himself averreth. Mat 22.31.32. Mat. 22.31, 32.
when he thus spoke unto him. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob. This was that which the Apostle Paul in all his writings
published, affirming withal, both before the governor Faelix, and that
honorable assembly. Act. 24.15.16. Act. 24.15, 16
That it was a maine principle which put him on to have a pure conscience
toward God, and toward men, and to account (as he tells the Phillippians
Chap. 3.7, 8. Phil. 3.7.8
) those things that were advantage to him, but as losses, so that he might
attain the resurrection of the dead.

Yea, the holy Scriptures are not only plentiful in Testimonies proving the
truth thereof; but in examples likewise, of persons dead, and some of them
rotting in their graves, who have by the power of Almighty God been perfectly
restored to life again; my labor therefore in further proving the truth thereof,
may (I doubt not) be the better spared; especially considering it is an Article
of our faith, universally received, of the whole Church of God, at all times
and ages: Deu. 29.18
notwithstanding, if there be any here, in whose wicked heart, there is yet the
root of Gall and Wormwood; so that when he hears this, he blesses
himself in his froward and wicked course, as though there were no such
resurrection, or further reckoning to be expected. Let such a one (if the
book of God will not give him satisfaction) look abroad into the large
volumne of Nature, where questionless (if his eye be not too much dimmed with
the fog and mist of Athisme and prophaines) he shall be sure to find the
infinite wisdom and power of Almighty God, in ordering and disposing by the
hand of providence many other things, (not unlike in nature, but altogether is
impossible to the judgment of man as this is) to their several ends, which
according to his eternal decree at the first he had determined. For instance:
there shall he find the glorious Lamp of the World, (the Sun I mean) in
the evening going down, having his beautiful eye closed with the shadow of
the night; and himself quite covered over, with the thick and black mantle of
the same, as with his winding sheet; and shrouded in darkness, continuing
for a time, until his Creator mindful of his covenant (the morning
approaching) raises him up again in such a glorious manner, that lo he
comes forth, Psalm. 19.15. Psalm. 19.15
Like a Bridgroome out of his chamber, and rejoices like a strong man to run
a race. There likewise shall he see the Moon wasting and wayning away, until
at length she seems quite lost and gone; but within a few days after, he
shall see her again, filling her horns with light, and the Heavens with
brightness: There shall he behold the infant buried certain months in the
womb of his Mother; but in the end, coming forth upon the stage of the World
a glorious Creature, Cor. 15
and richly adorned with the Image of the Creator. There lastly shall he see,
the Corn not quickened except it dye, nor the trees and plants of the earth
flourishing, until first they have endured a Winters death. But if neither the
Book of God, nor yet of Nature, can give such a cavelling, and Athiesticall
wretch as this is satisfaction; I for mine own part shall give him over to the
seat of Justice, to be answered as they were, Nehem. 13.2. rather verbere
quam verbo, Neh. 13.2
with the fist of the Magistrate; then with any dispute or force of argument.
And so I come to the persons that shall arise in these words.

Thy dead men shall live. FOr the further clearing of which words two questions
must of necessity be answered.

The first is, whether these words do not cross those in the 14 ver. before
going? For there it is said, Thy dead men shall not live: And here it is said,
That they shall live: and that They shall arise: Now between live and not
live, not rise, and arise, a man would think were a plain contradiction.

The second question, is, why the Spirit of God terms them, the Prophets dead
men, and not dead men in general, in these words.

Thy dead men shall live. To answer both in order. First we are to know, that
there is no contradiction, no saying, nor unsaying, between the words of my
Text, and those formerly delivered in the 14. verse: For whereas our Prophet
says in the 14 verse. Thy dead men shall live: or as some will have it: They
are dead, shall they not live, etc? or as others, Hi mortuj non vivent, such
dead men as these shall not live. He poynteth out questionless wicked and
ungodly persons formely mentioned in this Chapter: Such as our Savior Christ
aims at, Mat. 8.22
Mat. 8 22. when he wills that officious Disciple to suffer, The dead to
bury their dead. And on the other side by the word (Thy) (a plain note of
difference and distinction in these words of my Text) our Prophet doubtless
notes out a special, and chosen company differing from the rest, Rev. 20.6
over whom death has no power: but they shall live eternally. In a word.

First by those in the 14 verse: Not living: Not arising! Romans 6.21
our Prophet understands persons dying in their sins.

Secondly, those in my Text: Living and Arising, Rev. 14.13
he understands persons dying in the Lord.

And verily wicked men dying in their sins, neither are partakers of the
first Resurrection; neither does their Resurrection, deserve at all so
honorable a denomination: For as the Death of the righteous, cannot properly
be said to be a death: it being (as one says well) Occasio vitae, non deletio:
a further living, not an utter quenching of the Lamp thereof: so on the other
side, the resurrection of the wicked cannot (as I have said) properly be called
a Resurrection, it being a mere precipitation; and casting headlong of an
unbeleeving catiffe, into the devouring jaws of the second death, and fatal
gulf of eternal destruction.

Both in deed, good and bad, him that serves God, and him that serves him
not, shall be raised up at the latter day: and yet their resurrection shall
much differ. Whether we consider, 1. Either the manner of the Resurrection. 2.
The end of the same.


And first for the manner.

The Child of God is raised up by the hand of mercy, the wicked man and
reprobate, by the hand of Justice: the one by the virtue of the death and
resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, piercing into his grave; even as you see
the Sun and showers in the spring, sweetly soaking and sinking down into the
root of the plant, causing in it immediately to bud and blossom forth. The
other, by the arm and power of Almighty God, who shall then judge both the
quick and the dead; and who shall quoit him out of his grave, like a raging
and horrible tempest that casts up both stones and dirt.

Secondly, the one arises like a miserable Captive in the fetters of the
second death: the other, like a Freeman, in the garments of Glory: the one
comes forth like a condemned person, having the wrath of God like a cruel
Jailer, hanging on his arm, and hayling him from his grave, as from a stinking
Dungeon, unto the place of execution: the other, comes forth like a
Bridgroome richly apparelled, to meet his beloved spouse: or like a banished
man who is now arrived upon his native soil.

Secondly, as they differ in the manner, so likewise do they differ in the end
of their resurrection: the one to be graciously rewarded, the other to be
grievously tormented: the one to receive the reward of the righteous, the other
to receive the doom of the wicked: the one to be received into their Masters
joy, the other to be clapped up in the prison of woe: the one, lastly, to make
good that dreadful sentence passed upon Adam, Genesis 2.17. In the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely Genesis 2.17
dye the death. The other to fulfill that blessed promise made by Christ to the
faithful, Ioh. 11.15
John the eleventh, verse fifteenth: I am the Resurrection and the life. For
till then, we shall not clearly see the fruit, either of that undoing sin
of Adam, or of that eternal sacrifice, which Christ (the righteous) presented
to the Father, when he was pleased (in his infinite mercy) to dye for our
sins, and rise again for our justification: then it plainly appears,

First, what the second death means, and who they are, that are truly cursed.

Secondly, what eternal life is, and who they are that are truly blessed.

Thirdly, what Christ did for us, and that he dyed not in vain, where with
these eyes of ours, we shall see millions clothed with glory and immortality,
and of poor men made rich, of beggars, Princes.

By all which, it is most clear and evident, that godless persons (sons of
Belial) have no reason at all to look for the Resurrection day, but with
Faelix, Acts twenty four, verse the second, Acts 24.2
to tremble at it, since to them it will be a day of Darkness, and not light:
yea, very darkness, and no brightness in it. For however they shall escape
the pound of the Grave: yet the second death, shall like a cruel Wolf,
eagerly pursue them, overtake them, and quite master them; so that their
freedom from death, shall be no other benefit to them, then if a man fled
from a Lion, and a Bear met him: or entering the house, and leaning his hand on
the Wall, and a Serpent bit him. To the children of God (only) it will be a
joyful day: their marriage day: a day of great solemnity: A day wherein their
redemption draws near? A day wherein their vild bodies shall be made like the
glorious body of the Son of God (as we shall see afterward more plainly.)

The second question is, why the spirit of God calls these dead men, the
Prophets dead men, in saying, Thy dead men shall live.

To which I answer diversely: As first, for that these persons formerly were
his proper and peculiar charge, and he set over them, not only as a watchman
to inform them, Eze. 3.17 Isa. 40.11 Jer. 33.5 Ioh. 21.15
but a shepherd to feed them: And therefore his people, his flock: for
several congregations, are so many Ministers flocks: and all the souls
therein their special charge: to them they are in trust committed: and at
their hands one day they will be certainly required. Eze. 3.18.19, and 33.8


Hence was it, that the Apostle Paul in his farewell Sermon, so earnestly
exhorts the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 26.28
Act. 26.28. to feed the flock of Christ. Over which (says he) the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers. And the Apostle Peter, all ministers in
general. 1. Pet. 5.13. assuring them withal, that in doing so, When the great
shepherd does appear, they shall receive a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.13
that fades not away.

Secondly, they are said to be his dead, for that he was formerly a principal
instrument, and means, for the conversion of their souls; freedom from their
natural bondage; Act. 26.18 Rom 8.22
and bringing of them into that blessed liberty of the sons of God. So that
now they are his dead, who formerly obtained life by his help: For this is an
high privilege and prerogative which only belongs to the Ministers of the
Word, lawfully called; as was Aaron, not only to be the Ambassadors of the
son of God, Cor 3.9.
but his fellow-workers also: yea Saviors (instrumentally) of the souls of
men: the which does plainly appear, not only by that we read in the
Prophecy of Obadiah ver. 21. where he fore-telleth; Obad. v. 21
That in the latter days Saviors shall come up upon Mount Syon. Tim. 14.16
But by the exhortation that Saint Paul gives his beloved Timothy: willing him
to have a care both to himself, and to his doctrine: for in doing so, (says
he) thou shall save thy self, and those that hear thee.

The consideration whereof, ought not only to be as precious Wine, warming of
our breasts, but a spur and goad in our sides, that are the Ministers of the
Word, putting us on cheerfully to pass through the miery ways of scorn and
contempt, which we daily meet withal, as we walk along, carefully
performing the duties of our calling: remembering,

First, though it be here in this World a calling much contemned, yet is it
in heaven highly honored.

Secondly, though it be a calling full of pains, yet it brings in the end
unspeakable comfort.

Let us therefore, not so much eye the labor as the wages: the present work,
as the future reward.

Lastly, they are said to be his dead, for that he had not yet given up a
perfect account for them. And no marvel, for the Audit day was not yet come,
when both he and his people must appear face to face before that glorious
Tribunal, of that dreadful Judge; who with an unpartiall ear, will hear all
things passed betwixt them, and give sentence accordingly: For death seals
not a Minister his Quietus est, neither is he fully discharged of his flock
and cure, until that day, wherein the Son of God holding his general
Assizes, shall require at his hands, a particular account, both for himself,
and also for all those, who were formerly his flock and people. Heb. 13.19.
Heb. 13.19.


The due consideration whereof, made the Apostle Paul, and the rest of the
Apostles, to preach the Gospel with that assiduity and diligence as they did.
Col. 1.28
For that (says he, Colos. 1.28.) our desire is to present every man perfect
in Jesus Christ, which being so, first of all, happy and blessed is that man,
whom when his Master comes, shall find so doing: yea, happy and blessed is
that minister, Luk 12.36
and painful labourer in the Lord, who having worn out his Age and strength
in the service of the Church, and like a precious lamp consumed himself to
give light to others, is now laid up in peace, in the midst of a number of his
neighbors, and familiar acquaintance, it may be, by his means, brought to
the true knowledge and understanding both of God and themselves: what a blessed
sight will it be, when that day is come, and that dreadful voice, Surgite
mortui, shall shake Heaven and earth, to behold both him, and al those ancient
friends of his, lively leaping out of their graves, clothed all in pure robes,
shining and glistering as the light. Oh who can express the joy that will be
then, at this their meeting again.

But above all, the joyfullest sight will be, to behold that welcome which the
Son of God will then give him, with that Enge serve bone and fidelis: Well done
good servant and faithful: When he upon his bended knee, and al his company
kneeling round about him, shall then speak unto him, sitting upon his glorious
Tribunal. Thou Almighty King and supreme judge of the whole World. Lo here I
am, and the children that thou have given unto me. Isa 8.18
The which doubtless will be a sight so full of joy, that my tongue is not
able to express the same: my desire only is, that into that or the like
assembly, my self may one day come.

Secondly, as the estate of the faithful labourer will then be happy, so on the
other side, Ezekiel. 11.16, 17
the condition of him that is an unfaithful labourer, will questionless prove
most miserable.

How careful the Elders were in former times over the souls of such as were
committed to their charge, may appear by one example, which may serve in stead
of many: of St. John, Clemens Alexa^drinus and Sozomenus.
the blessed Evangelist, (standing upon record in Ecclesiastical stories)
which I will as briefly as I can relate unto you.

St. John (says the story) after the death of the Tyrant (meaning as I take it
Domitian) returning out of the I Will of Pathmos, and coming to the City of
Ephesus, where having ordained Elders, and dispatched much other business
concerning the Chrcuh, he comes at length to a certain City not far of,
whose name (says the Author) many at this day do well remember, where amongst
diverse others there assembled, he espied a certain young man, mighty in body,
and of a beautiful and manly countenance: whom after he had earnestly beheld,
the blessed Apostle turning himself to the Bishop of the place, after this
manner spoke unto him: I do here (says he) in the presence of Christ and
his Church, commit this man unto thee to be trained up, and instructed with thy
greatest diligence. And so immediately after, the Apostle returned again to
Ephesus. The Bishop receiving the young man thus committed to his charge, took
him home with him, and through his extraordinary care so wrought upon him, that
within a short time, he was thought fit, not only to be Baptized, but to
have a certain cure, in the Lords behalf committed to him. But after this,
the young man having obtained his former liberty, fell into company again, of
certain of his old ompanions, Idle and dissolute persons, that first drew him
to their riotous feasts and banquets; and after that to the perpetrating and
committing of far greater mischiefs and wickedness: So that now he is not
only an asociate of those wretches his companions, in the committing of many
Murders, Robberies, and other horrible outrages: but by reason of the
excellency of his wit, manliness of heart, and stoutnesse of courage, he is
made their head and Captain. In the mean time, Saint John coming again into
those parts, and meeting by the way with the Bishop before specified, required
of him the pledge which (said he) in the presence of Christ and his
Congregation, I left in thy hands to keep: The Bishop somewhat amazed,
supposing he had some money committed to his custody, which he had not as yet
received, knew not what answer he should make unto him. The which Saint John
perceiving: The young man, (says he) and soul of our brother, committed to
your custody, is the pledge that I require: The Bishop understanding his
meaning, with tears running down his cheeks, thus replied. He is dead (says
he) dead unto God, being now become a most wicked person, a companion of
thieves and villains, and haunting these mountains and deserts hard by. At
the hearing whereof, the blessed Apostle rending his Garments, with great
lamentation, said unto him: I have left a good keeper of my brothers soul. And
thereupon desiring instantly a horse and a guide, rod directly to the place
where this damned crew haunted, where being presently taken by some of that
company, he earnestly requested of them to be brought unto their Captain:
who coming to him armed as he was, at the first began to look fiercely on
him; but immediately coming to the knowledge who he was, as a man wholly
confounded, began to fly and run from him. But the old man followed him as
fast as he might, forgetting his age, and crying, My Son, why do thou fly
from thy Father? an armed man, from one without weapon? a young man from an old
man? Have pity on me my son, and fear not, for there is yet hope of
salvation: I will make an answer for thee unto Christ: I will dye for thee (if
need be) as Christ has dyed. I will give my life for thee. Believe me Christ
has sent me. The young man as one amazed, first stood still, and then casting
down his weapons, trembling, and bitterly weeeping, embraced the old man,
being baptized afresh again, through abundance of tears running down his
manly cheeks: whom after the Apostle had upon his knees fervently prayed for,
he brought back unto the Congregation; to which, after some time of humiliation
and daily fastings, he was happily at length restored.

The story is too long for me to comment upon: let him that has an ear harken
what venerable antiquity speaks:

I come now to the second thing to be considered in my Text, namely the manner
of their resurrection: the which is described by the blessed Spirit; as we
heard to be: 1. Very Beautiful. 2. Exceeding joyful.


And first, beautiful, in these words: With my body shall they arise.

The which standing (as they do) in the original, carry with them a
doubtful construction, which makes Interpreters somewhat to vary in their
translations: For that which some translate, With my dead body shall they
arise: others turn, My dead bodies, or my dead body shall arise. The matter is
not great in in which sense the words be taken, since they are so near a
kin, and carry with them several conclusions, full of Divine truth and
sweet consolation.

First, then, if we take the word as the ordinary translation has them, and
read them thus, With my dead body shall they arise: Then must we take the Son
of God in the same, comforting of his Church, together with the several
members thereof, with an assured hope of a most glorious resurrection. So that
however, the brutish and ungodly as he fell, Number. 24.21. 1 Cor. 10.
so he shall arise, and having his bones full of the sins of his youth which
( Job 20.11. Job. 20.11.
) lay down with him in the dust) shall come forth under the Tyranicall command
of the second death, the resurrection of condemnation: yet the servant of God,
Dan. 12.2
the true son of the resurrection, John the fifth, John 5.2
verse the second: However his body was sown in weakness, yet shall it rise
again in power, and putting off the rotten rags and patched mantle of
corruption, 1 Cor 15.47
shall be richly clothed and apparelled with the pure and precious garments of
salvation: Isa. 61.7
In affirming therefore that those dead bodies shall arise with his glorious
body, he intimates thus much: That when that day of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord: Aact. 3.19
he who is the resurrection and the life, shall not only remove all deformity
of nature, but work a blessde conformity between himself who is the head, 1
Cor. 15.49.
and all such as are several members of his blessed body, that as they have
borne the Image of the earthly; so shall they then bear the Image of the
heavenly. Then sin, together with the fruits and woeful effects thereof shall
wholly cease; and howsoever the bodily substance shall remain, yet the qualities
thereof, shall be wholly changed. So that for sickness there shall be health: for
deformity beauty: for baseness glory, for lumpishnesse agility: yea, for
weakness such abundance of strength; Zach 12 2
that he that is feeblest amongst them, shall be as David, and the house of
David, as Gods, and as the Angel of the Lord before them. For as by death our
natural infirmities are fully cured, Ephesians. 4.3
so in the resurrection (every way so glorious) our former losses shall
perfectly be restored, whilst we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ. By means thereof; Isa. 65.4 Psalm.
103.5, 6 1 Cor. 13.9
we shall not only obtain a freedom from all misery, but a fruition of all
good. Those things that we do now weakly believe, we shall fully embrace. And
those glorious things daily spoken of thee, thou rich inheritance of the Saints
of God, we shall both see and taste. For instance, then we shall by joyful
experience find:

1. The greatness of the Son of God, his purchase, and infiniteness of his
love: that he that knew no sin, should be made sin for us, that we might
be made (2 Cor. 5.21) The righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5.21


2. What those robes are of Christ's righteousness, and how precious those
Garments are of our Elder Brother; which the blessed Apostle so much desired.
Phil. 3.5 2 Timothy 4.8 1 Pet. 5.4
Phil. 3.5. together with the misery and most unhappy condition of those that
want them 2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Pet. 5.4.

3. What the Crown of Immortality and Life means: and whether it be worth
the blood of so many Martyrs and holy Confessors as have been spilt from
righteous Abel until now, for the obtaining of it.

4. Lastly, what a glorified body is, and the dignity and excellency of the
same; when our bodies shall be light and nimble, passing up and down, as upon
the wings of the Wind: when our daily food shall be the love of God; and all
our drink drawn out of the River of Celestial pleasures; when our bodies
shall be transparent like the purest Crystal: and our souls shining through
the same, like so many sparkling Diamonds: when God lastly shall be all in
all, the veil remooved, and we for ever with him.

The which in themselves, are things so excellent, that whilst I am speaking of
them; me thinks I hear my soul thus secretly complaining: Heu mihi
peregrinor tandin, etc. Alas that I soiourne in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5 Rev. 22
and dwell so long in the Tents of Kedar. Lord Jesus come quickly.

Secondly, if we take the words as some translate them: Cadavera mea resurgent:
My dead Carcasses shall arise: then questionless (in calling them his dead
carcasses) the blessed spirit assures them, of his special care over them,
until the day and time of their resurrection comes: so that although they
have left the world, yet are they not quite lost, but when they are not, then
are they his dead Carcasses. A dead Carcass, though of the dearest friend, we
see usually, few will own. A memorable example (amongst many others) we have
in William the second the Conquerors successor, who being fatally killed, and
now fallen to the earth: all his company, Nobles, and others, instantly forsook
him, save only a few of the meanest sort, who laying his Princely Corpse upon
a homely beer, drew it into a house or lodge near at hand; now if this were
the portion of so mighty a Prince, whom immediately before, so glorious a troop,
so royally attended: what must others then of meaner rank expect and and look
for, but only with deaths closing up their eyes, to have all their friends
excluded, and no sooner gone, but to be as suddenly forgotten. For Oblivion
and neglect, Psalm. 87.8
are the two handmaids of death, and her Kingdom where she principally
tyrannizeth is Terra oblivionis, The land of forgetfulness: when as David
therefore would express the worlds ingratitude, in the highest degree toward
him; he fetches her comparison from her usual manner in forgetting of the
dead. Psalm. 31.12
Psalm. 31.12. I am forgotten (says he) like a dead man out of mind.

And from this evil fashion, grew that ancient and usual custom of erecting
monument over the dead, ut ment^m moneant, ad defuncti memoria, that they might
retain and keep in memory persons formerly departed: the consideration
whereof, as it cannot questionless, but much trouble the dying heart, even of
the dearest servant of Christ (who naturally is sociable and desiring the
company of man) as we see in Ezechias doleful complaint Isa. 38.11. Isa. 38.11
I shall see man no more with the inhabitants of the earth: So ought the very
hearing that all the dead bodies of the Elect, are the Sons of God, his dead
carcasses, and peculiar charge, mightily to cheer up their dejected souls, at
the last hour and period of their lives. If then it happens (as often it does)
that these or the like Melancholy thoughts (upon the approach of Death) enter
thy troubled breast, and thus thou secretly musest with thy self. I see mine
hour and time is now at hand, when I must away, and suddenly make my bed in
darkness, in the slimey valley; whither my friends will not care to come, and
mine acquaintance tremble to approach: where my only Comrade must be
corruption, and the worm my chief companion. Then remember, that being
Christ's in thy lifetime, thou art his when thou art dead; then his living
Temple, and now his dead carcass. Neither does his love at all fail, when
breath fails: For however others perhaps will loath thee: yet be sure he
will not leave thee; but closing thy dying eyes with his gracious hand; will go
along with thee unto thy Grave, where having sown thee like precious seed,
will not forsake thee until he shall raise thee in a most glorious manner. For
even as those infernal spirits are never absent from the Graves and tombs of
Reprobates, prophaine and wicked persons; but there they are tryumphing over
them, as their spoil and conquest: so is the son of God never absent (by his
Divine presence) from the Graves and monuments of all pious and Religious
persons, perfuming them with the odoriferous savor of his death and passion;
and so preserving of them, that not a bone of them is lost. The which being so,
Psalm. 34 20.
when that time comes, and dye I must, egredere anima mea, egredere, go forth
my soul, go forth, fear not, so are up to that blessed society that is above,
Heb. 12:22.23.24
that company of angels, and spirits of just and perfect men; and to Jesus
mediator, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then the
blood of Abel. As for my dead carkase, I deliver it wholly over into the hands
of my blessed Savior; Tim. 1.12
being well assured, that he is of powerable to keep that which is thus
committed to him.

Secondly, as the resurrection of the elect (as I have showed you) will be very
beautiful, so again will it be very joyful; as may appear by the words
following, wherein they are willed To awake and sing. The which words may be
understood, either.

First, as a rethoricall passage, wherein the blessed Spirit turns his speech
to the dead bodies, willing them to Awake and sing.

Or secondly, in way of Prophecy, wherein he fore-telleth, as an addition to
their future happiness, that they shall Awake and sing.

If then we take the words in the first sense, then have we no other then an
application, or use, that the spirit of God makes of that comfortable Doctrine
formerly declared, concerning the resurrection of the dead, in speaking to them
as persons living, and willing them to Awake and sing: many the like passages
we meet withal in the book of God, where we find the Holy Ghost speaking to
things unreasonable, as though they were reasonable; senseless; as having
understanding; Isa. 1.21 Deuteronomy. 30 Isa. 41.1 Hos. 4.3. Jer. 2.12
dead, as living: sometimes calling them forth to be Judges: sometimes to be
witnesses, sometimes to rejoice, sometimes to mourn; sometimes to look boldly,
sometimes to blush and be ashamed. All which together, with the reason why the
blessed Spirit cloatheth his discourses in such Retoricall and rich attire, I
do willingly omit: fearing lest through teadiousnesse I might be troublesome.

And yet before I wholly leave this point, and come unto the second, I think
it not amiss to touch one necessary duty, which the method that the holy
Ghost here observes, affoordeth to us, in making (as I said) so excellent an
use of those comfortable doctrines formerly delivered.

For whereas in the words preceding, he assures the bodies of Saints
Inhabiting in the dust, that they shall not only a rise, but in a most
glorious manner; and that till then, they are under the wings and protection of
a most gracious keeper: so in these words, he turneh himself unto them, and
makes this blessed use of all, willing them, To awake and sing.

The which necessary duty, as it rightly concerns the ministers of the word,
in delivering divine truth (as if time would serve me I might easily prove) so
likewise does it the soul of every Christian, man, or woman, whenever they
hear promises or threatenings published or delivered. The which that they may
the better do, a necessary thing it is (for fear of making false
constructions) to harken what the Conscience, that (...) or treasure of the
soul speaks: For being the concluding part of the understanding, it will
easily tell a man how his case stands, either by accusing or excusing,
absolving or condemning. For instance, thou art a wicked and ungodly liver; and
thou hear these, or the like dreadful judgments, threatened and thundered
out against Adulterers, Swearers, impious and ungodly livers: That a flying
book of Curses shall enter into the houses of such persons, Zach. 5.3.4 Job.
15.12 15. Job. 20.7
and overthrow them quite. That their strength shall be famine, and that
Brimstone shall be scattered upon their Habitations. That they shall perish
like their own Dunge. And that they that have known them before, shall say,
where are they? Now; art thou desirous to know, whether this be the portion of
thy cup or no? then harken to thy conscience, and mark well her words, for
questionless upon the hearing of the same, she will thus conclude. Zach. 10.3
Math. 7.6
But thou art such a one; debauched person, and one of this rout, and brutish
crew; a stinking Goat, a filthy Swine, a snarling Dog: and therefore, Phil. 3.2
all those heavy judgments, and woeful plagues, are due to thee, as thy lot
and portion.

One the other side, thou art one, upon whose heart the Word of God has
wrought effectually; so that now thou wholly seek after things above. Thine
Eye, thy Tongue, thy Hand, thy Pilgrims Weeds; namely, Mortification and a
new Life do plainly show it: Many promises thou daily meetest withal, like
delitious Waters, dropping out of the Bucket of Jacob, Col. 3.12. and 5.1 Romans
6.4 Cor. 4.10
the which thou art exceeding desirous to know whether they be thine or no? A
thing that thou may easily do, if thou will but listen what thy conscience
speaks, which upon the hearing of the same, will assuredly after this sort,
both assume and reply: But thou my dear friend, my yoake-fellow and companion,
art one of this blessed company, (as not only my self, but my whole life and
conversation do plainly witness) therefore these promises do belong to thee.

Secondly, if we take the words, in the future tense, in way of prediction and
prophesies (as well we may, for that in the Hebrewe language, the Imparative
mood and future tense are set and placed, the one usually for the other) then
have we a souveraigne preservative against the fear and sadness of death, in
that the spirit of God assures these inhabitants of the dust, that they shall
Awake and sing.

The which, that we may the better see, we are to consider:

First, who the persons are, whom he terms, Inhabitants of the dust.

Secondly, their happy estate and condition at the latter day, in that they
shall Awake and sing.

And first, the persons, that are termed here the Inhabitant of the dust, we
are to understand no other then those formerly mentioned under the name of his
dead: variety of expression setting forth the self same persons, as may
appear not only by the word (Ye) as putting a special difference between
them and others; but also, for that though that all, good and bad, shall awake
and rise, yet all not awake and sing: Isa. 65.13
but the greatest company shall ( Isa. 65 13) Cry for sorrow of heart, and
howl for vexation of mind.

Qu. But why are they called the Inhabitants of the dust? why does not the
blessed Spirit give them a more noble denomination? not rather Gods Jewels?
Pros. 13.14 Isa. 35.10
Gods Redeemed? Hos. 13.14. Gods chosen. Esaias 35.10. or as formerly he did,
his dead carcasses, but inhabitants of the dust?

I answer. First, generally to declare and manifest the mutability of all
humane flesh: and that there is nothing in man, or in the son of Man, whether
Riches, Honor, Beauty, strength, or wit, yea pure Religion, (far more
precious then them all) that can hold him whom death will have, or latch the
arrow that death shoots. This is that David affirms, Psalm. 89.48
when he thus speaks, Psalm 89.48. What man is he that lives, and shall not
see Death? shall he deliver his soul from the power of the grave?

Secondly, and more particularly, the reason is three fold.

Heb. 9.17.
First, for that it was the eternal decree and counsel of Almighty God;
appointed to man upon his fall, Heb. 9.17, that he should once dye, and after
Death, should come to judgment.

Secondly, for that the whole seed of Adam, has Death mixed with it; yea, the
tender infant sucketh and draws it in, with the milk of the mother.

Thirdly, for that man has a certain inclination to Death, as the flower has
to fade, or the tree to fall.

Secondly, in a more particular, and special manner, they are called the
inhabitants of the dust.

First, to teach every man, that to be an inhabitant of the Dust, is an
honorable thing, when, namely, the dead corpse of Man or Woman, lies not as
dung upon the earth, but obtayneth a comely, a decent, and Christian burial. A
blessing promised to Ezechiah, Josiah, and other the like noble Princes: and
the contrary again threatened as a sore judgment against wicked and godless
persons, Iezabel, Zedechiah, Heb. 9.17 Ier. 3.4
and other of the like sour Leaven: and therefore to take it as a special
favor of God, to have not only ours, but the bodies of our Friends to be
laid up decently in their Graves, velut preciosa, and Deo chara (...), as
choice gifts, dear and precious unto God; Where dust may return to dust, as
the spirit formerly did to God, that gave it.

Secondly, to admonish all, but principally the great Men, and Princes of the
earth, not to look too much (with proud Haman) upon the glory of their
Riches, their train and followers, their honors, and high promotions, their
greatness, and swelling titles; which if they do, will so flash and glister
in their eyes, that they shall forget themselves, as also the liberal hand
from whence all these things did come. But rather turning their backs upon
those enchanting gleames and lights, let them with a serious look daily view
their original and birth, being of the basest Element: their flesh and blood
common with the meanest servant: their honorable carcasses wearing away to
their first Element: where all their pomp must leave them, and they inhabit
the sad and dusty valley.

Thirdly, to be a caveat to us, how we scorn our poor brethren partakers
with us of the same hope, and of the same household of Faith; Gal. 6.10
for that their houses are far meaner then ours, and their clothing and
attire much baser: Act. 17.10
For as we are come all of one blood, the poor and the Rich, the Lord and the
slave; so are we travailing to the same Land, where (there is no remedy) but we
must dwell together, and where our houses will not greatly differ: the outside
of the Rich man's, usually much gayer, but the inside of the poor man's, perhaps
much sweeter. There it is no disgrace for the Princes Palace to be near the
Peasants Cottage; or the lodging of the poor beggar, to be near unto the
Misers chamber, where the order against Cottages and Inmates is of no value;
since new Cottages are there hourly erected, and hundreds dwell on heaps in
base and silly Mansions: when then thy heart does begin to swel in pride and
with the scornful thoughts, thou have in regard of thy brothers poor estate;
then remember that it will not be long ere thou and he shall be both alike, and of
the two, he (it may be) acknowledged by Divine sentence the better man.
Remember Dives and Lazarus.

Secondly, we are to consider the several things, that they are foretold to
do; and these are

First, Awake. Secondly, Sing.

For the first, they shall awake; but not of themselves, or their own power:
but by the dreadful voice, and Almighty breath of God, willing them and us to
Rise up from the dead, Rom 14.12
and to give a strict account of what we in all our life time have done: (of
which I intend not to speak:) this only we may observe, that Death is nothing
else, but a mere sleep, out of which we shall be one day awakened: thus are
all the blessed Patriarckes, and holy Prophets, and Confessors, 1 Cor. 15.18.
dying in eldertimes said (1 Cor. 15.18.) to sleep. And the same Apostle
writing unto the Thessalonians, uses this as an argument to dissuade them from
over much sorowing, as persons out of hope for them that were departed; 1 These.
4.13
for that they did but sleep: yea, holy Stephen, though his death were
violent; yet says the Spirit of God: Act. 7.60.
soul and body were no sooner parted, but he fell a sleep.

The which, (although it be a truth) yet we must not fondly imagine:

First death properly to be asleep: or,

Secondly, when the body is dead, that the soul sleeps.

For first of all, death cannot properly be asleep; seeing they two are so
quite contrary; the one a friend to man, the other a mortal foe: the one
natural, the other accidental: the one a preserver of life, the other a
destroyer of the same. Death therefore is called usually by the name of sleep;
in regard only of a kind of similitude and proportion that is betwixt them.

For instance:

First, when a man is fallen asleep, all outward labor and business is laid
aside; he thinks not of them, neither does he at all desire them. So is it,
when a man is dead, he remembers no more the work and labor of his hands,
in all that Pilgrimage of his, formerly passed. He knows not what he has
done: and if you tell him, he will not regard. Friend or foe are all one to
him: Job. 14.21
neither does he care, whether his sons be honorable, or of low degree.

Secondly, when sleep possesses a man, pain and passion, fear and grief,
does not so molest and trouble him, as when he is awake. Such is the estate of
man when once dead. Is he a prisoner? He fears not (says Job) the voice of
the oppressor: Job. 13^ 18
or is he a slave? he is instantly freed from his cruel master. All the
threatenings in the World cannot make him quake, neither is he moved at all with
the angry look of the cruel Tyrant.

Thirdly, when a man is once a sleep, then all his senses are retired into
their proper places, and all the members of his body cease from working: not
only resting (as formerly I said) from those outward labors of his calling,
but even from working the works of God. Ioh. 6.28
Even so it is with him, who is once dead; his eye is no more lifted up to
Heaven, as to the fountain head of life and goodness: his knee bends it
self no more at the throne of grace; neither does his tongue any more here
below set forth the praises of that glorious God. Set the blessed trumpet of
the Word to his ear, and he hears it not; neither is there in him any
ability, or will to perform the least religious duty. For the living, they are
they that praise the Lord: the grave does not: Isa. 38.18, 19.
neither do they that go down into the Pit celebrate his truth. Isa. 38.18,
19. And therefore it being so, good it were for us, to follow that which our
blessed Savior always practiced, namely, whilst it is to day, to work the
works of our heavenly Father; John, 19.4
seeing the night comes fast upon us, when no man can work.

4. Lastly, as the rising of the Morning Sun usually expels the natural
sleep, and lumpishnesse of the night: so at the appearing of the Sun of
Righteousness; the brightness of his coming shall expel, and chase away the
sleep of death, and put an end to that drowsy night, neither shall we sleep
any more the sleep thereof. Psalm. 13.3


In these and many other the like respects, is Death usually styled by the name
of sleep: and this being so:

First, why should we tremble at it, seeing it is the same to the child of
God, that the cool shade is, to the weary travailer; Job 14.2.
and the evening rest to the painful Labourer.

Secondly, why do we so bitterly weep and mourn (as persons without hope)
for our Friends departed; for they do but sleep, These. 4 13
and one day assuredly they shall be awaked?

Thirdly, why do we not make more account of Churchyards, and places of
burial, then we see, usually is done; seeing that they are the Dormitories
and sleeping places of the bodies of the Saints; where resting for a time, they
shall at length be awaked again by the coming of their Master, and his
gracious call.

Secondly, we must not imagine, when the Body is dead, that the soul sleeps
(an ancient, yet erroneous opinion) it crossing directly the word of God in
many places: as namely, Eccles. 12.7. where the Preacher speaking of the death
and dissolution of Man; he thus expresses it ( Dust says he) returns unto
Dust, and the spirit unto God that gave it. And that of our holy and blessed
Savior Christ Jesus to the Thief on the Cross, Eccl. 12.7
Luke the twenty third, verse forty three, Luk 23.43
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. This was amongst many other of
ancients, the belief of holy Policarpus, who (as the story says) when he was
to enter the flaming fire in the defense of the Christian Faith, openly
professed, that he was fully resolved, Hodie sese representandum in Spiritu,
coram Domino: that he was in his soul that very day to appear in the presence
of God.

Ob. If it be so, (may one say) why does then God deal so hardly with the body
above the soul: Psalm. 139.15.
For are they not both the work of his hands? The one made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest, parts of the earth: and the other Creando
infunditur, and infundendo Creatur: like the most precious oil infused and
powered out of the tree of Life. And besides they are always loving friends,
sympathizing, and taking part in the weal and woe each of other: they weep
together, and rejoice together: why then upon their parting, goes the one to
the earth; the other to heaven? the one to a dungeon of darkness, the other to
a Palace and place of delight?

An. The answer whereunto is, that this is done by Almighty God in singular
wisdom, in these three respects.

First, to cross the fond and childish course of man and woman, whose delight
wholly is as (we daily see) in pampring and cherishing of their bodies, whilst
the care and due respect that they owe unto their souls, is wholly neglected:
their bodies are deliciously stuffed; their souls are miserably starved: their
bodies are clothed in Silk and Tishue; their souls in rags and tatters: their
bodies are presumed with the most odiferous ointments; their souls with stink
of sin, and blasted with the breath of Hell.

Secondly, that the body might in time be wrought and framed to be a fit
companion for the soul, which since the fall of man it is not; but rather (as
I have showed you before) a let, and oftimes hindrance unto the same, in the
cheerful performance of many necessary and Christian duties. And therefore it
pleased God our heavenly Father, to appoint the earth to be his furnace and
place of refyning, to waste and wear away whatsoever sinful contagion the body
formerly has contracted; so that the soul afterward with the same, may no
ways be incombred.

Thirdly, that they being thus parted, Rev. 6
the soul might earnestly, and hourly desire (as the rest of the souls do
under the Altar) their re-uniting and joining together again, and so
consequently the hastening of the number of the elect, and second coming of the
Son of God to judgment.

And thus much shall serve to be briefly spoken of the first expression of the
joyfulnesse of their resurrection; that they shall Awake.

I come now unto the second, where it is said, that they shall Sing: And
questionless so they shall, and we all shall sing with them, whilst the
blessed Angels shall help to make up the quire: And good reason: for,

First, our work is quite over, and all our toil and labor ended, our field
ploughed, and our vineyard planted; the Spring is come, and the voice of the
Turtle heard in our land; Cant. 2.12
is it not fit then that we should sing a Requiem to our souls.

2. Our warfare is at an end, our enemies destroyed, and lo our victorious
General is mounted now on high, upon his triumphant Chariot, with innumerable
troops of Angels, and celestial soldiers upon his right hand, and upon his
left setting forth his praise, showing his noble acts, and singing his victory:
what soul is there, that ever reaped comfort from the same, that instantly
will not join it self with this joyful assembly, and bear a part in this
triumphant song, Rev. 13.9.10.
saying with the rest, Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that
sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. For thou have
redeemed us by thy blood, and have made us unto God, Kings and Priests, and we
shall reign on the earth.

3 It is the marriage day, wherein the espousals betwixt Christ and his Church
so long deferred, shall be fully perfected, when the glorious Bride, (coming
forth in a rich mantle al of white, which her beloved spouse long before
bestowed on her) shall be married to her husband the Lord Jesus Christ: who
having crowned her with the crown of Glory, will take her into the
Bride-chamber near unto himself, Psalm. 45.
and there she shall abide for ever. If the Spheres (as some will have the)
do daily moove in a most melodious sort, then, questionless will they utter
their chiefest and most delightful tunes, and like so many roling Cymbals,
serve that Heavenly Quire. Then will Heaven and Earth be filled with
Epithalamies, and songs of Love. Then shall we see (I doubt not) this sweet
young Gentleman, coming forth with his Laurel on his head, Rev. 19.7
and his rich Robe on his back, washed in the Blood of the Lamb, singing
Alleluiahs unto God, and saying with the rest, Let us be glad and rejoice, and
give honor unto him, for the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self
ready. The consideration whereof, ought to be another maine comfort, against
that sadness which the shadow of death brings with it, when a dark cloud
shall oppress our hearts, when our songs shall be turned into heavy sighs,
and all our mirth into doleful complaints: then let the Child of God thus
think with himself; well, though I cannot now be merry, yet the time is
coming when I know I shall, now I am sad, but then I shall sing, my ship being
entered the wished Haven, and this boisterous tempest wholly over.

But I hasten to an end, intending as briefly as I can, to close up all with
the reason that the blessed Spirit yields in the latter end of the verse: why
the dead carcasses shall not only arise, but in so beautiful also and joyful
a sort: the which is no other, in word, then the opperative and working power,
and virtue of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, being the same to the
dead, that the dew and sap in the spring, is to the herbs and grass of
the field. All the Winter long (experience teaches us) when snow and frost
covers the ground, the grass and plants of the earth appear as dead and
withered, until the spring comes, when a pleasant dew armed with the power
of the Sun, not only mouldreth and prepares the earth, but soaking down
unto the roots of the plants, causes them speedily to arise and grow, so that
within short time after, the travailer may with their beauty feed his eye, and
the Labourer with the Fruit of the same, fill his lap or bosom. All which the
Spirit of God (in saying thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall
give up her dead) intimates to be the happy condition of all the Elect at the
latter day. So that how ever their Bones be dry, their Beauty lost, and they
returned again to Earth and Dust, yet shall the fruit and benefit of the
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, like an heavenly dew, or rather like the
breath of GOD himself, soake down and pierce into the bottom of their
Graves, causing them to arise and blosome forth, like the Rose of the valley,
and Lilly of the field, the darlings of the Spring; all which is by the finger
of God. Cant. 2.1.


And that the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus shall do all this; Romans 6 John.
6.4 1 Cor. 6.14. 2. Cor. 5.10 Ephesians. 6. Col. 6.4
may appear both by multitude of places of Scripture, proving the truth
hereof, as also by so many exhortations which we usually meet withal,
wherein we are earnestly put on to fit and prepare our selves for so high a
dignity and preferment amongst others, 1 These. 5.6.8.
1. Thessalon. 5. where the blessed Apostle wills us, Not to sleep as others
do, but but watch and be sober, putting on the breast plate of Faith, 1 Pet.
3.14
and Love, and for our Helmet, the hope of salvation. And the Apostle St. Peter
in exhorting us (in his 1 Epistle 3.14.) so earnestly as he does; that seeing
we look for such things to be diligent, that we may be found of him in
peace, without spot or blemish. Jud. 20.21
The like does the holy Apostle Saint Jude, in the twenteth Chapter, and the
twenteth first verse of his Epistle, in this sort, Wherefore my beloved, keep
your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ
unto eternal Life. But if this I have spoken something before, with which
contenting my self, I will in a word or two and that very briefly, show unto
you, the reason of the comparison, wherein the virtue of the Resurrection of
Christ Jesus is compared unto that dew of Herbs. The which indeed does most
excellently demonstrate and express the nature of the same, as may appear by
these instances following.

First, the Dew descends from above wholly wrought and perfected by those
superior bodies; and is, as it were, the sweat of their brows: such surely and
undoubtedly, is the virtue of the Resurrection of Christ, a Divine and
caelestiall Dew, pleasantly distilling and dropping down from the sacred top
of that caelestiall Hermon at all times; but then chiefly and more especially,
when he unlooseth and untyeth the sorrows of Death; it being unpossible for
it to hold him.

Secondly, the Dew is of a mollifying and softning nature (as I said before)
fitting the plants to spring, and the earth to bring forth: such is the
Resurrection of our blessed Savior, of so powerful and working a nature,
leading things on, in so sweet and excellent an order, to their several ends,
that neither the hardness and stubbornnes of the earth, the dryness and
rottenness of the trees, nor the indisposition of the dead bodies themselves
shall hinder, but that the earth shall cast up her dead.

Thirdly, the dew of herbs is not only full of spirits, and of a cheering
and quickening nature, but likewise sweet and pleasant, casting forth a most
odiferous scent and savor, (witness our Gardens in the Spring mornings,) of
such both quickening and perfuming nature will the Resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ be, by means whereof, the Bodies of the Elect shall not only be
restored to life again, but the stinch and rotten savours of the Grave being
remooved, they shall be so sweetened and perfumed with the odiferous savours of
the same, that all their Garments shall smell of Myrrh, Alloes, and Cassia,
together with all the choicest spices of the Merchants, fitting the Ivory
palace whereinto they are to enter, and where they are to rejoice for evermore.

Fourthly, the Dew is of a most beautiful and fair aspect, gracing much the
flowers, with her crystal drops like so many orient pearls, dangling on
the several slippes and sprigs thereof: so surely will the virtue of the
Resurrection of Christ Jesus be to all those that are truly his, at his
second coming, which will be to judgment; beautifying and adorning them in a
more rich and costly manner then all the chains, broaches, and ornaments on
the earth possibly can do, yea past the apprehension of man.

Since then Brethren it is so, and the son of God has done all this for us,
making by his own Resurrection ours likewise, every way so certain, and sure,
and every way so joyful, let us then in time, I pray you, make sure of the
same, which believe me, we may easily do, if we get but our part in the first
Resurrection. For if by the Resurrection of Christ we be once raised out of the
Grave of sin; then let us no way question, but by the power of the same
Resurrection, we shall be likewise raised out of the bed and grave of
corruption. Hence, says the holy Apostle Paul, 2. Cor. 4. verse 14. We know
that he that raised up the Lord Jesus Christ: shall raise us up also by Jesus,
and shall present us with you: and blessed and happy are they (says St. John)
that have a part in the first Resurrection, for over them the second death has
no part. And this likewise will appear plainly unto us, if our minds and
affections be not, with the blind Mole, and brutish Swine, grubling here
below; but with the nimble and pleasant wings of the Hawke and Eagle soaring
daily, and mounting up on high, with all care and diligence seeking after those
celestial things that are above: according to which Rule, the blessed Apostle
leads on his exhortation Phil. 3.1. after this manner: If you be risen with
Christ (says he) then seek those things that are above: as though he should
say, if ye be risen with Christ, then ought you to seek after the things
that are above. And again, if you be risen with him, then you cannot but
seek after them: so then by this seeking, it may easily appear whether we be
risen with Christ; which if we be, then blessed are we; for the second death
shall have no power over us: But death shall be to us the beginning of Life, and
a happy passage for us, from an inferior Room, to an higher; from base
Jericho, to that beautiful Jerusalem that is above: whether storms and
tempests cannot reach; and where the morning sun always shines; where
Rivers of oil run gushing up and down; and where is the temple of the
living God, and of the Lamb, where is Paradise, in which is no Serpent to
tempt; or Death with his arrow to kill: where are Riches without measure, and
glory without comparison; where the day never ends, nor comfort fades; where
our mourning shall quite cease, and we keep a perpetual Sabbath, with the
blessed Angels and souls of the Righteous: solacing our selves in the presence
of the blessed Trinity; and sitting us down at the right hand of the Father,
where are pleasures for emore. Amen.

AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THE TRVLY NOBLE GENTLEMAN, EDWARD LEWKENOR Esquire,
lamenting especially the final extirpation of that worthy and (in other
Countries) ancient Family although in Suffolk continued but for three
Generations By Sir Edward Lewknor, the Elder. Sir Edward Lewknor, the younger.
Edward Lewknor Esquire.

COuld I but sing such lays (great Soul) as thou
Chant'st amongst Angels, and Archangels now;
I might commend thee, but such notes as ours,
Are like A Crow saluted Augustus with these words: Ave Caesar. Mac. Stat. 2.
c. 4
Crows Aves to great Emperors.
A wonder, Reader, in one tomb does lie
Lowly interred a stately Family:
A greater yet; lo one poor heap of mould
Holds three such men, as scarce a World can hold.
Greatest of all, but three Decents, comprise
More Worthies, then most long lived Families.
Even as great sums for most part greater grow
By adding Ciphers, to the Figures; so,
It Is often in antique stemmes; wherein we see
Five or six nulls, for one Poor unity:
But 't was not so in yours, Nature would not
Set down one Cipher, but all decades wrote.
One old, in whom ten Nestors did reside:
One middle aged, in whom there did abide
The Worth, and Wisdom, of as great a ten,
As Nature breeds amongst the sons of men:
One young, whom now to Fate we would not grutch,
If out of ten we could extract one such:
Or as in counting, often, we see no less
Then twenty Counters, laid down to express
Some Shillings, or Deniers; when two or three
Do Hundreds, thousands, Millions signify.
So 'twas in you (Great Saints,) Nature had laid
Her Millions, then her numbering hand she staid;
Thinking perchance it were but vain expense
Of Time and Art, to put down pounds and pence:
Had she composed some fulsome potion,
Some huge Gallenical decoction;
Putting in substance, leaves and stalks, and all
Boiled in some quarts of Liquor Physical,
You might have been perchance a greater dose,
And matched the Stemme-proud vast Magnificoes;
But, when our Paracelsian would extract
Spirit of Spirits, Spirit, so exact
As Quintessence it self compared to it,
Was but Terrene and Feculent as yet;
Her curious Alymbecke, would forth power,
Only three drops, then staid and would no more.
As in Joves Palace, the vast Firmament
Shines with a many Starre-bright ornament,
But such as to the Gazers eye display,
Scarce any thing, but Bulls and Rams, and gay
Strumpets and Concubines, and Gorgons heads,
Scorpions, and Centaures, and ten thousand dreads;
When as those Orbs, wherein one Star is fixed,
Carry some God or Goddess uncommix't
With ugly forms; so was your destiny:
Ye were all God-like men, although but Three:
O sacred number, though it had no more
But ye to make it sacred! Henceforth score
Amongst the paternes of Triplicity:
Holy triplicity; this blessed three,
And next the greatest, let it greatest be.
Nor did the cruel fates their anger show;
But favor rather, to permit so few.
Rare things are made, for one age to behold,
Others to wonder at: If they grow old
And common, al our admiration stints;
So Loadstones are scarce better deemed then Flints:
Which were they rare, no Gold or Orient A round Loadstone called Terella.
stone,
The great earth scarce, would buy the little one.
It Is not for every age of man to know,
An Hector, Caesar, Cato, Scipio;
No, nor a Lewknor neither! 't may suffice,
To see a Phoenix in five Centuries.
Yet may we see Sir Robert Lewknor in ^er, brother to Sir Edward Lewknor the
younger.
one in another clime,
A Golden Branch, Transplanted; which no time
Shall wast; until that fair stem has out wore,
As many years as it had days before:
And shall in thee His only daughter.
sweet Babe, whom heaven has lent
Unto the World, that having largely spent
Such store of Honor in thy Sire, by thee
Another name may gain like dignity;
Amen to this, say all the Saints on high;
Amen to this, be Angels Harmony:
Say thou Amen, thou fountain of al Store,
Thy saying's doing; say it we ask no More:
Till then, live still thou Blessed name, in The Lady Lewkenor, wife to Sir Ed.
Lewkenor the younger.
Thee
Daughter, Wife, Mother, to this heavenly Three;
Relic of Three great Saints in Heaven, and Mother
To Three on earth unmatch't, but by their Brother.
As Iron placed betwixt two Loadstones, loath
To forsake either, hangs betwixt them both:
So live t'wixt Heaven and Earth: and be thou hight
An Earthly Angel, or an Heavenly wight;
Until the Heavenly part made strong by fate,
Draw thee at last to thine Eternal state.
AN EPITAPH.
THe fairest Blossom of as Fair a Tree
As Suffolk yields, Reader, lies under me.
'Tint strange that Blossoms fade, but cruel Fate
Did in this bud the whole Tree ruinate;
A Tree transplanted hither, to display
A Wonder in each age, and then decay:
For aged, middle, young, come Fame and tell
To three, but three Lewkenors, a parallel.
Ar't mute? then let thy Trumpe their worth resound,
And fame reviue whom Fate has laid in Ground,
And when one stem, three Edwards can allot,
Like unto these; let Lewkenor be forgot.
JOH. GARNONS. Dr. D.

FINIS.

