THE Ouer-throw of an Irish rebel, in a late battle: Or The death of Sir
Carey Adoughertie, who murdered Sir George Paulet in Ireland; and for his
rebellion has his head now standing over Newgate in Dublin.

depiction of Newgate prison, Dublin, with displayed heads of executed rebels

Imprinted at London for I. Wright, and are to be sold at his shop near Christ
Church gate. 1608.

(...) by them: Yea to such a habit of Savage tirany has Rebellion brought
that nation, that nothing has been or still is pleasing to a great part of
them, but that which all civil kingdoms abhor, (as being their only plague)
and that is Civil War: Murders and Massacres and vprores are to them as
Music and Banquets: blood as the most delicate cups of wine: Thou need not
(O gallant country) to boast that no venomous beast is bread within thee, for
the hearts of thy disobedient children are full of rank poison: Thou have
deserved to be called not one of the daughters of Britannia, but to be
rejected as a bastard: and albeit from time to time, she has been unto thee
as a loving Nurse and Mother, thou can not condemn her of unkindness if
she prove unto thee a stepdame. How many hundreds of thousands of our English
nation have been drowned in their own blood, sluc'de out by thy treachery how
many of our Nobility have lost their lives and been confounded, whilst in
their duty and allegiance they went about to enduce thee to ciuility, or to
chastize thee for thy Stubburnnes? how many widows have bewailed the loss of
their husbands, butcherd by thy rebellious people? how many sons and
daughters by thy means have been left fatherless? Yet if thou look back
(o Ireland) either upon the fortunate reign of thy late Queen and mistress
(of happy memory) or do but number up the days of rest which thy now royal
sovereign (our most gracious King) has in his peaceful and blessed
government bestowed upon thee, thou can not choose but confess, that (thy
ill deseruings being so many) thou have been favorably dealt withal, in
being not punished according to the measure of thy offendings: thou have been
worthy to have been beaten with rods of Iron for thy unruliness, and to have
had fire the sword play the executioners upon thee and thy nation for their
stiff-necked rebellion. But our Princes have been unto thee in their
correction as fathers are to children, when they punish them, yet nothing can
win thee to goodness or weane thee from thy bloody and barbarous proceedings.

But let us leave this stream, and hoist up sails in that sea where our
intent was at first to end our voyage. And that is to discover the onset and
overthrow of a Rebel, or rather conductor of Rebels, Sir Carey Adougherty.

You shall therefore understand, that Sir Carey Adoughertie, having with his
bloody assotiate (Fallin Reeah Mack Dauy) committed that inhumaine murder upon
Sir George Paulet, and others the inhabitants of the town of Derry, thought
with the Tragical Poet, Tutum esse sceleribus per scelus itur, that the only
buckler to defend villainies was to join the army of more (...) of his
Sovereign? Yet did Sir Carey Adoughertie in the height of his proud
ouer-weening, think that like a whirle-winde he should throw down all that
with-stood his fury, and that like a storm at Sea, the whole kingdom of
Ireland should veil to him, to save it self from shipwreck. But God, whose
Angels, are the guard of Princes persons, and whose right hand steeres the
helm, by which Kingdoms are governed, did arm the Lord Deputy, and the
Council of Ireland, not only with present courage to encounter this Rebel,
but with wisdom to prevent, and to beat back all storms that by his
boisterous and and turbulent spirits were threatened to disquiet the peaceable
state of the country.

One thousand English are therefore forthwith levied, and those divided into
three regiments, under the conducts of these Gentlemen and others, viz. Sir
Thomas Ridgeway, Treasurer for Ireland. Sir Richard Wingfield, Knight Marshall
of Ireland Sir Oliver Lambert. Sir Richard Morrison. Sir Thomas Roper. Sir
Francis Rush. Sir Toby Cofeild. Sir Josias Bodley.


And besides these, diverse gentlemen of name, all of them, using their best
policy, to cut off the forces of the enemy: And because, they would be sure,
that he should not escape out of the nets prepared for him, those three
thousand so divided into three several companies were directed to march three
several ways into the country, and by that means the Rebel, if he durst
come into the field, might be encompassed and set upon.

Before I proceed any further, it shall not be amiss to set down one
matter, as an argument, to express the confidence that Sir Carry Adoughertie
had in his forces, as also to show the pride and highness of his spirit, and
that was thus.

The Bishop of Derry and of those parts of the country had his wife surprised
by Sir Carry and his accomplices, and by them held prisoner: no entreaty of the
bishop, no nor the ransom of a thousand pound (which he offered) could buy her
out of their hands whereupon the bishop (who freely passed too and fro, as well
to Sir Carry as to the English that were his friends, without disturbance,
because he was a churchman) entered into speech with the rebel, about his
unnatural (proceedings against the peace of his country. But Adougherty being
careless of his reprehension, in the end spoke thus. I understand) quoth he)
(...) they fought with answerable courage, and answerable fortune; till at
length, one of those three companies, into which the English troops were
divided, secretly keeping aloof, came upon the sudden and unexpected of the
enemy, on the back of the Rebel, so that he was roundly be set with death and
his officers. They were like a heard of lusty Dear encompassed with huntsmen,
and every minute looked to hear the knell of their deaths rung forth; yet to
show that albeit they scorned life, they would not give it away for nothing,
they fought courageously, because they purposed to sell their blood dearly.
But (alas!) what strength of man can hold out when the finger of God is held up
against them? God added vigor, and knitte the sinews of the loyal Subject,
that hoe might be of power to confound the traiterous rebel. And that their
pride might be confounded even in that person, that first made them faithless
to their country, and foes to their Sovereign: heaven opened the hand of
divine vengeance, and from it shot a bullet, which struck Sir Carey
Adoughertie quite through the head. The wound was mortal, for with it, he
presently fell down and dyed; and so fell down, that his hand lay directly
under his cheek, (his head leaning upon it) and so was found slain about some
three hours after he was shot; the head being afterward out off from the
shoulders by one of Sir Francis Rush his men, And from the field sent to
Dublin, where to stands (fixed on a pole,) over the Eastgate of the citey,
called Newgate.

In this skirmish were lost on the English side very few; of the Irish many;
for the leader being cut off, those that were his followers in so dishonest and
dishonorable an action, fainted, and felt the deserved inst^ed of the wars,
so that in a short time, they were all either slain or (as chaff by a furious
wind) blown away a dispersed to nothing. Since which defeat (...) diverse of
the Rebels are come in of their own accord, and daily more and more do submit
themselves to that mercy, which Sir Arthur Chichester (the Lord deputy) has by
proclamation offered unto them.

Thus have I set down the ouer-throwe of a man, whose fortunes might have bin
better, had not a turbulent and revenging spirit dwelt in his bosom: But as
the course of his life was bloody, so (by the just doom of heaven) was the
conclusion of it. God never suffers a hand that takes a pride to be embrewed in
slaughter, to escape unpunished. Note the ends of all such mutinous and
barbarous-minded Rebels, that have burn^ up their country with the fires of
civil vproares, and have laid wast the hopes of the poor hus-bandman, and you
shall see that their deaths have been a sudden, as bloody, (...)

(...) known, such forces as Ireland then had of the kings, were with some
indifferent expedition made ready, and committed to the lending of the Marshall
Sir Richard Winckfield, and Sir Oliver Lambert, the whole number amounting to
600. or there about* who passing to the Derrie without hearing of the rebel,
made from thence to Culmore, a Forte some four mile form it, which he had take
from Captain Harry Heart by treachery before which was quit by those that kept
it for the rebel, before our for (...) sit down before it, so that it was got
with as much case as lost, though more honorably: for O Doghertie being
Captain Hearts gossip had under color of friendship invited him and his wife
to his house (as he had often done before) and having him there, kept him
prisoner, and swore to his wife unless she would use some means to deceive
the warders, and deliver him the Castle, her husbands life should answer for
it, which to save she performed the night before the Derry was burnt. This
Castle our forces, having again gotten, they marched after him, to fight with
him if he would endure, where they understood he was: but he having no such
purpose, quit his own country, and went into Mack Swines, being place of more
fastness. His wife, sister and daughter he had left in his country in a strong
castle of his own, whither after his flight our forces kept their course, and
having summond it and received a peremptori answer from the Constable thereof
they brought a piece of Ordinance before it, from which the shot being made,
and an offer of an assault given, did so daunt the defendants, that they
yielded both the castle and company in it to the Kings mercy, where the Bishop
of Derry (a most valiant and worthy Prelate) recovered his wife so long
detained by the rebels, and for whose ransom he had a few days before proferd
500. pound, which was refused O Dogherties Lady, sister and daughter being an
infant, were with some others sent to the Castle of Dublin where they yet
remain. After this blow given him, his Kernes seeing their hope perish,
earnestly pressed him to do something against the kings forces, or there vowed to
leave him, which he undertook to do. This being concluded, they appointed to
set upon our men at the edge of a wood, as they should pass (going the^ to
besiege Do castle which he held) and there to cut off some of our forces. But
notice being given, they found a hot welcome. When O Dogherty (having valor
fitting a better man) thought to do something worthy himself, and therefore
caused his foster father Phelim Reugh to lead a wing of shot, and himself came
up in the rear, which was well performed, but in the going off, he being
something to busy in shaking his Pike in a vain flourish, was by a soldier of
sir Francis Rush his company noted (though not for him) and shot through the
head: Phelim Reuhg seeing him fall, wheeled back and bestrid the body, thinking
to recover it, which made the soldier guess him to be a man of special note
that was slain, and therefore (being not so suddenly able to charge his Piece
again) he put powder into his pan, and made a false proffer, which Reugh
perceiving, and fearing the like fortune, left the body and fled, upon which
accident our men advanced forward,

(...) (...) that none of them do presume to relieve, entertain, receive, or
protect any person or persons whatsoever, who has been Actors, Counselors,
and Followers of the said O Doghertie in his late Action of rebellion, upon
pains to be reynted and a judged traitors in as higher degree as the said O
Doghertie himself, or any his Adherents. Notwithstanding We do promise, that
whosoever shall deliver or bring unto us the Lord Deputy, or any his Majesty's
principal Commanders or Officers of his Army, the body or bodies of any
person or persons, dead or alive, who have been followers of the said O
Doghertie in his said rebellion, being Swordmen or Owners of Goods or
Creathes, shall have for his reward, not only his Majesty's gracious pardon,
but also all the goods of such person or persons whom he shall so deliver or
bring unto us ( Phelim Reough mac David, and Shane mac Manus oge only
excepted) who must expect, no pardon, but whosoever shall bring the said
Phelims head, or deliver his body alive, shall have the full benefit of our
former Proclamation in that behalf.

Given at Dundalke the vii of July, 1608.
God save the King.
Thomas Dublin Canc. H. Winche. Henry Harrington. Richard Morrison. Adam
Loftus. Thom. Ridgeway. Oliver St. John. Geff. Fenton. H. Power. Rich. Cook.


DVBLIN Printed by John Franckton, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. 1608.


