Fouretene Sermons of Barnardine Ochyne, concerning the predestinacion and
eleccion of god: very expediente to the setting forth of his glory among his
creatures. Translated out of Italian in to our natyue tongue by. A.C.

It is good to hyde the Kings secrets, but to decleare and praise the works
of god, it is an honorable thing. Co. xij.

I will say to the north, let go and to the southe, keep not back: but bring
my Sons and my Daughters from the ends of the world, namely all those that
be called after my name. For the^ have I created, fashyoned, and made for mine
honor. Esa. xliii.

The titles of the Chaptres,
i. Whether predestinacio^ ought to be written, spoken, or thought. ii. How
excelent our election is. iij. If we may know in this present life whether
we be of the elect and in the grace or favor of God or not. iiij. Whether it
be good to know or to believe that we are elect. v. Whether it be necessary to
salvation to believe that we are elect or no. vi. If it be good to know
wherefore God has elect sum and sum reprobate. vij. Of the diverse effects it
works in man to believe that our election is al in the hand of God and that of
him only it depends viij. How it ought to be answered to them which lamente
that God has create them forseyng their damnacion. ix. Wherefore God has
elected us. x. Whether the elect can be damned or not xi. Whether god do
aggrauat, harden, and blind the hearts of men and in what manner. xij. How god
does dyspence his grace. xiij. If man have liberty or not, and in what manner.
xiiij. Of the effect wrought by the spirit of God when it enters the soul.
To the Christen. Reader.
WHEn these translated sermons of the famous Barnardine were come to mine hand,
Ientyll Reader, I thought it mete to publysh the^ to the end so Godly
Apostolyke doctrine should not be private to those only which understand the
Italian tongue, since through the honest travel of a well occupied Ientelwoman,
and verteouse meyden they speak in English: whose shamfastnes would rather
have suppressed them, had not I to whose hands they were committed half
against her will put them fourth, biddyng them blush that deserve blame: for
this of her part I dare safely affirm craves perpetual praise and if any
pretty pryckemydantes shall happen to spy amote in this godly labor (as I
doughte not but the nisytes will) seeing it is meeter for Docters of diuinitye
to meddle with such matters the^ Meydens, let the^ remember how woma^ly they
wast their time the one part in pryckeynge and trymmynge to vain hethennyshe
ostentacio^, and in deuisyng new fashyons of apparel, to whom if in their
glass appeared the foul fautes of their fylthy co^dicions as plainly as the
defautes of their forsayde faces, I doubt much whether they would delight to
toose therein so often as they do: the other part speaking in prynt like parates
with solemn countenau^ces, debate matters of importau^ce, and grave weight, as
though the order of realms appartained to them, or else warbling words of
scripture in all their doings, deface the thing they most babble of. But I
require the (Christian Reader) with judgment to read, and in the equal
balaunce of Scripture to way these learned and godly sermons, which thou shall
find (I dout not) of just weight with the sacred word of God: I forbear to
praise them, lest I should say to little, defend them I need not the author
lyuinge and here amongst us: a man whose life without words were a
suffyciente proteccion to his work. If ought be erred in the translacion,
remember it is a womans yea, a Ientyl womans, who commonly are wonted to live
Idelly, a maidens yt never gaddid farther the^ her fathers house to learn the
language. Fare well and use her labor to the amendment of thy life.

G. B.

To the right worshypful and worthyly beloved Mother, the Lady. F. her humble
Daughter wysheth increase of spiritual knowledge, with full fruicion of the
fruits thereof.
SInce the Orygynal of what so ever is, or may be converted to any good use in
me, has frelye proceeded (though as the minister of GOD) of your Ladyshypes
mere careful, and Motherly goodness, as well in procuring all things
thereunto belongeynge, as in your many, and most Godly exhortacyons, wherein
among the rest it has pleased you, often, to reprove my vain study in the
Italyan tongue, accompting the sede thereof, to have been sown in barayne,
unfruitful ground (syns God thereby is no whytte magnifyed) I have at the
last, perceived it my duty to prove how much the understanding of your
will, could work in me toward the accomplyshynge of the same. And for that
I have well known your chyfe delight, to rest in the destroynge of man his
glory, and exalting wholly the glory of God: which may not be unless we
acknowledge that he, does fore se and determyne from without beginning, al
things, and cannot alter or reward after our deserved worckes, but remain
stedefaste, according to his immutable will, I have taken in hand to dedicate
unto your Ladyship this small number of Sermons (for the excele^t fruit sake
in the^ contained, proceeding from the happy spirit of the santified Barnardyne,
which treat of ye election and predestinacion of God, with the rest (although
not of the self title) a perteynig to the same effect to the end it might
appear, yt your so many worthy sentences touching the same, have not utterly
ben without some note in my weak memory, and al be it, they be not done in such
perfection, as the dignity of ye matter does require: yet I trust and know, ye
will accept ye humble will of the prese^ter, not weghing so much the excelnecy of
the translacion, al though of right it ought to be such as should not by the
grosnes thereof deprive the aucthor of his worthynes. But not meaning to take
upon me ye reach, to his high style of thealogie, and fearyng also, least in
enterprisynge to set forth the bryghtnes of his eloquence, I should manifest
my self unapt, to attain unto the lowest degree thereof. I descend therefore,
to the understanding of mine own debilitye. Only requiring, that it may please
your Ladyshippe to vouchsafe that this my small labor may be allowed at your
hands under whose proteccion only it is committed with humble reverence, as
yeldyng some part of the fruit of your Motherly admonicions, in this my
wyllinge service.

Your Ladyshyppes Daughter most boundenly obedient. A.C.

Whether Predestinacion ought to be written, spoken, or thought: the first
Sermon.
There are many that would not here predestinacion spoken of, nor once named, and
if they might let it, it should never be preached, and that is because it seems
them to give offense, and engender confusion among the people. I cannot deny,
that many curiouse persons with their darcke natural light (willing to se
things supernatural that cannot be seen but by faith) do fall into thousands
of errors, and cause other to fall into the like. All that they may imagine by
force of wit, pleasynge to their own corrupt reason (of that high secret)
they thyncke it to be true, without other testimonye of holy scripture. And
thereby have entangled their brains, darkened their minds, and offended their
consciences. Curyosytye is an insatiable beast, it would pearce through all
things, and yet cannot get out of his dark and intricate laborinthes, nor
once lift vpthe head to divine secrettes. And if we suffer our selves to be
guyded of it (in things specially supernatural, neither will it at any time
be satisfied, nor we shall never perceive the truth. For immedialye after it
passes the borders of the natural light, it goes always blinded and at
aduentur. Therefore it must be put a side and (bringing his insatiable will to
an end) walk by faith to deuyne secrettes honoryng the^ without further
dyscussion. And if we be provoked to search them out by the wantonness of humayne
wit: we ought to remember that, Prou. xxv.
which is written: He that searches the majesty of God, shall be overcome with
the glory thereof. It is our office, to be co^te^t, with as much as God has
vouchafed to open unto us in the sacred Scripturs, in the which, he has given
us light sufficyently. But note, that as it is euel to be curiouse in willing
to know more then that which in the scripture is contained, and to us reveled,
so is it also evil, to be ignorant and not to seek to understand as much as
therein is: for that in them speaks the holy ghost who gives none offense but
edifyeth In them is written nothing pernicious, unprofitable, or vain, but only
commodious and necessary. Neither ought it to offend any man, when it is
spoken of, in the manner that Paulle speaks of it. And we neither may nor
ought to be more circumspecte in speaking thereof then Paul, ye then God, Gala.
ii.
that speak in him. Thynckest thou haplye that Paul (yea rather Christ that
lived in him, and moved him to write) did err in yt he wrote of it in such
sort, as he did? The holy ghost would never have given understanding thereof in
the holy scripture, if it had been evil. Thou wylt say, the preaching of it
in such manner as Paul wrytteth: gives offense, as it is euidente. I answer
that Christ crucified, was an offense to the Hebrews: i. Cor. i.
therefore the apostles did evil to preach it. The gospel seemed folyshnes to
the wise of the world: And therefore it should not be taught. The truth is
displeasaunt to the false christians, they find offense of the gospel, and
Iustificacion by Christ, should it then be kept in silence? Wherefore wilt you
that we hold our peace of that thing which Paul writteth? How can the words
of the holy ghost offend, that have been pronounced and written only for our
salvation? If thou be offended therwyth, it is not because it gives the
occacio^ but for that thou take it without any gift. Neither ought the
thereof to cease, more then the Apostles left preaching, though many were
offendyd therwyth. Thou will say, to preach the Gospel is necessary.
Wherefore that ought not to be left for offense: and I say that
predestinacion is a great part of the Gospel. Would thou not think this a
goodlye Gospel or glad tidings, that God from without beginning, had by his
mere grace, and by Christ crucified, elected us to be his children, and that we
be suer in his hands? It is a thing most necessary, to preach those good
news, in the which there is dyscouered unto us the exceadynge goodness of God,
that above all other things does move us to be ennamored of him, And he that
is offended with predestinacion, preached in the manner it ought to be, is also
offended with the Gospel. Know thou (that which in deed does hurt,
although it appear not to the blind and frantyke world) that any man
preaches it after ye human doctrine? But it may be thou wylt say, let us
come therefore to the particulars. Does it not seem to the, offense, to preach
that god has elect some and not other some? He that hereth these words, will
thyncke God to be parciall. I answer and first I say, that god cannot err;
nor will other wise then justly: Yea his will is so right, that as he always
wylleth any thing, it is even by that willing most just. Therefore none should
be offended with his works, for as much as he may dyspose us after his own
way, and show his pleasure upon us more then ye potter upon his pottes: and al
with justice and equite. For what bond has god with us? Moreover, Romans ix.
by the sins of Adam we are al lost, and he might iustlye damn us al, but
he saves as many as him pleases: and yet we complain, where we are not
worthy by sufferyng al punishmente to set furthe the bryghtnes of his glory.
Yea it ought to be preached that God has elected some, and not other some:
for to smite to the earth the wisdom of man and to make him al humble and
subject to God Now, Romans iii.
is it not necessary to be known that we shall not all be saved, and that many
shall be damned? And consequentlye God has many elect and many rejected. Thou
would say, this should give no occacion of offense, if it were preached,
that those that he has chosen, are chosen for there merits, and those he has
forsaken, are forsaken for their wickedness but they say yt those he has elect,
are elected by his mere grace, without works, and that our election and
salvation depends hollye upon God. And this gives the offense to the world.
Ephe. i.
I answer. If this be offense, Paul has given it him self, Romans ix.
because it is the doctrine of him ye rather of the holy ghost. Wylt thou be
offendyd, Romans viii. Ephe. i.
if Paul magnify ye fre mercy, seeing God has elected us to the laud of his
glory, as he wrytteth? We cannot magnify it sufficiently. But thou fear it
should be lauded and exalted to much. If it were told the thou were elected by
they works, then would I thou should be offended, for that it would make the
believe thy salvation, to depend upon thy self, whereby thou should be
begiled. Ose. xiii.
For of thy self comes thy damnacion, and of God thy salvation. Yea as often
as thou thynckest thy salvation in any part to depend upon thy self, it
dryueth the, either to dyspare or to be exallted in presumpcyon. And in such
case thou cannest never put in God all thy hope, nor all thy love, neither have
perfect quyetnes of mind, nor of conscience. Thou would say, that who so
knows that God above is resolved upon all things: waxes cold in well
doing, and says, what need I more to travail, God has immutably determined
and resolved all that is to be, I may pass my time in pleasure, for if I be
elect I shall every way be saved, And if I be reprobate, I cannot save my
self, though I never ceased to axe it, on my bare knees. Thou perceyuest not,
that he which says so, does dyscouer him self showing that he never did
good works, and yet he would his salvation should depend upon him self. This
sort of men, if they do any good (as they call it) it is to win heaven, and not
for the glory of God. Therefore if they should believe that their salvation and
electyon did not come of them selves (as men that were not mouyd with the zeal
of the honor of God) they would dwell in Idleness, yea, give them selves to
live lycenciously, and ungodly, without respect of the dishonor of God, they
are fearful Servants and hirelynges, and not sons of God, they serve
them selves and not God, and them selves they worship. The elect do never
become could, but are the more fervent, by hearing that their election and
salvation is only in the handdes of God, they know by fayeth, that the lord
louyth them so much (specially since Christ has dyed for them on the
cross) that they are suer of their salvation. Yea they feale so much the
goodness of God in Christ, and by Christ, that if it wear possible (while that
spiritual felyng did remain in them) that they cold believe them selves to be
reprobate (for as much as by this, i. Re. xxviii.
god is no less good) they would not any thing the less love him, or travail
to honor him, even as Saul cessed not most coragyously to fight for ye glory
of God, although it was foretold him of his death. The elect understand in
spirit yt they are the children of God. Wherefore they are forced by strength of
love and learn to have conditions convenient to their so hye estate: Hebru.
xii.
and are also ashamed to do a wicked work, not semeli or setting to ye bewty
of their dignity. And so much more the^ the other, do they fear so sin, by
how much more they know yt god does in this present life, punyshe his
legitimate children, more the^ the basterdes. If and astrologyer should tell an
ambycious man that he should be pope, although he did put undoubted trust
there in, yet for all that he would not be Idell, but would set forth him
self by all means po yble to come to yt dignity. Even so ye sons of god,
the suerer they are of their eleccio^ so much ye more they understand the
great goodness of God. They are always forced therefore, more and more by good
works, to make certain to them selves the knowledge of their eleccion. ii.
Pet. i.
Every one will travail for the things of the world. There is none that
says I will be Idle, or I will not eat, for always I shall live, and be rych
and happy in the things of the world, if God have forsene and determined it?
Only in those things perteining to the soul, predestinacion hinders them by
making it a shylde to their wicked life. But know thou that those which of
such a benefit take occasion to become worse, (though already with their heart
they did the same things and would have done it in work if they had thought
them sure of their salvation) show the^ selves to be reprobate, ii. Cor. xi.
and not to feel in Christ the great goodness of God. Satan is he that being
transformed into the similitude of an Aungel of light, trauayleth to persuade
that our eleccion depends upon us. This was the opinion of Pelagius: and the
Pelagians are they that be offended with this great mercy of God: they think
that God neither may, can, or will do other then reason. Then of force must it
be good to be preached, to the end it may be known, Esa. lv.
yt the time is already come of the covenant and promised peace that he which
has ears to understand, Math. xiii.
may understand, as have ye sheep of christ yt hear their pastor. It is also
good to be spoken of, to the end yt that be not hyd but declared, which (by ye
will of God and for our profit) is written thereof in holy scripture: Ihon. x.
and, yt the special cure yt god has of us, may be known, and how we should
serve him freely as children, and not as timorous servants and hirelinges. Yea
and that it may be understand, that God (being absolutely the Lord) may do all that he will, and what he wills is just, and to the end also, yt in our
election may be discovered to us, in superabu^da^t manner, his fre mercy, and
that it may be seen how we are prevented by innumerable benitites, and also yt
man may know yt he is only vanity, Psalm. xxxviii.
and ever an unprofitable servant. Paradise we little worth if with our works
we could win it but it is the inheritance of sons, and not a reward for
servants. I would know what men would say, if God should say to them: choose
whether ye will stand to my election and yt which I have determined of you, or
yt I disanulling (if this were possible) all that I have purposed to do with you,
should resolve me holy to put it in you, And to save you if ye do good works
and persevere in them, and if you do ye contrary to da^me you. I am sure then
men should know their own frailtye, ignorance and malice. And on ye other
party yt exceeding bou^ty of God, and remit it holy to him again, and much more
if they loved him, for ye greter glory to god, yea and also for their own
proper commodity, for it should never be done, if it depe^ded upon the^ selves.
And therefore for every respect, every one should stand to gods determinacio^,
if it were for nothing but to do honor to him. It is a thing more
magnifice^t, and to god more convenient, to give paradise by fre mercy, the^
if he should sell it: his liberality is thereby most discovered. Then, for his
greater glory I would always say, god has given me this. And also for mi own
commodity, yt whereas now I hold my salvation sure (for that I know it ha^geth
only upon god) I would think me damned, or at the least presuming on my self,
stand in dout, if in the least point it did depend upon me, because god
inco^parably does love me more the^ I ca^ do my self. Yea, I am ye greatest
enemy and traitor to my self yt may be. Therefore me^ ought by ever
co^sideracio^ to content the^ yt their salvation does stand in the hand of
god: yea in taking ye whole cure of us, he has showed us most dear love, he
has willed us to be sure of it. And therefore he would not trust to us,
knowinge we are so imperfect, that if we had paradise in our hands, we should
let it fall to therth where now we are sure knowinge that al our sins ca^ not
let the divine eleccion, neither quench or diminishe the divine charity. Yea,
hereof our sins took occasion to be showed with excess of more love. Roma. v.
We are not by this invited to more Idleness, nor to watch when we shall have
Manna from heaven, neither to be wickedly occupied, but we are drawn and moved
so much more to love him, as he is discovered to us by more bounty and
charity. But those that are not by Christ regenerate, are of so base and vile
a mind through sin, that they can not think God to be so liberal as to give
heaven without our works. But they ought at the least to think, that to bye
it the blood of Christ is sufficient without adjoining thereto their works to
boot: which surely are rych iuels to be mingled with his God is so fra^ke,
that he has given us Christ, Roma. viii.
and in him al things, and can not thou think he has given the heaven? It
is also our greater glory, that God has loved us somuche, that his own self
has wylled to take the care and charge of our salvation. And so to that end
has wylled his only son to die upon the cross, so that if with all our
travail we might enter into heaven by our selves: the glory only of the
cross is a far greater glory then any other which by our selves we could
attain. Yea, there is no other true glory, then to glory to be so much loved
of God, that he has to save us, put his son upon the cross. He may not dwell
in his own love, that wills to be happy, and only glory in God. If we might
glory of ourselves, we should have whereof to wax proud and prefer our selves
before our brethern, where otherwise we should have occasion to be humble, and
give to God all honor and glory as to him it apperteineth. i. Timo. i.
And further such as believe the^ selves to be by grace elected, saved sons of
God, heirs and sure thereof, not only because there remains no more to get
(God in Christ having given them all) but also by the great understanding they
have of the goodness of the Lord: they are constrained to work as children for
the glory of their father, and not for their own gain, and so also sure of
their salvation, with Christ they turn them with all their force, to seek the
salvation of their brother: they demand also grace with a bolder spirit and
confidence, sense they axe it not for their own lucre, but for he honor of
God, Ephesi. i. Romans vi. Psalm. xxxii.
and to his laud and gloy: so yt in the worlds to come, may be seen and
abou^dant riches of his fre mercy. Moreover such hope to be hard for that they
think not to deserve grace, Romans iiii. Gala. iii. ii. Cor iii. Ioh. iii.
neither put their trust in their own works, but in the goodness of God, being
inspired and moved thereto by the holy ghost. Such also as feel that our
salvation depends not upon us, but our damnacion, and that it stands
wholye in the hand of God: are forced to turn their backs to them selves,
and their faces to God: Where as the contrary belefe, would make the contrary
operacion, they would withdraw them from God, and seek to rest with hope in
them selves: also if God had elected us with this condition: Ephe. i.
If we would do well, we should be under the law contrary to Paul, neither we
should be saved, for the law saves not but works wrath, and is the minister
of cursing and damnacion. Let him therefore that lusts have Christ for his
judge, for I will none of him, but as a savior. If our eleccion by fre mercy
did harm us, he would not the^ have elected us so. But note them that think to
have their eleccion in their own hands, and thou shall se that they are in
their own love and trust, presumtuous, and full of vice: and yet for all this
they be so blind and arrogant, that they will have heaven by justice.

But let us pray to the Lord that he give them knowledge to the end they may
render to God all laud, honor, and glory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

How excellent our eleccion is, the second Sermon.
PAul magnifieth our eleccion, first in his behalf that has elected us,
saying: We are elected neither by man nor Angel, but by God: Hyer ca^ not
he go. Then concerning him that elected us, our eleccion is most excellent.
And likewise concerning the circumstaunce of time, although above there is
properlye no course of time. He elected us (as Paull writes) before the
constitucion of the world: Ephe. i.
meaning from without beginning, sooner could he not elect us.

And moreover he says, that he elected us which are most base, most vile,
most abject, worms in comparison of him. By the sin of Adam we were all
defiled, infected, in firm, frail, blind, malingnaunte, full of venim,
contrari to god, enemies and rebels: so that a thing more miserable could not
have binne chosen. Paul does also magnifye our election, in respect of the
dignittie, to the which we are elected, and says, he has not chosen us to be
his servants or friends, but to be his children, nothing to god can be more
nyghe, entire and dear, the^ his children, nether is it possible to imagine a
greater dignity. It does include al other virtues and goodness, it is so high
and excellent. Being then elected from so miserable an estate, to be the sons
of god. He has also chosen us to be the brethren of Christ and thereby with
him coheires of god: Romans viii.
yea the world is ours? Christ with all his gifts, all that is the fathers is
the sons, therefore al is ours yt is gods, whose goods we may dyspose as
children their fathers. And because we should shame to be the sons of god,
not having the manners, graces, and virtues conueient to such a dygnitie,
therefore not only our heavenly father, has chosen us to be his sons, but
has blessed us, not with words only, but with effects, not as Isaac blessed
Jacob or Esau, but with all spiritual bless nge in things celestial. And so
according to Paul, Ephe. i. Collo. i
has made us mete to be partakers of ye feloweship of light, and delyuering
us from the power of darkness, has led us into the kingedome of his beloved
son: God then with out beginning did determyne to iustifye, glorifye, and
magnyfie those that he had elect, and even so he has done: Romans vii^
as Paul writes, who also exaltyth our election for that cause, sainge: that
it was not our good worckes, which God forsawe without beginning, that were the
cause of our election, but he chose us by mere mercy, according to the
decreed purpose of his own will, to the laud and glory of his mercy, we were
not then chosen because we were Holy, but because we should be holly by his
election, and to show in the worlds to come, Ephe. i and.ii
the abundante riches of his grace. Paul also shewyth the worthiness of our
election, by respect of the dignity of the person by whose means we are
chosen, and says, he has willed, that between us and him there should be one
mediator, nether he would it to be an angel, but Christ the son of God. i.
Timo. ii. Ephe. i.
He means not only a mediator with words, but with his own blood, and
death Paul does exalt our election as concerning ye end. For because he has
elected us for his sons, to the end we may taste (not only in the life to
come, but also in this present) things so high, happy, rich, and pure, that
the eye has not seen, nor the ear has not hard, nor into the heart of man
(being carnal) has at any time entered, i. Cor. ii.
he has then elected us, to the end (that regenerate by Christ Jesus) we
should walk to God by good works, Ephe. ii.
yt we may be hollie and inreprehe^sible, before his presence. Our election is
also excellent by the suertye thereof, for that the elect are in the hands of
God. Ephe i. Ihon. x.
Therefore shall not they perish as Christ says, yea they can not peryshe,
even as they can not be pluckte out of his hands. Therefore our election is
most happy, so that nothing ought so much to be reioysed in, as to be
the elected and chosen of God. Therefore it is read, the disciples returning to
Christ, and reioisinge with great gladness, that even the very deuelles were
subject to them, Luke. x.
Christ among the rest of words, bade them they should not rejoice of the
subjection of the deuels, but that their names were written in heaven: by which
words, he did show, that we ought to make a singular Joy of our eleccio^, for
that includes, and brings with it the su^me of all our wealth, since then
that our eleccion is so excellent, rich, sure, and hapy. Let us pray to God to
give us light and grace, to perceive it, to the end, that tastinge in it (with
the spirit) the myghtie goodness of God, we may render him al laud, honor: and
glory, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

If we may know in this present life, This hole sermon must be warely red,
and well understood, or else it must be taken but as persuasiu^ not as doctrine,
whether we be in the grace of God, and one of his elect or not, and in what
manner the third Sermon.
IT is not to be douted yt God sees all things, specially his legittimate
children, se^ce he himself has chosen them to that dignity. ii. Timo. ii
Ephe. i.
Christ also knows, and knew the^ always, yt which was very convenient,
sense his father had given the^ to him for that he should be their governor,
shepherd, and brother, and yt he should save the^ with his own death: he knew
the^, and does know his sheep even as himself said, Ihon. vii. John. vi.
yea from the beginning he knew who should believe.

But it is not now convenient, Math. xiii.
that we may or can deserve distinctlye, the elect from the reprobate, to the
end we may be more fervent in exercisinge charity, with all men, as if they
were brethern with us in Christ, the which we would not do toward the
reprobate if we knew the^ distinctly: But in the end, the tares shall be
separate from the good wheat: none then being in this present life knows
certainly of his neighbor, if he be of the elect or not, nor also whether he be
in the favor of God: we may only have thereof an obscure, confused, uncertain,
and faylyng knowledge by conjecture of ye outward life and works, of whom
Christ speaking, said. Math. vii.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. But forasmuch as we see not the hertes
of men, i. Cor. ii. Luke. xvi.
which often times (although within they are ungodly and abhominacion it self
in the sight of God, nevertheless coueringe them with the veyle of hypocrisy
maskinge therein) they apeare to be saints. Therefore without special oracle,
we can have no certain knowledge thereof. But I say yt every elect, while he
is in this present life, being come to the years of discression, may, and
ought to know it of himself, not by natural light (by means whereof things
supernaural can not be perceived, as the excellent divine will toward us) but by
faith, without other special privilege. And this not with having respect to
them selves, where is nothing seen but worthy damnacion, neither with
co^sideringe or beholding the^ selves in God without Christ, for in yt case he
must show himself to us a just iudgeful of wrath: then we neither se our selves
his sons, nor in favor. But with lively faith beholding both our selves, and
God in Christ, we se our selves to be in the favor of god, and his elect
sons, and god to be pacified with us in love and our only father. Such then
as lively believe, yt Christ for the^ has died upon ye cross, have the holy
ghost within them, and are in the favor of God, because that faith does purify
the heart. This must be warly red and well understood or it is not true. But
if you understand what it is to believe in christ with a lively faith the^ there
is no danger at al.

i. Iho. v.


And further I say, that al they which in this present life to believe lively in
Christ (yea were it for a moment of time) shall be sauid. They are elect and
sons of God, and may be suer and certain, of their salvation. And that this
is true, the words of saint Ihon ought to suffice, which says, that he is
the son of God, therefore elect and sauid, who so believes Jesus Christ to be
the son of God. And also Christ said who so believes in me has life
everlasting nevertheless it may clearlye be prouid that none believes liuelye
in Christ, but he that but he that believes Christ to be wholly his
rightwisenes and that he is saved thorowlye by him, and he that seethe this
with supernatural understanding having no respect to him self nor his works,
but only to the goodness of God discovered in Christ upon the Cross, can not by
any means be disceiued, because ye light which he has to be in ye favor of
God, elect to salvation, ca^ not grow but only of the bounty of God,
considered in Christ, whereof can spring no false nor deceitful knowledge. Full
well may he be begiled and shall be, that does behold his works, and by them
thinks that he is in the favor of God and his son. But seeing him self in
Christ saved, chosen and in the favor of God, it must needs be said, that he
sees the truth, and that which is once true although it were but for the
twincke of an eye must be said to be ever true, he then which believes in
Christ, were it but a minute of an hour, in perceiving of him self elect by
Christ, sees that which is true, therefore shall it ever be true, that he is
one of the legitimat sons of God, so that the same his faith, be not in any
manner founded upon him self, nor his own worckes, but in christ, and the divine
excellence, and that it be not a certain trifleinge, light, baren and dead
opinion, but a lively faith. It must be said then that Judas had never perfect
faith, nether was elect to salvation, although he was chosen to the
apostelshippe, and the like say I of al ye reprobate: al such then as have had
at any time lively belefe to be saved by christ may be suer of their
salvation. And so also they, which have once at the least been perfectely
given to God, and committed to his governance, upon the couenaunte, that he
shall serve himself of them according to his own purpose, and with trust
that by Christ and his mere goodness he has accepted them for his own, they
may also believe that they are saved, because that he shall be no less God to
them, then they shall be promised of him.

Therefore having had in that couenaunte lively faith, This is not spoken to
declare that it is possible for gods elect to be wholly given to sin. but if
it were possible, yet should they recover that pestilence.
that God will forgive them as his Children, in such sort, that he will
conducte them to salvation, although they (as much as lies in them) were
continually prompte to all evil: yet is it necessary to say, that sense God
has taken them for his (as they know by the lively faith that they have
had thereof) that they shall overcome that wyckednes and have honor thereby.

For his goodness passithe their euelnes he would not have inspired them to give
them selfs, if from without beginning, he had not elected them and taken the^
for his own. Some peradventure will say, if we were only ones suer to have
been for a little time in the favor of God, to have had his spirit in us, and
lively faith in him, that we did believe suerlye to be his elect: yet we know
not if it have been a perfect faith or not, we fear it to have been a certain
cold opinion and lest we were begiled in believing to be in gods fouor and
elected of him. I answer that this is an euidente sign, that ye have never had
hitherto liuelye faith and knowledge of christ. For as it is impossible to
have fire within the breast and not feel it, so is it impossible to have in the
heart christ, the holy ghost, ardent charity and the fierye light of faith,
and not to perceive it, and this is, for that his light is so clear and
effectuous, that not only it makes the^ to se, and lively to feel with the
spirit, that christ is dead for them upon the cross, that they are elect and
sauid, but also it does make them know, that it which they see, is by divine
inspiracion, that it is the holy spirit which testifies unto their spirit,
that they are the sons of God. Romans viii.
Whose testimony is more clear, open, firm, and certain, then all the outward
oracles and miracles of the world, which without the inward testimony of the
spirit, can leave us none other the^ doubtful. Now, yt he that has in him
Christ and the spirit of God, does feel, know, and perceive it: it is clear by
Christ which said that the world knew not the holy ghost, but that he was
known of them in whom he was. And by saynct John, which said also In this we
know that Christ is in us, i. Iho. iii.
even by the holy ghost which he has given us.

Therefore said Paul, try your selves, ii. Cor. xiii.
make some proof of your selves, is it possible that ye should not know Christ
in you, if ye be not reprobate? And in an other place, know ye not how ye are
the temple of God, and that the holy ghost dwells in you? The holy spirit
goth searching throughout, i. Cor. ii Esa. xxxii. Roma. xv. Luke. i.
and judges every thing, and faith is so clear, yt it shows us the
profunditie of god: and thou will that it be blind of it self. Yea Paul
says, that the holy ghost is given to us, to the end we might know those
things that have be^ given us of Christ. i. Tesa. i.
The kingdom of God is peace (as writes Esai and Paul) without servile fear,
in much certentie. Therefore as Christ saw, that he was in the favor of his
father, and his beloved son, so also do the elect se them selves, all
though not with so clear light and certentye, but that they goo sometime
doubting, stumbling, and wavering. But they ought with the Apostles to pray
Christ to augme^t their faith. Luke. xvii.
And seek with their good works continually to make known to the^ selfs more
perfect their salvation and vocation, that thereby as by the effects or fruits
they should come into the full riches of certain perswacion, and understanding
of their election and salvation. i. Tessa. i ii. Timo. iiii Romans viii Gala. ii.
ii. Cor. iii.
Paul also knew he was in the favor of God, in faith, hope and charity,
elected the son of God, saufe and suer, and that he had the holy gooste and
Christ within him, when he said that he was one of them that Christ was come to
save, and that he knew in whom he believed, that he looked for the Crown, that
nothing cold separate him from the love of God, which had elected him before
the constitution of the world, that he had the spirit of adopcion of the
sons of God, and that Christ was he, who lived and spoke in him. Saint John
also said: we are suer we know God, and that we live in him, worldly and
carnal beasts are they, which know not God in the holy ghost, Gala. ii. Ioh.
xiiii. i. Cor. ii.
nor those things which be his, even as men not regenerate, they are rustical
paysau^tes of so abiecte and base a spirit, that they can not believe that God
has loved them so much, that by the death of his only begotten and most
intierly beloved son, he would save them, take them for his children, and
make them his heirs: But astonished of their sins, they are ever afraid of
hell. Where the regenerate feel in such sort the charity of God in Christ,
that they know them selves to be saved. Neither can they once think that
Christ (who has all his fathers power and shall be their judge) will refuse,
lose, or dampne them, and give sentence against his brethern and members,
Math. xxviii
for whom he dyed on the cross, and would dye again if it were necessary.
Ephe. i.
They have in them also the holy ghost for an earneste of their salvation. But
if God had given us nothing but our being, should not we for that only
benefit, feel so much the great goodness of God, that we might be sure and
certain of our salvation? And now he in every creature does sparkle toward
us love, with innumerable benefits, yea in Christ upon the Cross, casts he
the flame of perfect charity, and shall not we feel so much the goodness of
God that we should believe to be his elect?

If one only should be saved I would trust suerly to be he, if all the men and
angels would tell me that I were dampened, I cold not believe them, although they
did allege all the reasonnes possible, but I would ever give, more trust to
Christ alone, who upon the cross, with his blood and death, does tell me I
am saved, the^ I would to all the rest, for he alone, has more power in me, the^
all the reasons and authorities without him. Provided only yt I se him with lively
faith, dead for my salvation. Yea in that case seeing my self, Gala. i.
by Christ, to be ye son of God, I would with. Paul excommunicate the very
angels as superior to them, if they would say the contrary, or gainesaie the
gospel, and the great love and benefit, which in that case I should feel by
Christ. Paraduenture thou will say it seems me not, that I ca^ be suer of mi
salvation, because I am fre to do evil, so may I sin and be dampened. Our
life is in such sort variable, that to give a certain judgment, we must tarry
the end, for every one would have thought, that Judas should have been saved
when he was called of Christ, and yet it is seen, that it is contrary. I
answer, thou begilest thy self, in thinkinge thy salvation depends upon the
likelyhod of thy worckes. Ephe. i.
Paul affirms, that God has elected us by his mere mercy in Christ, not
because we were holy, or for that he foresawe our good works, but because we
should be holy, and should do good works, and perseueryng in the^, we should
dye in his favor and grace: Inwardly does God call his eelecte, gives them
knowledge of him, Roma. viii.
and does justify and glorify them. Therefore does Paul add and say, if God
be with us, who ca^ be against us? And he meant if we be once elect, we can no
more lose our selves: meaning, there is nothing that can let the eleccion of
God. Yea every thing serves to salvation, even sin. Therefore where thou
saieste, thou may sin, it is true, and peradventure thou shall sin.
Nevertheless if thou be the elect, thou shall algates rise again and be saved:
whereof thou may be certain and sure, so that once at the least thou have
perceived thy self in Christ, and by Christ saved, neither thou ought so
much to despair in thy self, as that thou should not much more trust in ye
goodness of god, knowing that the Gospel is not the law, but mercy, and know
thou that when the elect fall in any sin (which God does not permit but
for the benefit of them, and the other elect) whilst they are in that
error, they feel in them selves, a certain hydde^ virtue, which withholdeth
and refrayneth them, from doing worsse, it biteth, nippeth, and reprehe^deth
them of the euel fact, and does enduce and spur them to convert. There
remains ever a certain hate of sin, although they be sometime overcome of
frailtye. So that they never turn from God with all their power, nor run wholly
to vice with a lose bridell. God has them ever for his own, and governs
them as his lawefull Childrene. And speaking often in their herts he says that
which he said to his Apostles: Luke. xii.
fear not little flock, for it has pleased your father, to give you his
kingdom of his mere goodness although you be unworthy. And if thou would bring
in Salomo^, who says, none knows whether he be worthy of hate or love, I
answer. It is clear (chyflie by the words which follow) that he meant, that man
were he never so just and wise, was so blind in this world, that he cannot
know by the works of God, yt is by prosperity or adversity, whether of him
self, he be worthi of hate or love. And this is because God gives his gifts
so indifferently, to the good and evil, to the elect and reprobat. Thou will
say yet, Paul said: i. Cor. xiiii.
my conscience does not reprove me yet am I not thereby justified before God,
therefore it can not be known. But I answer, that thentent of Paul was to
say, that though by grace of the Lord he had ministered the Gospel, in such
sort, that his conscience did not rebuke him of any error (which was
imputed unto him for a sclaunder of false christians) nevertheless he held not
him self just for this, neither was he just, he judged him self just by
Christ, and not by preaching the Gospel irreprehensibly in the sight of man,
but yet not in the presence of God, for that he has not preached it with the
whole force of spirit, faith, and love. So that here Paul did condemn the
opinion of them, which judge the^ selves just by their own works, but he
does not reprove the judgment of those, which judge the^ selves righteous and
saved by the bounty of God, and death of his only begotten son: but does
approve it. With Paul also agrees Job, Job. ix.
when he said, that although he were just, he durst not judge him self so,
that is, he durst not hold him for ryghteous, by his own proper ryghteousnes
and works, but by the justice of Christ.

Sense then that it may and ought to be known of us, that we are in the
favor of God, and his elect, let us force us continuallye to increase in
more knoweledge of the Goodness of God: so that firmly establyshed in the
lyuelye faith of our salvation, we may as children render him all honor,
laud, and glory: by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

Whether it be good or euel to believe that we are elect: the fourth Sermon.
SOme say that it is euel to believe that we are elect, because, that as the
belief to be reprobate, brings men in dispeyre: so the belief of eleccion,
is cause of presumpcion. But the just and the holy fly both the one and the
other extremity. They are not exalted in presumpcion, believing to be elect:
nor fallen in the botomles pyite of dispeyre, with belief of dampnacion, but
keep the mean way, ever standing between both. And I say that it is true,
that none ought to dispeyre, or yet to presume, but assuredlye to hope and
believe to be saved and elected: Mary by our own works, this is an evil
vice, and ought to be fled. But to believe to be elected and saved by the
liberality of God, by the death of Christ upon the cross, and his works:
this is no presumpcion, but a hope which has regard (as divine and theological
virtue) not to our merits, but only to God by Christ. And as we ca^ not
love him so much, but that we ever lack of the perfection, so can we not to
much hope and trust in him. Yea we lack ever because we do not promise of God
so much as we should do, he that believes to be sauid, becomes not proud,
nether magnifieth him self, nor his worckes, but the goodness of God, and the
grace that we have by Christ. Therefore is it not evil. Peradventure thou wylt
say one ought to stand in fear. I agree thereto, in the reverend and
sonnelike fear, the which imports obseruaunce of reverence to God, but now
not so vile: Romans viii.
for we are no more servants but sons, not Hebreues but Christians, we are
not under the law but grace, we have God for our father, and not only for a
Lord. Romans vi.
Therefore our office is to love him like childrene, and not to fear him, as
servants, Romans viii
sense that we have the spirit not of servitude but of adoption, of ye sons
of God. If our salvation did depend in any part upon ourselfes: I would say
we ought to fear our da^nacio^ yea to be sure thereof: but sense it is al in yt
hands of God, therefore beholding not our selves, i. Iho. iiii.
but his goodness discovered in Christ upon the cross we may be suer and
certain of our salvation. Perfect charity chaseth away al servile fear, and
faith never douteth if it be perfect: the fear then of our damnacio^ grows
of imperfection of our charity, faith and hope. We ought never to fear the
mercyfulnes of God, but our own wyckednes. Thou would say, if we were
wholly confirmed in grace, we should not need to fear, but we sin daily,
therefore it is necessary to stand in doubt. I answer that yet thou go
about, to build my hope upon my worckes the which should be no hope but a
presumpcion. If we should hope with condition if we do well, and persevere
therein, my hope should stand with desperacion, for of my self I know I ought
to despair. If I had the sins of the whole world, yet would I most
steadfastly believe to be saved without any fear of dampnacion, nether may this
be said to be evil, for that I would not build my hope but upon Christ. If
thou would say, ye fear of dampnacio^ causes men to abstein from sin,
therefore it is good. I answer, that it causes men to refrain in their own
love, as does the fear of death whereby they become daily more sensual in them
selves, and therefore truly, worse inwardly. Fear works wrath in God, even
as the law does: and although it cause the abstain from some evil outward
work, nevertheless the venime remains within, the which is so much the
worse, as it is more united to the inward parts, yea that fear given to the
ungodly, is the scorge of God. The elect (knowinge that God in this present
life does punyshe more the legittimate children then the bastardes) abstain
also by this fear more then the other. But truly the love of God, the quick
feelynge of his great goodness, to believe firmly by Christ and his grace to be
the sons of God, elect and sure in deed, are those things which mortify
us to the world and to ourselves, and makes sin displeasaunt to us, even
from the botome of the heart. Therefore where the servile fear makes Ipocrites,
the son-lyke love makes true christians. If you would sai, to believe so, is a
thing very perilous because yt hereof they take occasion to live idle, yea to
give them self to al vice, saying I will make my paradise in this world, for
every wai I shall be sauid, se^ce yt alredi I am elect. I answer that when one
believes to be elect and perceives in spirit the mercifulnes of God in
Christ, then God tasted in Christ has in the heart such efficacy and
strength, that he can not offend, but is forced to dyspraise the world, and
is rapt to so high estate that he falls to oblivion of the world, him self
and his paradise, setting only God before his eyes. Ioh. iii,
Therefore says saint John. Who so has this faith, sanctifies him self.
So as the^ of chariti springs but goodness, even so is it, of this faith and
hope. Know thou where in is the parille? In believing to be elected, by
their works, and by beleuinge in Christ not stedfastlye, but to have only a
certain barraine, idle and a dead opinion thereof, the which stands in ye
worste life, in such sort that of that cold and unfruitful faith, they may
take occasion to give the^ to Idelnes, and all vice. But now not of that
perfect faith, the which is effectuous in doing worckes by love, being an
enflamed light, Gala. v.
the which is never without burninge. If also thou would say in beleuinge
to be elect thou should peradaduenture be begiled, therefore it is evil. I
would yet answer, that I would sooner give faith to the holy ghost, which
testifies in ye hearts of the elect, that they are the sons of God (as
Paul writes) then to the that would put me in doubt of it. Romans viii
The elect to hear inwardlye in their hertes a spiritual voice, quick and
divine, which bids them not doubt, and that they are suer of their
salvation, and that God loves them, and has taken them for his children, and
that they can not perish: the testimony of God is greater the^ man's. Ihon. x.


Therefore not only he is to be believed before man, but he deseruethe to have
given unto him undoubted credit. If thou would sai, it might be, not the
spirit of God but their imaginacions. I say, that what so ever it is they
know better then thou, i. Cor. ii.
for that (as Paul says) none knows what is in man but the spirit of man,
that is within him. Farther I am suer, that the same spirit whithc says to me,
I am elected is the spirit of God because the faith I have of my election,
springs not of my worckes, but only of the goodness of god, understand in
Christ and for that of his goodness can grow nether gyle nor falshod, therefore
am I suer to be in the truth. Deceites and falshedes, may, and do come, of the
belefe to be saved, by works, and elected: Moreover the light which the
elect have of their salvation, is so clear, that they do not only se them
selfs suere thereof, but they know also, that the light and knowledge they
have, is supernatural and divine. But we suppose as thou say, that in
beleuinge to be elect only by Christ and the goodness of God, I might be
begiled (which is false and impossible) yet would I still say, let me be
deceived for it is good to be so begiled, sense I can find no thing, that so
much does kindel me into a sincere and pure love of God, as to believe to be
elected by his mere goodness. Therefore vsinge it to make me inamored of God, I
ought not to be withdrawn, chifelie for yt I am happy, only by that faith,
of ye which whosoever is void, is not yet entered in to the kingdom of God,
where is nothing but ryghtuousnes peace and Joy.

Romans iiii.
Finalli Paul believed to be elected as in many places he says, yea he gloried
therein (nevertheless in God) and so to believe he induced others, the which, if
it had been euel, he would not have done. Therefore if it be not euel, let us
also with Paul, glory us by God in Christ, who likewise induced the Apostles,
Luke. x. Math. xv. Math. xvi.
to believe yt their names were written in heaven, that their heauenli reward was
ple^tuous, and that they should judge the xii. tribes, and thereby brought them
to believe they were elect, and that is also suer, that if that belefe had been
evil, he would not have caused it. Thou will say, thou ought not to compare
thy self, equal with the saints. I say it is true that I ought not to
presume to be like them, or holy by mine own worckes, for while I presume of
my self, I must of force become a deuell, but it is not evil to compare with
the saints in verity, for they were humble, and in believing that they were
elect, they gave to God all laud and glory because they did not believe to be
of the elect for their merits, but for Christ's. And would to God, I might
believe yt firmelye and with steadfast faith, the sacred scriptures are full, that
we ought not to despeire of our salvation, but that we ought to hope and believe
to be all ready saved, and daily to certify oureselues thereof by doing good
worckes, ii. Pet. i. i. John. iiii.
which are a testimony to us of our election, and that we should also
increase in charity, to take from us all fear of our dampnacio^ to the end
we may serve God without fear, in righteousness and holiness as zachary
said. Luke. i.
And likewise we ought to demand perseuerau^ce in the good with faith to obtein
it. Therefore to trust to be saved, and of the elected and to hope and believe to
be saved and of the elect, is not euel. Paul also says: our hope was never
confounded nor did shame to them that had it.

And likewise that faith, was never beguiled. Wherefore then is it evil that I
believe steadfastly to be saved by Christ? Let us behold then with open eyes of
lively faith, Christ upon the cross, in whom we se presentlye the goodness of
God in the face in such sort, as we may being pilgrims, to the end we may
render to him al laud, honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

Whether it be necessary to salvation to believe that we are elected or not:
the fyft Sermon
Hebr. xi. Mar. xvi John. iii.
Faith is very necessary, because that without it, not only God cannot be
pleased, but he that believes not shall be condemned, and is already judged.
But it is also impossible, that one that does not believe to be elected should
believe as he ought to do any of the articles nceessarie to salvation. And to
prove yt this is true, if you beleuest not yt thou art one of the elect, thou
beleuest not in God, in the manner that thou art bound, because that it
suffiseth not to have a certain dead opinion that Godi^ but thou must
effectuously believe that he is thy God, yt he loves the, that he is
propiciatory to the, yt he is continually beneficial to the, that he has most
special cure of the and causes every thing to serve the to salvation, and
therefore that you art elect. Yea who so believes not that he is elect, does
not feel in spirit, the benefit of Christ. Therefore being without Christ,
Ephe. i. Gala. iiii.
he is with out God, and knows him not as Paul writes. Then how is it
possible that thou may believe perfectli that he is thy father if thou do not
believe that thou art his son, and therefore his heir and saved. Gala. iiii.
Thou can also never earnestly believe that God is omnipotente, if thou
understand not, that continually he uses his omnipote^cie toward the, in
doing the good. Which when with the spirit thou did prove, thou should
of force believe thy self to be his heir, if thou believe not thou art elect,
how causte thou believe that God has created the heavens, and thearthe, and
that he susteineth and governs all to thy behofe having of the most singular
cure: it is needful, that with lively says, imbrasinge all the world for thy
own, thou perceive effectuallye the goodness of God, in every creature. And
when that is, thou shall be enforced to believe, that thou art the son of
God. Thou canste not also believe in Jesus, that is that he is to the Jesus and
savior, if thou believe not that thou art saved, nether canste thou believe
that he is thy Christ, that is to say a Prophet king and priest, if thou
feel not in spirit, that he does illuminate and lighten the, as a prophet,
rule the as a king, and as an only priest is offered for the upon ye cross.
The which if thou did believe thou should also believe to be elected. How
shall thou believe that Jesus is the only begotten son of God, thy Lord come
into the world to save the, and given to the, with all his divine treasures and
graces, if thou do not believe, thy self to be one of his lambs, you causte
not believe (as thou art bound to do) that he died for the, nor perceive his
excessive charity, so that with Paul you may say, Romans viii.
nothing can separate me from the charity of God. It is necessary to believe,
that Christ upon the cross has satisfied for thy sins, and that he has
reconciled the, satisfied to his father and saved the, and therefore that you art
the son of God: he that believes (as he ought) yt Christ is ryse^ to justify
us, does also know him self saved, and so he yt perfectly does understand that
Christ our head is ascended into heaven and entered for us in possession of
paradise, Philli. iii.
perceives him self risen with Christ, and already by hope being ascended into
heaven, Ephe. ii.
practices with yt mind in Paradise, where Christ is sitting in peaceable
possession of things celestial: he says with Paul, we are made safe by hope,
Romans viii
it suffiseth not to believe yt he shall judge the quick and the dead ye which
also the devils believe, but that the sentence shall be al in thy favor, having
to thy judge, him yt died upon the cross for thee. We ca^ not lively believe
the se^ding of ye holy ghost, if we feel it not in our selves: and if we do
feale it, we shall be forced with Paul to say, the spirit of God rendrethe
testimony to our spirit that we are the sons of God, therefore heirs and
saved. Roma. viii.
Neither is it inoughe that there is a church of God, but thou must believe to
be a portion thereof, and one of the lively stones, and therefore one of the
elect. And to believe the communion of saints, thou must feel, that as a
member of Christ, he does perticipate his grace with the, and yt thou art thereby
saved, you must also believe yt remission of sins, yt is not only that he does
pardon sins, but that he has pardoned the thine, and so elected the. Even
so thou must believe, that thou shall rise glorious, and have life everlasting.
Then there is no article of our faith, that can be believed in such sort as it
ought to be, of those which do not believe they are elected. To the Christian
it is then necessary to believe that God is his God, and father: that he
worcketh all for his benefit, and that Christ is come, was borne, has lived,
died and risen again for his salvation, so that with lively faith he imbraceth
Christ wholi for his own with all his treasur and grace. And likewise al his
life, death, resurrection, assention and glory, and perceives the charity of
God in Christ, as if there had been no mo but only him self in the world,
and that Christ for him only, would have wrought and suffered, no les then he
has done. The which when thou do believe, thou shall perceive thou art
elect. Yea he that believes not he is elect, can not pray as he ought,
being without faith, without the which (after Paul) we can not
effecteously recommende us to god, Roma. x. Iaco. i.
because yt we must ask in faith, if we will ask in veriti and be hard, now if
you believe not to be his son and heir, how can you (as Christ taught) say
our father, and as a son with confidence ask him grace. Prayer may well be
made, of infidels and Ipocrites, but like folishe scoffers and mockers. When you
say, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thou must have in the, the
spirit of adoption of the son of God. And as the son is moved of vehemente
love, pure and sincere, to desire the kingdom and glory of the father: so must
thou (saying the, the son of God) with a divine spirit, by the force of
love, ask and desire that thy heavenly father be honored, and reign in his
elect with out rebellion. Likewise shalt thou never thancke God with all thy
heart, if thou believe not to be one of ye elect: yea if thou shall doubt
therein, or think to be dampened in thy heart, and in thy life, and paraduenture
also with thy words, thou will dispraise him, that he has given the a
being, that he has create the world, sent Christ, and so the rest his
benefits, and wilt say. If I am not saved, what do these things profit me?
it had been better for me, yt I had never ben, Mar. xiiii
as Christ said of Judas. If I shall be dampened, the death of Christ serves me
not, but does inflame and burn, with al ye rest of his benefits: you can not
in perfection the^ tha^cke god, if you fear dampnacio^. Romans viii.
But who so believes he is one of ye elect and thereby yt al things serve him to
salvation, even the very troubles, he holds for a special grace and
benefit, in them perceiuinge the goodness of God, he gives him thanckes with
all his heart. Who shall he be that commits him self holy to the governance
of God (as every one ought to do) if he believe not that God is his father,
that he pardons him, and does take of him most singular cure? Other wise they
shall never trust in God, but with Adam shall fear him, and fly, sekinge to
hide him self from the face of God, nether is it possible, to love God in
verity, honor him as he ought to be honored and approve for just and hollye
all his worckes, and so delight wholye in him, if he feel not in Christ so much
the goodness of God, Gala. iiii.
that he se him self his son and also heir. If he know not him self to be
a son, he shall fear as aseruaunt and in all his worckes have respect to him
self, his pains, displeasures, incommodites, dishonoures, and hell, or else to
this paradise, and not to the glory of God. As he that sees him self a
son, lord of al and heir and suer thereof: such a one works only by
strength of spiirt, and veheme^cie of love to the glory of God, to whom he
has turned his whole intent, and to that end ordreth his whole life. Also it
can not be possible, to love thy neighbor as thy self, as a brother in
Christ, and member with the of ye same body, if thou do not believe to be in the
number of the sons of God. And finalli there can not one good work be done,
but of them that are regenerate, sons of God, members of Christ, and have in
them the holy spirit which testifies in their hertes, that they be the sons
of God. And may parteli be seen how false and ungodly, is the doctrine of the
antechristians, that where as it is cheiflye necessary to believe that we are
elected, and also above all things most commodious they force the^ selves to
withdraw every one from this faith, persuading them to stand in doubt, as
though they had wherein to mistruste the goodness of God, Osee xiii.
upon whom only depends our salvation, as our da^pnacion does of our
selves, But let us pray to God to open our eyes, to the end they may no
longer blaspheme, but render to God all honor, laud, and glory, by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

If it be good to seek to know wherefore God has some elect and some
reprobate: the syxt Sermon.
THy desire may be wicked, as it is in many, to who^ it apeareth that it
should have been better, if God (who being of power as he is) had elected all
men, and seems the^, that in this God has lacked of charity, yea in their
language, they say in their herrte secretly. If we had been God, we would have
elected all, and would have had more charity the^ he. Now behold, whether this
be ungodly, folyshe, proud blasphemy, or not. They Imagine to have more love
to the souls, then he, that for to save them gave his only begotten and
dearly beloved son upon the cross. i. John. iiii.
There are some other, to whom it seems on the one side, that god can not
err: and on the other parti, hearing that he has reproved many, they think
the contrary. They are not certain by faith, that God can not err, and that
all that he wills, must needs be just. Therefore to make it clear, they go
searchyng, wherefore he has not elected all men, and they would find a cause
where is none. If such were godly, they should quiet and satisfy the^ selves,
and should have their felicity in the divine pleasure, without searching to asse^d
any hler. It is evil the^ to seek wherefore god has elected some, and other
some not if this grow of the suspicion that God may, or have erred. The godly
knows certainly by faith yt he can not err, and hereupo^ rests. There are
some that ask after it of arroga^cie and presu^pcion. They would be answered,
that god had elected them for their good works, to have wherein they might
glory of them selves. And when they hearsay that God has elected them by
grace, it displeases them, they gainsaie it, seming them there rests
nothing to glory in. And they perceive not that this is the whole glory of the
humble and true christian, to be saved by the mere grace of God, and Christ
crucified, and to glory only in God by Christ, and in them selves not to se,
but things worthy to be ashamed of, to thend yt to God only be honor and
glory. i. Timo. iiii
It grows also to many of irreverence, for if they could se how
inaccessible the majesty of God is, how irreprehensible is his will, and how
inco^prehensible is his wisdom, they would not set them selves to dispute with
God, specially if they knew how blind, Roma. ix.
dark, fra^ticke and folyshe they be. And who art thou said Paul, that wilt
dispute with God, answer and contend with God? Paul was returned from the third
heaven, where he had heard secrets, so high that it was not lawful to speak
to man. Nevertheless doing reverence to the divine secret judgments he
said: O profou^d riches of the wisdom and science of God, how
inco^prehe^sible are his judgments? And man, blind, folyshe, and ungodly, is
so high minded, that he will do wrong to God, conde^pning him, and reprove his
holy, just, and irreprehensible judgments. And how many are they that seek to
know, speak and write of it, and be commended therefore? And all that they ran
Imagine by force of their own wit, and natural knowledge (which can not
perce so high secrets) they put in writing. And they are as arrogant, as if
they were in goodness and sapience superior to God: to be adored of the world,
they condemn the works of God. There are mani which are not co^te^t to know
as much as God has vouchsaued to open to us, but they would know also a great
deal more. But it is not the office of a good servant, to will to know all the
secrets of his Lord: yea the son ought to content him with the secrets of
his father, and to know of it only, as much as is reveled to him and to be suer
and certain, that he will not fail, to manifest all that shall be expedient for
him, even so we ought to content us, to know that which God has, and does
reuele us, knowing that he does love us in such sort, that we have not wherein
to doubt, that he will fail to manifest unto us, all those secrets, the
knowledge whereof shall be profitable and necessari. Ihon. xv.
Yea christ him self said that he had made known, all that he had heard of
the father, our office is to seek, to taste and feel with the spirit, that
which he has opened to us, and we may also desire to know all that pleases
God to reuele us, for the benefit of our soul, and his glory, now for that
God (to beat down carnal man, to the end that to him, be given al honor,
laud and glory) has vouchesafed, to open in the holy scriptures, wherefore he
has elected some, and other some he has not: Therefore we may and ought to
seek to know it that we may so much ye more honor God: but we ought to believe
it to be so, as God has declared, and to content us with that way, God has
taken, in electing and reprobating, neither to think nor suspect, that God
has erred, nor ought to desire any other way, but to be satisfied and
pleased, with so much as pleases the Lord, without being curious, in
willing to know more, then that which pleases God to reuele unto us, and all
that to the end that by Jesus Christ we may render him al honor, laud, and
glory. Amen.

Of the diverse effects that it works in man to believe that one eleccion is
al in the hands of God, and that of him only it depends: the seventh Sermon.
IT is seen by experience, that of one self cause, does grow some times
contrary effects. And is evident by the sun, which hardens mire, and
^etteth wax: and this is by their diverse disposicions. Even so of the belief
that our eleccio^ is wholly in the hands of God, does spring in men contrary
effects, by their contrary disposicions. The ungodly perceiving that in the
divine mind is resolved their being, to be saved or dampened, they are wroth
with God, they blaspheme him with their heart, they call him parciall and
unjust, they give them selves to do evil Inoughe, saying every way: that
shall be which God has infalliblye foresene, and immutabli determined, yea their
faltes they cast in the face of god, thinking yt he is the cause thereof, many
also despair of their salvation and presume more of them selves, then they
hope in God, they believe that they should be saved, if their salvation did
depend upon them selves, and therefore if they could disturb the divine
counsayles, and make that their salvation should not be in the hands of god,
they would do it. And this is for that they know not their own great mysery
how blind, infirm, frail, and unprofitable, they are to God impote^t of them
selves to goodness, and full of all wickedness, and that they did never work (if
it were put in the bala^ce of divine justice) that merited not to be punished,
and so likewise they feel not ye great goodness of God, nor the benefits of
Christ but think him to be Irefull, reuengable, disdaineful, proud,
parpetuall, unjust and malignaunt, as them selfs are. There are some which
have not perfect faith, but they are not so ungodly as the first. Now these
when they hear say, or think yt their salvation is all in the hands of God,
they remain confused and evil contented. And this is also for want of
knowledge of the goodness of God, they trust partly in God and partly in the^
selves, they love not God, nor trust nor hope perfectly in him they remain
doubtful, and know not whether it be best to depend all upon God or not, and
it seems them that it should have been best that in some part it should
depend upon them selves: and yet they think it well being al in the hands of
God, troubled in such sort, that they ca^ not tell which to choose: Therefore
they live in a great perplexiti. They consult some times with the holy
scripture or with the^ that have, the knowledge of the truth, and they find
that it is al in the hands of God, and they judge (when their eyes are
somewhat opened to the goodness of God and their own miseries) that it stands
well, and that so it is best, but then harkeninge to humane prudence, the
which not being wholye mortified, would have part of the glory to it self
(so proud it is.) And as that, that is blind, and sees not the impotencie and
malignitie of man, it persuades him that man might in some part be saved by him
self, where else he may despair, if it stand al in ye hand of God. Therefore it
concludes, that it were better if it did depend upon us, and chieflye for that
men become negligent, in thinkinge that it depends wholi upon God: where they
would stir them selves to be fervent, if they did believe that in any part it
rested in the^. And although such find the contrary in the sacred scriptures,
nevertheless they force the^ with the obscure light of their blind prudence,
to draw it out of the text, expounding it as may best serve to their purpose.
But ye godly perceive on the one side, in such sort their own proper
ignorancie, frailty, impotencie, and malice: And on the other party the great
bou^tie of god in Christ crucified, that it co^tenteth them to be so, all in
the hand of God, not only for yt it has so pleased god, but also for their
own commodity: because that whereas if in the least jot it depe^ded upon
them, they should hold the^ selves damned. Now they feel so much the
excellency of god, that certified of their salvation, they know the^ selves
elected, and hold it to be sure seeing by faith that it is al in the hand of
one their so mighty, sapient, excellent and loving father. Wherefore by this
benefit, they are stired to love him singulerly, to thank, land, and serve
him as children for his mere glory without respect at all to them selves,
their hell or heaven. And if God would set in their hands, although he would be
bound that they should be able to do al things with ease toward their
salvation, yet they would not accept the bargain: and that is because they
know that they are contrary enemies and traitors to them selves: so that if
they had paradise in their hands, then they should set it fall to the ground.
And also for that, they do make experiment and prove so great charity of God
in Christ, that it certifieth them of their eleccion. They can not think that
Christ being their judge, and diyng upon the cross for them, should give
sentence against them: yea they know, that who so believes in him shall not be
judged, Ioh. iii.
but shall be so certain of his salvation, that he shall not need to make
discussion of his life, for there shall not be any to accuse him, neither should
it be co^ueme^t that those which have the spirit of God, and are his sons,
the brethern and members of Christ, should be examined and judged. Roma. viii.
But with Christ they shall be judges of the other. Therefore the elect, sure of
their salvation, would not change Christ their judge with any in this world,
although it were their dear frynde or nere parent. Math. xix
Yea if God did put in their arbitrament to have Christ for their judge or
else to be their own judges of the^ selves, with full power to give sentence in
their favor although it were not just, yet to be approved, they would for all
this, choose Christ to be their judge, for that they trust more in him then
in them selves. Also they love God so much, that they would not glory, but only
in him by Christ. And this is al there true glory. Yea if they cold let or
disturb the divine counsel, or if it were necessary to be dampened they would
choose, rather to be in pain for the will of God, then in all the pleasures,
disagreinge to the divine will (if it were possible) they count them selves
unworthy to suffer for the will of God. They hold them selves happy to
honor him with sufferinge, and with being where it pleases to their lord,
they lamente only of the injuries they have done to God, but of that which
God will do of them with the spirit, they are content, although the flesh be
repugnaunte and would not suffer. This should be a hell to them, when God (if it
were possible) would not dispose them to his glory but to use them to his
honor they would satisfy them selves with all, and content the^ to know it so
to be the divine pleasure: now these are in a continual paradise by faith
allreadye they have had the sentence given in their favor, by hope they are
ascended into heaven, saying with Paul: we are made safe by hope, Romans viii
and by love they enjoy God. In the^ then of the belief, that their election
is all in the hands of God, grows firm faith, and hope to be saved, the
love of God sincere and pure, and chrystiane virtues, with the fruits of good
worckes. I would have pity on the first sort, but their desperacio^ grows
of an ungodly mind, yea it is most impiety, to despair of the goodness of
God, most perfect, showed in Christ crucified, as in one his liueli Image. I
have compassion of the second, and envy at the third. The second may
easelye be cured with shewinge them their frailty, ignorauncie, and malice,
and on the other party the omnipotency, infinite sapience, perfect goodness,
pity, mercy and chariti of God, showed in Christ upon the cross. Of the
first, I do not despair vtterli, but I know well it is very difficile to
cure the^, Math iii
but God is of power, of the stones to raise up childern to Abraham, they have
need to be prayed for, and that the Lord take from before their eyes, such
veiles of ignorauncye, and make them see their own great miseries, and the
incomprehensible goodness of God, to the end that reknowledging al their wealth
to come of God, they may render him al honor, laud, and glory, by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

How it ought to be answered to the^ yt lamente that God has created them
foreseyng their dampnacio^: the eight Sermon.
THere are many, the which although of God they have had their being, and
many other benefits, nevertheless they thank him not, but are ungrateful.
They are sorye, and lament of all the wealth they have had of him, saying:
Lord, if the being where thou have given us, with the rest of thigyftes, did
serve us to salvation, we should thank the therefore: But because they serve us
not, but to da^pnacion, therefore we ca^ not but complain us of the. Now to
these ought to be answered thus: Either you believe to be of the elect or not.
If they say yea: it ought to be said to the^, ye should thank God of so much
grace, that he has showed to you already, in chosinge you from so base a
being, to so high an estate, and you lament your selves: behold if your
ingratitude be great. And if they would say we are not sorye for our selves,
for we believe to be elect, but for compassion on those poor ones ye reprobate.
Then I would to be said, it is no true pity to have compassion upon them, that
are ungodly, against the divine goodness, showed chiefly in Christ crucified.
Think you happelye, to have more charity then God? take heed that your
demand, wherefore God has create the reprobate, grow not of the doubt, that
God can do them any injustice. Do ye fear yt God, being very righteousness,
Ephe. i.
yea charity it self, can do the^ any wrong? But if you liueli and verily
did believe to be elect by Christ, by mere grace and mercy of God, ye should
feale in such sort the divine goodness, that there cold not enter into your
mind so ungodly conceytes. They are in good custody, being in the hands of
God. They are in the power of one which never did, nor may do, one of ye least
cruelties, yea he never does justice, but it is with great mercy. Will ye
know more of the divine secrets then Paul? which rapt to the third heaven,
i Cor. i.
heard things so high and so secret, that to man it is not lawful to be
spoken of? i. Cor. i.
It suffised him only to know Christ crucified. Is it not think ye enough to
you to know Christ crucified, in whom are hidden all the treasures of the
wisdom and science of God? And if that suffice you, in Christ is seen non but
the elect, the rereprobate are without Christ, and in Christ only ought we
to contemplate and behold our election, your office should be to attend to
your selves, to increase dailye by Christ, in greater knowledge of the bounti
of God, i. Timo. iiii.
and to make certain to ye world with good worckes, your vocation and
election, and not to be so curiousse of other, forgettinge your selves. And if
they would say, ii. Pet. i.
we doubt and fear also least we be reprobate, and therefore we complain us,
and would know whi he has created us, forseing our dampnacion: now these must
be exhorted not to despair, but to contemplate and look in Christ, in whom
they shall se them selves elected. And so they shall not have whereof to take
occasion to lament, after it must be said to the^ for as much as ye do not
believe verelyet be of the elect, it is a sign, that ye have not lively light
of Christ, nor of his great benefit, and not knowinge Christ, it behooves to
say with Paul that ye know not God in verity, and that ye are without him.
Gala. iiii. Ephe. ii.
And how is it possible the^, that you being with out God, and without the
true knowledge of him, should understand and know his high secrets? It is
not possible to know sooner the divine judgments then God. Ye be therefore
without faith, and I prove that it is true, because that if ye had faith, ye
should se so clerelye that God does euerithing well and can not err, that you
would ask non other reason. And for that who so is without faith, is frantic
concerning the divine things, it must needs be said that you are even so,
and now is it a fransi, your demau^ding a reason of the creacion of the
reprobate, neither should it be possible to satisfy you, till such time your
reason were healed by faith. Yea while that ye are so without light
supernatural, being thereof not able to conceive, he that should search to quiet
you with resones, should also enter into a fransi with you. Humble then your
selves to God and ask him faith and not resones, because that things
supernatural, can not be seen but by faith. Insatiable is the golfe of folish
and frantike curiositi, the godly adore the high and inco^prehensible
judgments of God and with humility, they are content to taste in them by
faith, some drop, of the divine sapience and goodness: where the ungodly
presuming without faieth, have a will to perce, to the inaccessible counsel of
God, and remaining in darckenes, become mad and folyshe: ye perceive not that
ye want ye true co^ceiuyng of God. If ye think yt God may err, or do any
thing unjustly: you will perhaps add light to that perfect light, rule the
divine sapie^ce, correct that infinite goodness, judge that iudgeles justice,
and conde^pne that supreme mercy and charity. If thou did se the hyghnes and
magnifice^ce of God, and on the other side, the baseness and vanity of man, and
how in all things he depends upon him ye should se yt he never punished the^
in such sort, that they deserve not to have a greater punysheme^t, being so
frantic and proud, ye are not capeable nor worthy to have light of the high
judgment of God, yea you deserve to remain so co^fused. And for that, it is
the just judgment of God, that for the earnest peine of your hell, ye should go
ever with your troublesome thoughts, co^passinge by such dark and
inextricable mases. Therefore although I could give you a reason of all the
works of God, I would not do it. Humble you the^ to God, and ask him faith,
for with yt only ladder, we asce^d to ye intelligence of the secrets of God.
And the^ when ye shall have faith, saying with clear and supernatural light, yt
god does all things well, ye shall no more care for a further reason. And if
also you should seek it, it should be with a godly mind to be so much the more
able the better to behold God, in his just and holy judgments. And then I
would say to you, yt God might have saved al, but he has not willed it, yea
forseing the dampnacion of the ungodly, he created them, Prove. xix.
not for to save them, or to the end they should be saved, but to serve him self
of the^, so much ye more to be showed brighte and glorious, Romans vi.
to the world. The which is a more beutyful, more rich, more happy, and more
wonderful ordinance, then if sin had never be^ in ye world. And this is
because Christ and his elect (of sin) have taken occasion, to honor God
more then if the world had euerben innocent, and God with greateste sapience,
did reduce all the disordres, into a more marvelous order, then if the world
had never ben disordred by sin. If sin had not been, the saints had never
been persecuted, inprisoned, and slain, no more Christ crucified. Where then
should have been their victory, their Palm, triumphs and crowns? And if the
reprobate would say: we are forced to confess yt God has done well to permit
the sins of the elect, that after as the prodigal son, of his error and
miseries, took occasion to open his eyes and know him self, yea, and to return
to his father, to humble him self to repent with heart, and axe him pardon and
therbi to taste the fatherly charity, when he pardoned him, in more perfect
manner, then he had done before: so the elect, of their sins take occasion
the better to know them selves, and the bounty of God, and it is no small
benefit of God, that he suffer him self to be wounded of his childern, and
bear with it, to the end that some day, opening their eyes, they may se
their great ingratitude, and the excessive love that he bears them. God also
of these, may be afterward suerlye served, at every noble and great
enterprise, as of them that are altogether his, not only for yt he has created
and preserved the^, but much more because that by sin being lost, with the
blood of his only begotten son, he has recovered them. And so was Christ
served of Paul, and of his other mighti cha^pions, we must of force confess
also, that God does well to permit the sins of the reprobate to exercise
the elect in virtues, for the greater triumph of Christ and his glory. But
it seems that it should have been better, yt after that God had served his
turn with them, he should touch their heart, and give them his knowledge,
and his grace, so that they also of their sins should take occasion, to
reknowledge their vice, and the goodness of God, so that they might be saved,
to them ye ought to say: sense ye confess, that God has done well, to
permit the sins of the reprobate, ye can not deny, but that for the^ they
deserve to be dampened. Ye are also forced to sai, that god dampneth them
iustli, ^ence that they have sinned: God then does well to permit them to
sin, and when they have sinned, he may iustli damn the^ because that
voluntarily they did sin, and the falte was theires and not Gods. Ye can
not then complain you of God, if he dampne you, but are constrained to say he
does well. And if they say it is true, but yet it should seine us to be
better, and with his greater glory, if after he were served of the^, he would
save them. To these I answer first that is best, which pleases God, and
because it pleases him to dampne the^, therefore that is best. Then if God in
the end of the life, should give light to all, And so at last every one should
convert, they would do many more enormious sins the^ they do. For the
ungodly would say, we may do eueri evil, let us take our pleasure and live
frelie, without any fear, for every way in the end we shall be saved. And for
that one only sin is worse the^ all the peines of the dampened, therefore it is
best, that they be dampened. Their dampnation serves also to the elect, in
as much as that servant which when he sees justice done to his fellow
servant that before would have strangled him, knows the goodness of his
Lord, and the malignitie of the man: so the elect, by seeing in the dampened
the justice of god, do come to more knowledge of his mercy and justice, and
also of their own misery. God is served then of the reprobate, to illustreate
and setforth his glory, and uses the^ for instruments, not only while they
are in this life, but in death and in hell. His glory also is more discovered
(as Paul writes) by having in his great house vessels of gold, of silver, of
wodde, and earth, of mercy, and of wrath. But let us thank God that he has
elected us, and pray him that he give us so much light of his goodness, and so
much feruencie, that although he would ever be angry with us, not only we
should be content, but that we hold it for a singular privilege, that he will
vouchsafe in such manner to serve him self of us, to the end that in every state,
and for ever, we may render him al laud, honor, and glory, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Wherefore God has elected us: the nynthe Sermon.
IT should be no less then a very folyshenes, when one entendinge to speak of
colores, should bring in the opinion of one that is borne blind, and not
illuminate by miracle. So is it madness in the thing supernatural, to
allege the judgment of them that are not inspired but with natural
understanding. And by adventure have talked, of high, hid and divine
secrets, even as it has seemed well, in their own blind and darcke
understanding, having thereby their eyes ever open, to magnify man. Now
because that of the supernatural matters, there is so much known as is reveled
and opened to us. Therefore lokinge in the holy scriptures, Ephe. i.
I find that God has elected us by Christ, that is, that God lokinge in the
progeny of Adam, saw nothing there that was worthy of our election: but
tourninge the regard to his own goodness and Christ's, in whom he was so well
pleased, Math. iii. Ephe. i.
that by him he did elect us, he therefore chose us not because we were holy,
but because we should be, so that the divine grace found no saints but made
saints. Therefore did Paul give thanckes to God, that had made us mete to the
enheritaunce of saints. He chose us then because it pleased him so, for he
loved us frelie without saying in us any thing, worthy thereof. Ephe. i.
He elected us (as writes Paul) after the decreed purpose of his own will,
to the laud and glory of his fre mercy and not for our worckes. So that not
because we were just and worthi in his sight, he did elect and call us, but
(as Paul says) because he has elected, Roma. viii.
therefore he does call, justify and glorify us. In such sort, that he
willed not the end for the beginning sake, but the beginning for ye end sake.
He has saved us, after Paul not by the worckes that we have done, but by his
mercy. In a another place he says, yt he has delivered and called us with his
holy vocarion not after our worckes but according to his pourposed mercy,
ii. Timo. i
given all ready to us before the creacio^ of the world: so then, as of the
secrets reveled to the litel ones and hidden from the wise and prudent Christ
did give none other cause, but for yt so it pleased the father, Math. xi.
so of our election there may no another cause be alleged, but only because it
is the pleasure of God. Paul wills that the purpose that God has made us,
may not depend upon our works, because it should not be firm as it is, nor
we sure, as Christ says we are, and Paul also. If thou would say, that Paul
to the Romans spoke of the eleccion of Jacob and Esau, Roma. ix. John. x. Romans
viii. Roma. ix.
concerning the first birth, and not co^cerninge the heavenly inheritance, I
would answer that Paul with that trope, does declare the manner of the eternal
eleccion to paradise, otherwise the eleccio^ of Jacob, should be in vain, in
the which is seen (touching the things of the present life) nothing but
calamity and trouble. But the principal intent of Paul is to prove that
although the carnal Hebrews be not saved, it rests not therefore, that Jesus
is not the Messiah, for yt the promises were made to ye spiritual hebrews, yt
which in faith do imitate and follow Abraham, and they are the elect. Mala. i.
When God also in Mala. shows to the Iues that he has loved the^, because he
loved Jacob of whom they descended, and hated Esau: His reason had been
vnuailable if God did love and those by works. For ye Jews might have
answered: if thou did love Jacob and the Hebrews, it was because thou did
forsee their good works: and in like case thou would have done to Esau and
the Gentiles, Roma. ix.
if thou had foresene any good works in them. But Paul shows that the
Messiah is come also to the ge^tils, because God gives his gifts with out
having respect to works. If thou demand wherefore he has elected the^? Paul
answers, because it is written: I will show mercy on whom it pleases me.
Roma. ix.
Therefore Paul does infer and bring in, that paradise is not his that will,
nor that runs or laboreth by himself to get it: but his that God will show
mercy unto. He might also have answered, that although God hated Esau, before
he was borne, and before he did sin, he is not therefore wicked, for he had
him not in hate or he did forese his wickedness. But he says that he does
indurate who^ he will, to set forth the brightness of his glory. And to his
purpose he does allege the example of Pharao. Now tell me how it is possible
that God can forse in us any good, if he determine not to give it us? Thou will
say, he saw that some could use well frewil, and some not, therefore he chose
the first, and refused the second, they could not use it well, without his
grace.

Wherefore then did he determine to give that grace of well using to the one
and not to the other?

It behooves to return to the divine will, and say, because it pleased him
not: for the vsinge well of fre will is the effect and fruit and not the cause
of election. Peradventure thou will say, he did determine to give grace to
all, but he saw that some would use it well and those he chose, and some euel,
and those he forsook. But tell me, the use of that grace is also the gift of
God, wherefore did he not determine to give that grace to all, and also to use
it? Thou must needs say at last also, because it pleased him not. If thou will say, those that used it not well, was not because they lacked the grace
to use it, no more then the other, but they did not occupye it when they had
it, the desalte was theires and not of God, nor of the grace. If it were so, we
should have wherein to glory in our selves. But Paul is in the contrary, and
wills that to God ought to be rendered all honor and glory, i. Cor. iiii.
Romm. iiii. i. Timo. i. Iero. i.
so as from him comes al goodness. We might also of our selves, separate us
from the reprobate, and so our hope should not be al wholly in God, our salvation
could not be certain and suer, as Christ said: nor the cause of our election
so hid, Ihon. x. Romans iiii.vi.ix. and.xi.
as Paul says it is, yea fre mercy should be no more fre merci, if we might
be saved by worckes and paradise should be a reward, and not a gift clean
against Paul. The Hebrews did mo warckes the^ the gentiles, and nevertheless he
did chose the gentiles, and reproved the Jews, that sought to be justified by
their works. God from the beginning for saw in us nothing but repugnancie and
rebellion against his grace, being by the sin of Adam, the children of ire,
prove, Ephe. ii. Gene. viii. Romans xi. Psalm. xvii.ii. Reg. xxii. Psalm. xliii. i
Cor ii. Iaco. i. Ihon. xv.
and inclined to all evil. Paul calls our eleccio^, the eleccion of fre
mercy. David says: he saved me, because he loved me, and because it pleased
him. He saves then his elect because he delitethe in them, and distributeth
his mercy, after his own will. The^ he has begotten us voluntarily by mere
mercy, and not by our works: so that the.xij. Apostels did not chose Christ,
but he chose the^ to the Apostleship. So we be not they that have chosen God to
save us, but God is he that has chosen us to salvation. Even as Paul was
called without works by free mercy, because it pleased God: so he was elected
to show his mercy, Act. ix. Gala. i. i. Timo. i. Ephe. ii.
and the aboundaunt riches of his glory. It is humility it self, to believe
that we are chosen by grace. This opinion gives al glory to God, and to us
only confusion. And because we can not err in glorifiyng to much the fre
mercy and bounty of God, and abatinge the pride of man. Therefore it is most
sure, yea, although it stood not with the holy scriptures, as it does. And the
more it displeases the carnal man, because it co^foundeth al his glory, so
much the more it is pleasing to the spiritual, because it magnifieth God,
Christ, his fre mercy, and the gospel. And to say my opinion, it pleases me
best, to be all wholly in the hand of God. Yea if mine eleccio^ were in my
custody, I would (if I might) render it unto God, in whose hand, it must of
force be better, and more sure. Yea woe to us if in the least point it did
depend upon our selves. Se then what becomes of them that imagine (although
falsely) that it dependith only upon the goodly works that they do, to make
the^ selves elected again, where on ye other party, you shall se, that those
which with lively faith, believe to be by the mere mercy of God, and by the
death of Christ, in the number of the elect, and sons of God (for that they
feel in Christ, and by Christ, the great charity of God,) are by strength of
the spirit and love, forced to do worckes to be wondered at: not servile, for
they see them selves heirs, but the worckes of a son, sincere and pure to
the glory of their lively father, being prevented by love.

If thou wouldeste believe, we are not worthy to be so elected by free mercy,
I would answer, neither that Christ should suffer for us upon the Cross,
but did he not therefore die? Christ has not elected us, because we were
worthy thereof, but for the glory of his goodness: Ephe. i.
The cause of our eleccion is not then to be sought, but at the divine will.

Of the reprobate, I entende not to dispute, wherefore God has cast them of,
because it is neither needful to us, nor profitable to know. It serves to
humble us, and to know better the great goodness of God, that we are
elected by his grace, and not by our works.

The christian ought to believe to be one of the chosen, Ephe. i. i. Cor. ii.v.
and it ought to suffice him to have Christ for his book, in the which he
sees him self elect, and to know that that apperteineth to him. And
although Paul to the Romans spoke a word thereof, it was but incidently or
by the way, for it does apeare it was not his principal inse^t to seek the
cause wherefore God does reprobate and cast them of. It is inoughe for us to
think yt the omnipotency of God, being infinite, has neither limits nor
bo^des, therefore may he do with his creatures with out contradiccion: and the
divine will may do of them, determine and will all that, that with his whole
power he may do, being the whole ruler, and necessarily most right in all his
will, yea the very ryghteousnes it self. Wherefore honoringe the bright and
light judgments of God, let us believe that God does not condemn, but with
just and irreprehe^sible counsel, albe it the justice of his judgments be
to us incomprehensible, Romm. xi.
and that none is in hell, but by his own wyckednes: Our office is then to
humble us, and content us in the divine will, reknowledgyng that we be not
worthy, although we fuffer all punishment, to set forth the brightness of the
glory of god, to whom, for all his works, is due all honor, laud and glory
by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Whether the elect ca^ be damned or not: the.x. Sermon
AS it is written, Barn. iii. i. Ioh. iii. ii. Tessa. ii.
god sees from the beginning and for ever al things, and has of all,
certain and infallible science, and particularlye knows his elect, their
life and their end. So then as God, by the necessity of his being cannot be
corrupted, neither diminishe nor augment, being infinite and without end, nor
be altered, being most simple and pure, nor change place, being unmeasurable,
fyllyng al places: so also may not his determinacions be changed: neither by
ignorance for lack of foresight and consideracion, Roma. ix.
neither for defaulte of power, since he can not be let or weakened, nor his
will resisted. Neither may he change by malice, or for want of ple^tiful
goodness, for his purposes are most good and fyrme. Mala. iii.
God then is immutable in all his doings, changes not as children, nor like
old men, but as David says: The counsayl of the Lord shall stand for ever:
that must needs be that god has determined, neither is it in our power to
change his purpose, disturb the divine counsayles, destroy divine
ordinances, nor let his will, which is Empress, and owres of the hand
maiden. Therefore what God wylleth, must be, and not yt he must will after our
fantasy. Now because we are not to be elected, Ephe. i.
but (as Paul writes) God has elected us, before the constitucion of the
world, and is in his determinacions immutable, it is of force therefore to be
as he has determined. So likewise he sees and knows all things from the
beginning, with certain and infallible knowledge: it is therefore necessity
that, that be, which he has foreseen, or else it must needs be that God
may change, and that of our life and end he has no perfect knoweledge,
but a doubtful opinion, wherein also he may be beguiled, and that saying were a
most wyckednes. Thou will say to me, thou art deceived in imagining that
above is time, and succession of time, and that God has foreseen and
determined all that is yet to be, so that his determinacion and knoweledge is
already passed, in such sort, that he can not otherwise know, nor will,
without his change which is impossible. And therefore thou iudgeeste it
necessity, that all that come to pass, which he has foreseen and
determined. But it is not so, for above there is no end or succession of time,
night nor day, neither was nor shall be, as there is here underneath the
heavens, there is only all the present time, and only one most clear day of
one inseparable instaunte, the which by his eternity extends to the
succession and process of all time. And I answer, that I know right well,
that to God every thing is present, although being under this celestial
Sphere, where is following of time to make us better understand, we use with
Paul to say he has elected us: but tell me, do thou believe that the
eleccion of those that are in this present life, and like wise those that
shall be, is now in being in effect and present before God, or not.

If thou say no, the^ shall it never be, for with him is no time to come. If
thou sai yea, then may it not be without mutacion in God, sense thou
graunteste it once to be.

If thou would say it might be no being, yet it could not be not being,
but in the instaunt of the Godhead, in which thou graunteste all things to
be, for as much as above is no succession or course of time, and so in that
self instaunt indivisible, thou would have it possible, not to be any being
and yet a being: for as much as it is not so. Therefore if thou consent that God
(I say not has seen) but does se and determine all things, sense that God is
immutable, and his science infallible, and that there is no course of time, by
all means, likewise it is to be said, that, that must needs be, which God
with perfect infallible knowledge does for see, and steadfastly determine.
Because that (if with God there were any time past) eue^ as that could not,
not be which God had foresene by his infallible prescience, and immutably
determined: no more can that thing not be, which he does presently se and
determine. Thou will say, I grant that all that shall be, which God does forese
and ordeine, and so God shall not be beguiled, nor yet change, but yet
nevertheless it might be ye contrary, although it shall never be. But thou see
not how thou art deceived, thou grau^test that all the elect shall be saved,
nevertheless thou say they may be dampened: And whereto serves this, may be,
if in effect they shall not be dampened. Therefore this argues but in words, it
is curiouse and unprofitable. Now, as if thou would grant that an elect
could be damned, thou should be forced to say that God may change.
Therefore thou say, that all may be saved, which argues yet that the elect
may be damned, and so thou must needs confess, that God may also be beguiled,
and vari in his ordinance, which is impossible. That the elect then may be
dampened, it is a thing false, heretical, and impossible: it can not be
verefied by no sentence compound nor derived, sense that in God ca^ be no
mutacio^ nor succession Therefore if he be elect, he must needs be saved, and it
must needs be said, that the eleccion of them that shall be saved (I will not
say has been but standing in that eternity) is in being because that if it
were not now, it should not be hereafter, sense there neither is, nor can be
with God, but always the present time. Then God having in his divine mind
given us paradise from the beginning, and when he gives never repe^teth (as
Paul writes) it is of necessity to say that the elect be saved. Romans xi.
Paul writes that the eleccion of God is firm, and the divine purposes
steadfast, and that the Lord knows his with perfect infallible knoweledge,
Roma. iiii Roma. ix.
which ought to be to us a sure foundation, whereupon we may stablyshe
undoubted faith of our salvation. To this purpose Paul said, that those that
God has known for his, and therefore elected and purposed to save them, those
he has predestinate to be conformable to the Image of his son, and those,
having them after created, he does call with an inward calling, in such
sort, that they answer again, for because they are the sons of God,
therefore they hear his voice, and believe by being ordained to eternal life.
Yea he draws them, and gives them a new heart, and these that he calls he
justifies, he gives them Christ, and the light of him, faith, hope, and
charity, and all other christian virtues apparelynge them, he does enrich
them with many gifts, treasures, and graces, and afterward does happily
glorify the^. Therefore from the first to the last it follows, that the
elect must needs be saved. Paul added and said: if God be with us, who can be
against us: meaning, if God has elected us, and determined to save us, he
being omnipotente, and has taken upon him this enterprise to save us, who
shall let him? Yea he would have said, no man, because that Christ said,
John. x.
none can take them out of the hands of my father: it happens not to God as
to man, which many times does will a thing, seeks and can not find,
Rome. xi.
as the Hebrews, which sought their salvation, and could not atchieue it,
and that because they sought it not by Christ, by fre mercy, nor by faith,
but by works. It is not so with God, because that he, when he wylleth any
thing, it comes to pass, and his eleccion (as writes Paul) comes to
effect. Moreover God has given his elect to Christ, Iho. x.xi. and.xvii
and draws them to him, and those that go to him drawn of the father, he
chaseth not away, as him self said: he loses them not, but knows them for
his sheep, he calls them to him, they hear his voice, he prays for them
most effectuously, and is ever heard. For them he shed his blood, Math. xv.
and gave his life, even as for them only he was sent, and came into the
world, to them he does manifest God, gives them life, and makes them happy.
They are then in good hands, being in Christ's, out of the which none shall
take them, as him self has said. Iho. xi. and. xvii.
They may peryshe that are the sons of perdicion, as Judas, but not the
children of eleccion. The elect are sure, for there was never none of them that
peryshed nor never shall, yea it is impossible, Math. xiii
for christ speaking of the false prophets which should be in the kingdom of
Antichrist, said they should seduce the very elect, if it were possible,
for to show that it was not possible, yea for their sakes, those days shall
be shortened.

All that God has wrought and shall work is for his elect, for whom he did
create the world, and preserve the same, sent Christ into the world, and
wylled that for them he should dye upon the cross, for them he has most
special care. If God made such account of the Hebrews, that to thend their
name should not be forgotten on the earth, Deute. xv.
he did ordeine, that if the first brother died without child, the second was
bound to raise up sede to his brother: think thou yt he will not make
rekening of his elect whose names are written in heaven? Yea, I will thou know,
Luke. x.
that although Christ be he, by whose means al ye elect are saved,
nevertheless not by his impotencie, being given to him all power, but because
the thing of it self is impossible. Mar. x. Math. xxviii.
Christ can not save a reprobate, nor damn an elect. Now much less is it
in our power, if we be elect, to dampne our selves, or if we be reprobate to
save our selves, yet ought we not to cease to work well, because that if we are
sure to be dampened, we are yet bound every way, for his infinite goodness, most
hyghly to honor him. Let us then give thanks to god that has not only by
mere mercy elected us for his, but to the end we might be sure of our
salvation, has ordained that our dampnacion shall not lie in our own power
(being his elect) and with this gives us such grace, that we may in this
present life, render him all laud, honor, and glory, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Whether God do agrauate, harden and blind the hertes of men or not, and in
what manner: the eleventh Sermon.
IT is read in the holy scriptures, ii Reg. xvi. iii. Reg. xxix ii. Reg.
xxiiii Exo. i.vii x.xi. and.xiiii. Esa. lxiii. Ihon. xii. ii. Cor. iiii. Roma.
ix. and.xi. Gala. iii.
that God put in Saula wicked spirit to vex him and a liyng spirit in the
mouth of the Prophets to beguyl Achab, and that by Satan he moved ye heart of
David to number the people against his precept. And moreover he does harden,
blind, and make gross the hertes of persons, and gives them over in to a
perverse mind. And Paul writes, that he has shut up al men in unbelief and
sin. And although many held for ungodliness this manner of speaking, and
therefore they do not only abstain from pronou^cinge such like words, but also
go about to expound and make the^ better, eme^dinge them, forcinge them selves
to bring them after their pha^tasie, to such a way, yt they have a kind of
godliness therein. And I think they are moved to do this, to the end that of
these things men should not take occasion to think that God were the cause of
sin, or else to imagine with the Maniches to be.ii. first beginnings, the one
good, cause of the good, the other euel, cause of the evil. Nevertheless I will
not, ought not, may not will to be more holy then God, that speaks in holy
scriptures. And it is more wickedness to will to correct the long of the holy
ghost, because that none speaks nor can speak more circu^spectlye then he,
nor with greater thyrst of our salvation, with the zeal and honor of God. With
all this every one ought to know that we are the cause of sin and not God:
yea it can not be thought, that God is a God, if it be not thought that he is
without fault, without evil, infinitely good and just. Therefore as to us is
due all confusion, ignominy, dishonor, reproach and euel, so to God all honor,
laud, and glory. It is not euel then to pronounce these words, in the manner
that they are written, saying that God does agrauate, harden, and blind, but
it is good.

Thou will say, tell me how these words are to be understand, that God
does harden, blind, and such like: so that thereby I may not take any
occasion of offense. I answer, that after the opinion of some, God does
harden, and so blind the heart of a person, in as much as he foreseeth and
forepreacheth his hardenes, as he did forese and foresaye the obstinacy of
Pharao. But know thou, that when he said to Moses, I will harden the heart of
Pharao, he would not only say, I foresee that he will be hard herted, and I
tell it the before, for then the words which he he spoke after, should not
have agreed therewith, which were: for to show my power, that my name may be
declared throwghout the whole world.

But with those words he threatened to punyshe him, as it is read, that he
punished mo people for their sins, Deuteronomy ii. Esai. vi Ihon. xii. Psalm. lxxx.
Roma. i.
with blynding them, hardenynge them, with lettyng them do after their desires
of their own hertes, geuinge them over into a froward mind, in passions and
shameful effects.

Therefore there are some which say, that God many times does harden and
blind sinners, when sufferyng, yea giving them prosperity, and distributinge
his mercy and benefits, when they ought to open their eyes to so great
benignities of him, and be invited thereby to repent and change their life,
they, of this bounty of God take occasion to become worse, every day more
blind and indurate. But I say that the virtue and also the vice stands not
in prosperity nor yet in adversity, but in the men them selves. So that as to
the elect every thing works to salvation, Romans viii.
and by the special grace that they have of God serve him in adversity as in
prosperity: so to the reprobate, every thing serves contrary, and hurts,
yet by their defaltes as not only prosperity and adversity, but also the
preachinge of the Gospel, and the miracles do hurt and hinder them. Therefore
Paul said, that as to the elect, Christ was the odor of life, so to the
reprobat, ii. Cor. ii.
he was ye odor of death. It is nedeful then to say that God does harden and
blind the hertes of the reprobate, not because he gives the^ adversity or
prosperity, nor because he suffers them, and shows them many benefits,
but for that he gives them not grace to use them, and the commodity thereof,
to the glory of God: It may be truly said that he does harden and blind the
hertes of the sinners, when he takes from them, or gives them not his grace,
nor the understanding of his will, will, because that in such case, it is force
that man remain blind and indurate, and that every thing serve them, to the
dishonor of god, where as if they had that inward grace even of their sins,
they should take occasion to honor him. God does blind men, when withdrawyng
his light, he hydeth his face, and as Moses was veiled, so spredeth he the
veil of ignorance over the heart of the reprobate: Deute. xxxi.
so that god in withdrawinge the light of his grace, ii. Cor. iii.
blinds the hertes of infidels, in such sort, that not only the gospel is
hyd from them (as Paul writes) and they err, but standing in that darckenes,
they can not believe. ii. Tessa. ii. Ihon. xii.
And so also does he harden, not for that he gives prosperity or adversity
(of the which the elect also are partakers) nor because he withdraws not the
grace, but the swetenes and the sensual felyng thereof, of the which many
saints were void: nor yet for that he moves their hertes to evil, or cause
in them any obstinacy or evil quality: Ezechi. xi.
but only in wythdrawyng his grace, which molifieth a heart of stone and makes
it flesh, it is of necessity yt the heart remain hardened. And so likewise he
chaseth away the sinner, when he does not call him, and draw him to him before.
Yet for all this god sins not, for he is not holde^ nor bo^de to give us
this grace, he may harde^ and molifie after his own pleasure, yea the sinner
meriteth not only to be punished with pain and priuacion of paradise, but
also with priuacion of his grace: and that this is true, judge, if God had
killed Pharao, when he caused all the Hebrews children to be cast into the
floude: would thou have said that god had been unjust? Surely no. And yet if
then he had died, he had been damned, and remained obstinat for ever. Wherefore
might not god execute iustlye, the same sentence, as concerning blyndyng and
hardening, upon others, with wythdrawinge his grace? And on the other party
(as they are preserved) that shall be not amiss to preserve him in life for a
few mo days to be served of him, as of an instrument of wrath, prepared from
the beginning, to exercise his people in virtue, to the end that deliueryng
them so divinely, they might know the great goodness, Roma. ix.
power, and justice of god. And so being his name celebrate throughout the
world, he might be feared and loved. And finally all to his own glory, as
writes Paul and Moses. Exo. xxiiii. Psalm. lxxi.
The judgments that we give upon the secrets of god, are very madness, if by
faith we do not enter into his sanctuary. Romans viii.
God does inwardlye call the elect, as Paul writes, and they believe that
god, as their only father, will never forsake them, but shall endue the^ with
such grace, that al things shall serve them to salvation, even sin, in the
which god will never let them fall, but for their benefit. They are not
offended to hear say, that god, by abstayning his grace from the ungodly,
Romans viii
does blind, and harden their hertes, but understanding by faith, to be in the
number of the elect, and knowing that god saves not but by mercy, and
damneth not but justly, so much the more are they moved to live in pure fear,
to humble them selves, and render thanks to god, to whom be ever all land,
honor, and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

How God does dispose his grace: the twelfe Sermon.
There are many which think that god to every one continually does offer his
grace, and that it is in the power of man to accept it or not, as though they
had it in a boudget, and were in their arbitreme^t to open and take at their
own will. And yt of this their dead, false, and erroneous opinion, grows yt
they live most wickedly, thinking and saying, god never fails with his grace,
and it is at our choice to receive it at our will.

Therefore we may take leisure and line a vicious life after our own way, for
we shall be saved always, a moment of time is enough for us to repent and be
saved, sense it is in our power. Therefore for to fly such an evil, I have
judged it good to show yt it is not so. It is no doubt yt god has created the
world for his elect, so that if god had forsene that none should have been
saved, he would not have created it. For the^ also he did preserve it, Hebre.
i. i Cor. i. Romans viii
to them he has given the Angels for kepers, and of them as a father he has
most singular care and providence. God will not suffer yt they be tempted above
their power, yea eueri thing works and serves well to their salvation. Prou.
xxiiii.
Seven times in a day ye just shall fall, and rise again, because God is with
the^, and helps them in such sort, that the more they are in great perils
and necessity, so much the more is god beneficial to them. For the^ god gave
the law to the world, sent Moses and the Prophets, them he calls inwardly
in such manner, that they hear his voice, and answer him of them he molifieth
the heart, and draws them to Christ, as the adama^t does Iron: If they err,
he does correct and chasten them as children, as it is read of David, Psalm.
xxxi. Ihon. x. Ihon. ix.
to them he does not impute their sin, he does quicken and glorify them, and
finally all that god has wrought, and shall work for him self, is for the
elect, for the^ he sent Christ, and when he came, for them he took upon him
their sins, only for the^ he prayed, for them he wept, preached, and did
miracles, for them he shed his blood, dyed, rose, ascended in to heaven, sent
the holy ghost, and shall come to judge the quick and the dead: yea all that
he has suffered, wrought and shall work, is for the elect, whom he loves
in so excessive manner, that he does attribute to him self all that is done to
them. Ihon. x.
God then being gratified with the elect in Christ, does give unto them his
spirit, the lively light of him, faith, hope, with all the rest of virtues
and graces essencial and necessary to salvation. And moreover he gives them
grace to use in the honor of god, and be served in his glory, of all the
gifts and graces which may be comune both to the good, and to the euel, to be
used well and euel, as riches, honor, dignity, health, long life, children,
frindes, science, the gifts of the tongue, to do miracles and such like. Of
them in part, Paul made mention, writing to the Corinthes. i. Cor. xii.
And also gives them grace to use in his glory, poverty, ignominy, infamy,
infirmity, with all adversity, and the priuacion of like gifts, even to the
death, god gives them such grace yt with every wind, they sail to the port,
and they know that they are no less bound to thank god when they are
without such gifts, and in all adversity, then when they have such things
with the prosperity of the world, sense that bithe grace which god gives
them, all things work to good.

Therefore they are ever contented to be in the state which pleases the Lord,
neither would they change it, if they might (without the will of god) and
only for that they feel the divine goodness, no less in adversity then in the
worldly prosperity. In thend when they are fallen to any sin, god opens
their eyes, and makes the^ se, not only the evil yt they have done, but also
yt he has so permitted it for their benefit, to thend they may the better
know their own miseries and the bounty of god. But speaking of the reprobate,
I say, that it is enough for us to know that god is not bond, nor necessited
to give them his grace for their good worckes: because that the grace finds
not good worckes, but does make them to be done.

God neither has, nor may have any bond with his creatures. The bonds are
all ours with god, and so much the more, as that we being all lost in Adam,
he might justly, not only abandon us, but damn and punyshe us. He is not also
compelled of his perfect goodness, mercy and charity, to not have created the
world, he might now bring it to nothing, and dispose all creatures after
his own way, being still most perfectlye just, as he is now, and was from
without beginning, before he did create the world. God may give of his grace
as much as it pleases him, Math. xx.
when and to whom he thinks good, yea, and not to give it without being
unjust, or doing any minrie. God also has been of power, without doing any
unrighteousness, to create the reprobate, foreseynge their damnacion, to serve
his own turn, and to use them for instruments, or exercise the elect in
virtue, to the end that their victories and triumphs, and likewise Christ's,
might be the more glorious, and finally all for his own greater glory.

And moreover I say, that Christ hydeth him self and his grace many times
from persons, Iho. vii. Prove. i.
so that although they seek him, cry after him, and recommend them selves to
him, they find him not, nor he hears them not, notwythstandynge those such
as are not moved to seek him, or commit them selves to him, by the spirit, nor
for the zeal of ye honor of God, but for their proper interest, yea and mani
times he does blind and indurate the people, and all is most justly done. And
although it be written that God has cure of all, calls all, would save al,
died for all, does illuminate al, does rain and power his grace upon all, and
like sentences: I say, it is to be understand, that he has cure of al
ingeneral, but of the elect in special, and so he calls al, with a vocacion
universal, but the elect with an inward and singular. When Paul said also,
that he would save all, he understood that, to be of every sort of persons.
His death also was sufficient to save all, but it is not effectuons but to the
elect, and so where it is written, yt he does illuminate and give grace to al,
it is understand of the elect, of those that are illuminate. Math. xiii. Ephe.
ii. ii. Tessa. ii
Therefore said Christ to the Apostels, to you it is given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, Paul said likewise, that the says which
is the gift of God, is not al men's. It is well true also, that God does
illuminate al, in as much as there is no person that has not had some light
and knowledge of God. Let us then give him thanckes, sense that of his mere
goodness, he has co^numerat us among the elect, and pray we him that he give
us so much light of his goodness, that in every place and time we may render him
perfect land, honor and glory, by Ihesu Christ our Lord.

Amen.
If man have liberty or not and in what manner: the.xiii. Sermon.
SOme might think it superfluous for a christian, to think whether he be fre
or not, but that it is enough to force him self to make all possible resistance
against evil, and his best power to do well, geuyng al honor and glory to god,
because that in such a case, they walk to god surely, neither falling into
the depth of idleness. But herein consists the difficulty, in giving all the
glory to god. Yea it is not possible that man while arroga^tly he presumes of
him self (thinkyng to do that which he does not) can give all the glory to
god. Therefore have I judged it necessary to show what man can do, to thend yt
being able to know and discern between that which in deed is his, and that
that is gods, he can and may render all praise and land unto him to whom of
duty it belongs. First, although the being of the creatures, compared to the
being of god (by being infinitely far from the perfeccio^ of the divine
essence) is but a shadow, yea rather no being, Roma. iiii
so that truly it may be said that god only is that which is: nevertheless
with all this, Exo. iii.
it can not be said but that the creatures have a being, although imperfect,
in comparison of the divine. And so is it true, that they have virtue, during
the which they work, although principally in the virtue of god.

Therefore when the Lord had created the world, he commanded the earth to
spring, and the waters to bring forth. Then false is the opinion of them
that Imagine that god, and not the sun does give light, and god not the fire
does give heat, and so of all the rest of things created, that God does
work in the^, and not the creatures, but every creature even to the most
vile, has his proper virtue, duringe the which, it works. True it is, that
in the creatures inferior to man, there is no liberty at all, because that
being not let, they must of necessiti work according to the virtue that they
have in the disposition of things possible or sufferable, directlye set before
them as it is seen in burninge, and so it is necessary, they move according
to their virtue, strength, and apetite, the which is seen in the waters,
that run to the sea, nether it is in the power of living souls unreasonable,
to move or not to move weaklye or stronglye, to the obiectes that they apetite
or desire. Take away the impedimentes, they must of necessity move them
selves there unto, after the measure of the strength, and apetite they have.
Therefore in them is no liberty at al, as there is in man, in whom I consider
five sorts of mouinges, and operacions. The first are mere natural as if a man
should voluntarely throw himself down, it should not be in his liberty to
withholde him self, but should be by his weighte, compelled like a stone to
discende even to the earth. True it is, that the same faul was in his liberti,
in as much as he might not have thrown him self down at all. The second
mouinges, that I consider in me^, are vegitatiue, as the growinge when they are
children, and nurishinge and such like, the which also does plants. And
speaking of those, I say that they are not in the liberty of man, saving
that he may kill him self, and deprive him of that life which the trees can
not do.

The third are operacions animal, as to see, hear, and taste, and such
like, of the which speakinge, I say, that albeit, it be in the power of man,
not to hear a voice that is present without closinge his ears, and so of the
other like operacions, nevertheless it is in his liberty to shut up those
senses, in the presence of the obiectes or present things yt delyght him, and
to withdraw him self from them, and so not to move, or to move to one side or
another, softlye or strongly, as he will, the which the other anymalles or
living souls can not do, being necessitate, to move according to their
apetites. But speakinge, of the four operacions which are human, as to
think one or an other thing, to speak or not, in this manner or in that, to
learn this or that science, to govern him self or others in this way or in
the other, yea not to do, or else to do, always more or less, to this or that
person, (in case he have goods in power) to fast watch, pray, to hear the
word of God, to communicate or not, and so of all the other like operacions, I
say, that they are in the power of man, that is that men (without ^ther
special grace and miracle but only d^ringe the general influence of God) have
in their power to do them, and also not to do them, and always they shall do
them, if they effectuouslye shall will to do them, not being let of God, or of
some other stronger the^ they, and so also shall they not do them being not
forced, and not willinge, to do the^, men are not images. Yea that they are
free in things humane, it is so clear, that it can not be declared by a rule
more known, but spekeinge of the last worckes, that are holy, spiritual and
divine, the which are gratfull and acceptable to God, as to have lively light,
and spiritual knowledge and understanding of god, to have in him fyrme faith
and hope to love him, honor him, laud him, and reverence him, with all thy
heart, to order all thy life to his glory, to obey and commit him self wholly to
his governance with mortifiyng and deniyng him self, the flesh and his own
prudence, and to love his neighbor as him self, even to his enemies for the
love of god, with the heart to pray for the^, and do them all the good
possible: And finallye to do such works to the glory of god is not in the
liberty of them that are carnal, and not regenerate by Christ, because that
it is not in their power to have the supernatural knoweledge of god, sense it
is above all their might.

It is not also in their power to have lively faith in god, hope, and
charity, for as much as they are the gifts of god, divine virtues and
supernatural. Therefore it is not in their liberty to honor god in any wise as
is due to him, and that this is true, let the^ prove to make experience in them
selves, indeuoringe them to have more knoweledge of god then they have, to have
in him greater faith and hope, and to love him more, and they shall perceive
that it will not come to effect: whereof it follows that being not in ye power
of infidels, and not regenerate by Christ to love God with all their heart no
nor above al other things, that also it is not in their power, not to love
the things created, but in Christ and by Christ, nether is it in their
power, not to love them selves disordinatelye, or their parents, frindes,
dignity, honor, goods, pleasures, and the rest of things that are to them
profitable, commodious and delectable, and more over it lies not in their
power, not to hate their enemies, so that thou may se, how it is in their
power, to love them specially spirituallye in Christ: and to the glory of God
such like passiones and effects, are not in our power, as every one has
experience continuallye in him self.

A wicked man might abstain from killinge his enemy, when he might do it,
yea and do his best to healpe him, but it should not be in his power, to love
him in his heart, and much less in Christ and to God.

Therefore all be it, it is in his liberty, not to kylle his enemy, and so to
do him good, nevertheless it is not in his power, to refrain from kyllinge
him, or to do him any benefit for the glory of God. The ungodly might,
with all his conninge and power consider all those things that serve to the
dyspraise of the world, to the mortifiynge of their selves, to the loving of
their neighbor and also God: yet by no means should they come to such light
of the goodness of God, of their own miseries and vanity of the world, that
they should love God, to the hate of them selves, and disprayse of the world,
as he is bound to do.

It is not then in the liberty of the carnal man to do worckes spiritual, he
has need of the grace of God, of faith, and knowledge supernatural, nor it
is not in his power to get, neither in all nor in part, any gift of God,
grace or spiritual virtue. Yea before that by Christ he be regenerate, he can
not neither with thynkinge, desyringe, or workynge, nor by any other means
dispose or prepare him self neither whole nor partelye, to one of the least
graces of God: so that by those his thoughts, desires, or worckes, he may be
worthy, or have in all or in part deserved that grace.

And moreover I say, that as before his regeneracion he is ungodly and
wicked, even so is sin al his thoughts, desires, and works and this is,
because that while he is carnal, being the servant of sin and
concupissence which reigns in him, he is dead to God, and alive to him
self, he nether does work nor can work, to the glory of god as he is
bound, for want of ye lively light of him, but being as he is carnal and in his
own love he is moved to work, only for his own intereste, he sins then,
not for doing almost and like worckes, but for that he does them not for the
glory of God. And although the ungodly abstain some times from robbinge and
killinge, with such like wicked iniquities, yet always he sins (although
not so much) not in absteining, but that he absteineth not for the love of God
as he is bound to do, but for his own proper account intereste and utility.
And so is it true in carnal man, while he is carnal, sin does ever reign,
Romans viii. Roma. ix. Romans vii.
for that he ca^ not but sin, yea and ever does sin continuallye, because
that although he abstain from homicide, theft and committing such like
iniquities, nevertheless he sins ever continually, in leaving behind him
the love of God with all his heart, as he ought to love his neighbor as him
self, to work for the health of his neighbor, and the glory of God, as he
is bound, absteininge for his honor from all sin. Their sins are then
innumerable, and yet they think in confession to number them al being then
all the worckes of the carnal, sin and worthy of punishmente: see how they
can by any means be worthi to be rewarded, and how they may be true
preparacions, or disposicions to grace? Therefore as a dead man can not raise
him self, or work toward his resurrection, nor he that is not, work to his
creation, so the carnal man, that in Adam is dead, Ephe. ii. Roma. iiii
and as though he were not can not work toward his regeneracio^ and
creation, yea even as a humane body without the soul can not move but
downewarde, so the dead soul without the spirit and Christ, his life, can
not lift him self up, but must of necessity descend ever down, in
regardinge his own intereste. Ihon. iii.
Therefore he ca^ not but sin, he must be borne again to do works spiritual
and holy, and by our selves we can not be regenerate by no means, for it is
only the work of God. It is nedeful then that God creatinge in us a clean
heart do give us a new heart, Psalm. i.
as David did pray and God did promise by his prophets with out me, says
Christ, ye can do nothing, that is spiritual, holy and grateful to God.
Christ then is wholye our righteousness, and this is the more rich noble and
happi righteousness, the^ if we were just by our selves, yea none should be
just, if our justice did in any part depend upon us nor our own glory
excluded, i. Timo. i Romans iiii. Deute. viii.
as Paul and Moses wylleth it to be. There are many that think that as men
chose to serve a Prince, so we chose to serve god, but he him self in the
contrary, where he said, you have not chosen me, but I you. Likewise they
think, as they that best serve obtein most favor of their lord, and those
that have lost it, the more they humble them selves, the sooner they recover
it: so they think of us with god. Thus they build their good life, Gala. v.
not upon Christ, but on them selves, and fall from the divine grace. And
also it is clean contrary: for not for that we repent, humble us, and do good
worckes, therefore he gives us his grace: but because he gives us his grace,
therefore we do worckes that are holy. So that, not for that the good thyefe
upon the cross did confess Christ, therefore he did illuminate him, but for
that Christ did illuminate and touch his heart, therefore he did confess him:
and the like happens of all us.

And what good work did Paul when Christ converted him? He was most stronglye
against his honor, even as we were before he called us. These that are not
regenerate, be with Saint Peter in a darcke prison, bound with many
cheynes, in the power of the Devil, a sleep in sin, and will thou that they
be saved by them selves? No, the Lord him self must needs awake him, the
evil tree can not bring forth good fruit, as Christ said, Math. vii.
no more can the ungodly good worckes. Before we are by Christ regenerate,
we are flesh, and that which spryngeth of the flesh, is flesh. Iho. iii.
Therefore can we do no spiritual worckes, yea even as Paul says, all the
effects and desires of the flesh are death, unclean are all our worckes
which proceed of our corrupt nature, and finally he that is not with Christ,
is against him.

God at the beginnynge made man free, but in sinninge he was made in such
sort the servant of sin, yt not only he can not, neither in all nor in
part, merit before god any grace, but he can not in his light do otherwise
but sin: yet not for this he should leave to hear the word of God, to pray,
to take counsel, to seek to be corrected, to do alms and like work, not
for that he does deserve grace but punyshemente, even as he that by force is
compelled to humble him self, and axe pardon of his enemy, for that feigned
humilitye, he meritethe not to be pardoned, but should merit so much the
more to be punished, as that, having vniustli offended him, he ought with his
heart, to have humbled him, and asked pardon, and has not done it. Now so the
ungodly, in askinge mercy of God, does sin, for he that asks not for his
glory as he is bound, but for his own gain, nor therefore he ought to cease
from asking help of God, for that he sins not in prayinge but for the not
prayinge in spirit, for the glory of God, and with all due circumstances in
that case he did partlye obey God, for if he did not pray he should sin much
more greuouslye. The Zamaritane not only deserved not to have grace of
Christ, for asking him water, but for that her demand, she deserved to be
punished, because she did it not in faith, and to the glory of God.

Nevertheless Christ would that she should ask, and that it should pass by
those means. Now so he will that sinners ask grace, and do those worckes that
he has commanded them, albe it they do them not to the glory of god, being
blind to divine things, yea darckenes it self, Ihon. x. Ioh. viii.
as writes saint Ihon. But after the sinners are regenerat by christ then as
children of god, they are free, and not the servants of the deuell nor of
sin because that although in them remains the concupiscence of sin,
nevertheless thy do not consent to it, they obey not unto it. Roma. vii.
It does not reign in them: but they have so much light of god, and so much
spirit (which helps their infirmity) that they are stirred to the glory of
god, Romans vi.
though not wholly as they would, for because of the repugnaunte flesh.
Therefore said Paul, I do not ye good that I would do, Romans vii Psalm. xxxi.
Roma. viii.
but the evil that I would not. But such defectes are not imputed to them,
for that they are by faith graffed in Christ. The regenerate by Christ are
prone and ready to the good, god has illustrate their mind and toutched
their heart, in such manner that with all their soul, voluntarely freely, and
gladly, they do holy worckes, to the glory of god, so that as god counseled
the souls of them that did elect David to content the^ selves in their heart
to have him for their king, so he month the heart of the regenerate,
wyllinglye to have god for their god, to commit them to his governance, and to
delight to be governed of him, with honoringe him as a celestial father. So
the^ as the sons of Adam, before they be regenerate, are the servants of
sin, for that they ca^ not but sin, and therefore because they can not
work, will, desire, nor stir in any way to the glory of god, as they are
holden, but only for their carnal commodity, by ye which al men not
regenerate, are called flesh, not only the body, but the soul, the will,
desires and thoughts, with all the rest, so after that they are regenerate,
they be fre from sin, (for that they can work to the glory of god) and are
servants of ryghteousnes. Therefore although, as concerning the substance and
being of the body and of the soul, they remain the same: nevertheless, where
before they were called fleshly men, and flesh, for that they sought not but
their own proper things, afterward they are called spiritual men and
spirit, in as much as they seek the glory of God, the which they may do, for
that God has given them by mere grace lively light and spiritual feling, and
knowledge of his goodness, yea duringe in them that perfect light, not only they
are fre from sin, for that they be able not to sin, but also they can not
sin, for that they ca^ not but love god and work to his glory.

And this is the perfect liberty, the being fre from the power to sin,
and being not of power to sin, is not to sin. Otherwise, neither the
saints that are in the other life, nor the Angels should be perfectly fre,
neither Christ nor god, for they ca^ not sin. It is very true this, yt god
some time does let his elect and holy men fall, withdrawing his divine light
for a time (yet for their benefits) therefore we are not absolutely and wholly
fre from the power to sin, as we shall be in the life to come, but they are
fre from power to sin with this co^dicio^, during in the^ the lively and
actual light of god. So then as the carnal, before their regeneracion are in
such sort the servants of sin, that they ca^ not but sin, not therefore
absolutelye and without condition, but so long as they have not the holy light
of god, so the regenerate are in like manner fre from sin that they ca^ not
sin, yea they can not chose but work well, yet not absolutely, but during in
the^ that lively and actual light of god. And with all this, neither the will of
the flesh is viole^ted to will euel, nor the will of the spirit to will well. And
this is, for that the will ca^ not work, but of will (therefore wyllingly) but if
it were possible that of any outward power it were forced the^ by that
violence, it should work not voluntarilye. And on the other side, it should
work willingly for yt it could not work but of the same will yt it is:
therefore it should work unwillingly and willingly the which in a manner is
impossible, and implies co^tradictio^ and gainsaiyng. So the^ as if one being
a sleep were thrown done from a high place, and in the fallinge should
awake, perceyuinge his fall, should wyllingly content him self, and have
pleasure so to fall done to the botome, when he were at the ground, he were
well worthy to have shame and punishment, not for that he might in his fall
withhold him self, for it was not in his choice nor liberty, but for that he
did so delight and content him self with that fall, with his full will, and would
it with the heart, in such sort, that al beit he might have had the power to
restrain that fall, he would not have done it. Even so the like becomes of all the children of Adam, that being fallen in him, although when they come to ye
years of discression, and begin to discern the good from the euel, they
perceive the sins that they do, every way they do the^ volu^tarilye,
delighting therein, so that although they be not of power, not to do the^, they are nevertheless worthy of ponishme^t, for yt they in sort commit them
wyllingly, that if they had power not to do them, yet every way they would do
them, being their will so malignau^te, as it is. Their will then is not
violented or forced to do euel of any outward power, but of his own proper and
entiere or inward malice: And so the other party, the regenerate by the
gladsome, entier, liuelye, and enflamed light that they have of the bou^ty of
god, they are forced to eleuate the^ selves, with an amorous violence (Therefore
volu^tarily, and with perfect liberti) to god, to whom for ever be all laud,
honor, and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Of the effects wrought by the spirit of god when it entreche in to the
soul: the.xiiii. Sermon
EVen as Christ entering into the holy city of Jerusalem, Math. xxi
the whole city was moved, so moves the city of the soul when Christ
enters therein, specially, sense from that as from a fort and strong
municioned rock he has the great devil to chase away. And if in ye lunatike
son, Luke. xi. Luke. ix
there was a great co^mocion, when Christ out of his body would have drawn the
malignau^t spirit that had possessed him: think what co^mocion there is, when
he chaseth him from the soul, in the which he dwells more willyngly. And
know, that it makes a co^mocion not only outward in ceremonies, as do
commonly ye false christianes when it is nere Easter, but there is a co^mocion
within the very bowels of the soul, and inward part of the heart, there is
nothing that so ca^ perce the soul, as does the spirit of god, when it
enters into it by special slidinge. Not only it spoileth us of the old Adam
with his concupiscence, and does cloth us with Christ, Roma. xlii. Ihon. iii.
with all his virtues, but also makes us to be borne a new, that as if a poor
man were suddenly made an Emperor, he should be wholly changed, so he that of
a vile sinner, is made the son of God chau^geth thoughts, effects, desires,
and will, changes frenshipes, practices, words, works, and life, and of
human, beastly, carnal, earth, and deuelishe: he becomes heavenly,
spiritual, angelical, and divine as did Paul, goinge to Damasco, when Christ
did enter his heart. Acts. ix Psalm. lxxvi. i. Reg. xi. Math. xii.
There was a mutacion, from the right hand of God. When the spirit of the
Lord enters in a person, he is changed into another man, for that dieng to
the world, he begins to live to him self. And if when Christ did enter in
to the temple he purged it from those that bought and sold, think if when he
enters into the spiritual temple, he cleanses it from every uncleanness of
sin, Romans viii
there restith not in it any thing of dampnacion, he heals it most
perfectlye, so that if the unclean woman was healed, at the touch of the
hemme of Christ's garment, you may think what it is when Christ in spirit
entering in to the soul, and the person with lively faith, imbraceth him wholly
for his. Also as when the son beams enter into thy house, thou perceiuist in
the air, eue^ to the smalest mote which you could not se before, so when in
the soul do enter the beams of light of the divine grace, the sins are
perceived in more clear manner. Luke. xv.
Yea, as the prodigal son never knew nor perceived truly his own error, til
with such pity he was embraced of his father, and had proof how great was the
fatherly goodness and charity which he had offended: so the sinner when he
conuerteth and begins with the spirit to taste the divine goodness, he
begins also to know his malice, pride, and ingratitude with the rest his
unlawful sins. Luke. xvi.
He restores with Zacheus that which is not his, if Christ enter into his house
and dispenses the superfluous things, yea being rich with the treasures of
Christ, he leaves al with unmeasurable love. He can not participate or take
part of the bounty of god that does not communicate and distribute to others.
The liuelye flame must needs break forth, Iho. vii.
or else being smoudered it que^cheth and the fou^taines yt co^tinuallye
receive running water must of force ouerflow: so they that have in the^ ye holy
ghost, Roma. viii.
by yt testimony whereof they are sure to be the sons of god, have
continually one such and so entire, sincere, and pure gladness (which grows
of the lively knowledge yt they have of the great goodness of god) yt they ca^
not express it, i. Pet. i.
nor they cannot co^prehe^d the^ selfs. Therefore not being able to with hold
the^ selves, they spring and leap for joy with Ihon Baptist, Luke. i.
with his mother they make exclamacio^, Exo. iiii. Act. iiii. Math. vii.
and as to Zachary, so are their to^ges losed: so yt although in praising of
god they perceive with Moses that they sta^mer and are of an unlearned tongue,
nevertheless with the Apostels, Math. vii.
they can not keep scilence of that which they have heard, seen, and felt, with
the spieite, they must needs speak by the superabundau^ce of love, that they
have, Ihon. iiii
they desire with the woman of Samarye, that every one should taste that which
they them selves have had experience of. And although for preaching the gospel
they be persecuted, for all that they do not desiste and leave of, but
triumphing in all, they persevere and go forth even to the death, Roma. v.
they feel in such sort in the heart the charity of god, ^cte. v.
that not only it is sweet to them to suffer for his love, but with the
apostels they rejoice therein. And for that they participate of that great
charity of Christ, by being his members. Therefore with him they pardon al
men, being ready to shed their blood and put their life for their enemies, and
with Paul also to be accursed from Christ. Roma. ix. Act. vii.
And this, because that as to Steven, so the heavens are opened to them, in
such sort, that in spirit with clear and supernatural light of faith, they
see the glory of god, in having given his only begotten and dearly beloved
son for them upon the cross, they rest also quiet as the ship when Christ
entered into it, they have the peace of conscience, knowing with certain faith,
Mat. vi Roma. v.
that god by Christ and by his mercy, has pardoned them. They have also
quietness of mind, in such manner, that though they were in all the perils and
necessities of the world, yet always aprouing for just, the judgments of
god, knowing that he is their only father, that he has most singular cure of
them, and that every thing serves them to salvation, they stand most suerly,
quiet, in peace, and tra^quillitie. These such for that they walk according
to the vocacion of god, have honor of every enterprise that they take in hand,
they can not be let or resisted, no more the^ god. Yea it is force that
every one fear them, as Herod feared Saint Iho^ Baptiste, Gene. xxi. Gene.
xxvi.
for that he had in him the spirit of the Lord, and as Abimelech did Abraham
and Isaac. They are daily more firm and stablyshed in good purposes to do
ever better, being lyfted up continually to a greater perfeccion with Paul,
although their mind be conuersaunt in heaven, nevertheless, descending by
christian pity, i Cor i.
to feel the miseries of their brethern, they labor also to draw them to
Christ, and move the^ to have the spirit, and to be in verity Christianes,
and not I pocrites. As ye very grape does move the birds to taste thereof, and
not the pytfal. And finally, although with the Apostelles, they ever remain
with Christ and with the Cananite, Ihon. vi. Math. vii.
which would not depart for his ungentle words, nevertheless they are promte
and ready for his honor and glory, to leave with the Samaritane his sweet
presence.

And what is more to be said when the spirit of God does enter in to a
soul, he suffers it not to sleep, Ioh. iiii.
nor stand in idleness, but makes it work things merueylous and
inexplicable, for the love of God: to whom be ever all laud, honor and
glory by Jesus Christ our Lord Ame^.

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate, and Wylliam Seres,
dwelling in Peter College.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


