THE Lamentation of Troy, for the death of Hector.

Whereunto is annexed an Old woman's Tale in her solitary Cell.

Omne gerendum leave est.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Short for William Mattes. 1594

To the Right Honorable Sir Peregrin Bartue knight, Lord of Willoughby and
Earsby, al increase of Honor and true happiness.
I Have presumed (Right honorable) upon these three reasons to present this
unworthy pamphlet unto your honors courteous view, and favorable protection.
The first is from your own noble worthiness, for that you are, and are so
thought, the only Hector of Albion: and therefore most worthy to protect
Hector. The second, for that it was the will and desire of the Ghost, of the
woeful Ghost of Ilion: that in her tears you might behold the sorrows of your
own country whenever injurious fates should cause you miscarrie. The third
and last is (my good Lord) mine own private affection, wherein I have long
honored you, and having no place to make it known, have long desired to find
some opportunity to show the same. I hope your Lordship will pardon me, for
that affection is a most venial offense. And if herein I do not honor your
Lordship so much as you are worthy, and I earnestly wish, yet please it you to
favor and pardon this first, and as time and years shall enable me with a
more experienced judgment and knowledge, I will study and endeavor that,
which shall be more worthy your honors favorable protection. Please it you
accept, and I am graced, and my labor richly rewarded. I cease to trouble your
Lordship further at this time, I vow my self to your Lordships service, and so
most humbly take my leave.

Your Honors humbly at command, I. O.

The Prologue.
WHilom to him (whom Morpheus God of sleep,
Made slumbring dreams his senses al to keep,
Locked in the prison of the dark some night,
When ears were deaf and eyes could see no light,
When men are made the lively form of death,
Save only that they softly draw a breath)
Did come a Ghost, a ghost most ghastly crying,
Help me to death that have so long been dying.
With that he wakened and with fear beholding,
Saw her lament, her arms together folding,
A pale-wan thing, and yet with wounds fresh bleeding
Sodden in tears, in tears that were exceeding.
He much afright began to shrink for fear,
She bad him fear not, but my story hear,
I am Troys ghost that now appears to thee,
And well I know that thou have heard of me.
But now I come not what I was to tell,
For what I was (alas) each one knows well.
I come to thee to crave thy gentle aid,
To further her that has so long been staide
From blissful rest: because I have not told
My woes for Hector which I must unfold,
But that (alas) am I not able ever,
To show alone without the kind endeavor
Of some good wight, that can bewail with me,
And tell my tale while I shall weeping be.
The churlish Charon thwarts my passage over
Saying my soul shall never bliss recover,
Till I have done this weary task imposed,
Never my ghost shall be in rest reposed.
O help me then to tell my doleful story,
That I at last may cease to be so sorry.
First will I speak, and to the world declare
For Hectors death mine everlasting care,
So long, til tears do stop my faltring tongue,
And when I cease I pray thee tell along.
He then accorded to her pitteous suit
Granting to speak when tears did make her mute,
So that she would lay open to his eyes
The cause and manner of her woeful cries.
Then forth with causde she unto him appear
The form of Troy, the persons that were there
Chiefest mourners for worthy Hectors death
As they then wailde when fates new stopped his breath.
He then emboldende stoutly veiwd them all,
And tells her tale, when she from speech does fall.
Writing their words unto the world to show them
It was her will that he might so renew them.
Yet had she rather Spencer would have told them,
For him she calde that he would help t'vnfold them.
But when she saw he came not at her call
She kept her first man that does show them all
All that he could: but all can no man show,
But first she spoke as after does ensew.
Troys Lamentation for the death of Hector.
LO here the tears and sad complaint of her
Within whose gates all joys were once abounding,
Fair Ilions tears whose deep laments may stir
A flintie heart unto a sigh-resounding
Yet for her self does Ilion not moan,
But for her Hector which is dead and gone.
Sweet sacred Muses, you whose gentle ears
Are wont to listen to the humble prayer
Of plaining Poets, and to lend your tears
From your fair eyes unto a woes-displayer,
Now rest your selves: your aid I not implore,
For in my self I find abundant store.
Nor can I crave upon your blubbered cheeks
That you for me more showers should be raining,
Though you are kind to every one that seeks
Yet have you matter for your own complaining.
I saw your tears and pitiful wamentings:
But they are few that list to your lamentings.
Good naturde Nymphs you are too mild for me,
Troy tells of horror and of driery things,
Let your fair aid in Love and Music be,
Or in his tongue which pleasant Poems sings.
Furies and Frensies are fit company
To help to blase my woeful tragedy.
The damned Souls that live in lasting pain,
Whose endless torments force them to be yelling
Sounds ever balefull, and whose bane again
Is, that in torture they are ever dwelling:
Their sighs and shrikes accompany full well,
My trembling tongue this grievous tale to tell.
Snake-wreath'd Alecto and Megaera railing,
Howling Tisiphon evermore lamenting
With all that ugly is, or else still wailing,
Their cursed haps: and are deep hell frequenting:
Such as breath sulphur in eternal groaning,
They are companions fitting to my moning.
Stone rolling Sisiphus in his weary task,
And thirsty Tantalus in his river biding,
And woeful Yxyon, al these might I ask,
To be with shrikes my drery pen a guiding.
But I my self suffice without assistance,
If souls effusion be sufficient greeuance.
Hector thou know or else thy soul does know
For thou alas art Hector now no more,
Have Troy ten thousand souls she will bestow
Them all on thee, and power them out before
The throne of Jove for mercy ever calling,
For (ah) thy ruin was our utter falling.
But why (alas) must thou needs die so soon,
Troys cheefe-supporter, and the worlds great-wonder?
O let the man that thee to death has done,
From deaths fell torments near be seen asunder.
O let him ever die, yet not be slain,
But when he would be dead, revive again.
Heap on him torments, and ore-whelme with woes,
Hels Queen Proserpina this I beg of thee,
And if there be some wights thou countst thy foes,
O with those plagude ones let him placed be:
Or if there be a place that's worse than hell,
Grant me this boon, that he may in it dwell.
I speak not (Princess) of a shallow grief:
His damned stroke has pierst even to my soul
And at thy hands I humbly crave relief,
That as I mourn: so he may ever houle
Of thee I beg, because thou art a Queen,
And Women's mercy more then men's is seen.
Or if the Grim-god Pluto thy black Lord,
Do hold thee straight and give thee no such power:
Yet to his grisly-hood speak a gentle word,
Your sex has ever one persuading hour,
Wherein they wish their husbands to their will,
O pray him then that he torment Achill.
Foul helborne-monster sent upon the earth,
By froward anger and untoward will:
Only to work poor Troy and Ilions death,
which then thou wroughtst when thou did Hector kill:
But thou art cursed and damned for that deed,
And for thy sake accursed is all thy seed.
How could thy heart consent to heave thy hand,
Against him whose body was as then unarmed?
That worthy man the flower of all the land,
Which never any but with honor harmed.
How could thou then so cowardly him tuch?
But thou did fear: his valor was so much.
Like as a Bear that hungry is of pray,
Yet dares not buckle with a bigger beast:
Does watch occasion and his time does stay,
Till sure advantage bids him to a feast,
And then deuouers and tears all that he can:
So did thou wait to spoil this worthy man.
But thou art spoyld and he still worthy is,
Thy honor lost but his for ever biding:
Nor breaths the wight that speaks of him amiss,
All men all glory are to him ascribing.
And when you both are named it is this men say,
Achilles basely did brave Hector slay.
Why then sweet Homer did thy pen miscarry
That writes such wonders in Achilles name?
Thou madst his praise amongst the stars to tarry,
And in the skies thou regestred his fame
He were immortal by thy Angels tongue,
But that herein thou do a double wrong.
Wrong unto him that nere deserved so,
Wrong to thy self in flattering him too much:
Thou made his worth both men and gods to know,
And heavens can tell the cause was never such.
What worthy mind by treason would asaile?
When as he knew that valor might prevail.
Hector had hurt him hand to hand before.
I, Then he knew his power and his force,
Which ever after like a greedy bore
Made him to seek his life for to divorce
From that fair temple wherein it was well placed,
Who never ceased till it was out raced.
Then why did Homer Laureat of his time,
Consume the sweet of his mellifluous tongue
In honey lines, and from his golden chime
Chaunt forth in music a mellodious song
To sweeten him, that men should with delight
For ever read his praises day and night?
But it was the larges of his liberal hand,
Which makes some Poets pipe as they will dance,
At whose devotion their good wits do stand,
Waiting and pressed their honors to advance.
But Homer thou that could immorrall men,
Should not be thought to have a flattering pen.
No no it was thy kindness that did give
Thy countryman the glory of thy wit:
Nor can I think that thou by him did live,
But thou were feign in him to blason it;
Had Hestor been a Grecian borne I know,
Achilles name had nere been honored so.
There had been matter for thy heavenly verse,
A golden subject for thy Silver tongue:
His glorious acts were worthy to rehearse
And had sweet Homer of brave Hector song
Unto thy self such honor had it be
As for Achilles to be sung of thee.
There was the true looking-glas of honor,
In which together did all virtue stay
The worlds wonder for a worthy warrior,
A man most rare accomplished every way:
And to say truth of such exceeding fame,
That none but Homer can declare the same.
O then good Spencer the only Homer living,
Deign for to write with thy fame-quikninge quill:
And though poor Troy due thanks can not be giving,
The Gods are just and they that give them will.
Write then O Spencer in thy Muse so trim,
That he in thee and thou may live in him.
Although thou live in thy Belphaebe fair,
And in thy Cynthia likely art to shine,
So long as Cynthia shines in the air:
Yet live and shine in this same Sun of mine.
O live in him that whilom was my Sun,
But now his light and so my life is done.
With that she wept and that so piteously,
As she had been dissolved all to tears:
Throbbing forth sighs shriking so hideously,
As one that inly endless torments bear?
But ore a while: for every thing must stay,
She ceast her plainte and began agine thus say.
O tell my griefs, and to this world them sound
As I in sighs do send them forth to thee:
Was never dole so driery to be found,
As is the dolor that is now in me.
Tell how I dround in tears, in scalt-sighs burn,
And while thou sighest I will sit and mourn.
View but my looks and thou shall feeling write
My troubled spirit, and how it sighs with groans,
And still regard mine eyes that want their light,
Blinded with tears that issue from my mones,
And here, O here, behold dead Hector shoken,
And thou shall speak as if my self had spoken.
Then did she show me Hector where he lay,
Pointing her finger, holding back her head,
Scarce had she power, Lo here he is, to say,
It was such death to see her Hector dead.
There did I see the king, the Queen, all Troy
In mourning weeds, bewailing their annoy.
Olde-aged Priam kneeling ore the corse,
Priam
With trickling tears distilling from his eyes:
Looks upon him with a deep remorse,
And heavy cheer does view him as he lies,
His lukewarm drops fall down on Hectors face,
He wipes them still, and still they fall apace.
Passion be-duls him that he cannot speak,
Groaning he sits, and shaking of his head,
And then he sobs as if his heart would break,
That of his death too, they are all afraid.
Only he cried, O my son, my son,
But speech did fail him, yer it was begun.
One while he beats his sigh-swolne breast and cries,
But then a manly courage stays his crying
From being heard: and then he lifts his eyes
Up to the heavens, his fingers jointly tying.
"But mores his fire the more he chokes his fumes,
"For inward grief pent in the heart consumes.
Thus did the olde-man in his mellowed years,
Bewail the wind-fall of his fruit unripe,
His silver beard he pearled all with tears,
Which faster fell then he (good man) could wipe.
Nothing he said, but O my son, my son,
His breath still stopping ere he half had done.
The good king David never wailed so,
And yet he wailde for Absolon his son
With floods of tears which storms of sighs did blow,
As has this Priam for his Hector done.
"Death of a private son does grieve one sore,
But loss of such a one gals ten times more.
The godly Patriarch Abraham did grieve,
In sacrifice to offer up his son:
Unto I am and but he did believe,
His flesh and blood would such a murder shun.
If flesh and blood to loose a son be loath,
Then needs must Priam who was merely both.
Great was the gall unto Harpagus heart,
When king Astiages gave to him his son:
Whom he had slain before (O cruel part)
Then gave his father him to banquet on.
But this, nor those were half so much as his,
For Priam lost the pillar of his bliss.
Alas good king) that thou whose hap was such,
As never any might compared be,
That Fortune now at thy good hap should grutch,
Alas (I say) that thou should live to see
The Wheel so turn even now to vieu thy fall,
Who were but even now on the top of all.
Next him sat wailing in most pitious wise,
Hectors fair mother Hecuba the Queen: Hecuba.

Her outward looks her inward smart descries,
And by her sighing was her sorrow seen.
A mothers love unto her child exceedes,
And death of him her endless torment breeds.
Aye me (she cries) as women wont to do,
That ere I did conceive thee in my womb:
Thy life was mine, thy death is now my woe,
Aye that my belly had been still thy tomb.
Rather I had I never had thee borne,
Then thus in thee to see all Troy forlorn.
When I thy brother Paris did conceive,
I dreamt my womb was all on burning fire:
And true it was, he does me not deceive,
I fear we burn all by his hot desire.
Yet had thou lived thy self had been a spring,
To quench these flames that now are kindleing.
For when I bred thee (few do know so much)
I dreamt a Sea was in my body flowing,
And that the rage of Aeolus was such,
That blasts of wind the waves thereof were blowing.
I told it none: so was the sense nere found,
But now I both do find and feel the ground.
These Seas of tears which here about thee flow,
Are those same seas which I supposde to be
These storms of sighs, the winds with them did blow,
Thus is my vision verified in thee.
Hecuba queen of sad Seas.
Now that a sign of these Seas may be seen,
I will be called of sad seas the Queen.
The Troyan Queen is Hecuba no more,
Aye me, me thinks I see it now decaying:
Hector is dead: the Greeks do dance therefore,
And they give thanks while we for aid are praying.
Frown not O Neptune that I am Queen of Seas,
For Queen on earth great Jove it does not please.
With that she weeping tore her hair and said:
See, see, they come to take away my crown,
Like one half frantike, or with fear dismaide,
Look, look she cries they are burning of the town.
O Hector help us, she alowd him calls,
He cannot hear her, she to weeping falls.
Elkanah thy Hannah never sight so sore,
Nor begd with tears that she by thee might bear
A son: although she powered out before
Her makers throne, her soul who did her hear.
With tithe of tears I say did she not crave him,
As loss of hirs she mournd yet could not save him.
Thomyris thy tears for Spargapises slain
By Cyrus hand the butcher of thy son:
Were not a few which from thy cloudie brain,
Thou did let fall to hear what he had done.
But (O) the drops which Hecuba did shoure,
For thee to shed was never in thy power.
She lost her stay, her pillar, and a son,
Thou lost a son but neither stay nor pillar:
In Hectors death, Hecubaes life was done,
Thou had the head of Spargapises killer,
And victresse were living in joy long after:
She ever mournde and never moved laughter.
Thus sat the mother of that worthy man,
Weeping upon him in abundant rain:
Clasping his body strongly as she can
Into her arms, and then she weeps again.
Hugging him hard as though she would then take him
Into the place where great Jove first did make him.
By her I saw a goodly Lady bright,
A stately dame as one shall lightly see,
But that some drooping clouds then dimnd her sight:
I asked Troys ghost, what might that Lady be:
This is (quoth she) Andromache his wife, Andromache

Whom she did love more dearly then her life.
She wept and wailde and wroong her hands, and tare
Her clothes, her hair, her flesh from off her face.
A babie too within her arms she bare,
Aye me, me thought it was a pitious case,
To see the babe upon her breast to lie,
And both to weep, the child not knowing why.
O hear my Lord, O hear thy handmaid speak,
I am Andromache thy loving wife:
Through thy dead senses let my words now break
Thou that refusde to hear me in thy life.
Ah had thou listened when thou living were,
This grief had never come so nigh my heart.
Thou madste no reckoning of my vision strange,
"Brave men are wont to be too credulous:
My dream did tell me that thy life must change
If thou this day with Greeks were venturous.
I told it thee: But Women's words are toys
When men most wilful seek their own annoies.
I told the King our Father and the Queen,
We all did pray thee: All could not prevail:
For valiant men will have their valor seen.
Hector that day must needs the Greeks assail,
That day? that one day could thou not forbear?
But men resolved persuasions will nor hear.
Then floods of tears ran down her crystal cheeks,
Like streams that follow along the silver sands:
A troubled soul in tears her comfort seeks,
(O heavy comfort that in mourning stands)
Yet woman say in weeping there is glory,
Which mede this Lady so exceeding sorry.
The sweet young Infant that lay all this while,
Upon the Downe-bed of his mothers breast:
One while would cry, another while did smile,
Alas it knew no cause of such unrest,
Unless that this did make the babie weep,
To hear what howling they about him keep.
Sometimes it would the tender hand up lay,
And spread the fingers on the mothers face:
Stroking her cheeks as Infantes use to play,
But she that now for sporting had no place,
Weeping did wet the child as it did lie,
With brinish tears which made the babe to cry.
Then with a napkin does she dry his face.
Peace, peace (sweet heart) thus she her yonglinge stills:
He to his plaieng falls again apace,
She with her tears again his bosom filles.
And with her sobs she beats him as he lies,
That now the child with ceaseles shriking cries.
Alack the torments that she now endueres,
The cruel plunges in her heart so sore:
Her husbands death her endless woe insures,
The childs fell crieng makes her torments more.
Thus she (sweet Lady) is of all accursed,
Who sittes and sighs as if her heart should burst.
The faithful Porcia never sorrowed so,
Although her self for Brutus she did kill:
The loving Phillis never felt the woe,
Though for Demophoon she her self did spill.
As did Andromach for her Hector slain,
Their Death cut off: her life prolonges her pain.
Panthea deplord Abradatas his death,
With gaulling grief and bitter percing stings:
But yet her sorrow made her stop her breath,
Thus death a period to her tormente brings.
But this sweet Lady woe has so possessed,
That she must live and death may give no rest.
No present rest and so no rest at all,
Death when he came (he came) but came too late:
Sorrow before had wroght her utter fall,
Thus had she cause both death and life to hate.
Death that did stay and do her so much wrong,
To linger life that lived in death so long.
By her Cassandra with her lolling locks, Cassandra

Dissheuerd all upon her shoulders lieng:
With heavy chere her thought-sore breast she knocks,
So hard as Echo is again replieng
A dolfull thump: the Temple so did sound,
And thus she waits her brother in that stound.
Ay me she cries, I knew this long before,
That Paris fire must have a sea to quench it:
And now I fear the flames will burn so sore,
As we in time shall never live to stanche it.
The only spring wherein the virtue lay,
To slake the fire is dride and dead this day.
O Hector thou that were our spring of life,
Thy death is now the cause of many a spring:
Fountains do flow in every corner rife,
Of blubering tears there is now no other thing
In Troy but tears since Hector did depart,
For (ah) thy death has causd our endless smart.
Quanta per has nescis flamma petatur aquas.
I told my brother Paris what would fall,
And that a flame should follow through the seaes
At his return, he gave no heed at all,
But hoisted sail, his fancy he would please
He burnt with love, and we shall burn by love,
As by thy death I fear poor Troy shall prove.
Yet had thou liu`d, (alas what booteth had?)
Thou do not live, and therefore dies my soul:
Yet while I live in sable garments clad,
For thee (my brother) will I sit and howl.
And now I come to bear them company,
Who went before in this thy tragedy.
Then sat she down hard by her Sisters side,
Andromache that did with tears brine,
The margin fill of Hectors wound so wide,
By trickling drops distilling from her eien.
There did she weep with, her the King and Queen,
And next to mourn came in fair Pollicene,
Pollixina.
Alas that virgins should be so distract,
To spoil sweet faces that are made so pleasing,
She tore her golden hair (O rufull act),
And on her forhead was her nails a seazing.
The blood ran down and tears ore-tooke the same,
And both gusht afresh when she did Hector name.
Her tender limbs did tremble as she stood,
As did Diana when the huntseman spide her:
Unlucky huntseman ranginge in the wood,
She being naked having naught to hide her.
Thus did she quake, such is a virgins fear,
To se him dead whom she did hold so dear.
Shriking she cries alas what shall I do?
Hector is dead that was our only stay:
Troy shall be burnt, and I deflowred to,
The angry Gods conclude our wrack this day.
For in the stopping of this one man's breath,
They plainly show they minace Ilions death.
Yet gentle Gods vouchsafe a virgins prayer,
Through Cristall skies to pierce your sacred ears:
O hear my voice, my voice my harts-bewraier,
My heart and voice that are be-duld with tears.
O hear, now hear a pure virgins mones,
If ever Gods did hear a virgins groans.
Here have we Temples builded to your names,
And with devotion we do them adore:
Our Altars smoke with sweet perfumed flames,
And on our knees your graces we implore.
Why are you angry then O Gods with us,
That in all duty reverence you thus?
But Reason must not reason with the Gods,
It is their will, what will then dare say nay?
They will the Greeks and Troyans be at ods,
Until poor Troy be brought unto decay.
Our incense stinks, our sacrifice displease,
No offering may their kindled ire appease.
Hector is dead in whom they did delight,
Hector our sacrifice and incense sweet,
Who while he lived, we trusted in his might:
The Gods still laid the Grecians at his feet.
Til that their wrath was kindled over Troy,
And then displeasde they took from us our joy.
O send him back fair heau`ns for our defense,
If that the Gods will part with such a treasure:
But (ah) my prayer may breed more offense,
O keep him then, I know it is your pleasure.
This is the prayer which I humbly crave,
That I be laid a virgin in my grave.
I know the Letcher hopes to have his will,
Now that my honors chiefest guard is gone:
But I with Phillis first my self will kill,
I Will be no pray for him to seaz upon.
He slew my brother, hopes he now of me?
No bloody traitor, that shall never be.
Think thou a Virgins pure affection can,
Admit thee love that passes thorough blood?
Have thou by treason slain so brave a man,
And by that reason hopst thou so much good,
As that my heart will ever yield to thee?
No bloody traitor, it shall never be.
I never yet did stain my spotless heart,
By taking comfort in a strangers death,
And do thou think it were a Sisters part,
To love the man that stopped her brothers breath?
My brother dearer then my life to me,
No bloody traitor, it shall never be.
My hand, this hand which never yet did act,
Where rigor, force, or violence might be found,
Shall rather yield to work a bloody fact,
Which yet attempt my tender heart would swound.
Or in my self or else in murdring thee,
Rather then thou shall ever joy in me.
But yet I know that I am dear to thee,
I and I know that once I loved thee dearly:
But now my heart has quite forgotten thee,
And inlie longs to punish thee severely.
My fervent love shall now he turnde to hate,
And once my will shall work against my fate.
O Hector how shall I lament for thee,
When Women's tears are not sufficient strong:
Let heaven and earth for me avenged be,
While I bewail thee in a sighing song.
I can bewail thee but while life does last,
But if I may, I will, when life is past.
Then with an heavy cheer and downe-cast look,
She sat her down amidst the mourning crew:
And to her tears her self she has betook,
At whose approach the rest do al renew
Their doleful shrikes which stinted not before,
But greater number makes their shriking more.
A loofe from these did stand in sable weeds,
"(For mourning garments fit a mourneful mind)
A man whose heart and very soul now bleedes,
To see that Hector was to death assignde. Paris

And this was Paris brocher of their woe,
But he to Greece by Heavens instinct did go.
Venus commanded, who could her deny?
Had she not given, me thinks a man should crave it:
For such a prize who would not Fortune try,
And venture life, and goods, and al to have it?
Nor fire nor water should his passage stay,
To gain fruition of so sweet a pray.
Yet now he mourns, "for every sweet has sower,
(Alas that pleasure is not ever biding)
But like an herb that buddeth with a shower,
Should with a frost again away be gliding.
Why have the gods Loues-queen immortal made,
And yet her joys like withered grass do fade?
But now he mournes and pleasure must not dure,
Hector is dead: and therefore does it perish,
While Hector liu'de they thought themselves secure,
But since his death none can the Troyans cherish.
Each man can mourn but none can comfort make,
Al Troy does grieve so much for Hectors sake.
Poor Paris he is in a world of woes,
Legions of sorrows do possess his heart:
And as a man al mal-content he goes,
Or like an actor in a tragike part.
In muttering words unto himself he talks,
And then he stands and sighs, and then he walks.
Stopping his pace as does a troubled wight
That goes, then stands, and then turns back again,
Hiding his face he hates to see the light,
For darkness fits a melancholy brain.
Only he will sometime lift up his eyes,
And ghastly look at Hector as he lies.
Thus does he walk like one that is amassed,
Biting his lip impaling so his grief:
For men do scorn to have their sorrows blased,
By shrikes and tears which women gives relief.
"But greatest winds are when there is no rain,
And so in sighs thus Paris does complain.
O heavens (quoth he) why are you so unjust,
To heap on me more woes than I can bear?
Why did you lay my glory in the dust,
And yet torment me with a greater fear.
Did you me up into your bosom take,
To throw me thence into the Stygian lake?
Was Paris borne to be his Countries bane?
Were Goddesses conspiring thereunto?
Did Venus therefore into Greece me train
That I should be the instrument of woe?
Why do the Gods poor Ilions death conspire,
And make men say that I set Troy on fire?
The cause was just that in the Aegaean seas,
I launcht my ship and hoisted sail amain:
Bending for Greece, I did not go to please
Lascivious will as some unjustly feign.
For though that she my heart did nighly tuch,
Yet were there reasons that did move as much.
Proud Telamon borne in Achaia land,
Withheld by force fair Exion mine Aunt:
The pride of whom so nigh our hearts did stand,
That Grecians should in Troyan conquests vaunt.
That sweet Revenge did bid us seek away,
To rid our friend that did in bondage stay.
My father then for her his sister dear,
Did call a counsel craving their advise:
And every one spoke Pro and contra there,
In weighty causes so it is the guise.
Each man to speak what lies in his breast,
And then the king set down what likes him best.
Some led by reason thought it very meet,
(Not every one can future things foresee)
That we should now erect a mighty fleet,
And make for Greece in all the have might be,
Either to lose mine Aunt from out her tether,
Or else to rape some Grecian Lady hither.
Of this advise was that good Deiphobus,
My brother dear and eke a worthy knight:
And unto him assent did Troylus,
For well they knew our valor and our might.
And with their judgments was my liking seen,
Having my lesson taught me by Loues-queene.
Besides, Revenge did hammer in our heads,
And eke a care to ease our fathers woe:
Our might in men, in arms, in stately steeds,
My fathers grief, our right do al say go.
The king himself approou`d our counsel well,
But then some others began him thus to tell.
My Lord (quoth Hector) I, that gals my heart,
My woes redouble when I do him name,
I feel my senses from their subjects part,
And scorching sighs my troubled soul inflame.
O, had his verdict yet been with the rest,
Such storms had never beaten in my breast.
His prudent counsel did dissuade from war,
His courage though did manage still the same,
Twixt Greeks and us there was an ancient iar,
Which every man did with revenge inflame.
But he whose heart was never yet afraid,
In wisdom wished peace, and thus he said.
My Lord (quoth he) and eke my father dear,
Whose sage advise with reverence I do honor:
Please it your grace benignly me to hear,
Speaking by support of your high favor,
And eke to pardon what be said amiss,
Touching the voyage this my judgment is.
I know right well by force of Natures might,
Nothing is sweeter than revenge to man:
When very beasts of wrongs themselves will right,
And render like for like in what they can.
Then needs your heart must for reuengement long,
That have sustainde by Greeks so great a wrong.
But yet you see their power is very great,
(I speak not this for cowardice or dread:
For Gods do know my soul does inlie fret,
Til I may reap the proudest Grecians head.
And in their blood I bathe my thirsty blade,
That's never quenched, so much am I afraid.)
But this I say the Grecian force is great,
Europe and Africa do support their might:
The men are Warlike and they will entreat,
A weaker foe with terms of vile despite.
I wish that therefore you be well advised,
Before your purpose yet be enterprised.
Asia is rich, and we in peace now flourish,
Presume not though on Fortune for a smile:
For though that Troy a troop of Gallants nourish,
And men resolude, yet she may al beguile.
Then trust not her whose truth was never known,
"Better sit still then rise and overthrown.
And yet so great a wrong done in despite,
Cannot be brooked by a noble mind:
Pesants may bear, but Kings must needs requite
Abuses offered, when they do them find,
Wrought in contempt, intended to disgrace,
Whose thoughts are less, deserve a lower place.
But yet (dread sir) forecast what may befall,
Such high matters deep judgment do require:
A sudden blast may overthrow us al,
One little spark may set al Troy on fire.
Respect the end, beginnings often are fair,
And promise much yet issue in despair.
Like to the flattering face of Phoebus bright,
That in the morn his curteine will vnspread:
And grace the earth with shine of glittering light,
Showing the world his beamy-gorgeous head.
Then by and by his glory all will shroud,
Within the compass of a gloomy cloud.
Mine Aunt is dear. The wrong not to be borne,
Her bondage base. Your sorrow full of danger.
Insulting greeks each Trojan heart does scorn,
Yet watch your time wherein to work your anger.
And then power down your wrath in violls full,
And crush the brains of each barbarian scull.
So shall your purpose take his sound effect,
This sudden complot may repentance breed:
Then for your self and countries weal respect,
And of their force and malice take good heed.
Better mine Aunt should yet in bondage tarry,
Then for her sake both you and Troy miscarry.
Thus to your highness have I told my mind,
Wishing too rashly that you not attempt
The spiteful Greeks. Time will occasion find,
Whereby you shall repay their high contempt.
Then shall this hand imbrued in their blood,
Work their decay and do my country good
But if your mighty courage scorn to abide,
From swift revenge impatient of delay:
Then is your state in fortunes balance tried,
And you I fear be found too light to waygh
With massy Greeks. Heavens grant it prove not so
If into Greece my brother Paris go.
With that he ceast. But now he is deceased,
Ah, heauen-borne Hector how shall I lament thee?
For in thy wane my hope of life deceased,
O now till now I never did repent me,
That ere I did this voyage undertake,
Hector it greu`s me only for thy sake.
Of his advise was Helenus my brother,
A man well seen in Circes magic seaes:
And of that counsel was there yet another,
Who Pentheus hight, all these it did not please.
Besides Cassandra which did ghastly cry,
What will you do? alas we all shall die.
My Father yet whom nothing could content,
Till some revenge were had on Ajax pride:
For me his son in secret has he sent,
And for my brother Deiphobus beside.
Giving us charge our ships we ready make,
And sail from Greece reuengement there to take.
Thus did I go commanded by the King,
My quarrel good for to redeem mine Aunt:
Or else from thence some pearl of price to bring,
In lieu of her. This did my Father grant.
Venus besides said to me Paris go,
Who now would think this should have wrought our woe?
But heavens, and Gods, and fates, and all conspirde,
Our utter ruins and great overthrow:
Alas my heart with inward grief is fierd,
Billows of sighs the flames thereof do blow.
My clowdy brain from dropping never cleares,
Thus do I live for thee in sighs and tears.
But now nor sighs nor fear can show my grief,
Hector what shall I therefore do for thee?
Shall I from Laethe borrow some relief?
Or from that woeful wailing Niobe?
That mourned so long till she became a stone,
O no thou gloriest in revenge alone.
Then shall this hand for thee reuengment take,
If thousands souls for thee revenge may be
Upon the Greeks such hauock will I make,
As they shall think that Hector lives in me.
And now to work this barbarous route that trouble,
Me thinks I feel my force and strength redouble.
Champion I am for Venus now no more,
But I am Champion now for Hectors soul:
O help me Mauors I do thee implore,
And in thy Warlike book my name inroule.
Among the Martials favored by thy might,
That I revenge may work in Hectors right.
Now shall my sword plow up the Greekish ground,
Where proudly ietting they trace in and out:
And in the furrows shall their blood abound,
That pitious wights shall ready be to shout.
To see what rivers of their blood shall flow,
And bone-pau`d ways for passengers to go.
Their heads and hearts together will I pile,
Making such heaps as they that see shall wonder:
Their carcases which I do hold so vile,
Shall all in peece-meale there be torn asunder.
And when my weary arm would faint with pain,
I Will think on thee and then begin again.
Thus will I hew a passage through their troops,
Glutting my blade with gobbits of their gore:
Nor will I stint until Achilles droopes,
(Then did he kiss his Curtelax, and swore)
This will I do (O Hector in thy name,
Who had thou lived, would have done the same.
The aged king has taken youthful might,
And Lions courage in his Lambe-like years:
In thy revenge the Troyans vow to fight,
And tear the Greeks like ravenous she-Bears,
Hungry of blood and renting with their paws,
Thus have we vowed revenge in Hectors cause.
This said, he stepped to Hector where he lay,
Kneeling him down amongst the mourneful crew:
His sable weeds I saw him throw away,
But what his meaning was I cannot show.
Unless the Greeks then to assail he meant,
Taking his leave of Hector ere he went.
Next him came in that gallant Grecian dame,
Pride of her Country, mirror of her kind:
Earths only star, from whose fair beams there came,
Helena.
Heat to inflame with love the coldest mind.
Beauties existance, Joy of speculation,
Helens sweet self, a word of admiration.
She wept and wailde and tore her golden hair,
Her dainty tresses far more pure than gold,
Earthes metal is too base to make compare,
With that which thoughts divinely does unfold.
Yet this she tare and threw it from her head,
When she beheld her brother Hector dead.
O now the murder that her hand had wrought,
If with those hairs she should have thrown away
The several hearts that every hair had caught,
O what a murder had she done that day?
Then had her shame been registered in blood,
As now her fame in beauty long has stood.
The silver tears distilling from her eyes,
Run down her cheeks the Rose and Lilly fields:
A sugared stream where thirsty Cupid lies,
And drinks the Nectar that the fountain yields.
Til stormy sighs do make the boy to quake,
And force him thence his winged flight to take.
Thus does she weep and tears abundant shower,
Which blustering winds do drive from off her face:
And then they fall upon that snowie tower
Her neck, and thence into a lower place.
Til at the last they in her bosom rest,
who coucht was there might think that he was blessed.
Such were the tears of Albions Stella fair,
Which in continual raining she did shed:
And such her sighs which Ecchoed in the air,
When she heard say her Astrophil was dead.
Two so sweet creatures never mournde before,
But Helens grief was far exceeding more.
For now she fares like one that frantike is,
She weeps, she sighs, and often does she swound,
If ever Tellus lou`d a creatures kiss,
Now is she proud when Helen kissed the ground.
And when her eyes those Orbs of Troy are closed,
The heavens to rain do show themselves disposed.
The drooping clouds in foggie mists descend,
Troy seems dark so long as she is dead,
And til again her eyes their light do send,
To clear the vapors that are ouerspred,
Continual howling they about her keep,
Whose shrikes awake her from her coathing sleep.
Then she Gradatim heaued up her eyes,
And blood gone back retyrde into her face:
The duskie weather cleared in the skies,
When she gave light unto that gloomie place.
Thus heavens are dark and shine when she is bright,
So she a goddess made both day and night.
Then as her senses did return again,
To that fair subject where they lou`d to tarry:
Speaking like one that had a troubled brain,
Or else whose heart did sundry torments carry.
With halfe-stopt breath she muttred softly saying,
Hector dead, Troy gone, I, I al decaying.
With that she started and began a-fresh,
Renting her garments, throwing forth her breasts:
She proffered violence to her tender flesh,
But fearful hands denide such bold requests.
What violent hand does touch, and yet not wither,
The throne where all the Graces sit together?
Thou cruel Pyrrhus glutton-thirsting blood,
Cursed is thy hand that kilde so fair a maid:
Upon whose forhead beauty craving stood,
And yet thy hand has not from murder staid.
Cursed be thy sire, thy self to death be done,
Ye kilde a king, a Virgin, and his son.
Then did she go to Hector where he lay,
Weeping upon him in excessive rain:
And with her angels voice she began to say,
Hector, sweet Hector O revive again.
With that me thought I saw him heave his head,
She shrikt for joy, but he again was dead.
Injurious Parcae huswiues of man's life,
That spin the threads and cut them off at pleasure:
O Atropos why did thy fatal knife
Cut off from Troy so rich and great a treasure.
And Lachesis why did not thou still spin,
Sweet Hectors life that ever should begin.
But all injurious fraught with cruel spite,
Ye shortened have this worthy Hectors days:
Why do you not restore his eyes to light,
Now that the voice of such an angel prays?
O were you men and had the power to give,
At Helens prayer Hector needs should live.
Could trees and stones, in Orpheus tunes rejoice,
Was he so pleasing, and dumb things so witty?
And shall an heavenly grace with humble voice
Beg at your graces, and you show no pity?
But now your power is not life to restore,
Yet wast your power to have let him lived before.
But ah the passions that she then endured,
When false illusion did deceive her sight:
Of Hectors life her self she half assured,
When he (God knows) slept in eternal night.
Then was her grief far greater than before,
And hope deluded made her torment more.
Like to a Sayler beaten on the seas,
With boisterous tempests and outrageous storms:
Long wishing land for his reposed ease,
That spies by chance some earth-betokning forms.
And makes amain to them with speedy course,
Hoping to find for sorrow some remorse.
But when he comes to his desired ken,
And there does find nor show nor sign of land:
O silly man how is he grieved then,
That ever hope did bear him so in hand?
Then falls his hope, he under hatches goes,
Leaving his life to Neptune to dispose.
Thus was she tossed the sweetest soul alive,
Billoes of water beat within her breast:
No Phoebus saire the vapors dark may drive,
From that sweet Sphere whereon they were possessed.
Sorrow it self I think did love her so,
That even for love it was loath away to go.
For when she spoke (at length she began to speak)
"(Things that are violent may not always last:)
With grief and dolor did her silence break,
And every word of sorrow had a taste.
Then in the anguish of an heavy heart,
To Hector thus her mind she did impart.
Hector (quoth she) O thou that were our stay,
More are the cares which I for thee sustain:
Then were the woes of faithful Iulia,
Though for her Lords love she her self has slain.
Yet can I never be sufficient sorry,
Seeing thee dead that were our only glory.
Glory of Troy and wonder of the World,
Gem of true Nobles, knight-hoods full suffisance
Ah, why has Fortune now her wheel so hurld,
To throw thee down that were our whole assurance?
While thou did live I anchored in thy might,
Now Hectors dead, who shall for Helen fight?
Woes me alas) this day the Fates conspire,
To work my ruin and my endless vvoe:
Now shall the Greeks enjoy their full desire,
And I with homespun Menalay shall go.
Either to be with him a loathed wife,
Or else have judgment here to lose my life.
Hard is the Laborinth that I labor in,
Deadly the drift that I am driven to,
If I go back, al Greece derides my sin,
If here I stay, I die, that's better tho.
Better to die a thousand deaths and more,
Then live contemnd, who honored was before.
Yet will my Paris fight in my defense,
So has he vowed for me and Hectors sake:
Achilles treason will he recompense,
Or else such hurly-burly will he make,
As well the Greeks his vengeance great shall know,
Thus in a fury did my Paris vow.
But (ah) my love leave off that resolution,
Troylus and Deiphobus shall fight for thee:
Work not at once my whole confusion,
Stay thou at home and help to comfort me.
For if that thou should eke by chance miscarry,
What were the greefes that in my heart would tarry?
The sweet young Troilus that is yonder mourning,
To whom thou art, and Hector was so dear:
Shall for you both with puissant hand be turning,
His hardy foes unto a daunted fear.
He shall reuengement for my Paris make,
Which thou did vow to do for Hectors sake.
Then did she fly to Paris as he went,
Throwing her Iuorie arms about his neck:
Criyng the hour of her life was spent,
If unto her he had not due respect.
O stay with me, and if thou needs must die,
Well die together, and together lie.
But he whom now both love and wrath had sworn
To be revenged for his brothers death:
These fair persuasions seemde to hold in scorn,
Although she praid him, that was as the breath
Of life to him, his vow he would not miss,
He thus resolu`d they parted with a kiss.
A kiss sweet kiss, for she did stay so long,
Hanging upon him, cleaving to his breast:
Sucking his lips, breathing in amoung
His sigh-burnt lunges an air that made them blessed.
So never any had attaind such bliss,
Had not salt tears been mingled with that kiss.
Then to her mourning did she fall anew,
Weeping for Hector, and for Paris praieng:
This twofolde grief so chang`d her rosy hew,
That glorious beauty seemd to be decaying.
But that it might not part from such a place,
No more then`t could from morning Stellaes face.
Yet was she chang`d, whom does not sorrow break?
The sweetest flowers soonest are a fading:
Beauty is mighty: yet her strength but weak,
If heavy care do once become her lading.
Her virtue strong triumphing over all,
Her substance though most subject unto fall.
The meagre palenes of that fretfull worm,
Sits so nere to each true mourners skin:
That she that whilom was of lusty form,
Through sorrows anger looks now but thin:
Thus Helen, fair Helen began to fade,
On whom the Gods the Sun of beauty laid.
Sooner does fall the Rose then does the Nettle,
The huswiues cloth out-lasts the silken twine,
The brier brags when goodly Oaks do settle,
Phoebus goes down before that Cinthia shine.
Thing`s of esteem do fall when worse are stayed,
So Helen, fair Helen began to fade.
Alas that Hector is not living still,
That Helens beauty might have florisht ever:
O if such worthies must death rites fulfill,
And neither form, nor strength may them deliver,
Why do so many men in these days,
Horde up such treasure, and such buildings raise?
They make their houses like to goodly towns,
Proud stately turrets menacing the stars:
They do not know that fortune sometime frowns,
How ancient Cities are defac`d by wars.
Poor Troy and Verlam can declare of old,
That fame does lie in neither stones nor gould.
Nor do they think they can live ever here,
Hector and Helen show that cannot be:
Why do they then such mighty buildings rear,
Making in clay their lives aeternitie.
Knowing not when they can no longer last,
Fame dies with them and honor all does wast.
Then let him live for ever, and in honor,
Riding triumphant in fames golden Carre:
That holds the pen and sword so high in favor,
And by his bounty guerdons both so far,
As when the pen has regestred his fame,
The sword has sworn for ay to guard the same.
O let that man for ever be adornd,
Build him a temple on Pernassus hill:
Sing of him muses whom he never scornd,
Sound war like trumpets with his glory fill
The empty air, together blase his fame,
That loves you both, O ever praise his name.
But now is Helen weeping all this while,
No worlds delight can make her leave lamenting:
Her heart of grief is now become an Anuile,
Sorrow does bed and sighs are still tormenting.
Then in plunges of a pained sprite,
She said to Hector thus and bad me write.
Ay me (sweet Hector) how am I tormented?
The fulness of wrath is powrd down on me:
If ever woman's state was yet lamented,
Mine may be waild that now bevvaileth thee.
O might I die I should heavens ire fulfill,
But now they make me live to plague me still.
They make me live to see sweet Hector dead,
This is the torment wherewithal they grieve me:
A greater plague could not hang ore my head,
And that they knew, for nothing can relieve me,
Unless they will restore thy life again,
Whom they in anger have untimely slain.
But (ah) they did it for my lasting pain,
Framing a torture to endure for ever:
This was procurde by Iunos iel`ous brain,
Who works my woe by strength of great endeavor.
Only because she went without the ball
That Venus got, thus does she plague us all.
And now thou dearling of the world most dear,
By thee it is she works her high despite:
Stopping the passage of those beamys clear,
By which thy life did lend thine eyes their light.
Then giving out in her hate most envious,
That Helen was cause to make me odious.
Thus do I live of all the world despisde,
The Troyans hearts do inwardly repine:
And though their forms be outwardly misguisde,
Their thoughts persuade them that the fault was mine,
That this our flower, our pillar, and our stay,
Did fade, did fall, through death did flit away.
But Hector now I do appeal to thee,
And unto witness do I call thy ghost:
If thou were not as dearly lou'de of me,
As of the wight that could affect thee most.
While thou did live I loved thy virtues ever,
And since thy death my heart al joys does sever.
O speak Andromach and Hecuba speak,
How did my soul it self to sorrow yield?
When we with him in weeping terms did break,
Touching the dream, diswading him the field.
How did poor Helen his life then beg with you,
As with your selves his death she vvaileth now?
For who (alas) has greater cause to mourn,
And in continual tears lament his death:
Streaming a tide that never does return,
Then she, to whom his life was living breath.
For though through Troy a deadly smart be found,
Yet mine is most who neerlie seeks the wound.
The Gods conspirde, it was not Helens fault,
That Hector dies or if that Troy shall burn:
Juno from heaven poor Ilion does assault,
And all her force against it does she turn.
Who wars with Gods and comes not to the worst?
Then Iunos cause that Troy decays first.
Venus besides commanded me to come,
And sent her Cupid to prepare the way:
Then how unjustly am I blamde by some?
Saying, Helen the whore wrought Troys decay.
For if the Gods decreed it thus before,
It was their wills, and Helen is no whore.
But who would think that heavens should malice bear?
That their perfection should admit of anger:
An ouglie form ingendring gastlie fear,
A monster foul presaging naught but danger.
Who would suppose so huge and vile a beast,
To lie and harbor in a Goddess breast?
Yet this did Juno foster in her lap,
Juno unjust both unto Troy and me:
And in her malice has she laid a trap,
How Troy should perish, and I torturde be.
Which both are done by cutting Hector short,
Troys only Castle, Helens chiefest fort.
With that she weeping wrung her hands and cride,
Hector O Hector, this was all she said:
Then did she seat her by her sisters side,
Where still she vveepes, but then her speech was staide.
Sorrovve forced silence, grief ore-came her heart,
And thus a saint did act an hellish part.
The Troyan Nobles all lamented there,
In sable garments fitting to their woe:
Deiphobus and Troylus with a heavy cheer,
For Hectors death do wander to and fro.
The people too do make a doleful noise,
And call on Hector jointly in one voice.
Hector, O Hector from a troubled spirit,
They cry amain as if they would him pull
From death to life, and bring his eyes to light,
Which now was sunk into his hollovv scul.
Hector, O Hector, Hector thus they cry,
Who being dead they all do seem to die.
Then do they walk all mal-content about,
From place to place not knovving where to rest:
Sometime they stand and give a monstrous shout,
Like to the yell of a many-headed beast.
And then return to Hector where he lies,
The men in groans, the Women in outcries.
Like to the kind and loving naturde Bees,
That swarm together if but one be grieved:
Which leaves his hiue and seeks hollovv trees,
They fly with him and look he be relieved.
Humming they mourn as if they felt his grief,
So they can sorrow but lend no relief.
Then as a Ram that does retire back,
To make return with greater violent force:
So will these folks their cries outrageous slack,
And go lamenting still from Hectors corse. silen^

Till by and by they will return again,
Shriking in tears, like thunderclaps in rain.
Or like the billovv beating on the shore,
That falls off gently making little noise:
But when he comes again does rage so sore,
As men far off may hear his raging voice.
Swelling with foam through Aeolus puffing pride,
So do they yell when they are by Hectors side.
They vveep, they wail, they mourn, they fret with anger,
They swear, they vow revenge for Hectors sake:
Their hearts are boldned through their present danger,
Although for grief they driery wailings make.
Thus al amasde they wander to and fro,
His life did please, his death did irke them so.
They curse Achilles in this bitter rage,
They frown; they grin, their teeth they sternly whet:
Like desperate men they say naught shall assuage
Their ire but blood, on blood they al are set.
But why do we Achilles name, They say,
Which heavens pollutes and darks the brightsom day?
Alas poor Troy what wight can ere bewail,
And not lack words to write thy great lamentings:
To tell thy vvoes even Jeremy might fail,
That writ so well Ierusalems wamentings.
For who can forth thy cruel tortures sound?
Not angels toongs though such on earth were found.
How do they cry along through every street,
With clothes al torn and faces ashie pale?
What mourner does not with a mourner meet?
When they together tell a doleful tale.
Here men lament, there women gastlie cry,
There virgins shrikes do pierce the azure sky.
Now every one does read their own decay,
The Wives do cry, now shall we live to see
Our husbands slain. The men again can say,
The time's not far, we al shall spoiled be.
And then together do they cry at once,
Now shall our babes be dashed against the stones.
Our daughters ravished, and our sons be slain,
Our friends be murderd and our selves and all:
Then do they weep in such abundant rain,
Such lasting showers from their clouds do fall,
As Troy did seem in that tear-showring stound,
Not like to burn but rather like to drowned.
Thus do they mourn the most distressed wights,
On whom the Gods did in such vengeance frown:
That heaven depriu`d them of their wonted lights,
For Troy seemd dark when Hector was put down.
Hector they call, and they may call their fill,
For he is dead, and they are weeping still.
Then did Troys ghost again to me appear,
Go thou (quoth she) and show to Albion this:
Bid her take heed she hold her Hector dear,
And well regard him while he living is.
For when he dies as does poor Ilion here,
So vvil fair Albion sorrow then I fear.
She vanished then, and thankt me for my pains,
Although (quoth she) few others will do so:
Wise heads will deem`t too light by many grains
For who (alas) can rightly weigh my vvoe?
My woe and grief that toongs can never tell,
But now give Hector this, and so farewell.
For that (my Lord) I bring it unto you,
For other Hector Albion now has none:
Though valiant knights fair England has inow,
Whose worthy fames throughout the world are known.
And eke whose names shall one day forth be shovvne.
Yet but one Hector has our Country tried:
Prudent in peace, in Wars an expert guide.
FINIS. I. O.
An Old Woman's Tale in her solitary Cell.
IT fell about that time of the year,
When Phoebus with his beamis cieer,
Looked on Tellus with a pleasant face
Almost from the top of the highest place
Of his stately throne, where he in pomp rides,
And through the heavens (as him list glideth,
Carried on Palfreis, whose wondrous swift pace
Circuit the Welkin in a days space,
So fast they wend and never tire.
It pleased him now with his temperate fire,
To put juice and moisture soot
Both in the branch and also in the root,
And with the countnance of his beamis sheen,
To make the trees and the grass green:
In the month that hight Flower of the Spring,
Wherein birds sweetly tune and sing,
And flowers are the ground embellishing
By reason of this look blandishing,
When fishes in the brooks are playing,
It was in May when they go a maying.
Once on a morning in this goodly tide.
When Aurora in the brightness of her pride
Looked so freshlie on us here,
That every man by himself, or with his fere,
She does inuit to walk abroad,
And with her in the fields to make some abode,
I walked forth my self alone,
To see the pleasures Flora does lone
To earth and to creatures all.
*Walking and wandering thus, it did fall,
That as I went through a thick Wood,
Where trees by trees so nigh stood,
And their leaves are so together gone,
That Sol does scarsely his light shown
To them that thorough there pass.
*At length I light on a fine place,
Strongly environed with trees fair,
Through which there came a pleasant air,
That breathed sweetly through leaves whistling
Where birds on the boughs do chirpe and sing,
Where pleasant fountains sweetly are flowing,
And on whose banks flowers dainty are growing like to a little Paradise.
*Now in this stound busy were mine eyes,
To seek and search in every nooke,
What pleasure more might yet be took,
And what delight I might still have,
At length I light on a hollovv Cave,
Into which less wise then hardy
I went, putting my life in ieopardie.
For it might have been the Den of a Lion,
Or the place of some monstrous Dragon,
Or ravenous Wolves might have been there,
Or some devouring hungry Bear.
But as Fortune would it better fell,
For it hapt as I shall now tell.
*When I was into the cave ycome,
I had no sooner set foot in the room,
But an old Woman of look thin and pale,
(For alack) melancholy makes blood fail,
Specially if Age be sitting thereunto,
Then must the lusty red away go,
And meagre blunesse sit in his place,
Such God wot was this old woman's face,
Which time and care had well furrowed,
With wrincles deep, so long she had sorrowed
With bitter tears and inward greeuance,
But yet sure seemd to me her count`nance,
Inly to show sparks of gentilitie,
And that she liu`d there only through some malady
Of discontent and grief great conceived.
She now has kindly me received
Bidding me welcome with many words fair,
(But there was neither stool nor chair
Whereon to sit, Hermits seld been stor`d,
But with blocks and stubs such as the woods afford,)
And after some words of course passing,
She asked me how I was thither coming.
Since (quoth she) with us it is not usual:
That passengers do amongst us fall,
Our cells and caves they been so deuious,
And not to travelers obuious,
They been so fenc`t with thorns and breers,
As they seldom admit us any feres
To make recourse or to or fro.
But since it was thy fortune so,
To find this cell which none could ever
Epsy before since I came hither,
I hold it done by the divine influence,
And that thou were led by some great providence,
Only that I might make relatiowne,
Unto thee of my state wholy and condisiowne,
Of my cares all and calamity,
And why I live in this cell solitary.
Wherefore if thou list in good discretion,
Awhile to abide without indignation,
And to hear with gentleness and patience,
By and by I will do my diligence,
To acquaint thee withal though it be naught pleasing
To thine ears, yet to my heart will it be great easing.
Then did she bestir her with great business,
To get a breakfast in readiness,
Which when she had done with many puffes and pain,
It was a cup of fair water and a root scrapte clean.
Here was a high matter in a low house,
The mountains sweld and brought forth a mouse.
But yet the giver made the gift great,
And me thought it was then a rich banquet,
The author made the gift so precious.
For who would be at such a time curious,
Or fill his mind with disdain? but rather requite,
For the Widow gave much that gave but a mite,
Gifts are great as they are taken.
But now to her talk has she her betaken,
The breakefast is done ne might it long dure,
For there was no dainties to feed on sure.
And then with a countnance sad and words mildly spoken
With tears blended, she has with me broken.
It is (says she) no wonder in the course of Fortune,
Though she do not in one thing long continue,
She is aye so full of alteration,
Of fickleness and variation:
She is so brittle and so mutable,
So inconstant and so changeable,
As even now she will a fair look show,
Smiling upon thee with a smooth brow,
And glancing with a pleasing eye,
And then on a sudden by and by
Will she gloome upon thee with such a frown,
As spitefully she`l work thy destructiown,
She is like a Siren that sweetly will sing
When she intends a man to bring
To his end, or yer he be aware
Of her cruel poison under her face so fair.
I hold him unwise that will her trust,
For when he hopes most, she will lay him in the dust,
She is of so vile and naughty nature,
She loves worst an honest creature.
But who so scorns her through surquedry and pride,
She loves to be still by his side,
She is not constant to any ever.
For how has she by her false endeavor,
Thrown down Priam from his royal chair,
And Hecuba his queen so fair?
How made she Xerxes escape away in a whirrie,
Whose fleet once the sea would scarce carry?
How has she to queen Elstred done?
And how causd fair Rosamond to moan?
And how (though she was meanly borne)
Has she made Shores wife forlorn,
After estate and high calling,
And brought her to most woeful falling?
But I list not in Examples bide.
Thus has she dealt with me beside,
For once I was,"Then did she weep,
"wringing her hands and great mourning keep,
"Till at the last her tears she staid,
"And then again thus has she said.
For once I was my self flourishing,
Both in wealth, beauty, and many other thing,
I was then rich as I am now poor,
What Fortune lends we must restore,
I liu`d at pleasure having silver and gold,
And I was then young as I am now old,
And she that is now of pale wrinkled hevv,
Was then as fresh as any rose new,
Lustye of flesh and comely in color,
Red mixed with white, pleasing in favor.
Gracing with my looks both in hall and bower,
But these are al withered like this flovver
That is fresh to day and dead to morrow,
Alas they be not ours we do them but borrow
Of Fortune and Nature two that vvil call
Home for their goods, and take away al
When so it pleases them but to scovvle,
Alas we have neither bond nor rovvle,
Wherein they are tied, they are so free still,
And we in their farms are but tenants at will.
They are certain to us for neither year nor day,
They are theirs to give and theirs to take away.
Yet thus did they favor me while I was young,
If I did speak, they said Orpheus sung,
If I did my Lute in my hand take,
They said Apollo did music make.
If I did dance and my body move,
The Graces daunst and love was in love.
If I were merry and gladsome,
A number were frolike and gamesome.
If I were disposde for to be melancholy,
Few for that while would then be iollie.
For when I taught mine eyes to frovvne,
Straight would they learn to put mirth adown.
Thus in my youth after a fashion,
I was as t'vvere Queen of that Region,
I mean of that little circuit where I did wun,
For great homage was to me done,
And beauty wants not servants store,
That vvil observe their mistress humor,
That vvil be both diligent and pliable,
Necessary and conformable
To say or do as fits her fancy best,
And so in my youth was I blessed.
I had men of good sort that were my Wooers,
"For beauty is never without lovers.
Such as were of mine own degree,
Men of good Gentillitie
That were of vvorth, and besides very brave,
For so well could I my self behave
with so svveet carriage, my looks sometime grave,
Sometime more pleasant as occasion would,
And as indeed a Woman should,
For in sooth there must be variety,
"Men of one thing so soon take satietie.
Thus could I then devise,
As Women can with their eyes,
To entangle men in the snare of Love.
Now is it a thing we daily prove,
That who so for another digges a pit,
Falls himself often in it.
For as I was then busy laying snares
To catch Love in my golden hairs,
(For gold they were when I was in prime,
Though they be now silver by course of time)
As I was making baits for desire:
Behold, now comes a worthy Esquire,
A man of such countnance and visage,
Of so rare form and personage,
Besides with many parts so well adornd,
As Venus her self could not have scornd,
Nor yet Diana for all her chaste life,
To have been to this goodly man a wife.
He was such a one as the Troyan knight,
That wooed Helen that Lady bright,
Or like to him of Theseus kind,
Demophoon that did of Phillis find
So much love for his little loyalty,
Such was his form, though not such his royalty.
Or like to him that now Hector hight
Of Albion, that thrice noble knight.
For his fame does hither to these woods sound,
And in most places it is found.
He is so famous in virtues glory,
That birds of him record a story,
On willow boughs as they sit and sing,
And Echo does hither his praises bring.
For alas I seldom abroad stray
To listen nevves, but I have heard say,
He is wondrous worthy, and of a comely stature,
Of a sweet conceit, and a courteous nature,
Winning with his words, and pleasing in his carriage,
In view amiable, and sweet of visage,
Such a one sure was this gentle esquire,
For a heavenly face moving desire.
For no sooner now did I him see,
This comely man, this worthy he,
But she now (alas) that whilom was so free,
And teaching all others in love to be,
By her fair looks and eyes in chaunting,
By her beauteous hew love only vanting:
Is now (alas) inthraled in the snare
Which she for others did prepare,
Now is she for her self to seek remedy,
Who of late could ease a numbers malady.
Physician now thy self cure,
Ay me I learnt to say them sure,
As many had said to me before,
I love: I, and a great deal more,
For Women though they covet covertly,
Yet men to them desire but ouerly.
Their love is nothing so hot,
And yet this advantage have we got:
That though the Cow to the Bull cries,
And the Mare to the Horse niyeth:
Yet the man to the woman speaks,
And unto her his love first breaks,
Although women often think their own hearts broken,
Till beloved lovers of their love have spoken.
And then too forsooth for show of modesty,
We must make strange, and allege the honesty
Of a single life, we must keep virginities,
And many prayers must be offered to their diuinities,
Which they would grant were they not craved,
Men must look at their shrines to be saved,
When in the men is power to give
Unto some of those Saints whether they live,
Or perish through love, but alas men know not,
When they have this power, and so they do not,
Give them their doom, "women so well dissemble still,
Well, now to love it was my will,
And to be lou`d was his hearts desire,
Who said he burnt in loves damned fire,
Such inward flames did kindle in his breast,
That so long as I delaid, he found no rest,
This he vowed with protestations,
And sealed with sighs and heavy lamentations,
Begging at me with great humility,
That I on him would have some pity,
Else should he (alas) by love perish.
Now did I all this while cherish,
A greater fire in my heart,
Love had in me a bigger part,
And reason I had on him to have remorse,
Who was deeper wounded by the same force,
For though I smothered in the flame,
And under modesty hid the same,
As in deed so we ought to prove,
Whether men dissemble or truly love,
Yet at last it burnt so strong,
"(None can hide fire long,
That will by his light it self discover)
That I was compelled to tell my lover,
That now I loved as well as he.
Here need no recital be
Of our great joy, there was no tarrying,
To hinder us now from our marrying,
Both whose hearts love had so sharply whet,
That they were only onmariage set,
To try the knot of joy and pleasure,
The bond of love, the lovers treasure,
But now I will omit the complements,
The feastings iustings and turnements,
The maskes, banquets and iollities,
The routs revels, and companies,
The sights shows and tragoedies,
Of state and for mirth the commedies,
That were at our wedding solemnised.
These being done it was devised,
That I should now away wend,
With my new husband and my dear friend,
Into the country where he did then wunne.
And as it was devised, so was it done,
And with him did I live a happy wife
About twenty years during his life,
But when we had liu`d together so long
(O here begins my woeful song),
In all delight and honest pleasure
Tasting of joy in a full measure,
In this the highest of my bliss
By death away he taken is,
He whom I did love so dearly,
My stay, my joy, my comfort merely.
Alas what need I tell the monings,
The tears, the griefs, and the woeful wailings,
That then I have most inly conceived,
When Death from me has him bereaved,
O let them judge that know the like
What several torments their souls do strike,
Alas I die to think thereon.
With that her speech was from her gone,
She weps and wails and often to death swound
Falling with her face plat upon the ground,
She is with sorrovv so vvoe-begone
As one that meant to die anon,
But that ne may endure her kind.
Then does she her senses again find,
Through that small aid that I could lend her
In such a case who could not but befrend her?
And after, thus tells on her woeful story,
Ay me (she says) how could I be but sorry,
From him that was so dear to part,
For love and friendship make the knot in the heart,
When brotherhood knits but in the blood,
Therefore I hold it often more good
And lesser grief some brother to forgo
Then a faithful friend, but alas what shall I do?
That have lost both a friend and a brother,
That was to me both the one and the other.
My husband, my rock, my chiefest pillar,
My hope, my joy, my dearest wel-willer.
But yet alack this is not all,
Such torments often to others fall,
By death to lose their husbands company,
And such as were their chief felicity,
Many before me, so have done.
*And for example take Andromach for one;
What were her tortures when she her Lord lost?
How was Penelope in sorrows seas tossed,
While her Ulysses floted on the maine,
Longing to see him at Ithica again?
Yet might not enjoy him of long time nor tide,
But (alas) her sorrow was small to abide.
*Now was all this but the step to my woes,
The keie of care, the groundwork of sorrows,
The fearful entrance to a further danger,
The bloody herald of more cruel anger.
What should I say the messenger of death.
O heers my grief, now stops my breath,
Here is the cause of my calamity,
And the very floud-gate opening to misery,
O stay a while I cannot yet speak.
Then did she sigh as if her heart would break,
Watering the furrows of her wrinckled face,
With tears that she shovvred down apace,
Wringing her hands, and cursing cruel time
That thus had changed since her flowring prime:
But then she cleared from that drooping rain,
And gastlie cries anew this was my deadly pain,
To see my children weep and moan,
Which he left unto me alone,
To see them in such pitious state,
Mourning to me, and I disconsolate.
*Alas he left me children three,
Children distressed and mother in misery,
For father dead, and husband gone,
Yet do the youngest not only moan
For death of their father, but for he unkind,
Had them no dearer in his mind.
They wail his death and lament their own estate:
I weep for both, we al curse cruel fate.
For now ere he died by will he gave,
That Maximio the eldest should al have,
So was he called that was my firstborn.
But the other two has he left forlorn,
Whereof the one was hight Medalgo,
And the other was ycleped Iunio.
Only he still reseru`d my portion,
For it was my ioynter by condition,
Ne could he that dispose away.
But for the younger he left slender stay,
Little he gave to them God knows,
A poor pention he bestows,
An annual rent of five pounds charge,
And yet he thought it over large,
To burden his house with such a pay,
Alas, alas, now may they well say,
What booteth us our birth or our blood?
What does gentilitie do us good?
What are we better then the base,
Seeing Nature and Fortune thus us disgrace?
O the great follio of Albions fond custom,
Judge austere, O most unequal doom.
Yet had Maximio still been living,
(But fates after his father soon wrought his ending.)
Their wants by his bounty had been supplied,
For to his heart they were so nighe tied,
That they ne might ask what he would not give,
But he eke is dead and his son does live,
His son fostred among his mothers kin,
Of whom they must now first begin
To insinuate acquaintance if they would ought have,
And yet ask and go without, they say they must save
For the young infant Maximios son,
But alas why had fate Maximio done
To fell death so suddenly?
That he ne had his memory
To do for his brothers as nature would,
And as indeed their father should,
Had he remembered Natures right.
Thus on a sudden changed was my light,
My glorious shining and my summers day
Is now gone down and drencht in the sea,
It sets with the sun, but never may arise,
For now alas does Fortune so devise,
She that never did well for me,
But still did thwart my felicity.
For now is my living gone to another name,
That govern the child and enjoy the same,
Only I have a portion small,
To maintain me and my two boys vvithal,
An hundred pound yeerelie so long as I live,
But now I ne might it sell nor give,
It must teturne from whence it came,
And all must glorify the name,
I mean the eldest of the house,
When the Dutch are drunk (they say) they will carouse,
And where is enough there England gives more.
But now to return where I was before,
My husband and Maximio are now both away taken
By cruel death as thou have heard me sayen,
And thus was I left then in misery,
With my two young sons to keep me company.
They liu`d on me so long as I could give them,
what mother sees her children want and not relieve them?
But alas suppose I had died next day,
After their father was taken away,
As death might have done had it been his pleasure,
for he never keeps times, hours, nor measure,
What should my children then have done?
Alas, that they had, is spentful soon,
It is not fitting to their calling.
But yet hear more of my woeful falling,
Hear now hear what more befell.
*We did not above five years together dwell,
I and my sons in whom was my delight,
But see now of Fortune the dogged spite,
For she now has made a breach and partition,
Twixt my daughter in law and me has she sown division,
Twixt me and her friends that now they endeavor,
To work my overthrow quite and for ever.
And now mine own kindred would not me back,
When one is in need friends often are most slack,
And if that Fortune once do frown,
Rather then support thee, they`l help thee down.
But if so be of them you have no need,
They are most kind and loving indeed.
Whom Fortune favors they shall have friends,
And friendship for most part with riches blends,
Poverty is burdensome, and though he be of blood,
It is no policy to do him good,
For now we must square al by policy,
Fie upon this old releeuing charity,
They do abandon't, it smells of popery.
Thus does prevail this nevv-brocht fopperie,
Out of a vessel that seems pure,
Charity now there is none sure,
But that which in her kind discretion,
For her self only makes provision.
Or else so well can her alms bestow,
As for one gift they must receive two.
Friends look aloof when one is poor.
But now I come where I was before,
They strine I say and seek all they may,
To procure my fall and utter decaie,
And now alas have they found the mean
To ruinate me quite and clean,
Which in their high indignation,
They do fulfill to my confusion.
For now have they sought among the writings,
Both new scrowles and old indightings,
Which my husband left behind,
And now alas do they find
My iointure to be but slenderly conueid,
My iointure on which my sons and I both staid.
They trauerse the Law, and Law does assure,
It is at their will, if my liuelood endure,
Who were the heirs unto the land.
Alas that it so ticcle should stand.
Alas that a kind husband his wife should so leave.
Alas that Maximio did not give
A better assurance while he was living,
But (good young man) I think he knew nothing
That my state was so ticle, for he nere perused
These papers wherein I was thus abused
And thus on me (O cruel thing)
My sorrovves together do they bring.
For look what law affoorded in extremity,
That have they performed in all severity,
Leaving me nothing nor my children neither.
O Fortune how art thou like the vveather
That is now fair, and anon foul,
For a short smile how long do thou scovvle?
Alas thou art most pleased in evil doing,
Ne do thou delight in any good thing.
But sure I may say of thee now,
As the good-wife wont say of her cow
That gave a mess of milk new and soot,
And when she had done, threw`t down with her foot,
Thy joy is most in an evil turn,
And then thou laughtst when thou makst others mourn
For making one poor Abdolomine a king,
How many do thou to low estate bring?
In wicked works is thy glory ever.
But why do I against thee persevere?
Alas Englands custom works my vvoe,
And custom of England does me undo.
For though my husband to me was kind,
Yet wise men are often blind,
And led away with a fond antiquity.
Alas that wise men should not see,
Nor Nature make them to have remorce,
Why do men do against Natures force?
I do not now for my self complain,
But for my younger sons twain.
Alas my youngest were as dear to me,
As was Maximio, why should they then not be
As dear to him as was Maximio.
And yet this sure I would have thee know,
That I would have a difference made,
So that the eldest should not vpbraide
The younger of beggerie,
Nor that the younger should on him rely.
*Let the youngest have portions to keep them like men,
Fitting their birth and calling, and then
That the honor and chief living go to him might,
That is the firstborn, as is his right,
But now has he given all to Maximio,
What did he think that I did aside go?
Or beget he the rest for lusts suffisance,
After he had one borne to his inheritance?
Why do men of their young sons no more reckoning make?
But o foul custom it is for thy sake,
Men are so given to memorise their name,
And often in so doing they procure their shame,
As by and by thou shall understand.
But O vile custom only proper to this land,
For if it be as I have heard say
Nor France nor Flaunders take this way,
Neither does Italy so nor Spain,
Only in England it does remain,
And yet in the best gouernd part of this land,
I mean in the famoust city of all Albion,
The politic Citizens do so provide,
That the younger Sons shall not stand in need
Of the elder, though they give him the land
That they buie in the country through their industrious hand,
Only our Gentlemen keep this order,
Whereby does rise this great disorder,
That many Clownes do here become gentlemen,
Who scrape, and scratch for their Sons, and then
Send them forsooth to an Inn of Court,
Where the son of a Gentleman has report,
When his father (goodman) will drive the plow,
And his mother milk and serve the Sow,
Thus does the franklin in England rise,
And the base-borne Brat does the gentleman despise,
By reason their fathers leave them so poor,
And that is his shame that I told thee of before,
*But mark now and thou shall see even by my son
What this vile custom in England has done,
But in other countries they seem more wise,
The Hog in his own dunglies,
They keep the Pesant under and the Kerne,
They do so well of their kind discern.
The Bore puts not on a velvet skin,
Neither in silk is the Borin,
They may grow rich, but they keep their place.
And this to Ireland is a great grace,
Which though some call it uncivil and rude
Yet (they say) they are with this virtue indude,
The Kerne low borne shall never come a floate,
He shall not step into a gentleman's coat,
As God and nature make them base,
So shall they keep still in their place.
But this now to Albion is high disgrace,
For here the Clown rises and Gentilitie put down,
Only by old custom and unkind fashion,
We do not with the Danes uphold gentilitie
But with the Swishers we cut off their dignity,
As now but list and I shall thee tell.
For after all this hap that now me befell,
That my husband was dead and my loving son
After my foefment was by law away don,
Being now left in all this mesery,
My son Medalgo went into another country,
In which place for what should I tarry?
He loved a yong-woman and did her marry.
By whom God blessed him with children many,
For blessings they be though wealth he had not any,
And often it falls that the poor,
When rich go without have children store,
Who wishes often wants, who cares not to have
Shall never need of fortune to crave,
She is so blind she cannot well see,
She lets the wise unprovided be,
And gives to fools with a liberal hand,
Fortune favors fools, a proverb often scand,
And too too true may a number say.
But now is Medalgo at a weak stay,
Wealth he has none and charge does arise,
Wherefore he`s forced of force to devise
To maintain his children, himself, and his wife,
By taking upon him a laborers life,
Where with his neighbors he is called good man,
Now lost is the title of a Gentleman,
Se now the fruit of this fair blossom
Se the end of this custom,
Now poverty so has shadowed his name,
As men in true view cannot see the same,
Alas the commons cannot give men their due.
They call him master that makes a fair show
In riches and wealth, they know no difference,
But who has most gold him do they reverence
And this is the fruit of that custom fond,
Which now is installed in this land,
Either to make a beggar of a younger son,
Or else untimely to his death to be done.
For now as Medalgo is to low estate brought,
So has Iunio for preferment sought,
Trying what Fortune would for him do,
Because sometimes she does favor show
To younger brothers, and for she does advance
Men by the svvord and also by the lance,
Specially those that are of noble spright,
In whom there is by Natures light,
A kind of Nobles raisd from the common sort,
An high yet mild mind, still garding good report,
And yet still aspiring to higher honor,
And yet not rising but by the step of favor
Purchased by vvorth, vvinning men's hearts,
To advance him more high for his virtuous parts.
Such a one has Fortune now up raised,
And with renovvme his name blased,
Giving guerdon to due desert,
Who in every spring so plays his part
As they say, through his valor and manliness,
Through his wisdom, forecast, and worthiness,
That himself is now the hight the spring
Of honor, for this his brave doing.
They call him ver, which as I have heard say,
Signifies the time that, when Winter is away
Delights the earth and creatures all,
With his pleasant countnance for which men do call,
And birds with their music for joy entertain,
It is the time that puts life in the grain,
Sap in the tree, juice in the grass,
Smell to the flower, beauty to the earths face,
Such is his glory and renown.
Whereof I ne may make relatiown,
An old woman's tongue is far too weak,
For if it be as I have heard some speak,
His fame is like to such a spring
As never dies, alas it is a thing
For a sweeter Organ and a better song,
Then to be told by an old Woman's tongue,
Let him live ever with honor and fame.
But now I return from whence I came.
Iunio my third and youngest son,
Is now to the wars for preferment gone,
Wars the great worth which if Fortune favor
Ennoble men with the richest honor.
But alas she favors well but few,
As thou shall hear by that does ensew,
For there had he been but a while,
(Alas my dear son alas my good child)
But death has bereaved him of his life,
Untimely did the sister cut with her knife
which Poets saien has the twining of the thread,
Making (as she list) men alive or dead.
Alas I need not tell thee my woe,
Thou see what grief I conceived tho
That ever since fate these crosses did give,
I took this Cell where I in sorrovv live.
Then did the tears run down her cheeks.
Along through the furrows like water through creeks,
Alas me-thought it was a pitious sight,
That she that whilome was so fair a wight,
Shining like Titan in his gorgeous show,
Should now in color look so wan and blew.
Coughing she sits, half choakt with tears,
Alas now (me thinks) who so this hears,
Should in discretion and sound wisdom,
Utterly condemn the foul custom
Of Albion, for that causd her woe,
When it her younger sons did both overthrow
By want that great worker of confusion
To many brave minds in conclusion.
For when a man that is well borne,
I mean of lineage whom nature does adorn
Either with Noblesse or Gentilitie,
Does see himself through Fortunes cruelty,
(For Fortune it is of custom proceeding,
That men are driven thus to be needing)
Like to incur poverty or want,
By reason that living is very scant,
What danger does not he undergo?
What perilous attempt does he shrink fro,
Where hope of credit or gold does remain?
Choosing rather so to be slain
Then to live in misery.
And yet (God knows) it is of certainty
That little here at home is their estimation,
Though they venture nere so for reputation.
"Peac-nuslings so little esteem of valiancie,
And this is the fruit of that antiquity
Which men in custom now receive,
That is, when to the eldest they al give,
Leaving the younger little or naught,
That many to their ends untimely are brought.
For now did Iunio asvvell aspire,
As could Maximio though in wealth he was hyer.
Yet must their minds be equal in desire,
Being begotten both by one sire
Whose virtue in both had equal operation,
Seeing they were equal both by generation.
And Anima ex traduce some do hold.
Then if the father were magnanimous or bold,
Why should Iunio having that father,
Be of a lovv conceit rather
Then Maximio, why should his mind be any whit less?
Or why should his thoughts be of more baseness?
Why should not ambition in him dwell,
Seeing he was a Gentleman as well
As Maximio? Why should not a younger son,
Bear as worthy a mind as he that has won
The wealth from them al? Alas it is not gold
That nobleth the mind, though the mind it uphold.
Paris was poor amongst the shepherds known,
Yet had he a mind by which he was shown
To be more high then a shepherds swain.
And Cyrus too does show us plain,
That sparks of a Gentleman will always appear,
Though Fortune often such malice bear
That Sparco shall be the nurse to a king,
And that a bitch shall food bring
To him that is heir to a crown,
Yet will the mind never be put down.
She obscures the worth, yet the mind she cannot quel,
And yet too often times she does so deal,
That she will abate even a courage stout,
For want has no place to put their virtues out,
As they that have gold which gives them a countenance
The want whereof must needs be greeuance
To a good mind, to see meaner gifts preferred
Only by Gold, when better are debard.
O want is a gall that greeueth all good hearts,
Want is a curb to hold in virtuous parts,
want duls good wits, want makes high spirits soft
Want keeps them low, that ought to sit aloft.
Want in a man al good things does conceal.
But O that custom should so deal,
To make fathers their sons decaie,
Who should in Nature be their stay.
For what is it but their destruction,
Merely their bane and confusion,
As now more plainly shall appear.
For sure it is a case most clear,
That the world looks they maintain their worth,
That their countenance be as was their birth,
That they hold their place and reputation,
That they keep their credit and estimation,
That they maintain the state of a Gentleman,
Now would I know who he is that can
Maintain all these without wealth and living,
For wealth though true honor it is not giving,
Yet it is an ornament of Gentilitie.
As it is held to be to felicity,
For Philosophers deem it is not of the being
Of Summum Bonum, and yet seeing
Men are not happy without riches adiuments,
They hold them to be felicities ornaments.
But yet in these days they may well be called,
The seat wherein Gentry is installed,
Men in these times by their riches rise.
For who so has wealth that man is wise,
His words are respected with good aduertence,
He speaks not a tittle wherein is not sapience,
He is grave, sage, and prudent,
He is the Orator only eloquent,
For who so speaks by golds direction,
Speaks soundly without contradiction.
Men that are rich are all in all.
Then do I marvel that true Gentlemen fall
Into this custom, to impouerish their name,
When the baser do seek to extol the same.
Do they think their younger sons can live of naught?
O this was the custom that Medalgo brought
To beggerie, who was a man well borne,
This is it that makes many men forlorn.
This was it that brought Iunio to his end.
*But sure I marvel that men cannot mend
This old, gross, and frantike fashiowne,
Seeing that Wisdom in her discretion,
Provides for her younger son so well.
For though the eldest in her honor shall dwell,
After her death and falling,
And be raised to honorable calling,
Yet does her Iunio now remain
In honor before, and his place has taken
Of his brother Maximio, so has wisdom forseene
In her high policy, that the younger should been
Raised aloft while she is living,
Ne does she seek so much to be giving
Honor to him, to whom of due
After her death it must ensew,
If men were wise they would Wisdom follovv.
But now is the old woman in her Cave hollow,
Where she waileth not so much for her own estate,
As of her two sons the cruel fate,
Banning and cursing such customs antiquity,
As is the cause of so great misery
To many brave minds, which are well borne,
And yet like mean vassals left forlorn,
For convenient provision beseeming their vvorth.
But now from her am I come forth,
Leaving her (good soul) in her melancholy Cel,
Where she intends aye to dwell,
Til Atropos do for her as she did
To her husband and sons when she cut their lives thread.
FINIS. I. O.
Read Wrest, Leaf, 5, first side, fifth line, Flow, 8 le, 2, side, 8 li,
Disheueled nine leaf, 1, side, 20 line, Wailes, line 24. forsaken 10 line, 2,
side, 21 line, Billows 13 lea, 2. side, 22 line, Tears 13 lea, 2. side 25.
line, Then 15. l, 1, fi, 31 li. That 17, l, 2 si, 11 line, Beat, same lea, 28
line.


