A REPROVFE, written by Alexander Nowell, of a book entitled,

A PROVFE OF Certain Articles in Religion denied by M. Iuell, set forth by
Thomas Dorman, Bachiler of Divinity: and Imprinted at Antvverpe by John
Latius. Anno. 1564

Proverb. 19. 4. Teflis falsus non erit impunitus: and qui loquitur mendacia
non effugiet.

A false witness shall not remain unpunished: and he that speaks lies shall
not escape.

Set forth and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreete, by Henry Wykes.

Anno Domini 1565. 13. die July.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

M. Dormans preface to D. Harding (to whom he dedicated his book) and to the
Reader, are only omitted, for that nothing material was contained in them. Of
all the rest (so far as I have proceeded) not one word of M. Dormans, either
in the treaty it self, or in his marginall notes, is pretermitted.

There is nothing in this Impression altered from the first, saving only that
M. Dormans evil handlyng Fol. 3. 5. 14. 22. 60. 72. etc.
of the ancient Doctors, is in some places more at large explicated: and that
some part of M. Dormans treaty somewhere before divided, is now for more
perspicuitie and plainness joined together. Fol. 65.


THE PREFACE to the Reader.
THOUGH many simple souls may much meruell at such plenty of English
books, as are of late so sodeinly sent us from beyond the seas, by our
country men there, and both the authors themselves do much brag M.
Rastell in his praeface: to continue the memory of the challenge etc. and to
move an expectation which part shall first shovv her weakness. etc.
therein, and their fautors do magnify the same exceedingly: yet the learned
and discrete Readers, accustomed rather to weigh and judge, then to count and
number, will easily consider that it is no hard matter for our adversaries,
abou^ding with leisure, And again he says: specially where the nu^breis
great. etc.
and multitude, by common conference of many to patche up a sort of such
books in English, wherein there is nothing to any purpose written, but that
which was long before written in sundry latin books, and ready to their
hands, to translate thereout into their English books, as they thought meet
for their purpose: so that they be but seely translators, or borovvers of those
books, whose first authors they vvoulde appear to be. In the which poincte
yet M. Stapleton translating Staphilus his long Latin book, so long before
written, word for word into English, and not dissembling the matter,
has dealt therein more simply, the^ the rest of his fellows have done. By
whose example, the meanest men in learning and vvitte amongst them all (have
they only a little vnder^^^nding in the Latin tongue) may lode us with havoc
of books when they list. For it is well kuovven to all that be learned, that
nothing of weight, or to any purpose, can now newly be written for the
mainteinance of the Popes usurped supremacy, or any other their matters,
which they now treat of, but such as has been already both written, and
printed many years ago, in books as well of the Latin tongue, as other
languages, and the same to be fully ansvvered unto also, to the satisfiynge of
the Readers, and daily vvinning of great numbres of men and women of all
sorts and degrees, from their popish superstition, unto the truth of the
Gospel: such books as well of the one sort, as of the other, being rise in
the hands of such as understand, to such decay of their said superstition,
and success of the truth, as to the world at this day cannot be unknown.
Wherefore our adversaries mistrustinge that such kind of vvriting, or rather
translating, should not appear vvoorthie to be accounted the earnest doing of
any learned, or wise man: have done vvittely, either to pretend that to be
written D. Hard. says he did prepare his book but for one friend, and M.
Rastell, his book, for one friend alone, in their prefaces to the Reader.
but lightly for a private friend or tvvaine, and not mente to be printed, but
by persvvasion of friends, against their own purpose suffered to come
abroad (which yet they in deed have of long, by common conference
elaborated at convenient opportunity to be put in printe to the public
patrocinie of their decayed, and almost desperate cause) or else to appoincte
such, to bear the name as the authors of their books, as may seem most
meet therefore, being accounted of all that know them, for learning and
discretion, the simplest men amongst them. The same distrust of their own
dooinges, (or rather other men's dooinges set forth for their own) may seem
a cause why they direct their writings either only, or chiefly against
the Bishop of Sarisburie: thinkinge that though they shall absolutely of the
matters they take in hand be hable to say nothing, but that is already
said, and is likewise, or easily may be ansvvered: yet may they seem
abundantly to say to him, who chalengeth them that they can say nothing at
all: and who also does not tie them straightly to the trial of the
scriptures, the certain and only judges in controversies of Religion, and
vvherin in deed they can say nothing at all (as shall hereafter be plainly
proved) but gives them a most large scope of all Doctors of the Church,
who have written for the space of six hundredth years after our Savior
Christ's being here in earth, and of all Councelles kept in the said
continuance of D. Harding in his preface to the B. of Sarum fol. 1. a. and 2.
b. and M. Rastell fol. 1. b.
time. Out of the which Doctors and Councelles for that the said Bishop has
aduouched that the best learned of all the adversaries, or all the adversaries
together, are hable to bring nothing to any purpose for them, he has set all
the adversaries learned, and unlearned a work, by common conference to
devise to say something for themselves, and against him, who affirms they can
say nothing at all. And yet fearing least that somthinge, which they all are
hable to say* will fall out at the length to prove nothing to purpose: they
have all, like wise men, agreed, that some fevv shall take upon them to be the
only authors of that something which they all can say: least if that
something, as it is devised by them all, so it should pass abroad in all
their names, and in time prove nothing at all, all their estimation were lost
at once. And for more cautell, such some also to be named for the said
authors, as have not all learning, wit, nor discretion, but men of a diverse
profession, who have yet some fight in Divinity, as studientes of the same,
for so they profess them selves. VVherin they seem to me to deal with us,
as did the Phariseis with Christ, who would not Math. 22. b. 16. etc.
come them selves to dispute with him, but sent their Disciples, (well
instructed, and furnished with all, that themselves could possibly say) to
oppose him, to the end, that if their Disciples should obtain the victory,
the glory of their masters, who had such excellent scholars, might mount
above the Moon. But in case the scholars should be blanked, it might for
excuse yet be said, what marvel, if young men, and yet but studientes in the
Scriptures, took a little foil? But if the old Doctors come themselves, I
vvarrant you, this nue Prophet shall be otherwise handled. And yet like wise
men, they adventured not to come afterward the^ selves, assuredly knovving
that all that they could say, was already uttered by their scholars mouths,
but yet trustinge, that all men did not so know the same, but that they might
still maintain with some, their old opinion and doctoral estimation. And
though one Math. 22. d 35.
Doctor came, and was handled as were the disciples, yet was the rebuke but
one man's: but had he gotten the victory, the praise had been common to them
al. This is the effect of S. Chrysostom his Luc. 10. d. 25
exposition upon the sendinge of the disciples, and the coming of one Doctor,
unto our Savior Christ. Which our adversaries like men of much discretion,
have politikely followed. But all men that have any understanding at all, may
easily understand, that they all vvoulde not commit the handlinge of matters
of such weight (and for the which they all, as it were Pro aris and focis,
for life and death, as one might term it, do fight) to those fevv, being
very young men, and of mean learning, and small experience, in comparison,
and of a diverse study, and professing themselves (which they can not hide) to
be young studientes in divinity: all men, I say may well know, that they
vvoulde not commit such matters to such men, without their common advise,
and help joined with them. Seeinge that D. Hardinge himself do the plainly
confess, In his preface.
that he in the vevv of his work used the advice of his learned friends: and
that it is not credible, that M. Rastell would let his book lie by him four
years in a readiness, without a survey thereof made Rastell in praefat^^ne*
by some of so many remaining with him at Louane. Wherefore it is not hard for
any of any understanding, to understand that this publishinge of their common
devise unto the world, in the names of a few of the simplest sort among them,
is but a practice of policy. For they perciuinge that they cannot write nor
set abroad books worthy to be compted learned men's doings, do provide
authors meet for such books, as they can set forth. Whereby they shall not
only keep their own authority and cause without all danger, what so ever be
judged of these authors, or their books: but shall also maintein^^n the minds
of men a great opinion and expectation of themselves, as M. Rastell in his
preface and fol. 1. says: I am but a common soldier among the orders of
divines and therefore I must stand behind so many bishops, Doctors,
bachelors, and scholars in divinity. I will with a penknife deminish his
lusty blood. Let the old soldiers with great svvoordes and pikes kill his
heresy.
Veteranes, and old Soldiers: whose brunt, when they shall come to the
matter, will be, as may seem, of greater force and violence, than that it can
possibly be resisted, And again M. Rast. says he will prove M. Iuell may be
answered by a mean Scholar in Divinity, that he needs not to provoke the
best of the Catholics lyuinge.
seeing these young soldiers have given such a fresh onset. But I dare assure
you that either these matters shall thus still be handled by scholars and young
studientes (as they call themselves) or if the old doctors dare adventure
(which yet many doctors doubt of) they shall handle the said matters but
scholerlike, as has that one Doctor already done: and I doubt not, but it
shall to the world be made most manifest, that he has so done. And to speak
more particularly: as it was no great matter for D. Harding out of Pighius,
Gropperus, Hosius, and certain others (who have entreated of the same matters
in common places before him) to have translated into English what he thought
meet for his purpose, which he has lately put abroad as his own dooinges:
so might M. Dorman with far less labor, and better right also a great
deal, out of his master D. Hardinges book, so lately before written, borow
of authorities and reasons ready framed to his hands, as much as liked him,
and so of a piece of his masters book (containing only.iiij. articles
of.xxvi.) with great ease make us an other new book, as great, as is his
masters: the order here and there being a little transposed, to obscure the
matter, and to make a show of new invention: and the style somewhat floorished
with M. Dormans railing rhetorike. For they that do know M. Dorman better than
I do, marueiling of his dooinges in Divinity matters, do think that he has
all his learning, not of inheritance, but by l^gacie: supposinge that he has
met with Doctor Smith his written books, who of late deceasinge, did, as
they say, put M. Dorma^ in some trust. Else they think, he could not so
shortly, and suddenly, before he was known to be a student in Divinity, become
a Bacheler of the same. Unless perhaps he sometime stood upon the bridge
with others, whiles the creator said, Omnes vos qui statis in ponte, estote
Bacchalaurei: dixit, and fatui su^t. But the same his acqueintance, so
marueiling of his new degree in school of Di^initie, affirm, that in jesting,
scoffing, mockinge, and railinge, he is such a Veterane, and so old a
practicioner, that he does plainly reign, yea and triu^phe too, in the
school of scolding: and though they held their peace, his doings in this
book do well declare the same. And it is not unlikely but that M. Dorman with
others, upon view of D. Hardinges book, iudgeing that he, as a grave and
learned man, had sufficiently reasoned against us, but had otherwise dealte to
coldely with us (as of purpose auoidynge glikes, nippes, D. Harding fol. 5.
scoffs, bittes, cuttes, and girdes, for so himself says) thought it good
by common advise, that M. Dorman taking D. Hardinges reasons, and so eased of
that greatest part of the labor, should set forth the matter, and amplify
it (specially that of the Popes supremacy, in the which he saw his Master
had professed brevity) after D. Harding fol. 75. b.
his and certain others devise, and not only with nippes, and girdes pinche,
and wringe us, but also with whole cartlodes of railynges (in the which
faculty M. Dorman excels) should ouerwhelme us, that we might seem to all
their favorers, not only borne down and clean overthrown by D. Hardinge,
but also by M. Dorman torn all to pieces, according as M. Dorman has in this
book, for his part well endeavored himself to accomplish.

Now if any do marvel that I, not provoked, as may seem, do purchase to my
self so great and grecuous an adversary, as is M. Dorman, by answering his
book written, as he professes, against the bishop of Sarisburie, I make them
this answer: Though this and other like books appear in name and word,
to be written against the said bishop only, yet be they in deed and
meaning written against us all, as well as him: for that they do oppugn
and assault the cause, which is common to us all with him, under his name
only: goeinge about through his sides (as it were) to thrust us all through
the hearts. Further, seeinge such a number of books, as it were darts,
directed at his head, whereof the most part are such, that had he leisure
enough thereto, yet would he never answer them, but by contempt of them,
which yet not ansvvered, might seem therefore to be let alone, for that they
were not answerable, (such is, either the sclender discretion of some sielie
souls, either the bold braggerie of many malaperte adversaries) I thought for
the satisfiynge of the simple, and repressinge of the insolente, to say
somevvhat to some one of those books: and therefore to M. Dorma^s, rather than
any others, for that it came abroad next in order after D. Hardinge his
book. Of which book yet, had I, before I did begin, understood, (that I
now in process do) that it had been in substance so agreeable with D.
Hardinge his book, that the Bishop of Sarum should in ansvveringe the one,
in effect have ansvvered both, (as he must needs do) it should for me have
been let alone, until the bishops answer had come abroad in printe: and
than, (the conclusion only excepted, which is somevvhat several to M.
Dorman) should it by me have none otherwise been ansvvered, but only by
notinge in the margent, in what places of the bishops answer to D.
Hardinge, every place of M. Dormans book is ansvvered, which order I will
hereafter follow: and where M. Dorman shall have any thing peculiar, that
will I directly answer my self. Now as the ignorance of the affinity
between the Masters and the scholars books caused me to begin with M.
Dormans book, as an other nevve work untouched before, intending verefy to
go through with the same: so in the process of the book, the knowledge
thereof did grow more and more, and so much at the last, that I did not only
by the style (as did Tullie Theophrastes Disciple) but by the matter it self
also, know D. Harding his scholar, so like to him, that he might seem his
son also, and spitte out of his mouth, as they say: so that in deed he may
profess D. Hardinge to be his master of very good right, as of whom he
has the learning that he shows in this book. And had he not dedicate the
book to D. Hardinge, as to whom of right it apperteineth, being as a man
learned in the law, not ignorant of the chief property of justice, suum
cuique, he might have been justly accused of some unjust compilation of his
masters almeries: seeing he is not yet his exequutor, as well as D. Smithes.
This matter, I say perceived, enforced me to stay, least I might seem of set
purpose, though colorably, to have hasted to prevent the bishop of Sarisburie
in ansvveringe D. Hardinge, by ansvveringe M. Dorman: and so to have seemed
vvillinge, to go before him one way in hasty dooynge, whom I must needs
follow a great way behind in all well dooinge. And were not this cause,
(which yet is a great, and a just cause) I have not such leisure (which is
the common case of us all) as to answer that, which I do hear say is
already ansvvered, and ready to printe, as M. Dorman had leisure to write
again, that which was before written by his Master: neither had I such
leisure, list I, as he does, blotte paper with other men's dooinges. These
are the very causes why I have stayed, and as yet have proceeded no further in
the ansvveringeof M. Dormans book. But when I had passed thus far, and the
bishops answer* as the report than went, was not fully finished, and
many good men much desired sum answer, and as many adversaries as much
bragged, that their books vvoulde never be ansvvered: the council of some
friends, and such continual brag of so many adversaries caused me to
suffer this little taste, as untimely fruit, the sooner to come abroad: that
such as find double fault with us, for not ansvveryng speedely, or fully,
might in part be satisfied. And the rather have I consented to such advise of
my friends, for that by this taste that I have given the readers of M. Dorman,
they shall know him thoroughly not a lion (as they say) by his long nails,
but a liar by his leude tales. For by the view hereof, they may not only
judge of his whole treaty: but also, this principal part, and first
front, (in the which M. Dorman, as a skillful man, has placed the chief
strength and force) or rather this, the very fundation of the whole being
clean overthrown, (as I doubt not but it is) all the rest must needs come
to ruin with all. At the least, I trust, I have so far satisfied the
discrete reader concerning M. Dorman, that it shall suffice hereafter to pass
over the residue of his book by brief notes. And I do trust also, that
such as shall blame me most for not answering the whole, shall be grieved
most that I have ansvvered so much: and that those, that shall find most
fault i^ words with our slack ansvveringe, shall be most vexed in mind
with our speedy answering. For as their books were not therefore suddenly
written, for that they came suddenly abroad, so shall M. Rastell in his praefa
econfesseth his book to have been begun four years ago.
they, I doubt not, be ansvvered spedely: that is, in shorter space then they
were written in. And yet all speed is not alvvay in most haste. For it may so
fall out that M. Dorman with the whole company of his adhaerentes the
Papists shall more easily write ten such books more at randon, as this is
written, then be hable to maintain and to defend directly this little parcel
of his book, as either truly or learnedly written. And thus much I thought
good to say concerning our not speedy answeringe (as some men think) and my
parcel answering (which some men will blame) for the satisfiyng of some, for all
look not to satisfy, though al Dormans, and al other Papists, were altogether
already so answered as they al might be ashamed of their dooinges, as I doubt
nothing, god willinge, but it shall shortly so come to pass, though
peradventure not one emongst them all will ever confess the same.

Now that I have so diligently and largely, and as it may seem carefully also,
answered M. Dorman (whose own doings, I affirm to be more worthy of
laughter, than of any earnest answer) which shall. I am sure, be laid also to
my charge, I do certify the reader, that I do not answer the reasons
alleged in this book, as M. Dormans, but as the reasons of D. Hardinge, of
whom M Dorman has borrowed them: and not only Doctor Hardinges, but Eckrus,
Pighius, and Hosius reasons also, yea and of all those, that have written in
Latin for the Popes usurped power, and supremacy, in whose writings the like
reasons are to be found, and out of whom D. Hardinge (as out of him M. Dorman)
has translated adverbum almost, such places as he thought for his purpose:
wherefore I have used the more diligence, as under the name of one, answeringe
so many. An other and most weighty cause why I have used such diligence and
prolixitie, is this: M. Dorman though he be a weak assaylant and sclender
reasoner, yet is he a great liar, and a venomous sclaunderer: and therefore
has he set abroad a lewd book in deed, but not so lewd as sclaunderous:
and sclaunderous not to several persons only, but to our whole country, to
our laws, and to our gracious sovereign, whom he charge as usurping undue
authority: sclaunderous I say, not here at home only, but abroad also in
foraigne countries. Wherefore whom so ever M. Dorman shows him self to be,
and how sclender an answer soever might best become him: I thought it should
become me, not sclenderly to esteem the honor of my prince, my d^etie to my
country, and to the laws of the realm: but with earnestness to repel such
reproaches, as M. Dorman has attempted to blemishe them withal. Thirdelie for
that the simple and unlearned readers have often best liking in books more
boldly then learnedly written, and are most in danger to creadite most lewd
and sclaunderouse lies (in so much that a great many for the commendation of
these virtues, do praeferre the Scholar before the Master, M. Dorman I mean,
before D. Hardinge, such is their judgment) I have therefore in answering more
at large, applied my self to such as be of mean understanding, to whom the
guilefull dealinges of the Papists can not with brevity be made manifest. For
as a serpent at a touch thrusts in his stinge and venime: but the mischeafe
in like wise can not be as sodeinlie cured, but requires longer time, and
business: so can not the sclaunderous and venomous lies by M. Dorman quickly
told, be so quickly and briefly answered, with such plainness, as is mete
for such who are most in danger to credit such false tales. Wherefore (good
reader) if I shall seem to be too prolix and tedious, yea and to careful too in
answeringe so largely and diligently such a one as M. Dorman shows him self
to be, specially in the beginning till I have made thee acquainted with his
kind of writing, I trust thou shall the better bear with me therein, if thou will bear these considerations in memory. Yet have I labored to serve also
the learned and occupied readers turn: For I have in the conclusion of this
mine answer fol. 119.
in few words touched the sum of the whole process before, whereunto if it
shall please them at the first to resort, it may so satisfy them perhaps,
that they shall not need to stay about the larger explication of mine answer
in the formar process of this book. And this for my earnest answer to so
merry a man's book as is M. Dorman. Now as I have not dealt with him in his
Raylinge, Reuilynge* Ribalrie.
faculty, in the which I confess him to be invincible, and worthy to be not
only Bachilar, but double Doctor thereof: so yet if M. Dormans outrageous
railinges, and shameless lies shall cause me sometime to shape him an answer
meet for such a man, as he is, I trust the reasonable reader will consider my
not occasion, but inforcement rather thereunto: not only looking upon my
sayings, and vewynge how meet or unmeet they be for me: but how meet they
be for his sayings and him, to whom I do make answer. Who does so
confidently affirm, and solemnly aduouch that if our stomakes shall serve us
to reply, he is sure that our evidence is Dorman. fol. 110. ^.
so much, that six lines (to speak with the most) will receive with ease all
that we have to write. which how truly it is spoken, shall be tried, I
trust, by this little evidence that I have here given in, to thee (good Reader)
against his counterfaite, and false forged writings: wherein is not of
matter of truth, so much as six lines any where to be found.

FINIS.
Dorman.
THE ARTYCLES WHICH THE AVTHOR HAS TAKEN UPON HIM TO PROVE, AGAINST M.
IVELLES NEGATIVE.
That the Bishop of Rome, is the head of Christ's universal church here in
earth, and that within the first six hundred 1.
years after Christ's departure hence, he was so called and taken.

That the people was then taught to believe, that Christ's body is really,
substantially, corporally, carnally, or naturally, in the 2
Sacrament.

That the communion was then ministered under one kind. 3


That there was Mass said at that time, although there were 4
none to receive with the priest.

Nowell.
1 M. Dormans first article, is the fourth with D. Hardinge. fol. 75.

2 His second article, is the fifte with D. Hardinge. folio. 96.

3 His third article is the second with D. Hardinge. folio. 3^.

4 The last article is the first with D. Hardinge. fol. 9.

And thus as you see M. Dorman diverse from his Master in the order of the
matters: so shall you find his Masters reasons and allegations in his book
by like art disposed, that you may know that M. Dorma^, though bachiler of
Divinity, has not yet forgotten all his Logike, and that he has his
Rhetorike in perfect memory.

A REPROVFE OF M. Dorman in prima front libri.
Augustinus contra literas Petiliani. lib. 2. cap. 16. Si quaeras, quibus
fructibus vos esse potius lupos rapaces cognoscamus, obijcio schismatis crimen,
quod tu negabis, ego autem statim probabo. Neque enim communicas omnibus
gentibus, and illis ecclesiis Apostolico labor fundatis. That is to say. If
thou demaundest (he speaks to Petilian the Heretic) by what fruictes I know
you to be rather the ravening wolves, I obiecte to you the fault of scisme,
which thou vvilt deny, but I will out of hand prove. For thou do not
communicate with all Nations, nor with those churches founded by the apostles
labor.

Nowell.
M. Dorman had either no great store of choice, or some lack of judgment,
when he did choose S. Augustines sentence upon the words of our Savior of
those false Prophets who coming in sheep clothing, Math. 7. c. 15.
are in deed ravening woulfes: you shall know them by their fruits etc. For
what sentence of all other in the Scriptures or Doctors does more lively
represent the adversaries themselves, who, folowinge the old Iuishe priests,
Scribes and Phariseis (of whom our Savior spoke ye said words) in walking
gravely in long garments, pretending long prayers, preferring Mar. 12. d. 38.
ye amiable titles of ye Spirituality, of ye church, Luc 20. g. 46.
that loving mother, yea and of favorable fathers too: and professing with
their foresaid forefathers, yt they may kill no man, that they may not enter
into the judgment place, for fear of pollution of that pure white Johan. 18.
e. 28. f. 31.
fleese of their innocence: yea and when a condemned person falls into their
hands, to be committed to the fecular power, they pitifully make request, that
Domine i^dex rogam vos etc.
the wretch suffer no loss of life nor limme. And when they have so ouerspread
and covered themselves with Vt in actis Regist. Lo^dinensi^.
these and such like sheepish white flieses, more softer than lambs wull, and
have so sheepishly bleated with words abhorring blood: than proceed they
forward with their said Fathers, than play they most the most ravening
woulfes, and most show their insaciable thirst of murder and bloudsheading.
Let Jerusalem, and the countries about sprinkled with ye blood of our Savior
Christ, and his holy Apostles and Disciples testify this as most true in
their forefathers, the Phariseis, Scribes, and high Priests: and let all
parts of England, France, Italy, Spain, Germany, yea of all Christendom
ouerspread with the blood of the innocent sheep of Christ's fold, men and
w^men, yea young striplinges, and maids those little lambs, shead by these
ravening and bloudthristie woulfes, testify the same most abundantly in our
Phariseis, Scribes and high priests, the successors and children of those
their old Iuish forefathers: of who^, with their said forefathers as this
sentence was spoken, so does it most expressly represent and depainte them
most lively in their natural colors, that ye may well know them by their
fruictes. For that they spoil poor wydowes houses, under yt pretense of their
long prayers, their diriges, Masses of Requiem, Trentalles etc. is but a
trifle with them: but the greatter shall be their damnation, as our Savior
says. Now concerning Marc. 12.
the schism which M. Dorma^ shoots at chiefly: Luc. 20.
We answer we have made none other schism from you, than did S. Paul make
from the said high priests, Act. 22. a. 3.
Scribes, and Phariseis your predecessors, from whom (though he were from his
childehood brought up emongst the^) he did well, and upon good ground depart,
for that they had before departed, and made a schism from God, and his most
holy law, to the traditions of the mother church of their Pharisaicall
fathers: as have likewise you Papists departed, and made a schism from
Christ, and his Apostles doctrine, and from the ancient churches, founded by
the Apostles labor, to your mother the Romish Sinagoge, and have by your
poisoned Popish traditions, slain more souls, than you have by your cruelty
murdered bodies of Christian men and women, as we have proved, and will daily
prove more and more most evidently unto the world, until all godly in the
world, knowing you by your fruictes, do forsake you (as did the godly
before, forsake the old Phariseis, Scribes, and high Priests, and followed
Christ and his holy Apostles) as we have partly already brought to a good
forwardness.

Thus you may see why we have departed from you, and returned to Christ, and
his holy Apostles, and the churches by them founded, from whom you have
departed. Return you to them, and we will not swerve from you: take away the
schism that you have made from Christ our savior and his holy Apostles, and
the churches founded upon their doctrine, and we will ioygne with you.
Otherwise, as long as you shall thus swerve from Christ, and his Apostles, and
their doctrine, cry you out against schismatikes never so much, we will never
ioygne with you, being the very schismatikes in deed. And thus much I
thought to say to the sentence of S. Augustine against Petilian, by M. Dorman
alleged, in the first front of his book, as against us, but in deed most
directly detectinge the schismatic sect of all Papists our adversaries,
that I might leave no one sentence of any old doctor by M. Dorman, though
colourably and falsely alleged, unanswered.

To the Reader.
I Do understand since the first printinge of this book, that much
mutteringe and whisperinge is made by certain Papists, about certain places
of my book, as false or faulty, and namely that place of S. Cyprian De
simplicitate Praelatorum, It is to be found fol. 49 b. of the first print and
fol. 50. b. of this print.
as by me guilefully alleged, by omitting that which makes (as they say)
for them and their Popes Supremacy. This Popish practice by mutteringe,
whisperinge, poinctinge, quarellinge and liynge, to attempt the defacinge of
the simple and plain truth, and to the maintenance of their own untruth,
is no new practice, neither happens it to me unloosed for at this time:
which they fail not to do to al men, and in all matters at all times. But as
I can not certainly answearevncertaine corner mutteringes, so as soon as I
shall see any certain thing set forth in Printe to the world against my
book, I will, God willinge, not leave it longevnanswered, as well to the
aduouchinge of my true dealinge, as to the declaration of
theirvniustquarellinge, and consequently, as I trust, to the more full
satisfaction of all reasonable Readers, that do love truth and sincerity.

A. Nowell.

Dorman. Fol. 1. A PRAEFACE, OR INTRODVCtion to the first Proposition.
THE blessed Martyr of God S. Cyprian, Nowell. It is Epist. ^.
writing to one Rogatianus a Lib. epist. 3. Epist. 11.
Bishop of his province has thiese words. Initia haereticorum, and ortus
atque conatus schismaticorum male cogitant ium haec sunt: vt sibi placeant, vt
praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. Sic de occlesia receditur sic al^are
prophanum for is collocatur: sic contra pacem Christi, and ordinationem, atque
vnitatem Dei rebellatur: Which is in English thus much to say: The
beginning of heretics; the first springyng up, and enterprise of schismatikes
thinkyng a miss in matters of faith, grows of pleasure that they take in
themselves, and of that, that being puffed up with pride, they contemn their
head, and governor appointed over the^. By this means straie they from the
Church. Thus is a profane altar placed without the doors, and thus rebel
they against Christ's peace, gods ordinance and unity.

Nowell.
Saint Cyprian writing this Epistle to Rogatian one of his fellow bishops
in Afrike, who had a disobedient deacon, has in the beginning of his letter
these words: Grauiter and dolenter. etc. I, and my fellow bishops here
present, were sore moved, most dear brother (says saint Cyprian) when we
had read your letters: wherein you complain of your deacon, that he
forgettyng your priestly place, and his own ministry, has grieved you with
his reproaches and wrongs. Thus far S. Cyprian. By which words it appears
that the mattier was between Rogatian a bishop in Afrike, and his deacon
disobediente to him: and therefore nothing apperteinyng to the bishop of
Romes supremacy at all. Which might well have appeared to the reader, had
master Dorman written but the iiij. lines next before the place by him
alleged, which are these: Ideo oportet diaconum. etc. That is to say:
Therefore it is mete that the Deacon, of whom you do write, do penance for
his boldness, that he acknowledge the honor of the priest, and do satisfy
the bishop his superior, with full humility. For the beginning of heretics,
the springyng up and enterprise of schismatikes, being evil minded, are these:
that they do stand in their own co^ceite, that they despise their governor
through swellyng pride. etc. As Master Dorman has out of saint Cyprian
alleged. This declares most evidently, that the sentence of S. Cyprian,
alleged by M. Dorman, apperteineth to Rogatian and his deacon, being
Africanes: and so generally, to all other bishops, and their inferiors, of
what country soever they be: and makes nothing for the Bishop of Romes
supremacy at all. If M. Dorman would prove hereby, yt every inferior minister
ought to be obedient to his own bishop, as his superior: or that the
disobedience of such is cause of schisms and heresies, (for so does S.
Cyprian mean) we grant the same. But if he would have it apperteine to the
bishop of Rome, or to make any thing for the Popes supremacy (as by that M.
Dorman calls this an introduction to the proof of his first proposicion,
which is, of the Popes supremacy: and by the process of this his preface
also, it does plainly appear, that he means) he abuses shamefully the
authority of S. Cyprian: and thinks all the world, saving himself alone,
asleape, and blind on both sides too: Considering that that in all this
Epistle, there is not one word of the bishop of Rome, or his supremacy, nor
he as much as once named therein.

Dorman. fol. I.
And again in an other place he writes thus: Vnde enim schismata and haereses
obortae sunt, nisi dum episcopus qui vnus Lib. 4. Epist. 9.
est, and ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, and
homo dignatione dei honoratus, ab indignis hominibus indicatur? Whereof [saith
he] do heresies and schisms spryng, but of this, that the bishop which is
one, and governs the church, is through the proud and arrogant presumption
of certain, contemned and set at naught, and being the man by Gods approbacion
allowed, and honored, is of unworthy men judged.

Nowell.
M. Dorman trusted that as soon as these words, The bishop which is one, and
governs the church is despised: the man by gods approbacion allowed, is of
unworthy me^ judged, should be read, or heard of the simple, they would
nothing doubt, but that ye Pope of Rome despised by such as we be, was meant
thereby. But this epistle, as it is written by S. Cyprian to one Pupianus, so
does it entreat of them two, and their matters: and nothing concerns the
bishop of Rome. For as before, by the head and governor appoincted, Rogatian
was meante, and not the Pope: so in this place, by the bishop, which is one,
and governs the church: by the man by Gods approbacion allowed, and
honored, and of unworthy men judged, Saint Cyprian himself, bishop of
Carthage, is meante: who was abused by the said Pupianus, and to whom he did
write this epistle, reprouyng him for his disobedience to his bishop, (S.
Cyprian) who was the only manne allowed by Gods approbacion, to govern the
Church of Carthage: and so by the said Pupian, as his inferior, to be
obeyed. Wherefore this place is as impertinente to M. Dorman his purpose, as
was the former place. For neither in this long Epistle is there as much as one
word of the bishop of Rome. I conclude therefore, that these places are by M.
Dorman falsely and shamelesly alleged, to make a show, or as he calls it, an
introduction to the bishop of Rome his authority, whereunto they apperteine
nothing at all, but only to the euersion thereof. And that M. Dorman has
thereby declared, what credit he deserves in the rest of his book,
continued with like impudente lies. Touching S. Cyprian his phrase of one
bishop of the church, which M. Dorman takes as signifiyng one bishop over
the whole church, for that the falsenesse of that collection, is at large
explicated after in a more pe^uliar place, I pretermitte here to speak of it.
Only this is most evident, in what sense so ever S. Cyprian takes these
words (one bishop that rules the church) the bishop of Carthage is that
one bishop, and not the bishop of Rome: and therefore that phrase of one bishop
rulyng the church, can make nothing for the bishop of Rome his supremacy, but
rather does utterly overthrow it, as apperteinyng specially to the bishop
of Carthage, in A^rike: not to the bishop of Rome, in Italy: and declaryng
in deed, the bishops of all places to be equal in authority, and
consequently ouerthrowyng the supremacy of one over all.

Dorman. fol. ^.
The very same thing, although in other words, Epist. 61. 2^ Episcopos
Italiam and Galliam.
Nowell. It is Epist. 69.
does S. Basile in an epistle written by him, to the bishops of Italy and
France, bewailyng therein the estate of his time, most plainly declare.
Whose words, because they do lively represent unto us, the most miserable
face of this our age: I have thought good to allege, and set before your eyes.
Ambitiones eorum qui dominu^ non timent, *praesidentias inuadunt, et in
propatulo de caetero impietatis praemiu^ proposita est prima seeds. Quare, qui
grauiores blasphemias protulit *ad populi episcopu^potior habetur. Perijt
authoritas sacerdotal^s, populi admoneri nolunt, praesides dicendi libertatem
non habent. Silent piorumora, permissumest autem dicere omni blasphemae
linguae. Prophanata sunt sacra. That is to He should have said,
say. The pride* and ambition of them which fear not our lord they invade
the chief roumes or places.
does invade and set upon their heads, and openly the chiefeste place, is
proposed as a reward for wickedness. And therefore he that can utter he is
compted more worthy to be the bishop of the people.
against the bishop of the people, most grievous and slanderous blasphemies,
is accounted of greatest price, and had in most estimation. The Authority of
priesthood is lost. The laite will not be admonished. The rulers be restreined
of liberty to speak. The mouths of good men keep silence. Every
blasphemous tongue is set at liberty. Al holy things are made profane.
Hitherto S. Basil.

Nowell.
M. Dorman does not (as he said he would) set Saint Basilles words
before your eyes: but does go about (as much as he can) to bleare your
eyes, that you should not see the truth. For he is so desirous to make some
show for the Popes supremacy, that he would by false translation wrest places
of the doctors, most impertinente, to make them seem to sound that way: and
therefore in this place, in steed of these words, praesidentias inuadunt,
they do invade the chief roumes: he has translated, they do invade and set
upon their heads. And again instead of these words, He that can utter most
grievous blasphemies (to wit against Christ and the holy ghost) is accounted
more worthy to be the bishop of the pople: he has thus translated, he that can
utter against the bishop of the people, most grievous and slanderous
blasphemies, is accounted of greatest price, and had in most estimation. Thus
has M. Dorman translated this place, whether negligently, as half a sleep,
according to his name: or ignorau^tly, as he that could not see, though broad
wakyng: or maliciously, wittyng and willing did he falsify it, to make it
seem as spoken of the bishop of Rome, whom he would have to be taken for the
head, and the bishop of the people: And us he would have to be taken for the
inuaders of the said head, and the blasphemours of that bishop, as it were of
God himself, against who^ properly is blasphemy. But let S. Basil himself
be judge, between M. Dorman, and me: whose words in th'epistle following,
where he entreats of the same matter, and the which also M. Dorman hereafter
allegeth, are these. Vnigenitus blasphematur, and non est qui contradicat:
Spiritus sanctus ignominia afficitur, and qui potest redarguere fugatur. etc.
To say: The only son of God (Christ) is blasphemed, and there is none to
gain say it: the holy ghost is reproched, and he that is able to reprove it,
is chased away. Thus far saint Basil. Lo M. Dorman, who is blasphemed,
not the bishop of the people, as you do dream, but our savior Christ, and
the holy ghost are blasphemed: and such blasphemers are judged most worthy
to be bishops of the people. This is the truth, this is saint Basilles
mind, that the blasphemer is made bishop of the people, and not, the bishop
of the people blasphemed. It is easy to perceive therefore, good readers, that
this is most far from all purpose, that he allegeth by patching here and
there, out of Basilius Magnus his. 69 epistle, to the Bishops of Italy and
France, and ouerpassing purposely sentences, directly touching the adversaries
them selves: where saint Basil declares the miserable state of all the
East Churches, even from Illyrike, to Thebaida (as he there says) by reason
of the disturbaunce that all good and godly bishops of the said East
Churches (which were of the Greeks for the most part) suffered by the
Arrians, whose heresies all the world does know how much we do abhor.
And therefore even the chief of the Hosius contra Brentium lib* 1. folio. 24.
and lib. 5. fol. 249.
Papists can not but therefore much commend us. What abuse therefore is this
of the readers, and of his own, and other men's time, that M. Dorman should
charge us with the crimes of those men, whose heresies and wickedness, it is
well known, we do most detest. But as before he abused certain words of
S. Cyprian: so here, because mention is made by S. Basil of these words:
Praesidentias inuadunt, prima seeds, and populi episcopus. That is to say,
They invade the highest roumes, the chief see, and the bishop of the people: he
trusted that the ignoraunte would take the said words, as meant of the
bishop of Rome, and his authority, and of our contempt of the same. But
both this. 69. epistle, and the epistle following, by master Dorman also
hereafter alleged, do manifestly declare, all these words to appertain to
the East churches, and to the Bishops of the East churches, and not to the
Bishop of Rome: and that the chief roumes so invaded, be the Bishoprikes of
the East churches, and not the Bishoprike of Rome: and the set of every of
them, is that chief see, or place proposed for a reward of wickedness, and
not Rome: and that the blasphemous Arrian is that bishop of the people: whoo^
if master Dorman will have to be the Bishop of Rome, I will not much
labor to let him. And so all this is altogether impertinent to his purpose, to
make any show for the Popes authority, or any rese^blaunce of our doings
against the Pope. For if he would have it to perteine to us, as doing the like
now as was dooen in saint Basilles time by the Arrians (For he says, it
does lively represente our times) why may not we with as good, and more
reason, affirm it rather to apperteine to the Papists them selves, and most
lively to represent their doings? It is their passing pride and ambition,
which shows that they fear not the Lord. They have invaded presidences,
not only ecclesiastical, but temporal also, having the titles of bishops,
leadyng the lives of temporal Lords and Princes. The more wicked that any of
them is, the more blasphemous, the more likely is he to clime to the highest
place, as his due reward. Which has been observed for a rule in the election
to the Papac^e, the higheste place of all, this many hundredth years. What
speak I of election? For the obteinyng of the which highest place among them,
so many frauds, simonies, poisonynges, bloody fightes, and murders have been
committed: as may to such, who will read their own stories, well appear.
Yea the verse Pope that now is, In oratione habita in consistorio Romae 1564.
Februario mense typis excusa.
Pius the fowerth, does pitifully complain, that not only Simonie, and
corruption by largition of huge sums of money, but also force and arms have
been attempted, to deprive him yet living, of his Papacy, and to place an
other. To proceed, the authority of Priests is lost amongst the Papists,
and turned into temporal lordship. The rulers of the clergy among the
Papists can not teach the people, they are so ignorant: and their lives be
such, that they have lost their liberty to speak against vices, where of
them selves are most guilty: and the laity does disdain to be by such
admonished. Where ye Papists do bear swaie, there are all godly men's
mouths stopped by their exceadyng cruelty: only blasphemous Friars have
their tongues at liberty. The holy Sacraments are profaned by their
superstitions: the holy word of God is corrupted by their gloses, and
Traditions. In sum, all holy things are by their unholy doings polluted
and defiled. And thus far touching as much as is by M. Dorman alleged out
of S. Basil, and how it does right well agree with our adversaries. Basil.
epist. 69.
Now S. Basil has more matter, which master Dorman has of purpose
ouerpassed, as in his own ears somewhat soundyng of Popish properties: to
wit, that the authority of Priests was lost, for that there Defecerunt qui
pascunt cu^ scientia ouile domini.
lacked in the clergy such as could with knowledge feed the Lords foulde:
for that Aconomias pauperum in proprias voluptates i^sumu^t
they of the clergy converted the provision, made in the church for the
poor, to their own pleasures: kept Annihilata est canonum sinceritas.
not the Canons and rules ecclesiastical: Licentia peccandi multa. etc.
used all liberty in sinnyng: came to dignities Ecclesiastical by men's
favor, more then their own worthiness: and Serui enim sunt eoru^ qui
beneficiu^ contulerunt.
so became their bond men, who bestowed upon such benefit or benefice. This
has also S. Basil in that Epistle. Now what ignorance of Gods law was in
the Popish clergy, until we stirred the^ up to their books: what riotous
wasting of ecclesiastical possessions upon their own pleasure, before we did
find fault with it: what breach both of Gods law, and of the old Canons
Ecclesiastical, yea even of their own Popish decrees also: what liberty and
impunitie of most wicked life, until all the world cried out upon them:
what suite, simonie and ambition for Ecclesiastical promocions, was amongst
the Popish clergy: how many of the^ for bribes or worldly favor were
promoted: how few for their own worthiness, was well known over all
Christendom, and can not yet be forgotten. I am sure therefore, that this
whole place of S. Basil may more justly be applied to the Papists, then to
us. And it is not unknown to M. Dorman, that it is in reasonyng the greatest
fault that can be, to bring that for him, which may be either common to
his adversaries, or returned back against himself. Wherefore I beseech thee
good reader, consider the sincerity of M. Dorman, who, upon such places as
are these, taken out of saint Cyprian, and S. Basil, as it were upon good and
substantial grounds, concluded thus.

Dorman. Fol. I.
To be short, there was never yet any heretic emo^gest Nowell. Hosius against
Brentius, lib 2 Fol. 42. has the same.
so many as from time to time, have continually troubled the Church of God,
that made not his first entry into his heresies, by the proclaimyng [as it
were] of open war, against the beautiful order of the church [whiche they
have always forseen to be to them, terribilis vt castrorum acies ordinata,
terrible as is the froonte of a battle well set in ordre] and against the
bishop of Rome, appointed of God to be here in earth, the lawful governor
and head thereof, not lackyng also therein great policy, that by strikyng the
shepherde, they might the easelier scatter the flock.

Nowell.
You see here the conclusion gathered out of that, which hitherto by him has
been alleged out of S. Cyprian, and saint Basil. And how the very words
written by saint Cyprian, in the places before mentioned, for the maintenance
of bishop Rogatian his authority, and for his own authority also, they
being both Bishops of Afrike, he is not ashamed here in his conclusion, to
place out of place, and to apply them to the proof of the bishop of Rome his
supremacy, whereunto they apperteine nothing at all: and to frame thereof this
leude argument: The entry into all heresies is, to make open wars against
the bishop appointed by God, to be the lawful governor and head of the
church. This is the mayor, and is proved by S. Cyprian: now follows his
minor, but the bishop of Rome is the bishop appointed by God, to be here in
earth the lawful governor, and head of the church: the conclusion: ergo,
The entry into all heresies is to make open war against the bishop of Rome.
I sai^ the minor, is false, and a false conclusion does follow of the same.
For the bishop (of whom S. Cyprian speaks) appointed by God to be lawful
governor, and head of the church, is in Carthage S. Cyprian himself: and
Rogatian, in his own Diocese: and not the Bishop of Rome, otherwise then in
his own Diocese only. And therefore open war to be made against them, in
their own Diocese, whereof they be lawful bishops, is the beginning of
heresies, and not to resist the bishop of Rome, vsurpyng to be head of the
universal Church, over the which, of right, he has no authority. For these
words. [the bishop appointed by God, to be the lawful governor and head of
the churche] if they make for any supremacy at all, they make for the
supremacy of Rogatian, and Cyprian bishops of Afrike, of who^ S. Cyprian
speaks them: and not of the bishop of Rome, of whom in those Epistles he
speaks not one word. And if they make not for the supremacy of Cyprian,
and Rogatian, they make for none at all: and if they make for no supremacy at
al, they were here without all cause alleged by M. Dorman, but only to
deceive the simple, by such a guilefull, and untrue introduction to his first
false proposition, of the Pope his supremacy. Now if he think yet that he
might make such a simple collection of S. Cyprian and S. Basil his words,
as this: That as the beginning of heresies in their time, was the contempt of
the inferiors toward their own Bishops (for so S. Cyprian teaches) so in
likewise is the contempt of the Pope, as the highest of all bishops, the
beginning of heresies now. First I deny the argument, for that it follows
not, though it be evil for the inferior to disobeie his own bishop, to whose
obedience in all godliness he is bounden. Therefore it is evil for a
stranger, not to obeie a strange foraine vsurpar, to whom he owes no duty
of obedience. Again I say, though it be the beginning of heresy, to disobey
Cyprian, Rogatian, yea or Cornelius, being godly and catholic bishops: yet is
it not likewise the beginning of heresies, to disobey any the late Popes of
Rome: who were not only no godly bishops (as were Cyprian, Rogatian, and
Cornelius) but both most wicked, and in deed no Bishops at all, but false
usurpers of worldly tyranny. Whom, for the subjects of an other christian
and lawful sovereign, to obeie, and not to disobeie, is Basilius Epistola.
70. Persequutionem patiuntur pastores, vt dispergantur oues gregis.
the beginning of heresies, treasons, and all other evils and mischiefs. In
the conclusion it is to be noted, when Basil speaks of all the Bishops of
the East, as the shepeherdes sufferyng persecution: master Dorman alteryng
the number, speaks it of the Pope, as the only shephearde: Remouyng the
matter from many Greek pastors persecuted, to one Roman depastor dispersyng
the flock, and persecutyng, not sufferyng persecution.

Dorman. Fol. 2.
Thus did in the time of S. Cyprian, Nouatus that Lib. 6. ca. 30.
Nowell. It is cap. 3. and not. 30. The like is Eusebii libr. 6. cap. 43. and
in sundry Epistles of S. Cyprian, who does speak most of Nouatianus.
great heretyke, who as Nicephorus reports of him, holdyng between his
hands, the hands of such as minded to receive of him, the blessed Sacrament
of the altar: used to them these words. A diura mihi per corpus et sanguinem
domini Jesus Christi nunquam te a me discessurum, et ad Cornelium (Romanus is
Episcopus fuit) reredituruinesse. Swear to me quod he, by the body, and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will never forsake me, nor return to
Cornelius, who was then bishop of Rome. So did in our time the scholars and
folovvers of Martin Luther. So did Ihon Calvin with his congregation at
Geneua: So do even at this time, in our unfortunate country, those wicked men
[apon whom I beseech almighty God to extend his mercie] who occupiyng the
places, and rooms of catholic bishops, being themselves indurate heretics,
cease not daiely most cruelly to practice, that lesson learned of their
auncestor Nouatus. For what manne admit they to any living, of whom they
exact not first this oath? Whom suffer they to continue in his living, if he
give not this oath? For the only refusal hereof, how many notable men of the
clergy, both for life and learning, suffer they to pyne away in prison? I
remember not hear, the great number of gentlemen, and other mere lay men not
included in the statute, of pooer young Scholars of both th'vniuersites, who
vvitheout all face of law (for, for the other theie pretended The banishement
of scholars from the vniu^rsities, for refusing to swear against the Pope.
a color) being not so much themselves spoiled of there colleages, as there
colleages, universities, yea there country self (which had of the most part
of them been likely to have received both help and comfort) spoiled and robbed
of the^: wander now abroad in dispersion, lamentyng the estate of their
miserable country.

Nowell.
As it is evident, that we are most far from Nonatus heresy, so is Nouatus
his oath not only unlike, but clean contrary to our oaths. The controversy
betwixt Cornelius and Nouatus was not, whether the bishop of Rome was the
supreme head of the church, (as it is now between us and the Papists) but
whether Cornelius or he was by right ye Bishop of Rome. And Nouatus exacted of
the Romans, or Italians, an oath, that they should cleave to him as their
bishop, against Cornelius, who was their true Bishop in Eusebius libr. 6.
cap. 43.
deed: which was unlawful to require. Our oaths be of obedience to our
natural Prince, due by Gods law: and of renouncyng of foraine usurped
power, or authority over our Prince and country: without the which, we ca^
not be faithful to our own sovereign. But let us consider his words. Thus
did Nouatus, says M. Dorman, as though Nouatus had made his first entry to
his heresies, by making open war against the bishop of Rome, appoincted by
God to be the lawful governor, and head of the church: and as though, he
made them renounce the said bishop of Romes supremacy. For his words, thus
did Nouatus. etc. (Which must needs have relation to that, which goes
before) do importe no less. And his appliyng of this oath of Nouatus, to our
oaths, inforceth the same. But Nouatus made neither the beginning, nor endyng
of his heresies, about any deniyng of Cornelius supremacy, as bishop of Rome:
nor exacted any oath for that purpose. For such usurped authority of the
bishop of Rome, was then unknown and unheard of, as shall hereafter most
plainly appear. But the Cyprianus li. 3. Epist. 13. Eusebius li. 6. cap. 43.
Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3.
oath which Nouatus required was, that they should acknowledge him for their
bishop, and not Cornelius who was their Bishop in deed. And further the said
oath concerned the maintenance of Nouatus his heresy: which was, that such,
as for fear of torments had renounced the Christian faith, or had offered
Incense to the Idols of the Gentiles, though they repented therefore, were not
to be received into the church again: which cruel opinion, as well S.
Cyprian bishop of Carthage, as Cornelius bishop of Rome, with all other godly
bishops, condemned: and taught the contrary true doctrine, that such also,
upon due repentance, might be received again into the church: according as
we this day, do also most earnestly believe and teach. Now as Nouatus being
in Italy required an oath, that their adherentes Romans, or Italia^s, should
not turn to Cornelius bishop of Rome, to acknowledge him for their bishop, to
be of his faith, and to communicate with him: so did the professors of the same
heresies travel in Afrike with their disciples there, being Africanes, that
they should not return to Cyprianus lib. 4. epist. 9.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, to communicate with him. Which, as it makes
nothing for any supremacy of S. Cyprian bishop of Carthage, no more makes the
other for any supremacy of Cornelius bishop of Rome. For though it be
unlawful to exact an oath of any, to disobeie their own godly bishops, what
proves that, that one may not swear to refuse the obedience of an aliene and
wicked vsurpar, and to keep him in the obedience of his own sovereign?

And where Nouatus began first his heresy in Afrik by striuyng against S.
Cyprian, as S. Cyprian himself Cyprianus li. 2. epi. 8 Ide^est Nouatus qui apud
^os primum discordiae and schisma it is incendium seminauit etc.
does witness, and not by striuyng first against Cornelius bishop of Rome,
(as M. Dorman untruly reports) the beginning of heresies is rather to make
war, and strief against the bishop of Carthage, then against the bishop of
Rome, as M. Dorman would have it. But there was then neither striuyng, nor any
oath required, concerning the bishop of Rome, as head of the church, as by
that whole process in S. Cypria^, Eusebius, and Nicephorus it does plainly
appear. Wherefore M. Dorman may be ashamed to forge so manifest a lie, as
that Nouatus exacted an oath against the Popes supremacy: or that we follow
Nouatus in exactyng like oath as he did. And seeing that we do most deteste
that cruel heresy of Nouatus, and do firmly believe, and earnestly teach
as did S. Cyprian, and Cornelius, it is as maliciously, as untruly done of M.
Dorma^, not only to apply to us the example of Nouatus oath, exacted for the
maintenance of his heresies: but also to call Nouatus our auncestor, and our
Bishops as his disciples, indurate heretics: who do most abhor both
Nouatus, and his heresy, and most earnestly, and pithilie in all their
writings and Sermons do impugn the same, by setting forth to their power,
the unspeakable mercy of God toward all sinners truly penitent. Whereby it
may appear to the discreate readers, that M. Dorman, and such other
malicious adversaries, pass not much whether they lie, or say truth, so
they may bring us, by hook or crook out of credit, and into the hatred of
the world. I believe also that M. Dorman in the alleagation of Nouatus his
oath, had a further respect to that he makes mention of the body and blood
of Christ: by the which, because Nouatus caused the^ to swear, M. Dorma^
thought belike, thereby to prove, or at least to make an insinuation, to the
simple, that the body and blood of Christ, should be corporally present in
the Sacrament: but the daiely oaths of blasphemous men, swearyng likewise in
his corporal absence, do confute that collection. And to the end, that M.
Dorman should gain nothing in that matter of the Sacrament, by this place, I
have thought good to admonish the reader, that the said place of Nicephorus
and Eusebius (of whom Nicephorus had it) is directly against Nicephorus lib.
6. cap. 3. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
their transubstantiation, and for our usage now in the church. The words of
Nicephorus a little before the place by M. Dorman alleged, are these: Quum
enim oblationes offerret, qui mos sacerdotibus est, and iam ad distributionem
panis peruenisset, data cuilibet part sua, pro eo quod cum gratiarum eam
action percipere debebant, iurare miseros coegit. Vtranque enim percipientium
manum comprimens, non prius eas remisit, quam iuratu^ ab eis esset: [vtar autem
verbis eius conceptis] Adiura mihi per sanguinem and corpus domini nostri Jesus
Christi, nunquam te a me discessurum, and ad Cornelium [Romanus hic fuit
episcopus] rediturum esse. Miseri autem illi non prius quod acceperant,
degustarunt, quam se illi deuouerunt. That is to say, When Nouatus made his
offerynges, as the manner of Priests is, and now was come to the distribution
of the bread, he, deliueryng every one his part, in the steed of due thanks
geuyng in the receiuyng of the same, compelled the wretched men to swear:
for he laiyng hold on both the hands of the receivers, did not let them go,
until they had sworn: (for I will use his own very words) Swear to me by
the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will never forsake
me, nor return to Cornelius, who was then bishop of Rome. And those wretched
me^ did not taste that, which they had received, before they had by oath
assured themselves to him. etc. Thus far Nicephorus. Eusebius, who has the
very same words, calls it bread also. And so if M. Dorma^ thought this
place by the way, might serve for their purpose in the matter of the lords
supper (which he here calls the sacrament of the altar) he was far
deceived. For both Nicephorus and Eusebius calling it after the consecration
(as they term it) bread, and Nicephorus saying that they tasted that which
they received, that is to say, bread: and by the circumstances it appearyng,
that the use of the primitive church than, was agreeable to our use now, in
geuyng the Sacrament into the receivers hands, both is their
transubstantiation clean euerted, by two witnesses, even by M. Dorman himself
chosen: and we are declared by the same witnesses, to be the very folowers
of the primitive church, in that usage of deliueryng of the Sacrament into
the receivers hands. For the which yet they charge us, as horrible profaners
of the holy Sacrament. But to cloak these matters, where Nicephorus calls
it the distribution of the bread, M. Dorman calls it the blessed sacrament
of the altar. And where Nicephorus says, he gave every one his part, before he
caused the^ to swear: M. Dorma^ says, he caused such as minded to receive of
him the blessed Sacrament of the altar, to swear: where as in deed, they had
received it of him into their hands before: as is also in Nicephorus book in
the margente, noted by Ioannes Langus, the translatoure Joan. Langus. Ea
tempestate laicis etia^ Eucharistiai^ manus dabatur: quod postea in Ecclesia
mutatum est.
thereof, and councelour to the late Emperor Ferdinandus, that the custom of
the Church then was, to deliver the Sacrament into the receivers hands. But
in deed this is M. Dorman his ordinary custom in alledgyng of authors, to
pass over with silence that which is against him, and to take that which
makes a show for him, and withal to add that is not in the author, in
such sort, as the ignorante would think it to be the authors very words.
I know, it is impertinente to entreat of the matter of the Sacrament, in
this controversy of the Popes supremacy: but M. Dorman, of purpose as it
seems, does mingle such things by the way: which, if they be there
answered, shall make a mingle mangle of diverse matters unpleasant to the
reader: and if they be passed over not answered, as impertinent to the present
treaty, he trusted it would serve to inta^gle the simple, and withal to be
an occasion to his favorers, to triumph in the mean time, as though we
dissembled the matter by silence, for that we could say nothing to it. But to
return to the purpose again: whereas M. Dorman has here in one half leaf,
heaped a great number of euidente lies, as it were, in a packet together, I
have thought good to put the reader in remembrance of them, in order as they
lie. The first lie is, that after his discourse out of S. Cyprian, of the
Bishop appoincted by God, to be the governor and head of the Church, he
says, the bishop of Rome is that head, whereas by S. Cyprian, the contrary
is evident: and that himself, 1.
or bishop Rogatian is that head, whereof he speaks, as has been fully
heretofore declared. The second is, that to make war against the Bishop
of Rome, is the first entry to heresy. Whereas S. Cyprian 2.
teaches, that the contempt of every godly bishop in his own diocese, by
such as are their inferiors, is the beginning of heresies. The third is, that
he says: Thus did Nouatus: to wit, that Nouatus 3.
made hi^yrst entry into his heresies, by making open warr^ against the bishop
of Rome, appoincted by God to be in earth the governor and head of the
Church: which is a double lie, and maiestande for two. For Nouatus began his
heresies first in Afrike, and contended with S. Cyprian, before he troubled
Cornelius Cyprianus lib. 2. epist. 8.
at Rome, as by the testimony of S. Cyprian is evident. Wherefore his entry
to his heresies, was his proclaimyng of open war against S. Cyprian,
appoincted by God, to be the governor and head of the Church, as S. Cyprian
himself says. The other part of this lie is, that he says, Nouatus made
war against him, as the governor and head of the church: for his words,
Thus did Nouatus, must needs be referred to that which went before: but
Nouatus took not Cornelius, but himself to be bishop of Rome, as does by
the story evidently appear: wherefore the strief between them was not,
whether Cornelius as bishop of Rome was head of the church (as M. Dorman would
have it seem) but whether he, or Nouatus were bishop of Rome. The fourth lie is
a double lie also: where he reports that Nicephorus says, that Nouatus
holdyng 4.
between his hands, the hands of such as minded to receive of him the
blessed Sacrament of the altar, used these words. etc. For Nicephorus has no
such words, but he says thus: when Nouatus was come to the distribution of
the bread, he geuyng every one his part, caused them to swear. etc. And this
doublelie, the receiuyng of the blessed Sacrament of the altar, in s^eede of
the distribution of bread, and they that minded to receive it, where as they
had received it already into their hands, he made of purpose to save their
transubstantiation harmless, and to keep it secret, that our usage in
deliueryng the Sacrament into the receivers hands, is agreeable to
th^^rimitiue church. The^ifte lie is, that he says, we do swear men in
such sort as Nouatus did: and that no man 5.
can either get any living, or kept that he has without making of this oath:
Meaning such as Nouatus exacted. But Nouatus exacted an oath of the Romans
to cleaus to him against their own Bishop, which was unlawful. We
require an oath of subjects Englishemen, of obedience to their and our
natural Prince, and of renouncyng all foreign and usurped power. Again
Nouatus caused them to swear that his heresy was the truth, and that
Cornelius true doctrine was heresy. We have no such matters in hand, but
are on Cornelius side against Nouatus, teaching the same doctrine that
Cornelius did, abhorryng the heresy that Nouatus taught. Wherefore in this
manifold fable of M. Dormans, amplified by his Rhetorike, look how often he
says, so did Luther, so did Calvin, so do those wicked men in our country:
as often, as he says: They exacted this oath. etc. If he give not this oath.
etc. So many times as M. Dorma^ does repeat these words, this and so, so
many loud, lewd lies has he made, one upon an others back: whereas in deed
it is neither so, nor so.

This M. Dormans deceiptfull dealyng, most usual unto him, was the cause why I
said once in public place, that I had not found any one authority by him,
(as far as then I had read) truly alleged, besides his untrue notyng of
the places in ye marge^t. Which, though it sometime happen by negligence of
Printers, M. Dorman yet in this book, being otherwise so diligently printed,
may seem of set purpose to have done, lest such as would be inquisitiue,
should to speedely find out the lewdenesse of his allegations, seruyng nothing
to his purpose: unless perhaps master Dorman did never use his own eyes,
in vewyng of these places, but did credit his collectours therein altogether,
as in the process of his doings does credibly appear that he did. For in one
leaf, or little more, of four only places by him alleged, three thereof be
noted untruly, that he might therein agree with his Fol. 1. Episto. 11. for 9.
guilefull and untrue appliyng of places of the doctors Fol. code^ epi. 61.
for. 69. Fol 2. in principio, cap. 30. for cap. 3.
and authors, altogether impertinente to the matter he treats of. Which as
in all places he fails not to do, so has he in this place, as you se, well
performed the same. Who also procedyng therein, calls Nouatus our ancestour,
and our bishops, as his disciples, at his pleasure, he calls, indurate
heretics: where it is known to all that understand, that we most abhor
Nouatus, and his heresies: and goes on saying, that for the only refusal of
this oath, how many notable men of the clergy, both for life, and learning,
suffer they to pine away in prison? M. Dorman, this oath ye talk of, was
never required of them: and they pine not, but fare well, and of other men's
cost too, a great many of them: they be well fed, and in good liking: and
some of them so fat, as they may wallowe too. They neither sit, nor ha^g in
stocks, by legs or fingers, nor have their necks in chains: they are
neither whipped, nor scourged, as some of them used others. In sickness time
they had their progresses, both for health, and pleasure too. Where M. Dorman
says, that gentlemen, lay men, and scholars of the university are put to the
said oath (which in deed is of due obedience to their natural Sovereign)
without all face or color of law, and for refusing thereof are spoiled of there
country, and wander in dispersion, lamentyng the miserable estate of their
said country: I doubt not, but had they refused to swear to that false Romish
usurper, in ye time of his tyra^nie in England, there would have been face and
color of law enough found, to have spoiled the^ of their lives also, by
most cruel death. And such gentlemen and scholars, as could so easiy swear
fidelity to such a foreign false usurper, and would wa^der in dispersio^,
rather then take the oath of due obedience of their natural prince, do
worthily wa^der in dispersio^: and mase more ius^ly bewail their own wicked
folly, the cause thereof, then the miscrie of their country: which, thanks
be to God, is in no such case, but in far better then they would have it to
be. Had we feared no worse at your hands, then any of these, whose case you
so lament, do suffer, we would never have forsaken our natural country,
wandering in far more miserable dispersion, then you do: we would in our
country have bitterly lamented, the pitiful case of our country, then most
miserably oppressed with Popish superstition, and foreign tyra^nie: and,
would you have been satisfied with our tears, and not have forsed us most
cruelly to have shed all the drops of blou^ in our bodies, and very
hearts, we should not have thought our selves to have suffered any persecution
at all, but rather to have received great friendeship, and courtesy at your
hands. But what fables so ever it does please M. Dorman to fourge about our
lawful oaths, and what cruelty so ever he feigneth us to use, making a great
matter of every trifle, touching the Papists, it is true, and to true, that
for refusyng of that most unlawful, and wicked oath of the Popes supremacy,
and not acknowledgyng of his usurped authority, a great number both of
learned, and unlearned: as well of the laity, as of the clergy: of women, as
men: of young, as old, have lost not only their livings, and all their goods,
but also as many of them as escaped not out of their country into miserable
exile, were apprehended and cast into most vile prison, being not set, but
hanged, as I have said, in stocks, and yrons, by feet, hands, and neck.
And after long punishments, and pinyng, most painful, and pitiful also, to
al, saving only pitilesse papists, have finally lost their lives, being
most cruelly consumed by terrible flames of fire into ashes, if they might
obtain so much mercy, as to escape that usual, long, lingeryng, and
roastyng in slack and smokie fire. And yet M. Dorman thinks it much that
they, who have in this wise used others, for the refusyng of most wicked
oaths, and thauthoritie of a false foreign usurper, should themselves lack
some part of their livings, and liberty, for refusyng to acknowledge the
lawful authority of their own natural sovereign. And further, whereas M.
Dorman does make such a tragedy, about our most lawful oaths of due
obedience to our natural sovereign, and of the refusyng of foreign usurped
power: I shall, in place convenient, make good proof, that that false usurper,
the bishop of Rome, has both wickedly exacted most unlawful oaths, not
only of subjects, but of Princes, and emperors also: and has more wickedly
dispensed with the lawful oaths of subjects, of obedience to their own
natural soueraines, and procured them to rebel against their Princes, to the
great effusion of Christian men's blood, and utter decaie of all christendom.

Dorman. Fol. 2.
Of the which they may, and we all justly now say, Epist. 70.
Nowell. All this place has M. Dorman translated out of Hosius lib. 2. contra
Brentium fol. 92. b.
much more then did S. Basil of the persecution in his time. He only
complained that the Church doors were shut up, that th'altars lacked that
spiritual worship, that should have been done upon the^, that there were no
assembles of Christian men, that learned men bare no swaie, that there was no
wholesome doctrine taught, that the feasts and holy days were not kept,
that the prayers in the night were ceased. To that holy It is written to the
bishops of France and Italy: which M. Dorman A co^pitison between the
complaiure which S. Basil made of his time, and that which we may make of
ours. disse^bled, for that the bishops of France are placed before the
Italian bishops: geuyng a shreude suspicion of no supremacy at Rome i^ those
days. But he expressed before, to whom S. Basils other epistle was written,
the Italia^ bishops being first named.
father it seemed a great outrage, that the churches were shut up: what
would he (think ye) then say were he alive in these days, when of our
Churches he should see, some made the dvvellyng houses of private men, other
some turned into barnes, or stables, other clean overthrown, and made even
with the ground, and those that remain whole [so much worse then if they
had been altogether shut vp] left open for heretics to pollute, with
schismatic service and deuelishe doctrine? It grieved S. Basil that
th'altars should lack the spiritual service, which was not neither for any
mislike that men had therein, but because in that grievous persecution of the
Christians, they could not be found that durst do it. And could he have taken
it well to have seen them broken, defaced, and quite ouerthro wen: yea
(which is a crime so horrible, that to write it I tremble) in those places
in which the altars stood, vvhereon was wont in that spiritual sacrifice to
be offered up, the most precious body, and bloudde of Christ: Oxen and
beasts more unclean, to be fed? He lamented that learned men were not
esteemed, that they were not provided of livings: and would he not much more
lamente, to see them deprived of those which they had, and Shoemakers,
VVeuers, Tinckers, Cowherdes, Broom men, Russians for felonies burned in the
hands to be put in their places? Then was no wholesome doctrine taught, now
is there nothyngelles taught but poisoned and unwholesome. Then were there no
holy days kept, nor hymns used in the night. Now are they accounted to be
superstition.

Nowell.
M. Dorman would induce the reader to think, that Necesse est aut adorare
imaginem. etc. Et mox vnigenit' blasphematur, Spiritus sanct' ignomi^ia
afficitur, etc. Which words also do declare the leudnes of M. Dormans
translation of Basiles former place, as though the bishop, and not Christ, had
been blasphemed. As is before declared.
we are like to the Arrians in wicked opinions, and in persecution of the true
church of Christ: but who so will read that. 70. epistle of Basil, shall find
it otherwise. We neither worship our selves, nor enforce any other to worship
the Image that Basil treats of in that 70 epistle: we are no Idolaters, nor
teach false doctrine: we have not many gods, less, and greater: we abate
nothing (as did the Arrians) but most to our power set forth the glory and
deity of Christ. Let the Papists see that these poinctes touch not
themselves rather. We do not sequester the holy ghost from the glorious
Trinity, as did those Arrians in saint Basils time: whose mischief, and
their own misery, he in this epistle does deplore and bewail. Wherefore his
sayings in that Epistle apperte^ne nethyng to us, who are nothing guilty of
those crimes and heresies: but they are brought in by dreaming M. Dorman
without any cause, and biside all purpose, saving only that in readyng Hosius
Lib. 2. aduersus Brentium. Flo. 92. b.
he found this place alleged, and thought good to follow him therein, and to
translate it into his book. But now touching our very case: why did not these
bishops of the East write their humble petition, for help in their miseries,
severally to the bishop of Rome, as head of all the church: but do write
to all the bishops of France and Italy indifferently, without any mention of
the bishop of Rome at al? So far of is it, that they made any special
mention of him, as the chief or head over all the church: yea placyng also
the bishops of France, before the Italian bishops, The inscriptio^ of Basil
his. 70 epistle. Pie^tisfimis reuera, ac charistimis fratr^bus, and in
ministerio co^sortibus vnanimis, per Gallia^ and Italiam episcopis, Basilius
Caesariae Cappadociae episcopus.
(though M. Dorman do craftily dissemble the same) and calling them
altogether brethren, and fellows in the ministry, which they would never
have dooen, had they had this opinion of his supremacy, that master Dorman,
and other Papists do now defend and maintain. But in the said. 70. epistle
the said East Bishops, which do not once speak of the Pope, do pray the
French and Italian bishops, to make humble suit to the Emperor, that he by
his authority would repress their enemies the Arria^s, and releue their
miseries: which makes rather for the Emperor his supremacy in the church,
then for the bishops of Rome. Now where M. Dorman speaks of persecution, as
he did a little before of our most cruel practice, I refer it to the
judgment of all the world, whether our adversaries or we be more cruel
persecutours: and whether have suffered more persecution, they, or we: and
whether they or we do come more nere to that example of persecution, by S.
Basil in this. 70. epistle described, I pray thee good reader judge
indifferently. First S. Basil shows that the persecution was most Basil.
episto. 70. Persequutio, and persecutionu^ horrendissima apprehendit nos, and
afflictiones quas impossible est auribus suscipere, propterea quod nullus
sermo reperiatur qui declaret. etc.
horrible, cruel, and bloody, such as was impossible to be expressed with
words: and that Maleficus quidem nullus. etc.
thieues, murderers, and other offenders were more reasonably, and
mercifully dealte with, then godly men were in that persecution: that they
were apprehended Quida^ neque nouerunt accusatores etc sed in tempesta nocte
violenter rapti i^ exilium fugati sunt. etc.
in the night, and neither knowing their accusers, nor co^uicted of any crime,
were banished, or put to death. And that there was continual Gemitus fiunt
populoru^ etc.
mournyng, weepyng, and sighyng every where: that because the Quia Christianorum
nomen perseque^tibus incumbit. etc.
persecutours had the name of Christians, they would not suffer such as they
put to cruel death, to have the names of martyrs, and that Father Latimer,
Reuere^de Cra^mer, god^^ learned Rid^^y, burned in ^^^^diche.
neither No^ canicies apud iudices iniquitatis venerabilis est. etc.
age, and a hoare white head, neither godliness, and a life virtuously led
had any reverence with the persecutours. He shows that the persecutors were
rich and wealthy, but they No^ ob tenu^ate conte^pti ^ertatem di^^endi non
ha^^mus. etc.
who were persecuted were poor men, and for their poverty contemned, not
having liberty to speak. He calls this horrible persecution ^^ Flagelloru^
^^mmae tradi. ^^d Timoth.
fire by a figure, but the persecution that we suffer is by fire in deed, by
the which our adversaries try us, and sifte us into ashes: so that saint
Paul's prophecy of many, who in the last days should be tried by fire, is in
deed, and without figure accomplished in us. Consider I pray you, good
readers, these circumstances of most extreme cruelty in those persecutours,
whom S. Basil speaks of, and judge whether we, or our adversaries do the
like: and withal consider how reasonably M. Dorman resembles us to the said
persecutours, and themselves to them that were so persecuted. Now where he
goes about to burden us with envy of Churches, either pulled down, or
altered to other use, and of their altars destroyed (much like as the rebels
did burden Henry the eight, in the. 28. year of his reign) we make this
answer: Truth it is, that the foundations of Abbeis and Chauntries, Pro
redemptione animarum fundatorum The true causes of the ruin of Abbeis.
suorum and progenitorum ipsorum. etc. For the redemption of the souls of
their foundours, and their progenitors souls. etc. (as in the said
foundations appears more at large) were so unsure and weak, or rather wicked,
that they could no longer bear such huge superstructions and buildings, as
were laid upon them. For the Idolatry, supersticion, hypocrisic, and
wickedness of the Monks, Nuns, and Priests themselves were grown so
great, and so heavy now, that no foundacions, though sure and good, were
hable any longer to bear and abide them. Let the horrible history of their
dark, dreadful, and most diuellishe doings, notified to king Henry the
eight, and after to the Parliament house, by the report of the visitours,
retournyng from their visitacion of Abbaies, and the Monks and Nuns
themselves, in their own confessions subscribed with their own hands, be a
proof thereof: which being regestered in a black book, might more justly
be called doumes day, then any record this day remainyng in England,
reuealyng such matter, as they had thought should have remained hid unto the
great day of revelation of all secreates, if ever they looked for it. Now
truly the monstrous Monachorum monstra monasteria euerterunt.
lives of Monks, Friars, and Nuns have destroyed their Monasteries and
Churches, and not we. Concerning their foundations so contrary to the merits
of Christ our savior, that is come to pass of the^, that our savior himself
foreshewed. Omnis plantatatio. Math. 15. b. 13.
etc. Every plantacion not planted by my heavenly father, shall be plucked up by
the roots. Touching their impiety toward God, and wickedness of life: that
is fulfilled, that was foreshewed by the Prophets, Esaie, and Jeremy upon
Babylon and Jerusalem: Esaie. 14. d. 19. and. 34. d. 13. Hier. 9. d. 11. and
10 d 21. and. 50. ^. 40. and. 51. d. 37.
and consequently, upon all wicked cities and places, where Gods law shall
likewise be transgressed: where like Idolatry, like fornication, bodily and
ghostly shall be committed: where shall be found like foolishenesse,
ignorance, and blindness of the Pastors, heads and rulers, that is to say:
that their busldynges shall be made heaps of stones: that brambles and briers
shall grow, where their pleasant lodgings were: that Oules, night
scritches, and Dragons shall make their neastes, and houle and seritche, where
the voice of bankettyng and joy was wont to be heard: and that their houses
shall never be builded again. And that when men shall pass by, and say,
why has the Lord thus dooen to this great City, to these goodly Abbeies,
Nunries, and Fratries? Answer shall be made, for that they have forsaken the
covenant of the Lord their God, and have worshipped strange Gods, and have
served them. These, M. Dorman, be the true causes of such horrible
destructions and desolacions, as have in our time come upon Monasteries, and
other houses and churches. Well it may be, that the Gospel of Christ (which
M. Dorman calls heresy) was occasion of their ruin, Esai. ^. c. 14. Luc. 2.
^. 34. Roma. 9. g. 32. 33. 1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7.
as Christ is the ruin of all infidels, or that the co^etousnesse of men,
seeking their own gain, may be judged of many, the cause thereof. But the
very true causes in deed, of this their subversion, were their wicked
foundations laid by their first founders, and the superstructions of
Idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy, and abominable life, which they, falsely
named religious men and Priests, heaped so hugely upon the said foundations.
Had their foundations been good and sure, had their works been honest and
godly, they should by the light of the Gospel have gotten praise, and honor:
and their works had not to their shame been discovered by the light, and by
the 1. Cor. 3. c. 13.
heat of the triyng fire, utterly consumed. But being as they were, they loved
darkness, they hated and fled loan. 3 c. 19. 20
the light, least their works should be seen: and because they could no
longer hide so huge wickedness in so clear light, which discovers even
small blemishes: it came to pass that God by his officers, stirred thereto
through their counterfeite holiness, and so double wickedness, reueiled by
the said light, executyng his justice by the fire of his dreadful and
terrible indignation, consumed all together: so that the houses were destroyed,
and they dispersed. Touching the name of altares, which M. Dorman so gladly
catches hold of here in saint Basil (as he did before in S. Cyprian) where
we call it the Lords table, we have for us good Lib. 3. epist. 9.
authority. First that Christ instituted the Sacrament at a table, and not at
an altar, is most manifest: except M. Dorman would have us think, that men
had altares in steed of tables, in their private houses in those days: but
our savior expresselie saying, that the hands of him, who should betraie him,
were upon the table, Luc. 22. c. 21.
takes away all doubtyng. And S. Paul also 1. Cor. 10. c. 21.
calls it Mensam dominica^, the Lord his table. Sure I am that M. Dorman and
all the Papists with him can not say so much out of the scriptures of the
new Testamente, for their altares, as I have alleged for the Lords table:
they may therefore go and join themselves to the Jews, as in multitude of
Iewishe ceremonies, so in altares also: as it seems in deed, they would
both become themselves, and make us too Jews, rather then christians. If S.
Basil, and some other old writers call it an altar, that is no proper, but a
figurative name, for that as in the old law their brent offeringes and
sacrifices were offered upon the altar, so are our sacrifices of prayer, and
thanks giving etc. offered up to God at the Lords table, as it were at an
altar. But such kind of figurative speech ca^ be no just cause to set up
altares, rather then tables: unless they think that their crosses also should
be turned into altares, for that like phrase is used of them, where it is
said, Christ offered by himself upon the altar of the cross. Now the old
doctors do call it the Lords table, Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in. 2. Cor. Augus. Tract.
26. in loan. and multi multis locis.
usually, truly, without figure, and agreablie to the scriptures. Concerning
the spiritual worship or service of God, or sacrifice, if you will (seeing it
is also mentioned in S. Basil) due to be done at the Lords table, which, as
before is noted, he calls an altar, it is not lackyng in our Churches at the
Lords table: that is to say, true repentance of heart, which is, as the
Prophet calls it, a service and a sacrifice pleasant Psalm. 51. b. 19.
unto God, the offering up of our prayers and praises unto God: which service
and sacrifice of praise, as the Psalm witnesses, does honor God: and
specialie, Psalm. 50. c. 14. d. 23.
that sacrifice of thanks giving, most peculiar to this altar or Lords
table, and to that holy Sacrament, having thereof a peculiar name, being
called with the Greeks (...), to say, thanks geuyng, for the grateful
remembrance of that one Sacrifice offered by our savior once for all: which
sacrifice of thanks Hebre. 10.
geuyng we ioynctly with other present do offer up to Christ our savior in
the memorial by him left, and by faith in our hertes do communicate his
precious body and blood, a sacrifice by himself offered for us. Neither are
our oblations, or offerynges to the poor lackyng, when we come to this altar,
which S. Paul philipp. 4. d. 18
also calls a sacrifice acceptable, and pleasant to God: whereas you
Papists have no such thing, but only the bare word Offertorium, without
any offering for the poor: saving that you did not forget to receive the
offerynges for your selves at the usual offering days, and when any Dirige,
or Months mind did fall. Thus you se, master Dorman, that we have even that
same spiritual worship, service, and sacrifice too (if you so will) due to be
done at this altar, that is to wit, the Lords Table, which S. Bafill
speaks of here: and any other altar or service he means not, nor knew
none. And were you not altogether to gross, S. Basil so oi^te speaking of
spiritual worshipping, and spiritual service, might somewhat reform your
carnal and sensual understanding. You see we do not stick to Spiritualis
cultus, spirituales gratiae.
grant you not only a spiritual worship and service, but a sacrifice too,
which yet has no need of your altares, framed to your selves upon this false
fantasy, that the body and blood of Christ are there offered by the
Priests for the quick and dead, with the abuse of that distinction of the
bloody, and unbloody offering of Christ's body, applied to the same: which
is altogether a false fable, and a vain dream most mete for M. Dorman. The
scriptures do thus teach us, that Christ our savior once for all offered up
his body and Hebr. 10. c. 10. n. 14.
blood upon the altar of the cross, the one and only sacrifice Phil. 5. a. 2.
Hebr. 10. c. 10. 12. 14.
of sweet savor, to his father: by the which one oblatio^ of the body of
Christ, a sacrifice for our sins, once for ever offered, and no more to be
offered by any man, we be sanctified and made perfect. Wherefore the popish
Priests which do repeat often the sacrifice of Christ's death, as they do
teach, thereby, as much as in the^ lies, do take away the efficacy and
virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ's death, making it like to the sacrifices of
the old law: the imperfection of which sacrifices, S. Paul does prove by the
often repetitio^ of the same. For the continuance whereof their priests also
needed succession: but Christ is a Priest for ever, without succession, and
his sacrifice perpetual, without repetition; as the Apostle plainly teaches.
Our Hebr. 10. c. ^.
service and sacrifice now, is the often and thankful remembrance of that
only sacrifice, in the receiuyng of the holy Sacrament at the Lords table,
according to his own institution: Hoc facite in memoriam mei: do this in
remembrance of me: with spiritual feadyng by faith also upon that his most
precious body and blood, so by him for us offered. Touching the pullyng 4.
Reg. 18. c. 22 4. Reg. 23. 2. Para. 14. a. 3. 2. Para. 17. b. 6. 2. Para. 31.
a. 1. 2. Para. 34. a. 4
down of your altares, I answer: they are justly destroyed, as were those
wicked altares by Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias godly kings of Judah
destroyed. For as abominable Idolatry was committed on, and before your
altares, as ever was upon and before those. If you require proufes hereof, you
shall have them in their due places of the Mass, and of Idolatry to Images.
In the mean season, if you think it enough, only to call us heretics, and
to affirm that we pollute such Churches, as yet remain, with schismatic
service, and diuelishe doctrine: and that we do account hymns in the night,
and holy days to be superstition: If you M. Dorma^, think it enough only to
say thus, to prove nothing, to rail much: seeing all is not Gospel, that
Dauus or Syrus do speak in plaiyng their parts, let it serve me at this
present also, to say the contrary: that we teach no doctrine, but such, as
is agreeable to God his word, and therefore be no ^eretikes: that we have,
and keep our Sabbath days, and holy days too, as well as ever did the
Papists: and do sing as good and godly himnes in the day, as ever did they
your Nightyngal^es, in the dark, and better too. And when we have both thus
said, to leaus the judgment of both our sayings to the discreate reader
for this time, rather then continually, at every occasion by you catched, to
make a confusion of diverse matters, which it seems, you have purposely
sought. And thus far to that, which M. Dorman has alleged out of S.
Basil, as against us. And I do much marvel that he did not rehear^e these
words of saint Basil in the same place also. Vnum est crimen. etc. to say:
There is one fault which is now vehemently condemned and punished: to wit,
the diligente observation of the tradicions of the fathers. These are saint
Basilles words in effect, which omitted by master Dorman, do signify
that either he read not the place himself, or was more then half a sleep
when he did read it, else would he never have let it so escape him. But we
answer to such as have alleged it. The traditions of such fathers as were S.
Basilles fathers, and lived in the primitive Church, we esteem as we ought
to do. The traditions of our later stepfathers, unborn long after S. Basilles
death, who be the children of that stepdame the Popish Synagoge, we contemn
and condemn, for that they have preferred their said traditions, before the
law of God, and the institution of our savior Christ. And thus much for our
agreement with S. Basil. Now when M. Dorman beside S. Basil, and besides the
book too, as they say, affirms, that learned me^ are deprived of their
liuinges, and Shomakers, weauers, Tinkers, Ruffians, Felons, etc. put in their
places, it is but a floorish of his Rhetorike: he is not able to name any one
such in a learned Papists room, or any of such dishonestie, as ruffians, or
felons in our ministry: though it be not unknown, that there has been great
plenty of popish priests, both felo^s, and traitors too. But if M. Dorman
will make a reasonable comparison, he must compare the learned of our side,
with the learned of their sort: or their unlearned sir Ihons, with our poor
ministers. And I doubt not, though our Bishops be not so well learned in
Canon Law, in matters of contention about worldly controversies, in bearyng
of temporal office, and authority, and in comely courtly behavior, and
worldly pomp, as are their Bishops: yet in all kinds of learning, manners
and qualities, by S. Paul in the 1. Timo. 3. 2. Tit. 1. c. 7*
office of a Bishop required, there shall be found as many learned
bishops, and as able, and willing to do the duties of good and godly
bishops [per se, no^ per alium] amongst us even at this day, as ever were
emongeste the Papists, or in England, fith the first Bishop was created in
it. And I trust likewise, that our Clergy, next under our bishops, shall
not be found any whit inferior in learning, nor honesty of life, to theirs.
Therefore M. Dorman, when it pleased you to say, that Cowheardes, and Broume
men, are placed in learned men's roumes, you do but fable, as you are wont
to do. And that we lack a great many of learned men to furnishe all
ecclesiastical offices, we may thank you Papists, who have mou^e crnellie
consumed so many of them to ashes, and thereby driven us to supply small cures
with some honest artificers, exercised in the scriptures: whom, neither saint
Peter the Fisher, nor saint Paul the Tente maker (who Joan. 21. a. 3. Act.
18. a. 3.
both used their arts after their calling to the Apostleship) would so
despise, as do you M. Dorman. And I do much marvel of your judgment, who
do place Peter the Fisher in the higheste room above all Bishops, and can
not suffer other honest artificers, sufficiently exercised in the Scriptures,
to have any place at all in the inferior ministry. Which honest poor men,
if they have succeeded in the places, not of learned men, as you do untruly
say, but in the steed of your Popish sir Ihons lack latin, and all good
learning, and honesty too: who took the change of our Church Service, from
Latin into English so greuouslie, for none other cause, but for that they
could read no English, a great many of them, when they were put to it (such
great clerks they were) and were otherwise, by trial found, in all
qualities far more meet to be Tinkers, Cobblers, Cowheardes, yea
Swineheardes, and Bearewardes too, then ministers of Christ's Church: no good
and godly man can therefore justly be offended with such change, though M.
Dorman storm never so much thereat.

Dorman. Fol. 3.
Now as we felt none of all these miseries besides a thousand more, so long as
we keapt ourselves within the unity of one head: so is every manne able to
bear me witness, that as soon as the devil the author of all heresies had
once obtained, and brought about the banishemente in our country of that one
bishop, with the which [as you have heard out of S. Cyprian before] he uses
always to begin, all these russhed in upon us, as the door that should have
kept them out, being set wide open.

Nowell.
M. Dorman faieth, you have heard out of saint Cyprian, that with the
banishing of that one bishop, (meaning the bishop of Rome) the devil
begins, and brings in all miseries afterward: but you have seen it
plainly declared, that in all those places, alleged by M. Dorman out of S.
Cyprian, there is not one word written or meant of the bishop of Rome, but
of Rogatian, and of S. Cyprian himself, being both Bishops of Afrike. And
where he says, that all miseries have russhed in upon us, with the banishyng
of that one Bishop, and head, and only says so, I do say the contrary is
most true: and will also in place of this treaty convenient, not only say,
but prove, that where the Pope has had the greateste authority, there has he
brought in with him, as well all miseries, mischieues, and destructions upon
the common wealth: as also all superstitions, hypocristes, errors, and
Idolatries into the Church. And for this present time, it shall be sufficient
to admonish the reader, that in all respects we be now in far better case
without the Pope, in more quietness, peace, security, plenty of things,
etc. then we were of late under the Pope: and that therefore, M. Dorman does
most evidently and falsely fable, when he says, that a thousand and more
miseries have rushed into this realm, with the refusal of that one bishop
and head.

Dorman. Fol. 3.
And as this is confessed by the most ancient fathers that have written sense
Christ's time, that by this means we first revolt from the church, by
contemnyng, The way to return to the unity of the church^.
and not acknowledgyng the head: so must our return thither again be by
the contrary, that is by reuerencyng him, by acknowledgyng him, by humble
submission of our self to him.

Nowell.
It is none otherwise confessed by other most ancient fathers, then you have
already heard it confessed by S. Cyprian, and Basil, whom he has without all
shame alleged for that purpose, whereas they speak not one word of that
matter, neither acknowledge any such head. And as they remained in the
Church of Christ, never acknowledgyng the bishop of Rome, as head of the
Church: so do we, likewise re^ectyng his falsely usurped supremacy, nothing
doubt, but we remain in the Church of Christ, whose sworn enemy we do
know that false usurper to be, and therefore none of Christ's Church: so
far of is it, that he can be the head of the same.

Dorman. fol. 3.
So did those that after their fall with Nouatus, S. Cyprian received into the
Church again, upon their submission testified in these words. Nos-Cornelium
Episcopum Epistola ad Cornelium papa^. lib. ^*
sanctissimum Catholicae Ecclesiae, erectum a Deo omnipotente, and Christo D.
nostro scimus. Nos errorem nostrum confitemur. Circumuenti sumus perfidiae
loquacitate factiosa amentes: videbamur quasi quandam communicationem cum
homine schismatico habuisse: Syncera tame^ men's nostra in ecclesia semper fuit.
Nec ignoramus vnum Deumesse, and vnum Christum esse dominum, quem confessi
sumus, vnum Spiritum S. Vnum Episcopum in Ecclesia catholica esse debere. We
[saie thei] acknowledge Cornelius This Cornelius was Bishop of Rome.
to be erected by God almighty, and Christ our Lord, to be the holy bishop
of the catholic church. We confess our error: we have been circumuented
ronnyng mad by the factious babblyng of treachery: we seemed to have
communicated as it were, with that schismatic manne Nouatus: yet was our
sincere One God, One Christ One holy ghost. One bishop
mind always in the Church. Nor we are not ignoraunte, that there is one
only God, and one Christ our lord, and that in the catholic church there
must be one holy ghost, and one bishop.

Nowell.
Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius (whom M. Dorman Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3.
means) neither revolted from the Church, by contemnyng, and not
acknowledgyng this head, he speaks of: nor returned to the Church again,
by acknowledgyng of any such head. For in those days Cornelius, bishop of
Rome, was not acknowledged to be head of the Church, by any man living:
such ambition, and false usurpation of the bishop of Rome, to be head of the
Church, being unknown to Cornelius, then bishop of Rome, and to all other
bishops of Christendom also. But to make the truth in deed known to the
reader how these men revolted from the Church, and how they returned, I
shall out of saint Cyprian, and histories Ecclesiastical, declare Eusebi.
lib. 6. cap. 43.
the verity of the matter. After the death of Fab^anus bishop of Rome,
Cornelius was lawfully chosen by Nicephorus lib. 6. cap. 3. Cyprianus li. 3.
episto. 13. ad Stephanum li. 4. epist. 2. Ad Antonianum.
the clergy and people, to be his successor there. Nouatus, who was of that
opinion, that such as for fear of torments and death, had renounced the
Christian says, though they repented therefore, were not to be received into
the Church again, made a great stir against Cornelius, who with saint
Cyprian, and all catholic bishops, held the contrary: that is to say, that
the Penitentes ought to be received after due discipline executed upon them.
But the faction of Nouatus waxyng greater, Nouatus, or (as saint Cyprian
says) Nouatianus, would have intruded himself, into the Bishoprike of Rome,
and took himself, and was taken of his faction, to be lawful successor of
Fabian, and the true bishop of Rome: and Cornelius to be an usurper, as one
that did communicate with such as had renounced their faith. Whereupon grew
this question and controversy, which of them two^ was a catholic bishop,
holdyng the truth, and truly and lawfully chosen by God: and which was the
intruder, and not of the Catholic church, but an heretic. And amongst
others, Maximus, Vrbanus, and Eusebi. and Niceph. vt supra.
Sidonius, priests of Rome, ioigned themselves to Nouatus, against Cornelius,
holdyng Nouatus opinion, and taking him for their Bishop. And thus they
revolted by falling to heresy, and refusyng Cornelius their bishop, and by
ioignyng themselves to Nouatus an usurper and heretic, and not by deniyng
Cornelius, as bishop of Rome, to be the head of the church* as M. Dorman
fableth. But afterward Maximus and his fellows repe^tyng their deed, did
forsake Nouatus Cyprianus li. 3. epist. 11.
as an heretic and usurper, and returned to Cornelius again, as their true
Bishop, to ioigne in faith and communion with him, as with a catholic
bishop, or a Bishop of the catholic Church, which is all one. And they do
acknowledge that he was erected by God into that Bishoprike of Rome: and so
consequently, Nouatus to be a false usurper and heretic, and so no bishop of
the Catholic church. Wherefore it is evident, that when M. Dorman says,
that those men returned again to the Church, by this way, that is to say,
by acknowledgyng Cornelius to be the head of the universal church, he
says most untruly. And has corrupted, and translated this place falsely,
remouyng the word sanctissimae from his place, and in steed of, Cornelium
episcopum sanctissimae catholicae ecclesiae, Cornelius a bishop of the most
holy catholic Church, as saint Cyprian does write, he has Cornelium
sanctissimum episcopum ecclesi catholic, Cornelius the most holy Bishop of
the Catholic Church, to make a better show for his purpose: as though
Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius, with others, had acknowledged Cornelius to be
erected by God almighty, to be the most holy Bishop of the Catholic and
universal Church, and so to make for his supremacy over the whole Church.
Which is neither written here, nor else where, neither ever was meante by
Maximus, or his fellows, nor by saint Cyprian himself. But this is the true
sense of those words. Nos Cornelium Episcopum sanctissimae Catholicae
ecclesiae, erectum a deo omnipotente, and Christo Domino nostro scimus. etc.
We acknowledge Cornelius to be a Bishop of the most holy Catholic
church, erected by God almighty, and Christ our Lord. etc. as if they had
said more at large, where we before took Cornelius to be an unlawful usurper,
and to communicate with those that had renounced their faith, and therefore to
be no member of the most holy Catholic church: now we acknowledge him to be
a Catholic Bishop, by God erected, and that we were deceived before in
ioignyng with Nouatus against him. And that this is the true sense of that
place, saint Cyprian himself in his epistle to Stephanus shows, writing
thus of that same matter: Non potest a quoquam nostrum illi communicari, qui
episcopo Cornelio in Catholica Lib. 3. epist. 13.
ecclesia dei iudicio, and cleri, ac plebis suffragio ordinato, profanum altar
erigere, and adulteram Cathedram collocare, and sacrilega contra verum
sacerdotem sacrificia offerre tentauerit. That is: None of us ca^ communicate
with him, who has attempted to erecte a profane altar, and an untrue chair,
against bishop Cornelius, ordained in the catholic church by Gods
judgment, and by the election of the Clergy and people: and has attempted
to offer sacrilegious or wicked sacrifice against the true Priest. Thus far
saint Cyprian. Whereby you may see, that he calls not Cornelius here the
bishop of the Catholic church, but Bishop Cornelius ordained in the
Catholic church by God his judgment, and the election of the Clergy and
people. And this is all one in sense and meaning with the other. For Episcopus
Catholic ecclesiae, and Episcopus in catholica ecclesia, be as much to say,
as Catholicus Episcopus, a catholic bishop, and not the Bishop of the
Catholic or universal Church, as M. Dorman would have it. For this being in
controversy, whether Cornelius or Nouatus was the true and Catholic Bishop,
or Priest, and which was the usurper and heretic: here do Maximus, and
Vrbanus with others confess, that Cornelius was the Catholic bishop.
Wherefore M. Dorman in translating the said place so, that it may seem to
make for the Popes supremacy, and by the way remouyng this word
Sanctissimae from the Catholic church, to attribute it to Cornelius (by like
to make a show that the title of Sanctissimus was of old appertsining to the
bishop of Rome) does herein like him self. Now, concerning that which
follows in their confession: We be not ignoraunte, that there is one S.
Cyprian his phrase of one Bishop of, or in the church, ori^a church.
God, one Christ our Lord, one holy Ghost, and that there must be one
bishop in the Catholic church. or more truly, in this place, in a
Catholic Church. This M. Dorman did not doubt, but that the simple sort
would take it to be a most plain proof, not of Cornelius supremacy only,
but ex abunda^te, that he alone was that one Bishop, which ought to be only
in the whole Catholic Church: for so it seems by his marginall note, of one
God, one Bishop etc. he means. But I trust, that few will allow M.
Dorman, even of those that be of his own part, if he would so wrest saint
Cypria^, that as there is one only God, and none but he: so there should be
but one only Bishop, and no mo but he. Whereas nothing less was meant by
them, that made this confession, nor by saint Cyprian, who makes report
thereof. For first, Maximus and his fellows, which had before ioigned the^
selves to Nouatus, who challenged to be a true catholic bishop, and bishop
of Rome also, do now acknowledge Cornelius to be the true bishop: and
because there can be no more bishops in any one catholic church but one,
therefore now affirmyng Cornelius to be that one Bishop, they do reiecte
Nouatus as no bishop, but an usurper: and thereby acknoweledge, that there
ought to be but one bishop in that catholic church. And so nothing less
is meant here, by one bishop, then one head bishop over all other
bishops: much less is meant one bishop alone of all the Church, as there
is one only God over all: as it may seem that M. Dorman would gather. For the
declaration whereof, it is to be noted, that when saint Cypria^ speaks of
one bishop of the catholic church, he means no one special Bishop over
all, but indifferently all, and every catholic bishop throughout the
universal church: for that they have every of them the full possession of one
only bishoprike. Which as it is but one throughout all the world, so has
every bishop the same, wholly, and fully. So that when saint Cyprian speaks
of one Bishop only to rule the Church, he means the Bishop of that
Diocese, which he then entreats of, who so ever, and of what country so
ever he be: as here in this epistle, he means Cornelius: and in his epistle
to Pupianus, by the Lib. 1. epist. 5.
said one bishop, appoincted by God to rule the church, he means himself
being bishop of Carthage. For in both places he has the same words, of one
bishop Lib. 4. epi 9.
appointed to rule the Church, by the contempt of the which Bishop, heresies
do spryng, or arise. This remains yet more fully to be declared, as well by
Cornelius, as by saint Cyprian himself in other places. First Cornelius
writing to Fabius Bishop of Antioche (as Eusebius testifies) has these
words Histor. ecclesiasticae libr. 6. cap. 43.
concerning this very matter. Vindex ille euangelij (de Nouato loquitur)
ignorauit vnum esse debere episcopum i^ catholica ecclesia, in qua nescit
(quomodo enim sciret?) presbyteros esse. 46. diaconos 7. hypodiaconos 7.
acoluthos. 42. etc. that is to say: this defendour of the Gospel (he speaks
of Nouatus) was ignorant that there ought to be one Bishop in a Catholic
church, In catholica ecclesia.
in ye which he knows not (for how should he know) that there be. 46.
Priests. 7. Deacons, 7. subdeacons, 42. inferior ecclesiastical ministers,
or seruiters. etc. Thus far Cornelius. By which words it is evident that
the Catholic church, whereof Cornelius and Cyprian do speak, and wherein
there must be but one bishop, is not the universal church throughout the
world, as M. Dorman would have it (unless he think that 46. Priests, and 7.
Deaco^s may suffice the universal Church for ministers, as well as one only
bishop is sufficient for the head of the whole Church, for the one is as
reasonable as the other) but the catholic church that Cornelius speaks of
here, is the particular church of Rome: in the which as one bishop, so also 7.
Deacons might suffice. Which particular church is by Cornelius here, and by
S. Cyprian, and other ancient doctors of the church in their writings,
called Catholic, because it professed and taught the catholic faith, and to
notify it from schismatic or heretical churches. And any other particular
church teaching the catholic faith, may in like manner be called a catholic
church, or ye catholic church of such a city, or country. Now concerning
S. Cyprian, he declares in many places, that every Bishop in his own diocese
has the full possession of ye bishoprike, which is one throughout all the
world, and therefore is the only bishop and head of that his own Catholic
church: as namely in his epistle to Antonianus, where he has these words.
Vna est Ecclesia, a Christo per totum mundum in multa membra diuisa: item
episcopatus vnus, episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate diffusus. etc.
That is to say: there is one church, from Christ throughout the whole world
divided: likewise one bishoprike, spread abroad in the agreeable multitude of
many Bishops. But S. Cyprian declares his mind most plainly of this one
bishoprike, wholly and equally possessed of all and every bishop, in his book
De simplicitate praelatorum, not far from the beginning, writing thus. Vnum
corpus, and vnus spiritus, Cyprianus De simplicitate praelatorum.
vna spes vocationis vestr, vnus dominus, vna fides, vnum Baptisma, vnus deus.
Quam vnitatem firmiter tenere, and vindicare debemus, maxim episcopi, qui i^
ecclesia praesidemus, vt episcopatum quoque ipsum, vnum atque indiuisum
probemus. Nemo fraternitatem mendacio fallat, nemo fidei veritate^ perfida
preuaricatione corrumpat. Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum
pars tenetur. Ecclesia vna est, quae in multitudine^ latius incremento
foecunditatis extenditur: quomodo solis multi radij, sed lumen vnum: and rami
arboris multi, sed robur vnum, tenaci radice fundatu^ etc. Which is to say:
There is one body, and one spirit, one hope of your vocation, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God. The which unity we must firmly hold and
maintain: specially we Bishops, which do govern in the Church, that we
may prove the bishoprike it self also to be one, and undivided. Let no man by
liyng deceive the brotherhodde: let no man corrupt the verity of faith by
false preuarication. There is one Bishoprike, part whereof every man has
wholly, or In solidum.
more plainly, there is one Bishoprike, which every bishop has wholly for
his part. There is one church, which is spread abroad by increase of
fruictefulnesse into a multitude: as there be many beams of the su^ne, but one
light: many branches of the tree, but one body of it, stayed upon a sure
root. etc. Thus far saint Cyprian, with much more process to prove the
unity of the church, and the unity of one bishoprike, which every Bishop
wholly has for his part: and so consequently, all Bishops to be equal.
Wherefore master Dorman has in vain noted in the marge^t of his book in this
place, One God, one Christ, one holy Ghost, one Bishop: as though the
Bishop of Rome were that one Bishop, and none but he: as there is one only
God, and none but he. Where as that place of saint Cyprian (as by conference
with this place appears) proves, that though there be one bishoprike
throughout all the world, yet are there many bishops, and that every one, in
his own Diocese, has the whole possession of that one Bishoprike: and that
therefore there is an equality of all Bishops, and so consequently, no
superiority of any one over all, as M. Dorman would have it. For if every
Bishop have in solidum, that is to say, fully, and wholly that one
Bishoprike, or bishoplie function and office, as S. Cyprian says, no one ca^
have more, then the whole, and therefore, no one can be above all other. Which
may appear more plainly, by the comparisons of one faith, and one Baptism,
which saint Cyprian in the same place uses. For as there is but one faith,
though there be many faithful persons: one Baptism, though many Baptized: so
there is by saint Cyprian his judgment but one Bishoprike, yet be there many
Bishops: which one Bishoprike is equally, and wholly divided emongeste all
the said Bishops: as faith and Baptism are equally, and wholly divided
emongeste the faithful Baptized: and yet remains still but one Bishoprike,
as there does but one faith, and one Baptism: for that every bishop has
that one bishoprike wholly: as every true faithful has the one christian
faith wholly: and In solidum.
every one, that is duly Baptized, has that one Baptism wholly. And
consequently it follows, that as no one man has any superiority in Baptism,
or faith, above other truly faithful, and Baptized: so has no one bishop
any superiority over other bishops, for that every bishop has that one
bishoprike wholly, and therefore none has it more then other, but be all equal
In solidum.
in office and authority. This is S. Cyprian his mind of one Bishopric,
which every bishop has wholly, and equally, and is therefore in his own
Diocese the one only bishop in the catholic Church to govern the same.
Whereby any manne, but of mean understanding, may well perceive, that this
saying of one bishop, used by saint Cyprian, makes nothing for the bishop
of Rome his supremacy, but directly against it: making all other bishops
equal with him: as they, which have in solidum, wholly, that one Bishoprike,
as well as he. And therefore when saint Cyprian names one bishop in the
catholic church, or of a catholic church, he means the bishop of that
special diocese which he entreats of, of what country so ever it be, as
here he means Cornelius: and by the like words in other places, he means
other bishops, and of other diocesses. Which is most evident by the like
words, of one Bishop who governs the church, used by the same saint
Cyprian, in this epistle to Pupianus. His words be these: Episcopus, qui vnus
e^^, and ecclesiae praeest, co^temnitur. etc. The Bishop which Libr. 4. epi. 9.
is one, and governs the Church, is contemned and set at naught. etc.
Where it is most evident, that by that one Bishop, who governs the Church,
and is contemned, he means himself, being bishop of Carthage, and by the
said Pupian despised, as is at large already declared. Which place yet M.
Dorman alittle before alleged for the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome as
leudelie, as he does this place here. To conclude, Maximus, and his fellows
had a controversy with Cornelius, altogether diverse from our controversies
with the Popes of Rome: and therefore, their example apperteineth nothing to
this case of the Popes supremacy, then neither moved, nor known. And it is
no marvel, if that Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius being priests of Rome, and
there having with Nouatus, Eusebi. lib. 6. cap. 43.
being himself Priest of Rome also, made so great stir and business against
Cornelius, reconciled themselves to Cornelius the Roman bishop, being their
own bishop: which apperteineth nothing at all to us, who have nothing to do
with the bishop of Rome.

Dorman. fol. 3. Nowell. Ex papa bo^^f^cio Extra. libr. 1. Tit: de Maiorit. and
obed. cap. vnam sancta^.

So did Vrsatius and Valens forsakyng the heresy of Arius, offer up their
recantation to Julius then Bishop of Rome. By this meane^ [good Christian
readers] returned they to the Church, by this must you return that have
straied, what so ever you be, if you will be saved.

Nowell.
Vrsatius, or Vrsitius, and Valens, in their recantation Socrates lib. 1. cap.
27. Nicephorus lib. 9. cap. 13. and. 27.
make nothing for the Bishop of Rome his supremacy, but rather against it.
They write to him, as they use to write to any other bishop: their
inscription is, Ad Iulium Episcopum Romanum, to Julius the Roman bishop. They
use these words: Bonitatis tuae literis in hanc sententiam traducti. We were
brought into this mind or judgment by the letters of your goodness. Apud
humanitatem tuam profitemur. We do profess unto your humanity or
gentleness. And, pietas tua, your godliness: and such like, which are no
words of supremacy. For that they call him once Tom. 2. Aug. episto. 183.
Augustino episcoporu^ sum mo: and mox, venerabilis papa etc.
beatissimum dominum papam, the most blessed lord Pope, makes nothing for
his supremacy: unless it make for saint Augustine bishop of Hippo in
Afrike his supremacy also, who is not only called venerabilis papa,
honorable Pope, but also the highest of al bishops. But M. Dorman himself
confesses somwhere I trow, this name Papa^, pope, to be common in that time to
all bishops, and therefore unmeet to prove the supremacy of any one. But if
he think the titles added, Most blessed Lord, do make the word Papam, Pope,
to be singular, and for the supremacy: thereto I do answer: First, it is
evident that this word dominus, Lord, or sir, is used not only to all
bishops, but to all Popish sir Ihons also, who yet have no supremacy at all.
And I am content that this word, Beatissimus, most blessed, may serve M.
Dorman his purpose here, so that he will admit it likewise in other places:
as in this, amongst other. All the Priests and Deacons of Rome call Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage, Beatissimum, Lib. 2. episto. Cypriani, epistola. 7. in
fine
and gloriosissimum Papam: the most blessed, and most glorious Pope. Lo
Master Dorman, here is a double epitheton and title, for your single. Let
the bishop of Carthage then have the supremacy with the bishop of Rome: or
let the bishop of Rome go^ without it, with the bishop of Carthage. But if
this make for Julius bishop of Romes supremacy, that Vrsatius, and Valens
offered up their recantacion to him, as M. Dorman takes it to do: let it
also make for Athanasius bishop of Alexandria his supremacy, to whom in like
manner they offer up their recantation also, as is recorded in the same place.
The cause concerning Nicephor. lib. 9. cap. 27.
Vrsatius and Valens standing thus, M. Dorman abuses the readers to much, to
give them a dor, with a matter nothing to the purpose: saying, So did Vrsatius
and Valens, and so to pass over without further declaration, or as much, as
once noting the place, where the matter might be found. Which M. Dormanne
has done of set purpose and knowledge, that it was nothing to the purpose,
that they did, and that him self alleged. And yet hereupon, as upon good
proves and declarations, he concludes thus. By this means returned they to
the Church, by this must you return, that have straied, if you will be
saved. I took my Harp into my hand, and twange quod my stryng a.

Dorman. Fol. 3.
Ex Pighii Hierarch. lib. 5. ca. 2 fo 210.
Seeing now as I have declared, the going out of the Nowell.
Church is by the contempt of the head thereof, and the return home again, by
the acknowleging, and reuere^cyng of the same: Ex Hosii co^tra Brentium lib. 3.
fol. 134.
persuade your self that it has not been for nothing, that good men in all
ages have been, and at this time are, no less busied in defense thereof, then
heretics, missecrea^tes, and enemies to our faith, are ready with all their
power to assault the same.

Nowell.
You have declared nothing at all, your Doctors The sum of all hitherto
alleged and said by master Dorman.
say nothing for you, your allegations, and examples are altogether
impertinente. Rogatians deacon being an African, must reconcile himself to his
own bishop an African: Pupianus ought to reconcile himself to saint Cyprian
bishop of Carthage. For the first places alleged out of saint Cyprian,
perteined only to them two, disobedient to their own bishops being
Africanes. Saint Basil speaks of the East church, and bishops: Nouatus
swears men to stick to his heresy, and to take him, and not Cornelius for
their bishop: Maximus, Vrbanus, and Sidonius Priests of Rome, reconcile
themselves to Cornelius their own Roman bishop, whom they had unjustly
forsaken: Vrsatius, and Valens, offer their recantation, and be reconciled to
Julius bishop of Rome: they do in like wise to Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria. For they took Arrius the heretics part against them both, and
had greatly vexed them both, and therefore were they reconciled to both: as
al christians are likewise bound to reconcile themselves, not only to
Bishops, but to all other, whom they have offended or wronged. What rhyme or
reason is it therefore, for M. Dorman togather hereof the Bishop of Rome his
supremacy, as he has gone about in this his Introduction, which he might
better have named a Seductio^, as in ye which, he has proved nothing, railed
much, lied more, deceived fielie souls, abused the wise, and better occupied
readers. And as there is not one place, hitherto by M. Dorman alleged,
apperteinyng to his purpose, nor any one sentence of his void of liyng: so
shall you in the sequel of this treaty find him no chaun^gelyng.

Dorman. Fol. 4.
The consideration whereof has caused also me, in this enterprise of mine, to
begin first with the fortifiyng of that whereunto our enemy* [as the very
foundation of all true religion, the comfort and stay of the Catholics, the
terror and utter undoing of all heretikes] do most direct their battery.

Nowell.
You have done like a wise manne, and used herein more discretion, then did
your master D. Hardyng, who has made this matter of the Popes supremacy, but
as a common matter, and as the Latins say, vna^ ex multis, one of many: Where
in deed, as you hau^ well considered, it is the chief foundation of all
Popery, your Religion, the comfort and stay of all Papists, vsurpyng
falsely the name of Catholics: the terror and worldly vndooyng of all those,
whom it pleases you to call heretics, hold they never so much with Christ
and his Gospel, agree they never so much with his true, catholic, and
ancient Apostolic church. For may you once establishe the Popes
authority, not to be denied: his supremacy, not to be disobei^d: you have
won all, you need no Scriptures, no interpretation of Doctors, no assemble
of Counceiles: Sexto Decret. lib. 1. tit. 2 ca. licet. Roman' pontifex iura
oi^a in scrinio pectoris suice^setur habere. Vide Platinam in vita papae Pauli
secundi.
all is in the box of the Popes boosome: (as the Popes themselves, Boniface
the eight, and Paul the second with others do brag) he is all in all: he
says it, ego it must needs be believed: for Fides Petri non deficit, Peter's
faith fails not: as Pighius out of Eckius, Hosius lib 2. contra Brentium
fol. 83 a. and. 86. a. b.
Hosius out of Pighius, and D. Hardyng fol. ^5. b.
D. Harding out of Hosius have alleged: which yet apperteineth as much to
the Pope, as does a Saddle to a Sow. Likewise, the Pope commands it, ergo
it must be obeyed: For be is the judge, and final determiner of all matters,
as M. Dorman has M. Dorman fol. 7. a. and. 9. b and 12. a and. 62. b
often alleged for the same purpose, out of Deuteronomium. If it please the
Pope to offer his feet to Emperors and Kings of the world to kiss: or if
it stands further with his pleasure to tread on their necks, as he served
the Emperor Frederike: or if he have a likyng to their crounes and kingdoms,
as he had to the croune of England in king Ihon his time: or list he to
depose kings and Emperors, as he has deposed many: yet may he neither be
disobeied, nor denied in his will and lust. For as Pighius to that purpose
has alleged, Qui superbierit Pighius Hierarch. lib. 6. ca. 13. fo. 323. d.
nolens obedire. etc. He that waxes proud, and will not obey the
commandment of the high Priest for the time being, let him dye by the
decree of the judge. And peculiarly, that he may so tread upon Emperors and
Kings necks, that in so doing he does but right, appears by this text,
alleged for that purpose by Pope Alexander the third: Super aspidem and
Basiliscum ambulabis etc. That is to say: Thou shall walk upon the Adder and
Basiliske: thou shall tread upon the Lion and Dragon. And his right to all
kingdoms, and that in askyng of them he does but ask his own: and that he
may make, and depose kings, and bestow kingdoms at his pleasure: and that
he has both the swords, and the right of both the heavenly Extra. Ioannis
22. tit. 5. cap. 1. Sifratrum. Extra. co^m. lib. 1. de Maiorit. and obedie^tia.
cap. vnan: sa^ctam.
and earthly Empire, is proved by these special textes alleged by Pope
Boniface the eight and other Popes for that purpose: Ecce duo gladij hic.
Behold two swords here. Et ecce, constitui tesuper gentes, and regna etc.
Ieremi 1.
Behold this day do I set thee over the people and kingdoms, that thou
may root out, break of, destroy and make waste, and that thou may
build up, and plant. And by this text alleged by Platin. in vita Gregorii.
7.
Pope Gregory the.vij. Quicquid ligaueris aut solueris in terra etc. What
soever thou do bind or loose upon the earth, shall be bound or loosed in
heaven. Of which words the said Pope makes this collectio^, that if they
may bind and loose in heaven, they may much more in earth take away, and
give Empires, Kingdoms, Principates, and what soever mortal men else have, and
so forth, as follows in Platine, most worthy to be read. And the same is
proved also by this special text, to the like purpose alleged by Pope Julius
the third: Gens and regnum quod mihi non seruierit, peribit. The nation and
kingdom which shall not serve me, shall perish. Which sentence also The
inscription of pope Julius the third his coigne.
for more surety, the said Pope caused to be stamped in his coigne. Finally
whatsoever it shall please the Pope to do, to the burte of men's bodies, or
loss of their gooddes and possessions, yea or to the eternal damnation
D^stin. 40. ca. Si Papa. Extra. Ioann. 22 Tit. 4 cap. 2. in schol^is.
of their souls, be they never so many, yea be they innumerable, yet may no
mortal man blame him, no man may be so bold to say: Domine cur ita facis?
Lord why do you so? Wherefore, notwithstanding saint Paul's boldness with
Peter the Popes predecessor, as he says, we are ^ow without all remedy
against the Pope, what error so ever he do teach, and what mischief so ever
he do: and we must rather suffer our selves and infinite thousands to b^e
damned, then to be so bold as to allege any scriptures, though most
manifestly contrary to such the Popes sayings, and doings: Such as
amongst others, are these: Principes gentium. etc. That is to say, Princes of
nations bear rule over them, but it shall not be so Math. 20. d. 25. Marc.
10. f. Lucae. 22. c.
amongst you, but he that will be the chief amongst you, let him be your
servant: and he that will be great amongst you, let him be your minister:
even as the soonne of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister unto
other. And again, Nolite vocari Rabbi etc. Vos omnes fratres estis. Be not
desirous to Math. 23. b.
be called Rabbi, for one is your master, to wit Christ, and ye are all
brethren: be not called masters, he that is greateste amongst you, shall be
your servant: for whosoever exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he
that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Et ne sitis ceu dominium exercentes in
cleros. Be not as those 1. Petri. 3.
who exercise dominion over the people, or, as Lords over Parishes. For so is
it translated also. If we (I say) shall allege these, and such like
Scriptures against such usurped tyranny and false wrestyng of the
scriptures, we shall gain nothing thereby, but only to be accounted
here^ikes, for not obeyng the voice of the high Priest, who alone can tell the
sense and meaning of the scriptures, according to this text: Legem requirent
ex ore sacerdotis: they shall require the law at the mouth of the high Priest:
without whose interpretation, the scripture is but the dumb and dead letter,
a rule of Lead, a nose of wax, flexible what way you Pighius Hierarch. libr.
3. cap. 3. f^. 103. d
list bou it. If we further do bring the old Doctors of the Church, by
whose interpretations it is declared that these scriptures do serve directly
against such usurped rule and dominion: as saint Augustine, alleged in the
Popes own Canon law, teaching that, Episcopatus operis, non honoris nome^
est: a Bishoprike ^. Quaest. 1. ca. Qu^ episcopatum.
is a name of work, not of honor. And S. Hierome likewise alleged in their
own Canons, willing bishops to know that they be Ecclesiastical ministers,
Distinct. 95. cap. Esto.
and not Lords: where he brings for him the foresaied place of S. Peter. And
the scholies of that Canon do^ note it to be written against the pride of
Bishops: and that where they call their inferiors, children, they ought to
call them brethren. And the same place of S. Peter, S. Bernard likewise
alleges to Pope Eugenius, and wills him, as Peter's successor, to hear
Peter, Epistola. 237. ad Eugenium 1. Petri. 5. 2. Cor. 1.
yea and Paul also, both ioinctly warnyng him to avoid the vsyng of dominion
and Lordeship over the Church. And tells him that if he be sent by Christ,
he is sent to serve, and not to be served. And exhorts him not to be
presumptuouslie wise, but to fear: and warns him to beware of bribes, and to
weigh the causes of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishops of
Winchester and York, not by money (according to the custom of the court of
Rome) but by equity. For these Prelates at that time pursued their
controversies in the court of Rome. And the same saint Bernard upon De
consi^eratione ad Eugenium lib. 2. Lucae. 22.
this place before alleged out of saint Luke, The kings of the earth have
dominion over them. etc. has these words. It is plain: dominion is
forbidden unto Apostles. Go therefore and be so bold, says saint Bernarde
to Pope Eugenius, as to usurp to thy self either the Apostleship vsyng
dominion: or dominion, Vsurpare aude aut dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus
dn^atu^. etc. Si vtrunque similiter habere voles, perdes vtrunque. Osee. 8.
being Apostolic. Doubtless thou art forbidden the one or the other. If thou
will have both a like, thou shall lose both. And so forth, telling him
plainly, that if he will needs reign, he shall be of that compainie of who^ God
speaks by ye Prophet: They have reigned, but not by me: they have been
Princes, and I have not known them. And if such several testimonies of
doctors may not serus us, if we for further proof bring a number of doctors
ioinctly agreyng together, and forbiddyng bishops such tyrannical dominion
over the church of God: as did saint Cyprian in the Council of Carthage,
with the allowance of the whole Council then, and with the approbation of
saint Augustine afterward, and an other whole Council also: The words
spoken by saint Cyprian in the said Council, and by so many Bishops and
Doctors allowed, are these. Nemo nostrum episcopum se episcoporum constituit,
aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi Cyprianus in council. Carth. in initio.
Augusti. lib. 2. de bapt. contra Donatist. ca. 2.
necessitate^ collegas suos adigit, quando habeat omnis episcopus pro licentia
libeitatis, and potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio
no^ possit, cum necipse possit alterum iudicare. That is to say: None of us
makes himself Bishop over Bishops, or does by tyrannical fear force his
fellow Bishops to the necessity of obeiyng: seeing every Bishop has for his
liberty and power his free judgment, as he who can not be judged of an other,
neither can himself judge an other Bishop. Thus far saint Cyprian and
saint Augustine.) We shall profit, I say, no more by the allegations of
Doctors, yea or whole Councelles, tha^ by the allegation of the Scriptures
themself, against the Popes sayings or doings, what so ever they be.
Neither the text of the scriptures, nor the interpretation of Doctors, nor
judgments of Councelles can have any credit against him. For as Pighius the
principal Doctor of the Popes part says: In concilijs Hierarch. lib. 6.
cap. 1. fol. 275. b.
vniuersalibus vniuersis haud fere aliud factum est, quam vt conuenientes ex
toto orb episcopi, praeiudicatam iam Apostolicae sedis vnanimi consensu
amplexarentur and sequerentur sententiam, nec in eis definitum aliquid, quod
non iam praeiudicatum ante definitumque esset a sede Apostolica. That is to
say: In all general Councelles, for the most part, nothing else is done, but
that Bishops coming together out of all parts of the world, should embrace
and follow with agreeable consent, the foreiudged and before determined sentence
of the Apostolic see: and that nothing was defined in such general
Councelles, the which was not before defined and foreiudged by the Apostolic
see. Thus far Pighius: who also affirms in the same place, that the only
judgment of this one see is more sure, then the judgment of an universal
Counsel of the whole world. Whereby it may well be understood, what labor
and cost even by the Papists themselves is lost, and how in vain their
Bishops take such pain to come to Councelles out of all parts of
Christendom, leauyng their cures vncared for, and unlooked tos, and that
sometime a sort of years together: as of late they have done, in the last
Tridentine council, only to determine things already determined, The
Tridentine Council began anno 1545. and ended anno 1563. in the which time
they sat at Trident seven years.
and that therefore they should like wise men keep themselves at h^me, and
spare such travel and cost, and only harken what is pronounced out of that
sacred mouth of the Pope at Rome, and it to obey absolutely. And the same
Pighius afterward in an other place says expressly. Huic Hierarc. li 6. ca.
13. fo 323 c. The same does M. Dorman teach fo. 62 b. out of pope Innocentius
his epistle.
sedi authoritas componendi and definiendi exortas i domo ecclesiastica
vniuersas questiones and controuersias, ab eodem Christo est data: tibi vero
illius definitionibus and iudicijs absque vlla discussione est imposita
obsequendi necessitas. That is to say: The authority of orderyng, definyng
and determinyng of all questions and controversies risen in the Church, is
given by Christ to this see of Rome: and upon thee is laid a necessity of
obeiyng all definitions and determinations of the said see, without any
examinyng or discussing of ye same. These be Pighius words also. No marvel
therefore, if you do well consider the premises, that M. Dorman calls the
Popes supremacy, the fundation of al. Naie, it is the fundation,
superstruction, batilmentes, garnishinges, and all together: it is all, and all
in all. For were this one article of the Popes supremacy with the
appurtenau^ces, as I have said, once obtained, you need not to travel in
writing any more: you need not to bring any proufes out of the scriptures,
Doctors or Councelles for you, or against us any more: for it were concluded
at once, that you be the Catholics, who do acknowledge the necessity of
obeiyng the voice, the determinations, and definitions of that high Priest,
without whattes, or whies, without discussyng or examinyng of them by your
selves, or with others: and that we be the heretics, who do not obey his
voice, being against Gods voice: but are so bold to examine, how his voices
do agree with Gods voice. And therefore are we worthy to dye most cruel
death, due to such false heretics. Grant this one proposition of the Popes
supremacy with the appurtenaunces, I say, and by and by, all that M. Dorman
has hitherto most leudlie alleged, or shall allege hereafter, for the Popes
supremacy, is to the purpose: all lies he has already made, and shall
hereafter make for that purpose, are truths. And whatsoever we say to the
contrary, what scriptures, what Doctors, what Councelles so ever we bring,
all is to no purpose, nor of any credit: for he alone is judge, whose the
cause is: he alone, as your great Doctor Pighius says, is more to be
believed, then a general Council of the whole world assembled. And therefore
has M. Dorman done like a wise manne, to entreat first of the Popes
supremacy, and in the treaty thereof to spend more paper and ynke, more oil
and labor, as they say, yea twice as much, as he has done in the other
three principal matters, though otherwise the greatest of all other, as
touching even the very Mass it self, which as it has hitherto sustained the
Pope, and all his Clergy: so if the Pope do not now by his supremacy and
irrefragable authority (sustained by master Dorman, like a friend at need)
sustain the Mass again: it may come to pass, that bathe Pope and Mass,
will come to naught shortly. Now follows the division of M. Dorma^s treaty.

Dorman. fol. 4.
In the handlyng whereof I purpose God willing to take this order:

First, before I come to the principal poincte that lies in question between
us [whiche is of the bishop 1
of Romes supremacie] to prove to you by most plain, and evident reasons, that
the Church of Christ here militante in earth must of necessity for diverse
and sondrie urgent causes, have one chief head and ruler under Christ, to
rule and govern the same.

Secondarily, that that one head must needs be a Priest. 2


Thirdly and so last of al, that of all priests the bishop of Rome is he,
which must supply that place, and that 3
for so (that is head and ruler of the church) he has been, of the ancient
councils, and old fathers, within the first six hundred years after Christ's
departure, taken.

Nowell.
And I following your order, M. Dorman, do affirm, and will prove the
contrary, to all, and every point of your division: that is to wit.

First, that it is not profitable, much less necessary, that the Church of
Christ here in earth should 1
have one chief head, and ruler under Christ, to govern the same: and that
for diverse, and sundry urgent and most weighty causes.

Secondarilie, that no priest can be any such one 2
head of the Church here in earth.

Thirdly, that of all priests, the bishop of Rome can not be that head: for
that he is no Bishop, but rather a 3
temporal usurper, and tyraunte, contrary to Gods express word: and that
all such places, as are by you, M. Dorman, and others alleged out of the
scriptures and doctors, for the said bishop of Rome his supremacy, apperteine
nothing at all to that purpose.

Dorman. fol. 4. Nowell. This is Pighi' his assertion. Hierarch. li. 5. ca. 14.
fo. 262. c.

That Christ's Church here in earth, must of necessity have one chief head,
and gouernoure under Christ, to rule the same.

Nowell.
M. Dorman does well begin with this part first, to prove that there must of
necessity be one chief head and governor of the whole Church under Christ:
for if there ought not to be such an one head and governor at all, he did
well perceive, that consequently the bishop of Rome could not be that head and
governor. Wherefore it being thoroughly proved, and manifestly declared, that
M. Dorman fails in the proof of this first point (as I doubt not but it
shall be so proved and declared) I trust that all wise men shall understand,
that this first and principal part, and stay of the whole being overthrown,
his whole treaty of the bishop of Rome his supremacy shall altogether fall to
ground with it, without any further batetrie to ye same, or vnderminyng
thereof to be made.

Dorman. Fol. 4. Nowell. This is in Pigh^us Hierar. lib. 4 cap. 3. fol. 149. b.

The truth of this proposition [good christian readers] is not only by the
whole order, and form of the estate of Gods people in the old law [whiche
was also the true church of God] long before the coming of our savior into
this world, but by the daiely experience also, of c^uile and politic
government, most manifestly confirmed.

Nowell.
Of the estate of Gods people in the old law, who, as they were one several
people, so had they one high priest: what can you gather further, but that
likewise in every Diocese or country, it were good to have one chief prelate,
or bishop to rule in the clergy? Which we deny not, nor ever did deny. But
of this matter M. Dorman gives us occasion to sa^e more hereafter.

Dorman. Fol. 4.
Nowell. Borovved out of D. Harding Fol. 81. and 82. who had it out of Pighi'
de Hierarch. lib. 5. cap. 2. fol. 204.
For who is there so blind that he sees not, that in the whole frame of this
world, there is no kingdom so mighty, no realm so puissant, no city so
populous, no town so wealthy: yea on the contrary part also, no village so
little, no family so small, finally no so cietie of men, no not of those that
have wrapped them selves in league, to rob and spoil, that can any while
continue without a head to govern them. If therefore to live under the
government of a head be a matter of such importance, as without the which
neither great nor little, rich nor* poor, good nor badde can stand: how
much more necessary shall we think it in Christ's Church here militant in
earth, where the devil in his members, is continually occupied in raising of
schisms, in stirryng up discord, to vex and molest the people of God, to
have this wholesome provision for the appeasyng thereof, and the restoryng of
the same being troubled to quietness again?

Nowell.
This reason he had in D. Hardyng his book, who borrowed it of Pighius, which
being taken out of S. Cyprian his epistle to one Pupianus, they have violently
wrested to a wrong sense. For S. Cyprian makes this reason directly against
them, for the proof of his Cyprian. lib. 4. episto. 9.
own authority, being bishop of Carthage, and for the authority of every
Bishop in his own diocese. Now to the matter. Who is so blind? quod M.
Dorman: now surely I trust, no man is so blind, but he can see that M. Dorman
reasons blindlie, and without all reason gatheryng thus: that because every
kingdom has his several king, every people, city, town, village, house, yea
every company of the eues, and robbers, have their several governor, or
head: put to and you will also, (as does saint Cyprian, out of whom D.
Hardyng and M. Dorman vndiscreatly took the occasion of this argument) every
hiue of Bees has his capitain Be: therefore should it follow, that all
Churches, or the whole church dispersed throughout the whole world, must have
one head. You should M. Dorman, if you would have reasoned reasonably, have
taken as well saint Cyprian his conclusion, as you have taken his antecedent,
and have concluded with him, Ergo in like wise every diocese, and every
Church ought to have their several head prelate, or bishop, who is to be
obeyed by all their own clergy: and we would have granted the
co^sequencie, and consequent as they say. For by this means saint Cyprian
concludes, that Pupianus did wickedlie in disobeiyng saint Cyprian himself,
who was his bishop. But neither saint Cyprian, nor any other learned man does
use these examples or similitudes any where, to prove that there ought to be
one head or governor over all churches, or the universal church: but has
the clean contrary, saying thus. Singulis pastoribus portio gregis ascripta
Lib. 1. epist. 3. pagin. 10.
est, quam regat vnusquisque, and gubernet, rationem sui actus domino
redditurus. That is to say: A portion of the Lords flock is appointed to
every pastor by himself, the which every one ought to rule and govern, who
shall give account of his doing to the Lord. And so forth, most plainly
against the supremacy of one: and for that due gouernmente of every bishop
over his own ture. This is saint Cyprian his reason, this is his conclusion,
M. Dorman. But if you like your conclusion so well, that you will needs
conclude, that there ought to be one general head of all Churches, you must
thus begin. As there is one general governor or king over all the world, one
general head over all people, all cities, tounes, villages, and houses: one
captain thief and robber, over all thieues and robbers: one king Be, over
all hiues of Bees, throughout the whole world: so must there be one only
head in earth over all Churches throughout the world. But as no man is so
blind, but he sees the falsehood of this antecedent: so is (I trust) no man
so blind, but he sees the absurdity and inconsequencie of your former
conclusion, of one general head over all Churches, gathered out of an
antecedent, and unlikely similitude of the several governors that every
kingdom, country, people, city and town, and every company of men
severally have. I merueile he alleged not Homer the Poet, and Aristotle the
Philosopher also for the Popes supremacy, as does his master D. Hardyng, D.
Hardyng fol. 81. b.
who has these words: It is not good, says Homere, to have many rulers,
let one be ruler. It is true, that Homere says, it is not good to have
many equal rulers over one country, or nation: but this makes nothing to
prove that there should be one head over all the Church throughout the
world: except D. Hardyng can prove that Agamemnon was king of all the world,
or at the least, that Homere meant he should so be: but he meante nothing
less, for he speaks of the gouernemente of the army of the Greeks only.
And so I grant it is good likewise, that one bishop do govern one diocese:
as it was good in Homers judgment, that one graunde captain should govern
the Greek army. And thus much by the way to D. Hardyng his Poetical
argument for the Popes supremacy. Now seeing it pleased doctor Hardyng to make
mention of Aristotle, who misliketh not Aristocratie, that is to say, the
gouernyng of the best and wisest men, being a competente number: and seeing
further, that many cities have been and be far better governed in
Democratie, by many rulers chosen of the people, then ever was the whole
church by one Pope: It is presumptuouslie done by M. Dorman, both against his
master doctor Hardyng, and against Aristotle so noble a philosopher, and to
zelously, for one Pope, to safe they be all blind, that can not see the
necessity of one only head governor every where. And it may seem to some,
that such kind of speech does not so much spryng out of absurdity of the
matter, as out of the disposition of M. Dormans drousie head, and dim sight.
Let us in England be in that poincte of the best judgment, and in the best
case (as we be in deed) under so moderate a Monarchy: and yet let them
withal, who have of long time been under the quiet gouernemente of many
reasonable rulers, neither be stark blind, neither (though not in so happy a
state as are we) yet in no unhappy case, as it seems M. Dorma^ would place
them. But let every nation and city think it self most happy in that state
of regiment, that God has placed it in. And concerning the government of the
universal Church, seeing it stands of so many, or rather innumerable
thousands of men and women of al countries, nations, and languages
throughout the whole world, so that it can not possibly be ruled and governed
by one, neither was it by God appoincted to be by one governed, no more then
the whole world it self, the several kingdoms, and countries thereof being
appoincted by God to several kings ^ccl. 17. b. 14.
and governors. Yet if it must needs be governed by popes, seeing it needs
many governors, I would we had many Popes, were they good governors: but
being, as they are, false usurpers and cruel tyrauntes, one Pope is to many by
one. Concerning the auoydyng and quietyng of Schisms and troubles in the
Church, we say, that as the several kings of every kingdom, the several
governors of every country and city etc. are able to ouersee their several
charges, and to keep their people in civil order and peace: so are the
several Bishops of every diocese, and the several chief prelates of every
province able to avoid, or to appeace, if they rise, all schisms and troubles
ecclesiastical: as saint Cyprian, out of whom this reason is borrowed, and
falsely wrested by the^ to an other purpose, does most plainly teach,
saying thus: Cum statutum sit omnibus nobis etc. Whereas an order, Cyprianus
lib. 1. epist 3. pagi^. 10.
says saint Cyprian, is taken amongst us all, and it is right and
reasonable, that every man's cause be there heard, where the fault was
committed: and whereas every Bishop has a part of the flock assigned to him,
which he ought to rule and govern, and for the which he must g^ue an
account unto the Lord, it is not convenient that such as be under their
governance should run from one Bishop to an other, but there to make
answer in their causes, where they may have accusers, and witnesses of their
crimes. Except such desperate persons think the authority of Bishops in
Afrike to be less, then is the authority of other Bishops. Thus far
saint Cyprian: with much more in the same place, expressly affirmyng that it
is right and reason that several Bishops have the gouernemente of seu^rall
diocesses, even for the same cause, for the which you do untruly allege the
necessity of one head: and declaryng the commodity of pacifiyng of heresies,
Schisms, and dissentions (for of them he speaks in that place) and of
correction of vices by every such several Bishop in his own charge, mosie
directly against D. Hardyng and M. Dormans doctrine of pacifiyng of schisms
by one only head of the universal Church: affirming all such appellations
from a Bishop of one country, to a Bishop of an other country to be
unlawful, for that all Bishops of all countries be of like authority: and
that none but naughty and desperate men, do think the authority of some
bishops, to be inferior to the authority of other. And further, following D.
Hardyng, and M. Dormans own grounds, we say: that as God is the one
heavenly king over all the world, and yet has not appoincted any one man to
be his only deputy in earth over all the Kingdoms of the world: but that
the whole world is governed by his providence, as the only king thereof, and
by the ministry of many several kings and rulers, whom he has severally
Eccl. 17. b. 14* Romans 13* ^.
appoincted over every nation, as his deputies, as is expreslie declared in the
scripture: so in like wise is Christ the only heavenly head of his
Church, and neither neadeth, nor has appoincted any one person in earth, to
be his deputy or vicar general over all the church throughout the world:
but by his providence, and the ministry of many Bishops, his several
vicars in every diocese, both has, and does well govern his Church: and
that as it is impossible, that there should be one only earthly king over
all the world, (as by the state of the world, from the beginning hitherto, is
most manifest) and in case there were one, yet were it impossible for that one
to ouersee his charge, and to keep all the world in Civil order (seeing the
wisest kings that be, have of one particular kingdom their handful as they
say) so in like manner is it impossible, that there should be one general head
in earth over the universal Church, or all Churches dispersed throughout all
the world, conteinyng so many nations, so diverse languages, and natures of
men: or that such an head could ouersee his charge, and keep all Churches
from Schisms and troubles, and pacify them when they were risen. This, as a
thing tried by the state of the world at this day, and ever since the first
beginning thereof, I leave to thy reasonable consideration, good reader, to
determine betwixt us.

Dorman. Fol. 5.
And because good Christian readers, you shall well perceive, that this is no
new devise, or fantasy imagined by me: I will here lay before your eyes, the
judgment of certain notable men, whom God gave to his church to serve for
a wall for the same, against the incursions of the wicked Phylistines his
enemies. In whom you shall most plainly perceive, this order in Christ's
Church to be so necessary, that the only breach and lack thereof, has
been by the^ taken, to be the high way, and very path that leads to all
heresies.

Nowell.
M. Dorman may be careless, no man takes the Popes supremacy to be his
devise and invention: it is known to be the invention of the ambitious Popes
themselves, whom the devil has set a work to trouble the quiet state of
Christendom, and to bring all errors into Christ his Church, and to lay the
foundation of the kingdom of Antichrist.

Dorman. Fol. 5.
And first to begin with that blessed martyr of God saint Cyprian, has he
not concerning thi^ matter, Nowell. Bor^wed out of D. Hardyng Fol. 76. b. who
had it out of Hosins contra Brent. lib. 5. fol. 234. b.
in an epistle by him written to Cornelius then bishop of Rome, thiese words?
Neque enim aliunde obortae ^b. 1. epist. 3.
sunt haereses, aut nata sunt schismata, quam ind^ qued sacerdoti dei non
obtemperatur, nec vnus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and ad tempus tudex,
vice Christi cogitatur. That is, neither ^he high way ^ heresies to ^i^ke that
^et is not one ^dge in earth ^ the steed of ^hriste.
yet truly do heresies arise, or schisms grow, of any other cause, then
thereof, that men obey not the Priest of God, neither do think, that
there is in the Church in the steed and place of Christ, one Priest, and one
judge for the time.

Nowell.
Either M. Dorman had not with sufficient diligence read and noted that long
epistle, written by saint Cyprian to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, or else he
deeply dissembleth that, which he there perceived. For though the epistle be
written to Cornelius, yet it is for a great part written of Cyprian himself:
and many of the sentences in that epistle, yea and this very sentence, which
M. Dorman here alleges for Cornelius his supremacy, as Bishop of Rome, by
the tenure of the epistle appears to be written specially of saint
Cyprian himself, Bishop of Carthage in Afrike, rather then of Cornelius, as
afterward at large shall be declared. And further it appears that this
sentence, and all other sentences of the authority of the Priest, or
Priests, Bishop, or Bishops (for saint Cyprian in that epistle does
often change the number, and sometime speaks as of one, sometime as of many,
or all Priests and Bishops) do indifferently appertain, as well to every,
and all Bishops of all cities and diocesses, as to either Cornelius, or
Cyprian. For that he here says Sacerdoti dei non obtemperatur, The priest of
God is not obeyed, is as much as, Sacerdotibus dei, the Priests of God are not
obeyed. As when the scripture says, Regem honora, honor the King, is as
much, as though it had said, Let subjects of all places, honor their
kings. Touching these words, Neque vnus in ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and
ad tempus index vice Christi cogitatur: that is to say, Neither is one Priest
in the Church for the time, and judge for the time in Christ's steed thought
upon. I have declared at large before, how that saint Cyprian takes all
Bishoprikes, to be but one Bishoprike, as the faithes of all men, are but one
faith. Vnafides, says saint Cyprian, vnum baptisma, vnus episcopus, cuius a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur. There is one faith, Lib. de simplicitate
praelatorum, non procul ab initio.
one Baptism, there is one Bishoprike, the which every Bishop has wholly
for his part. So that when he speaks of one Bishop, one judge in the
church for the time, or of the bishop which is one, and rules the Church
absolutely, he means every Bishop in his own di^cesse without exception: if
he speak specially, he does mean the Bishop of that city or diocese
whereof he entreats, whether it be ye bishop of Rome, Carthage, or any other
place. For the most manifest proof whereof, note these words of saint
Cyprian to Pupianus, who was stubborn against the said Cyprian, whereof it
has been before entreated. Vnde enim schismata etc. Whereof says saint
Cyprian Lib. 4. epist. 9.
do heresies and Schisms spryng, but of this, that the Bishop which is
one, and rules the Church, is through the proud and arr^gant presumption of
certain contemned, and set at naught: and being the man by Gods approbation
allowed and honored, is of unworthy men judged. And a little before this
place: T^ te episcopum episcopi, and iudicem iudicis ad tempus a deo dati
co^stituis. Thou do make thy self a Bishop over the Bishop, and a Judge over
the Judge by God for the time appoincted. Thus much saint Cyprian to
Pupianus, who despised the said Cyprian, so appoincted by God to be the
Bishop, and Judge for the time, as he there says. Now in his epistle to
Cornelius, he says thus: Neque enim aliunde etc. Neither do heresies arise,
or schisms grow, of any other cause, but hereof: that men obeie not the
Priest of God, neither do think that there is in the Church, in the
steed, and place of Christ, one Priest, one Judge for the time. Compare now
these two places together, and you shall find them all one in effect: And
that S. Cypria^, nor any other could have vttred in diverse places, one sense
more nearelie, unless he would have used the same words altogether. But it
is most manifest to all men, that will read these epistles, that in the
first place, by the bishop which is one and rules the Church, by the man
by Gods approbation allowed, by the co^temnyng of whom, heresies and schisms
do spryng and arise, by the Bishop or Priest, and by the Judge for the time
by God appoincted, S. Cyprian himself being Bishop of Carthage is meant: and by
him, that despises the said Bishop, is Pupian meant, who did despise the
said S. Cyprian. Wherefore either it must follow, that saint Cyprian is the
head of the universal Church, seeing those words, which by M. Dormans
judgment appoincted that head, apperteine to him: orels, as the truth is in
deed, that any Bishop is called by saint Cyprian, the Bishop which is
one, and rules the Church, or the judge for the time in the Church in
Christ's steed or place (for all is one) and that then the special bishop of
that place which is entreated of, whether it be Rome, Carthage, or any other,
is meant: and so consequently every Bishop in his own diocese, is that one
Bishop that rules in the church: and that judge for the time, in the steed
of Christ. And that in this place, saint Cyprian means no supremacy of
any one Bishop, but the equality of all Bishops, it may be most evident to
them, that will read the whole epistle, and note how often he speaks of all
Priests, and Bishops. As, Sacerdotibus tantus honor conceditur: so great honor
is given to Priests: and immediately before the place by M. Dorman alleged,
are these words: Sacerdotalis authoritas, and, Sacerdotum hosts: That is to
say, the Priestlie authority, and, the enemies of Priests. Also these
words next following the same place: Sacerdotum collegium: and mox,
Sacerdotes. i. dispensatores dei: the College or company of Priests: and,
the Priests, that is to say, Gods dispensers or stewardes. If they will in
readyng the epistle note these, and many like phrases, they shall easelie
perceive this also, which M. Dorman alleges, to be spoken of the authority
of many, and not of one only. And if it be to tedious to peruse the whole
epistle, if the readers will but cast their eye upon the short argument of
the epistle written by Erasmus, who was no unskillful, or negligent vewer of
the writings of the old fathers (and whose authority M. Dorman uses in this
book against us) they shall easily understand the same. Erasmus his words
in the argument, or sum of this epistle, are these: Ostendit praeterea,
qualiter sacerdotalis authoritas, and potestas, diuina dignatione firmetur: and
inde abortas haereses, and nata esse schismata, quod dei sacerdotibus
obtemperare noluerint. Saint Cyprian does show (says Erasmus) how the
Priestlie authority and power, is by Gods goodness established: and that
heresies Diuina dignation^.
and schisms do arise hereof, that they will not obey the Priests of God.
Thus far Erasmus: who speaks, as you see, of the very place here by M.
Dorman alleged. And if M. Dorman had read and marked but this short argument
of that epistle, thereby might he have understood, that this place by him
alleged for the supremacy of one, to wit Cornelius as Bishop of Rome,
pertains to the authority of all the Priests of God, as well as to him. And
that saint Cyprian Lib. 4. epist. ^.
means that every one Bishop should be ruler only in his own diocese,
and that no one Bishop or other manne should be ruler and judge over all other
Bishops, appears by his words, wherewith he blames Pupianus for that
presumption: Tu te episcopum episcopi etc. Thou do make thy self a bishop
over the Bishop, and a judge of the judge, by God for the time appoincted.
These are saint Cyprians words, with whom in this case saint Augustine
does agree: Augu contra Donatistas de baptismo. lib. 2. cap. 2. ex epistola
Cypriani ad Quintum.
who (as is before noted) reports, and allows these words of saint
Cyprian. Neque quisquam nostrum episcopum se esse episcoporum constituit. etc.
That is to say, none of us makes himself Bishop over Bishops, or does by
tyrannical fear force his fellow Bishops to the necessity of obeiyng.
Seeing every Bishop has of his liberty and power, his own free judgment, as
he who can not be judged of an other, neither can himself judge an other: let
us then look all for the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has
power both to place us in the governance of the church, and to judge of our
acts. Thus far saint Cyprian and faincte Augustine: by whose judgment
you see, M. Dorman, how the Pope has usurped a tyranny over other Bishops, in
taking upon him to be Bishop over all Bishops, and judge over the Judges
appoincted for the time in Christ's steed: and that you maintain the said
tyranny.

Dorman. Fol. 5.
Hitherto saint Cyprian. By the which words good Christian readers, it is
so evident, that there must be one Priest in the Church, whom all other
must obeie, that the same must be taken of us, for judge Th'Apologie of the
English church reproved by sainct^ Cyprian,
here in earth, in the steed of Christ: that you see I nothing doubt, great
cause to condemn, the gross ignorance of our late apology: wherein the
authors, contrary to this doctrine of saint Cyprian, most impudently
pronounce, that in his Church, Christ our lord uses not, the help of any
one man alone to govern the same in his absence, as he that stands in need
of no such help, and that if he did, no mortal man could be found, hable
alone to do the same: and finally with the same S. Cyprian, who died a holy
martyr, and is no doubt a saint in heaven, to whom the belief of both these
two articles seemed not only not impossible, but also very necessary, to
live and dye in the obedience of this Priest, and under such a judge, then
with a sort of leude losels, in whose Church [beyng a certain The definiti^^
of the prot^^^ tantes church*
secret scattred congregation unknown to all the world beside, and to their
own fellows too] is another head, order, obedience, neither yet certain rules
or grounds where on to stay, to run hedlong ye wot no more then your
guides whither.

Nowell.
I trust it is sufficiently and most evidently declared, that every Bishop in
his own diocese, is that one Priest, whom all must obeie: and that this place
apperteineth to any Bishop of any place, as well as the Bishop of Rome. But
whereas M. Dorman would so ^aine have these words of saint Cyprian, Vnus in
ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos etc. which is to say, one Priest and one Judge
in the Church for the time in the steed of Christ, to prove that there ought
to be one head Bishop over all the Church: if that, to gratify M. Dorman,
were granted him: where upon he would gather consequently, that Cornelius, as
Bishop of Rome, should be that one head, as to whom, and of who^ this place
is written (as M. Dorman thinks): if it be declared by the very place it
self, that these words be spoken and meant of saint Cyprian himself, and
not of Cornelius: and so consequently the supremacy of the Church by their
own reason, to be removed from Rome, to Carthage in Afrike, where no
Christian Church now is, may not M. Dorman, D. Hardyng, and Hosius, who do
al so confidentlie allege this place for the Bishop of Rome his supremacy, be
either ashamed of their great folly, or else declare their shameless
impudency? For declaration whereof, I say, that as this third epistle of the
first book is written to Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome: so is a great part
of the said epistle written of saint Cyprian his own affairs, and of the
injuries done to himself, by the heretics, both present in Afrike, and of
their railinges against him in his abse^ce, as appears by these words,
about a side of a leaf in folio, from the beginning of the epistle. Quae autem
sui elatio, quae comminantium tumens, and inflata, ac vana iactatio, illic
absenti minari, cum hic me habea^t in potestate praesentem? What a presumption
of themselves i^ this, what a swelling and puffed, and vain braggerie is this,
there to mannesse me being absente, when as they have me here present in their
hands? By these words of S. Cyprian it appears evidently, that here he
speaks of himself, being despised, and in his absence railed upon by certain
of his own inferiors: and so goes on with a long process, and with many
allegations out of the scriptures, and reproves that damnable vice of a proud
and slanderous toungue. Amongst other places he allegeth this text. He that
says thou fool to his brother etc. is guilty of hell fire: whereof he
infers, how can they then escape the judgment of God the aue^ger, who spoke
such things not only to brethren, but also to Priests? And so procedyng
alleges out of the Scriptures against those heretics, which had so railed
on him: as out of Deuteronomium the 17 chapter, and out of the first book of
Kings, out of the 8. of Mathewe, and the 10. of Luke, the 23. of the Acts, of
the obedience and reverence due to the high priests, and to the Apostles. And
all this he writes specially, to confirm his own autthoritie, being so
vnwoorthilie railed on behind his back: as is most euidente by the
continuau^ce of the process. After which follows the place by M. Dorman
alleged, of the priest of God who is not obeyed, and of one priest, and one
judge in the church in Christ's steed, not regarded. Which words he
speaks of himself so abused by those heretics, so railyng on him behind his
back, as by all that goes before, from the first entry of speaking of
himself and his own wrongs, and still continuyng the treaty of himself, and
his own matters, and also by these words following, it does most plainly
appear. Caeterum dico, dico enim prouocatus etc. But I say, says saint
Cyprian, for I say, being provoked (to wit, by such railers upon him as he
began first to speak of) I say, being sorrowful, I say, being compelled:
when a bishop is placed in the room of his predecessor being dead, when he
is chosen peaceably, by the voice of all the people: being in persecution
defended by Gods help, ioigned faithfully to all his fellow bishops, tried
and allowed of his people in his bishoprike four years: sufferyng so many
persecutions, even at this very time, in the which I do write to you these
letters, cried for to be thrown to the Lions: when such a brother is assaulted
of certain desperate and wicked persons, it appears that they which do so
assault him, be the enemies of Christ. Thus far saint Cyprian: whereby it
appears, that he has continued, and does still continue to write of
himself, by the very words, prouocatus dico, I say being provoked etc. and
by the circumstances of his complaints to Cornelius, for such unworthy
despisyng of him and railing upon him, by such his disobedient inferiors, and
by the circumstance of the matter and time, where he says, that he, who was
of his people allowed four years in his Bishoprike, is the broother so
assaulted: being the Priest of God, is so despised: being the judge in Christ's
steed for the time, is not regarded, as he said before. Whereby it is most
manifest, that saint Cypria^ means himself, and not Cornelius, who was
bishop of Rome but three years, or as Platina and others say, Nicephorus lib.
6. cap. 33. Platina in vita Cornelii.
but two years. So that these words of one priest and one Judge in the
Church, for the time in steed of Christ (which M. Dorman has alleged for
the supremacy of one head of the universal Church) can not possibly be
taken as spoken of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, but are directly spoken of S.
Cyprian himself Bishop of Carthage in Afrike (as I doubt not but all learned,
and discreate men readyng the epistie will judge.) Wherefore it falls out, by
M. Dormans diligence, that Carthage, which is in Afrike, and in the possession
of the Infideles, should be the sea of the supreme head of the Church, and
not Rome. Now the truth in deed is, that as this place is here alleged by
saint Cyprian, with a number of scriptures there like wise rehearsed for the
mainteinaunce of his own authority in his Bishoprike: so do they likewise
apperteine to the authority of every other bishop in his own diocese, who is
there the one priest, and the one judge in the church in Christ's steed for
the time. And neither these, nether any other such places were ever alleged by
S. Cyprian, for the supremacy of any one Bishop, over all the church. Let S.
Cyprians words next before the very place, by M. Dorman alleged, prove this
that I have said. Cum haec tanta, and talia, and multa alia exempla praecedant
etc. That is to say, where as these such, and so great examples, with many
other, do^e go before, by the which the sacerdotal authority and power is by
Gods goodness established: what manner Di^nadignatione.
of men think you be they, which being the enemies of Priests, and rebels
against the catholic Church, are feared neither by the threatenings of the
Lord, forewarnyng: nor with the vengeance of the indgement to come. For
hereof rise heresies and schisms, that the priest of God is not obeyed etc.
as master Dorman has alleged out of this place of S. Cyprian. You may see
that where S. Cypria^ says now, The priest of God, as speaking of one:
immediately before, he said, The priests, as of many: as it is all one to say,
Obeie thy superior: and, Obeie thy superiors. Which also declares that the
words next following, of one Priest, and one Judge, in the Church in
Christ's steed, do apperteine to all Bishops: that is, to every one in his
own diocese, and not, one to be over all the church. Concerning the
Apology, master Dorman his own example of civil gouernemente, ^ little
before alleged, plainly declares that he does unjustly find fault with
it. For as the Apology with us denies not, but that every king in his own
realm, every meaner magistrate in his office is, in Gods steed or place, a
Judge for the time: so does it not deny but that every Bishop in his diocese
is, in Christ's steed or place, judge for the time. But as the Apologi^
denies that every one King is, or can be in Gods place, judge over all the
world to rule it: but every king is in Gods steed Judge in his own kingdom
or kingdoms, as God does appoinct, for he gives to Eccle. 17. b. 14
diverse kings many kingdoms, but to none, all: so does it deny, that any one
bishop is, or can be, in Gods place, judge in the universal church, or in all churches throughout the world. Wherefore the Apology is herein unjustly
blamed of you M. Dorman: neither does S. Cyprian (who died an holy martyr,
and is no doubt a saint in heaven) hold with you against the Apology, but
with it against you most plainly, in this and all other places, which you have
untruely alleged, and all reasons, that you have vnreasonablie gathered, and
violently wrested against it, out of S. Cyprian. And I trust that of this, and
such like vndiscreate allegations, it will appear to the wise reader, how
little cause M. Dorman had to triumph, as though S. Cyprian were of his side
altogether: and withal, so insolentlie to rail upon us, saying: that it were
better with S. Cyprian, to live and die in the obedience of this Priest, and
under such a judge (meaning the Pope, of whose supremacy saint Cyprian never
dreamed) then with a sort of leude losels, in whose Church (being a certain
secret scattered congregation, unknown to all the world beside, and to their
own fellows too) is neither head, order, obedience, neither yet certain rules
or grounds whereon to stay, to run headlong ye ^ote no more then your guides
whither. And withal to note in the margent of his book, this to be the
definition of the protestants church. To the which outrageous railynges, in
this and all other places, I say as S. Cyprian in this very epistle says to
such like railers against him. Multa turpia, and probrosa, and ore Lib. 1.
epist. 3. non procul ab initio.
tuo digna, te proferre. That thou vttereste many vile, and shameful words,
mete for thine own mouth. And as S. Augustine, even in the place by M. Dorma^
in the first face of his book alleged, does say to Petilian, being a weak
reasoner, but a mighty railer, such as M. Dorman is. Tu es maledicus
conuiciator, August. contra Perilianu^ lib. 2. cap. 32.
non veridicus disputator. Thou art an evil tongued railer, not a true and
pithie reasoner. The first part whereof, M. Dorman himself does in this
place, and in all the rest of his book prove abundantly: the weakness
of his reasonyng, partly I have already, and shall hereafter more, and (as I
trust) sufficiently declare. Now to the matter: I say, our congregation is
not so scattered, nor so secreate and unknown to the world, as M. Dorman
does make it: the Pope and his have both more knowledge and feelyng also,
then likyng thereof. And we take this objection as no reproach, being common
to our congregation with the primitive church of our savior Christ, and his
holy Apostles, specially in the time of persecution. We are not headless, as
you make us: we have Christ in heaven, and our Prince in earth under him: we
have orders both civil and ecclesiastical, and live (as men may)
thereafter. We do obeie our natural Prince, and the magistrates, and
ecclesiastical prelates under our Prince with better conscience, then you do
obeie your foraine head, the Pope of Rome. We have the rules and grounds of
Gods word, and therefore we know whither to go, and whereupon to stay:
whatsoever you M. Dorman say.

Dorman. Fol. 5.
But saint Cyprian, was he trow you of this mind Nowell, Borrowed of doctor
Hardyng fol. 80. b who calls this a notable saying.
alone? No verily, for saint Hierom is of the same, as by thiese his words
it is most evident. Ecclesiae salus; in summi sacerdotis pendet dignitate,
cuisi non exors, and ab omnibus Contra Luci^^rianos.
eminens detur potestas, ^ot in Ecclesia efficientur schismata quot sacerdotes.
The health [saieth he] and welfare of the Church, depends upon the
estimation of the chief Priest, who, if he have not authority pearelesse, and
above One chief Priest to a^oide schisms
all other, ye shall have in the Church, so many schisms, as there be
Priests.

Nowell.
It is true that S. Hierome is of the same mind that S. Cyprian was of: but
neither of them both were of that mind that D. Hardyng and M. Dorman be of:
that is to wit, that either there should be one head over all the church, or
that the Bishop of Rome should be that head: but that every bishop in his own
diocese is summus sacerdos, the high priest over his own clergy: and that
one bishop is not superior to an other. Neither has saint Hierome in the
whole dialogue against the Luciferians, as much as one word that is special
to the Bishop of Rome only, but common to all bishops of all places: as the
learned, that will read the dialogue, shall easily understand: and as
Erasmus in the argument of the said Dialogue, has well noted, saying: Liber
est in primis lectu dignus, quippe qui multa salutaria praecepta complectatur
de vita Episcoporum. The book is very worthy to be read (says Erasmus)
as the which does contain many wholesome precepts concerning the life of
Bishops. Thus far Erasmus. For whereas the Luciferians thought that lay
men, which had fallen into heresy, being penitent, might be received into
the church again, but that bishops ought not to be received again upon their
penance, except they were vnbishopped, S. Hierome proves that the bishops
also upon conversion and penance, might be received, and remain still
bishops. And here about is the disputation in the first part of the said
dialogue, co^teining the one half of the same: in the which part also is this
sentence by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman alleged, for the authority of one Bishop
over the whole Church, which is by S. Hierome there most plainly spoken for
the authority of every bishop in his own diocese. But it is expedient that I
do note certain of the places out of the said dialogue, which evidently do
prove that which I say of every bishops authority, and do reprove ye
wresting of this place by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman, to the authority of one
bishop over all the church. Orthodoxus dixit: Nescis and laicos and clericos
Orthodoxus.
vnu^ habere christu^, nec alium neophytis, aliu^ Episcopis esse deu^: cur ergo
no^ recipiat clericos, qui recipit laicos penite^tes? That is to say: He of ye
right faith said thus: Dooest thou not know yt as well they of the laity as
they of the clergy have both one Christ, and that such as be but nouices in
christian religion have not one God, and bishops an other? (but that both have
one God): why should not he therefore receive the^ of the clergy, who does
receive such of the laity as be penitent? And again, not much after.
Luciferianus: oro te no^ne legisti de episcopis dictu^: vos estis sal te^r?
etc. which is to say The Luciferia^ said: I pray thae have you not read yt which
is spoken of bishops: you are the salt of the earth? but if ye salt have lost
his saltness, what ca^ be salted therewith? and so forth at large. Unto who^
Orthodoxus answers thus, Sit, ita vt vis, Arrianorum Episcopus hostis
Christi, sit sal infatuatu^ etc. That is to say, Be it so as thou would have
it, that an Arria^ bishop is the enemy of Christ, be it ye he is infatuate or
unsavory salt etc. Hitherto out of S. Hierome against the Luciferia^s. Whereby
you may see yt he speaks of many bishops, or of one heretic bishop, as of
al of ye same sort. Now to come nerer the place, by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman
alleged: whereas the Luciferian thinks the dignity of a bishop to be so
great, that it may not be retained by one that has once been in heresy, S.
Hierome co^sesseth in deed that bishops be in authority above al priests and
deacons in their own diocese, but that yet they may nevertheless after
penite^ce retain their bishoprikes. These be S. Hieromes words alitile
before the place by M. Dorman alleged. Orthodoxus. No^ equide^ abnuo hanc
ecclesiaru^ esse co^suetudine^, vt ad eos qui long i^ minoribus vrbibus per
presbyteros, and diaconos baptizati sunt, episcopus ad inuocatione^
sanctispu^s, manu^ impositurus excurrat etc. That is: I do not deny this to
be the custom of churches, that ye bishop does come to those that be
Baptized in lesser tounes by Priests and deacons, to lay his hand upon them,
with the invocation of the holy ghost. And shortly after he says: Quod si hoc
loco quaeris, quare in ecclesia baptizatus, nisi per manus episcopi no^
accipiat spiritu^ sanctu^, que^ oe^s asserimus i^ vero baptismate tribui? disce
ha^c obseruatione^, ex ea autoritate descendere, quod post ascensum dn^i spu^s
sanctus ad apostolos desce^dit. Et multis i^ locis idem factitatu^ reperimus,
ad honore^ potius sacerdotij, quam legis necessitate^. Alioqui si ad episcopi
ta^tum imprecatione^ spu^s sanctus defluit: luge^di sunt qui in viculis aut in
castellis, aut i^ remotioribus locis per praesbyteros and diaconos baptizati,
ante dormierunt, quam ab Episcopis inuiserentur. Ecclesiae salus in summi
sacerdotis dignitate pendet: cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens
detur potestas, tot in ecclesiis effictentur schismata quot sacerdotes. That is
to say: If you ask in this place, wherefore he that is Baptized in the
Church, does not receive the holy ghost, but by the hands of the bishop,
the which holy ghost we all do affirm to be given in true Baptism?
Learn, this observation to come of that authority, that after the ascension
of our Lord, the holy ghost came down unto the Apostles. And we find that
the same is dooen in many places, rather for the honor of Priesthood, then of
the necessity of the law. Else if the holy Ghost come down only at the
prayer of the bishop, they are to be lamented, who being baptized by Priests
and deacons, in little tounes and villages, or places further of, do dye
before they be visited by the bishops. The health of the church depends upon
the estimation of the chief Priest: who, if he have not authority pearelesse,
and above all other, ye This is master Dormans translation.
shall have in the church so many schisms, as there be Priests. Thus far
S. Hierome: whose words I have repeated at large, and in the last place
without any intermission have ioigned the very words, by D. Hardyng and M.
Dorman alleged, to S. Hieromes words next before. Whereby it is most
euidente that S. Hierome speaks of every bishop in his own diocese, and of
the priests and deacons that be under him in his said diocese. And that the
authority which S. Hierome says the Bishop has, is the authority of laiyng
his hands upon children, or other lately baptized by inferior ministers, and
curates in villages of the said diocese (which authority is apperteinyng to
all bishops in their own diocese) and that bishops have that authority given
them above other priests or deacons, being curates of smaller tounes and
villages in their diocese, not by the necessity of Gods law, but for the
honor of their bishoprike. For if every priest of the diocese should in all
poinctes be of equal authority with the bishop, there would arise so many
Schisms by the arrogancy of the priests, as there be priests. And for this
cause has every bishop an authority pearelesse (as M. Dorman does translate
it) and above all other priests in his diocese. For it is evident by the
places before alleged, that comparison is made between priests, deacons and
cuvates in small tounes and villages, who have authority to baptize, being
many, and between the Bishop of the diocese, who is one, and the high priest
in the said diocese, and has authority pearelesse over all other priests
and deaco^s in the same diocese: And that there is no comparison here made
between the bishop of Rome, as the high priest, or bishop over all other
priests and bishops, as D. Hardyng and M. Dorma^ without all shame would wrest
it: whereas there is not one word from the beginning of that long dialogue
of S. Hieromes unto this place by them alleged, nor to the end of the same,
either written, or meante of the bishop of Rome, but of every Bishop in his
own diocese. And therefore this whole matter is altogether impertinente to D.
Hardyng, and M. Dormans purpose, of one only head over the whole Church,
unless M. Dorman would frame us thereof this leude argument: Saint Hierome
says that every bishop ought to have authority above all other priests of
his own diocese, ergo the Bishop of Rome ought to have a preemine^ce
pearelesse above all bishops of all diocesses, and over the whole church
throughout the whole world. Which may well be M. Dorma^s reason: but fure I
am, that no reasonable man, being awake, will so reason. To conclude, you see
it is not without great cause, that Fol. 80. b. Where he untruly says, that
S. Hiero^ here means the Pope Peter's successos.
D. Hardyng in his book calls this place of S. Hierome a notable place, and
says that it may not be let pass: which his masters words, M. Dorman
well noting* would not suffer it to pass, until he had by the handelyng
thereof, declared his notable foolishenesse. Wherein as I do little merueil of
M. Dorman, whom, the leude^ the writing is, the better it does become him: so
can I not but much muse how it should come to pass, that doctor Hardyng, or
any of any honesty and learning, should so abuse himself, and the readers,
with the allegation of such impertinente places: and with what conscience, and
shamefastness they can do it. Unless they think that this excuse may serve
in matters of religion also: Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirat? which is
to say, What matter makes it whether you use fine force (plain truth) or
guile, with an enemy? And therefore they deal with us rather as enemies, then
as does become themselves being Christians, or as apperteineth to the treaty
of religion, worthy of al truth and sincerity.

Dorman. fol. 5.
And again in an other place, speaking of the apostles Ad Euagr^^.
he writes thus, Quod vnus postea electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur, in
schismatis rem^dium factum est, ne vnusquisque ad se tra^ens ecclesiam
rumperet. That is, That one was afterward chosen to rule the rest, that was
dooen for a remedy against schisms, least while every man would challenge to
himself the church, by such halyng and pullyng they might break the same.

No well.
S. Hier^me in his epistle to Euagrius, she weth that praesbyter and episcopus,
a Priest and a bishop, be all one, by the first institution, and by the Law
of God: which he proves by many testimonies of the sc^ip^ures, and withal he
declares that the Apostles themselves were called praesbyteri, that is to
say, elders or priests. So that all bishops, which be the successors of the
Apostles, be also praesbyteri, that is to say, priests: whereof it follows
also, that there is an equaliti^ amongst all bishops by Gods law, as the
equal successors Omnes Apostolorum successores sun^.
of the Apostles. And that this is S. Hieromes mind in that place, all learned
men, who have read the said epistle, do well know. Now to that plac^
which M. Dorman allegeth out of this epistle: Quod autem postea vnus electus
est, qui caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factum est: ne
vnusquisque ad se trahens ecclesiam rumperet. That is to say: That one was
afterward chosen to rule the rest, that was done for a remedy against
schisms: least while every man would challenge to himself the church, by such
halyng and pullyng they might break the same. Thus far has M. Dorman
alleged: but S. Hierome proceeds further to declare the same matter, by these
words. Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Euangelista, vsque ad Heraclam and
Dionysium episcopos, praesbyteri semper vnum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu
collocatum, episcopum nominabant: quomodo si exercitus imperatorem faciat, aut
Diaconi eligant de se, quem industrium nouerint, and archidiaconum vocent. Quid
enim facit, excepta ordinatione, episcopus, quod praesbyter non faciat? That is
to say: For at Alexandria from Mark the Euangeliste, unto Heracla and
Dionysius being bishops there, the priests did ever place one chosen of their
company in the higher room, and named him, bishop: as if an army should make
a captain: or deacons should choose one of their own company, whom they
know to be active and diligent, and call him Archedeacon. For what does the
bishop (only orderyng excepted) that a priest may not do? These are saint
Hieromes words. Whereby it appears plainly, that the words of saint
Hierome, One chosen afterward amongst them to rule the rest, for a remedy of
schisms, do appertain to every Bishop, as head ruler of the Clergy of his
own Diocese. For, says S. Hierome, such an head ruler was chosen at
Alexandria in Aegipte, where S. Mark the Evangelist, Heracla and Dionysius
were bishops, to govern the priests and clergy there. And withal
whatsoever was done afterward, was not done de iure diuino: upon the ground of
Gods law, as you would have the Popes supremacy to stand, but of an
ecclesiastical order and policy. For that which was done by Gods law, was
not dooen afterward, but first: this which was thus done afterward, says
saint Hierome, was done rather for the honor of the priesthood, then for the
Hierome contia Luciferianos: ad honorem potius sacerdotii, qua^ ad legis
necessitatem.
necessity of the law. For by the law of God, which is first, the priest (as
S. Hierome says) may do as much, exceptyng orderyng only, as may the
bishop: but afterward for order, one was placed in the highest place for the
auoidyng of schisms. And if a priest by saint Hieromes mind, may do
as much as a Bishop, I think one bishop also may by Gods law, do as much
as an other bishop. Further seeing this one afterward chosen to rule the rest,
was chosen as well at Alexandria, as at Rome, or elsewhere: and the Bishop of
Alexandria was that rular of the rest of his Clergy, as well as was the
bishop of Rome of his own clergy: it must needs fall out, that these
words, one chosen afterward to rule the rest, either make for no supremacy
of any one bishop over all the church, as apperteinyng to every Bishop in his
own diocese: or if M. Dorman will needs enforce a supremacy by the said
words, he shall be enforced to confess the said supremacy to be common to
the bishop of Alexandria (where S. Hierome says this one was chosen to rule
the rest) with the bishop of Rome: as by the other place last before alleged
by M. Dorman out of S. Cyprian, the said supremacy should appertain to the
Bishop of Carthage. But both Carthage, and Alexandria are now in the hands
of Infideles, and therefore can there be no supremacy of the church there:
and yet as well there, as at Rome, where Christ is as much blasphemed, as he is
either at Alexandria, or Carthage. But it is in deed most plain by that
epistle of S. Hierome, that he does not mean that one bishop should be
above an other, much less, one head over all other. For he expressly says,
that all bishops be equal, and none superior, nor inferior to an other by
Gods law. Neither does it hurt our cause, in case that we grant to M.
Dorman, that this place does appertain to the Apostles: and that one was
chosen emongst the Apostles themselves to have the chief place: that is, to
speak first, to moderate other, to stay contention, and to remedy schisms.
Naie it makes with us directly, who do grant that as amongst those.xij.
one was so chosen to be ruler: so it is good, that in every competente number
of priests and clergy, one be chosen likewise to be ruler. And if M. Dorman
upon this grant, would infer such a supremacy of one over the rest of the
Apostles, as the Pope claims over the church: Saint Paul reprouyng Peter
more sharply to his face, then Gala. 2. c. 11. etc
is lawful now for any bishop to deal with the Pope, does prove that Peter
had no such supremacy. For though the Pope by his abominable doings do
Disti^ct. 40. ca. Si papa. Extra. Ioannis. 22. Tit. 4. cap. 2. in scholiis.
damn himself and innumerable other, yet may no man be so bold as to blame
him therefore, but let him go uncontrolled to the devil of hell. Neither
follows it, though one man be chosen so to be ruler amongst xij. therefore
may one also be chosen to be ruler over all the Clergy of the world, of
all nations and languages, and to far of also, to be well ruled. No more
does it follow, for that S. Hierome does say, that one was chosen of the
company of the Priests of every one Church or diocese, to rule the rest
(as namely was dooen at Alexandria) the which ruler was called the bishop:
therefore ought there to be one chosen to rule all bishops of all diocesses
(namely at Rome) and the said one ruler to be called Pope, or head of the
vntuersall Church. For this kind of collection, usual to M. Dorman, I have
by his own former reasons and similitudes of several governors or Princes,
necessary to be over every city, country, or kingdom, and that none can be
over the whole world, proved to be a vain and leude collectio^. And I have
also by his own witnesses, S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, and by the very places
of them, by him guilefullie wrested, at large declared the same. And I shall
yet hereafter more plainly declare that S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome, whom he
has alleged for the supremacy of one, that is to wit the Bishop of Rome,
are of all other writers most clear against him: and that in the very same
places by him for his purpose alleged: so that it may be justly meruelled,
whether M. Dorman were so ignoraunte, that he should bring those for his
witnesses, who dootestifie most against him: or so impudente, that he cared
not whom he brought, or what he said, so he might seem to say and bring
somethyng, were it never so far from, or so much against his purpose.

Dorman. Fol. 5. and. 6.
Leo, of whom the whole Council of Calcedon, as one of the greatest for
number: so of all men accounted emongeste the four general for authority,
reported so honorably, that they did not only with one voice all, openly
profess themselves to believe as he did, but called him also, by the name of
Sanctissimus et beatissimus, that is most holy and blessed of all other,
speaking of the mystical body of Christ's Church writes after this sort.
Haec conn^xio, totius quidem corporis vnanimitatem Nowell. This place D.
Hardyng noted out for his scholar. fol. 87. a.
^^istola ad A^^stasium epi^^psi Thessal.
requirit etc This combination and ioignyng together, [he speaks of the body
of Christ's Churche] requires an unity of the whole body, but especially of
the priests, amongst whom although there be one dignity common to them all,
yet is there not one general It is clean contrary in all printed books that
I have seen. To say: Quibus etsi dignitas no^ sit coi^s, est tame^ ordo
generalis. That is, amongst who^ though there be not one dignity common, yet
is there one general order.
order amongst them all. For even amongst the blessed Apostles in that
similitude of honor, was there yet a difference of power: and whereas in their
election, they were all like, yet was it given to one, to be above all the
rest. Out of which form is taken our difference of Bishops, and by
merueilous order and disposition is it provided, that every one should not
challenge ^^shoppes.
to himself every thing, but that in every Province, there should be one,
whose judgment amongst the rest of his brethren should be chief, and of
most authority. ^rchbishops.
And again certain appoincted in greater cities whose care should be greater,
by whom to the only seat of Peter, the charge of the universal Church Pope.
might have recourse, that nothing might at any time dissent from the head.

Nowell.
The Council of Calcedon professed that they believed as did Leo concerning the
most blessed Trinity, and condemned Eutyches heresy: but what is that to the
purpose? We profess that we do therein believe as did Leo: and we do like
wise condemn the heresy of Eutyches. For that the said Council calls him
Sanctissimum, and beatissimum, the most holy and blessed: what makes that
for his supremacy? All the Priests and deacons of Rome do call S. Cyprian
bishop of Carthage, Beatissimum and gloriosissimum papam, the most blessed
and most glorious Pope, as I have before noted: and yet I think that M.
Dorman will not therefore grant saint Cyprian the supremacy. But what the
Council of Calcedon granted to Leo Bishop of Rome, or is feigned to have
granted to him, or what they granted equally with him to Anatholius bishop
of Constantinople, and what Leo did like, or mislike, allow, or reject of the
said Council: I shall have more conueniente place to declare afterward,
where M. Dorman does more specially entreat of the said council. Now
concerning this epistle by M. Dorman alleged, this is first most evident, that
the epistles carried about in the names of the first ancient Popes, are either
forged, or at the least corrupted by their ambitious successors of later
time, to make a show of the antiquity of their challenge of the supremacy:
and this to be true is easy to perceive by many circumstances, as shall
hereafter at large be declared. But be it, that these be Leos own words,
and were this Leo accounted never so holy, yet I trust he being bishop of
Rome, may netther be his own witness, nor judge in his own cause of the
Popes supremacy. The holiest and the best men that be, are lightly partial
in their own matters. Wherefore Christ our savior, most worthy of all
credit, says: Si testimonium perhibeam de meipso, testimonium meum non Joan.
5. c. 31.
est verum. If I bear witness of my self, my testimony is not true: which
he says, for that were his testimony never so true, as it was ever most
true, yet being of himself, it would not be taken of men as true, as it
appears by the words of the Phariseis to our savior: Tu de te^pso
testimonium perhibes etc. Thou Joan. 8. b. 13.
(say the Phariseis) bears witness of thy self, thy witness is not true. If
Christ's words may not here take place, let the Pope then cause this note to
be blotted out of his own canon law also: Papa iudex esse no^ Causa. 16.
Quaest. 6. cap. Consuetudo, in scholiis.
debet in causa propria: The Pope may not be judge in his own cause. For it
stands there in vain, as it seems. To the which yet it appears that
Pighius in the fifte book of his Hierarchy had a respece: for he Lib. 5. cap.
14. fol. 258. b.
allegyng a Clementine, that is to say a Popes decree, for his purpose, has
these words. Quum Clementinam audis, nolo imagineris, audire te vnius hominis
Romani pontificis in sua ipsius causa sententiam, sed cogita te sententiam
audire Viennensis concilij, in quo ex vniuersa ecclesia conueneru^t plusqua^.
300 episcopi. That is to say, When thou hear the name of a Clementine, I
would not have thee to imagine that thou hear the judgment of one man, to
wit, the bishop of Rome in his own cause: but consider that thou do hear
the Sentence of the Council of Vienne, in the which more then. 300. Bishops
were assembled out of the universal Church. Thus far Pighius. Whereby it
may seem that he does not think the Popes only testimony in his own
cause to be sufficient. D. D Hardyng fol. 76. b.
Hardyng, who does follow Pighius very much, says that he will not allege
the testimonies of many Popes for the proof of the supremacy, for that we
do make, though without all cause (says he) exception against the popes, as
unlawful witnesses in their own cause. And therefore he is somewhat more
shamefaste then M. Dorman, and has only noted this epistle of Pope Leo:
which M. Dorman thus largely rehearses, and with marginall notes so
beautifieth, as some special place to prove the Popes supremacy. As he laith
on load continually, not of popish witnesses, but Popes themselves, witnesses
in their own false claim: M. Dorman fol. 63.
though he can not dissemble himself in an other place, but that we may make
exception unto them, as not indifferent witnesses in their own quarelles.
Well, if these causes of exception to Popes in their own cause, which I have
alleged, shall not seem to D. Harding, and M. Dorman sufficient, I trust yet
that all reasonable indifferent men shall judge them sufficient. And for more
reasonable cause of exception to this Leo here, and all other Popes too, in
this matter we say: that Zozimus or Sosimus bishop of Rome about a. 24. years
before this Leo, moved with an ambitious desire of this supremacy, which the
bishops of Rome his successors now strive for, as it were, pro aris and focis,
for life and death, as one might say, did corrupt and falsify the decrees of
the Nicene Council, pretending that it was decreed in that Council, that the
bishop of Rome should be the chief judge, above all other bishops, and that it
should be lawful for any man under any other bishop, to appeal to the Bishop
of Rome, as to the highest judge over all ecclesiastical persons: and the
said Zozimus, as the manner of falsaries is, did counterfeite a decree to that
purpose, and put it in writing, and labored to put it in execution by
mainteinyng one Apiarius, a priest of the diocese called Sicce^sis in Afrike,
against his bishop called Vrbanus: which Apiarius being by his said bishop,
for his most wicked life excommunicate, appealed to the said Zozimus Bishop
of Rome. If ye ask me how I prove that I have said, to wit the said
Zozimus Bishop of Rome to be a corrupter, and falsarie, I answer, I prove it
not by two only, but by two hundredth and.xvij. good witnesses, the whole
Council of Afrike, in the which so many Bishops were assembled, and amongst
them was saint Augustine, the best learned of all bishops, and equal in
virtue and godliness with the best not only of his time, but of all ages,
with Orosius, Prosper, and many other bishops notable in learning and virtue.
They al, as in their epistle to Celestine one of the successors of this
Zozimus appears, testify that there was no such matter for the Bishop of
Romes superiority, as was by Pope Zozimus alleged, neither in their usual
copies of the Nicene Council, neither in the authentical examples, which
were sent them by Cyrill, Patriarch of Alexandria, and by Atticus, Patriarch of
Constantinople: which authenticalles agreyng with their own copies, and all
other copies every where, had no such thing as Zozimus alleged, but had the
clean contrary: for that the sixth and seventh decree of the said Nicene
Council make the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antiochia, and Jerusalem, equal
with the bishop of Rome. And the said. 217. Bishops made a decree in Conci.
Africa^. circa tempus Bonifacii. 1. cap. 105.
that Africane Council, that no sailyng over the Sea with controversies, nor
appellations to the Bishop of Rome, nor sendyng of his Legates laterall into
their countries, as judges, should be used: according as by the epistle of the
said whole council sent to Pope Celestine Ad Papa^ Caelestinum vrbis Romae
episcopum.
plainly appears. In the inscription of which epistle, they do acknowledge
the said Celestine none other, but Bishop of the city of Rome: for this term
Papa, Pope, was in those days common to any notable Bishop, of what place so
ever he were. For the which it pleased D. Hardyng to call the Africanes,
amongst D. Hardyng fol. 89. b.
whom S. Augustine, Orosius, and Prosper, with many other learned and godly
Bishops were, schismatikes, as those that submitted not their necks to the
Pope: and following Hosius his author, he says, that Afrike Hosius contra
Brentium lib. 4. fol. 187.
continued in this schism. 100. years: to wit, from Boniface the first, to
Boniface the second. And M. Dormans Dorman. fo. 3. b. and fol. 11. b.
judgment is, that all such are out of the state of salvation, and in
damnable case, following the judgment of Pope Boniface, who does say,
declare, define and pronounce (for the man as in a matter of weight Extr. co^m.
lib. 1. De Mayor. and obedientia. cap. vnam Sanctam.
lays on load of words) that of necessity of salvation, all men must be
subject to the Bishop of Rome. But I had rather be a schismatike from that
false vsurpar, with S. Augustine, Orosius, Prosper, and those 217. godly and
learned fathers, and with the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Constantinople,
Cyrill and Atticus, ioignyng with them in the truth of the Nicene Council
(and so being, I thank God, do little fear any damnation, other then to
their fagottes and fire) then to be with the corrupter and falsarie Zozimus,
bishop of Rome, a counterfeite catholic, and in deed a false schismatike from
Christ, and the truth. Though Hosius goes about in vain to defend the cause
of this corrupter, most impudently going about to prove, that neither in
Greece, nor Afrike, nor else where, there was any true copy of the Nicene
Counsel remaining, but only with the Bishop of Rome: which how credible it
is, I leave to the discreate readers judgment. But of this matter M. Dorman
gives me occasion to speak more largely hereafter. After this Zozimus, his
successor Bonifacius the first, Celestine the first, with all others almost,
following Zozimus steps and ambition, have with toothe and nail striuen for
this supremacy: and for that purpose did stick still to the falsified Nicene
Canon, and have likewise falsified other Councelles, in sundry places: and
have forged a great many of the epistles now abroad in the names of the old
Popes, Clemente, Anacletus, Euaristus, Telesphorus, and other their
predecessors, whom they make to write almost of nothing else, but of the
prerogative of Peter's chair, the sea of Rome: whereas those godly old
fathers, ever subject to persecution and death, never thought of any such
matters, neither had lust or leisure to occupy their heads and pens about
such ambitious matters: as by the true stories of the^ does most plainly
appear, and shall hereafter at large be declared. And whereas this Leo
refused the title of Oecumenicall or universal Patriarch given him by the said
Council of Chalcedon, and apperteinyng to him of right, as Pighius says,
though master Pighius, lib. 5. ca. 10. fo. 239. b M. Dorman fol. 65. a.
Dorman do deny it, there must needs be some error. And it is great
marvel that Leo would so ambitiously challenge in his epistle the same title
in effect, which he refused so freely offered unto him by the whole Council.
And it may seem that if the Popes judgment be above the Council, as
Pighius does teach, the Council did err, in geuyng him such a title: and if
the Council in this poincte did well, as Pighius says, but M. Dorman
denies, either the Pope should have received the said title offered, or not
have claimed the like of those, who would not gladly grant it unto him.
Wherefore I trust no reasonable man will disalowe our exceptions to such
witnesses in their own cause. Yet besides these causes of most just
exceptions to this Pope, and all other Popes in their own cause of their
falsely usurped supremacy, I will go otherwise to work with M. Dorman. I
say that Leo here, (be it these be his words, which yet is in
controversy) says untruly. If M. Dorman ask how I prove it? I would
first ask him whether he has truly translated this place? And if he have,
how he can make these words in this epistle, there is one digniti^ common to
all Bishops, to agree with these following: there is difference of power
emongst them, and it is given to one to be above all the rest, whose
judgment is of most authorite, and how this manne is not in dignity
differyng from the rest? And if master Dorman think he can well enoughe
frame this Jar: I say further, I will prove the sayings of Leo untrue, by
two witnesses, against this one: by indifferente witnesses, against this
partial witness in his own cause: by witnesses without and above all
exception, against this witness, unto whom so many and so just exceptions
may be taken. I will prove (I say) his own witness of himself false, and M.
Dorman too, by M. Dormans own witnesses, saint Cyprian, and saint Hierome
brought in by himself for the proof of his part: and that which is more, I
will prove it by the very same places of saint Cyprian and saint Hierome,
which are by Doctor Hardyng, and master Dorman here alleged: that is to
say, by the third epistle of the first book of the epistles of saint
Cyprian, and by the epistle of saint Hierome to Euagrius. And I doubt not,
but as of his three witnesses brought for him, one is no witness (but such as
if one would say ask my self whether I be a thief, or no) so the other two
witnesses, who be most worthy credit, shall prove my cause true, I trust,
and master Dorman a very liar. Wherein I do thus proceade. First, I will
Lib* 1. epist. 3. pagin. 10.
put the reader in remembrance yet once again, of Saint Cyprians own
words before touched, written in the same epistle by master Dorman alleged,
which are these: Cum statutum sit omnibus nobis, etc. which may be thus
translated: whereas an order is taken or statute made emongeste us all, and it
is also reasonable and right, that every man's cause be there heard, where
the fault was committed: and whereas a portion of the flock is assigned to
every bishop by himself, which every one ought to rule and govern, and must
give an account of his doings to the Lord: these which be under our
governance ought not therefore to run about (to wit, from one Bishop to
an other) neither to break the agreeable concord of Bishops by their
guilefull temeritie or rashness, but ought there to make answer in their
causes, where they may have accusers, and witnesses of their crimes, except
it seem to a few desperate, and cast away persons, that the authority of
the bishops that be in Afrike is less, then the authority of others,
which Bishops have already given judgment of them: their cause is already
heard, sentence is already pronounced against them: neither does it agree to
the grave judgment of Bishops, to be blamed of the leuitie of a mouable and
inconstant mind: whereas our Lord does say, Let your speech be, yea,
yea: no, no. Thus far saint Cyprian, M. Dormans own witness, even in the
same epistle by himself alleged. And this sentence of saint Cyprian touching
the determinyng of controversies in the places where they do rise, and that
no appellations shall be made to any bishop of an other Province, yea and that
namely not to the Bishop of Rome, nor that he shall send any Legates Laterall
to hear or determine foraine matters, does the whole Carthaginense council
approve and allow: wherein was saint Augustine, Drosius, and Prosper, with.
217. more learned and godly Bishops assembled, as I have before noted. The
same saint Cyprian ever agreyng with him self in this verity of the equality
of al bishops, (which is the overthrow of the supremacy of one) does apply
many such places of the scriptures, as are customarelie, but most falsely
alleged now a days by this author, and other adversaries for the proof of
the popes supremacy over all Bishops, to the declaration of the equal
authority of every Bishop in his own diocese, as the place of Deuteronomium
concerning Deuter. 17.
the obedience due to the high Priest: out of Numerie, of the disobedience of
Chore, Dathan, and Abyron against Numeri. 16.
Aaron: out of the Acts of the Apostles touching Saint Paul's words: I
wiste not that he was the Act. 23.
high Bishop, for it is written, thou shall not speak evil to the prince of
thy people. All these places, I say, does saint Cyprian allege for the
authority of Rogatian Cyprianus lib. 3. epist. 9.
an Africane Bishop, and against the disobedience of the said Rogatians
oeacon against his bishop. And the same places does saint Cyprian likewise
again Cyprianus lib. 4. epist. 9.
in an other place allege for his own authority, being Bishop of Carthage,
and against the stubbornness of Pupianus toward himself. So that saint
Cyprian does in all places maintain the equality of bishops, and withal
overthrow the supremacy of one over all, directly against this place by
you, as out of Pope Leo, alleged. But in no place is saint Cyprian more
effectuous and piaine concerning this matter, then in his book entitled De
simplicitate praelatoru^: where he has these words: Dn^sapostolis oi^bus
post resurrectionem suam, parem potestate^ tribuit. and mox: Hoc erant vtique
and caeteri apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and honoris
and potestatis. That is to say. The Lord after his resurrection did give like
orequall power to al his Apostles. The other Apostles were the veric same, that
Peter was, being endued with like fellowship, both of honor and power. Thus
far saint Cyprian: who being in so many places so directly against this
usurped supremacy of one, and for the equality of all Bishops, it is to be
wondered with what face M. Dorman has been so bold and busy with S. Cyprian
in this his treaty of the popes supremacy. Now let us hear S. Hierome, M.
Dorman his second witness: and even in the same epistle by M. Dorman alleged
also. Where Saint Hierome speaking of the authority of Churches and Bishops,
and making the^ all equal, and none above an other, has these words. Nec
altera Romanae vrbis ecclesia, altera totius orbis estimanda est etc. We may
not think that the Church of the city of Rome is one, and the Church of the
whole world an other. Both France and Britain (now called England) Afrike
and Persie land, the East countries, and Indie, and al barbarous nations
woorship one Christ, and observe one rule of truth. If you seek for
authority, the world is greater Mayor est orbis authoritas quam vrbis.
then the city (of Rome): wheresoever any bishop is, whether he be at Rome,
or Eugubium: at Constantinople, or at Rhegium: at Alexandria, or Tanis: he is
of the same merit, of the same priesthood. The power of riches, or baseness
of poverty makes not a bishope either higher or lower. But they be all the
successors of the Apostles. But thou will say, how do they at Rome a^ the
testimony of the deacon ordein the priest: What dooest thou allege to me the
custom of one city: what dooest thou challenge for the laws of the Church
the usage of a few, whereof presumption has risen: Thus far saint Hierome.
Upon the which place Erasmus in his Scholies notes that Eugubium, Rhegium, and
Tanis were base and little tounes, and that saint Hierome matcheth in paires
and couples a poor and simple Frigidum opidulum.
little town, with a noble city: to she we thereby that the dignity of the
Bishop is not esteemed by the greatness of his diocese or city, but that all
bishops be equal in office. Now let us compare these two, saint Cyprian I
say, and saint Hierome bearyng witness with the truth, with Leo only
bearyng witness to himself. Leo says, In the holy Apostles themselves there
was a difference of power, and that it was given to one to be above all the
rest. On the contrary part S. Cyprian says, The Lord gave like and equal
authority to all his Apostles: all the Apostles be endued with like
fellowship, both of honor, and power. Thus says S. Cyprian in his book
entitled De simplicitate praelatorum, Of the simplicitis of priests: noting
them as double faced prelates, that teach, or attempt the contrary. Again Leo
says: Out of this form is taken our difference of Bishops, that in every
Province one be chief and of most authority, and the bishop of greater
cities to have greater care, and consequently that he who sits in Peter's
chair, should have charge, and be head of the universal Church. Thus says
Leo: and thus he says, because he himself would be Lord and head over all
the church. S. Cyprian says: Every bishop has his several portion of
Christ's flock to rule and govern, for the which he must give an account unto
the Lord. And that those, who are under the charge of the bishop of one
country, may not appeal to a bishop of an other: nor the cause determined by
one Bishop, may be called in question before an other: for that the authority
of one Bishop is not inferior to an other: nor the authority of the bishop of
Afrike is less, then the authority of the bishops of Italy, or Rome it self
(for his words have evidently that relation) and that none think the
authority of one bishop to be less then the authority of an other bishop,
but a few wicked and desperate men. Thus you see how your own witnesses are
at square, and there is, yea, and naie between this your Leo, and S. Cypria^
in these matters. S Hierome, agreing with S. Cyprian, says: All churches
worshippyng one Christ, and obseruyng one rule of truth, are equal with the
church of Rome: all bishops be the successors of the Apostles, and of one
priesthood, and of the same merit and dignity. Thus says S. Hierome. But
Leo says contrary: that it was given to one to be above all the rest, and that
they, who be appoincted in greater diocesses or cities, have more care and
authority: and that the only see of Peter has charge of the universal
Church, and is head thereof. Thus says Leo. S. Hierome says: The less
diocese or town, or the poorer estate makes not the bishop lower, or less
in authority: the greater province, the greater city, the greater riches make
not a Bishop greater in authority. And though Leo do make never so much of
Rome, and set it above the universal Church: S. Hierome says, The Authority
of the universal church is greater, then the authority of the church of
Rome, as the world is greater, then the city of Rome. And he says further:
What dooest thou allege me the use of the one city of Rome for a law of the
church, whereof rises presumption of a few against all men? I think ye fire
and water are not of more contrary nature, then are S. Cyprian and S. Hierome
contrary to that epistle alleged by M. Dorman, as Leo the Popes epistle: nor
that any witnesses brought against a man by his adversary, ever have more
directly testified against him, then these two witnesses, S. Cyprian and
saint Hierome brought in by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman for them, do testify
against them, even in the very places by themselves alleged: besides their
consonancie with themselves in all other places, and the consent of S. Augustine
and two hundredth and more Bishops agrecyng with them, against this Leo. What
should one judge of these me^, bringyng in together three witnesses, of the
which two are most directly against them, and against the third also,
who alone seems to make with them: and that third, as in his own cause, to
be suspected: and further to be doubted also, whether it be he in deed, or
an other under his name: and such as he is, the words of his testimony
either manifestly falsified, or else at the least in diverse copies being not
only diverse, but clean contrary? as having in one copy, it is so, in an
other (if M. Dorman slepte not) it is not so. And yet both these, impossible
both to be true, be one man's testimony, of one and the same matter, and
in one and the same place also. Were these men so blind that they did not
see this, or so shameless that seeing, and knowing, they durst yet allege such
witnesses for them? So blind bussardes they took all men in the world,
saving themselves, to be. Surely me thinks it to be an hard case, and a
silie shameless shifte, for men to be driven to allege those authors, and
to bring those witnesses for them, whose testimonies do thus conuicte them,
and quite overthrow their cause, and withal shame them utterly. And very
miserable is the Pope and Popery, being driven now at the last to the
patrocinie of such proctours, who openyng and bewraiyng the weakness of the
grounds and foundations thereof, so long time heretofore, by ignorance of the
world, judged sure, will themselves bring all Popery, being already of it
self ruinous, to speedy and utter destruction. For the which also all godly,
and such as love the truth have great cause to give God great and hearty
thanks, for that (these causes as desperate, being forsaken of almost all
learned and grave men) M. Dorman, with such other as he is, have thus taken
them in hand, and that such leude matters have found at the Similes habe^t
labra lactucas.
proctours and patrons most meet for them.

Dorman. Fol. 6.
Hitherto have you hard good readers, beside the experience that we have of
civil policy, and worldly gouernemente, the opinions also of saint
Cyprian, saint Hierome, and holy Leo, all three agreing in one, that there
must needs be one judge in Christ's church in his steed, that the health of
the church depends Cyprian.
upon the authority of the chief Priest, that if his authority be not above
all the rest, there will so many Hierom.
Schisms break in upon us as there be Priests, that for the auoidyng of
that mischief, there was one chosen even amongst the Apostles, to govern the
rest: Leo.
Last of all, that that usage in Chris^es church to have one head, is no new
invention [as some men falsely report] but taken from the example of the
Apostles themselves.

Nowell.
Hitherto have you heard, good readers, how of the experience of civil policy
and worldly government, wherein every several country, city, and company,
have their several Princes, rulers, and heads, master Dorman would most
l^udely gather, that al churches dispersed in all countries, cities, tounes,
villages, nations, peoples, and la^guages (impossible to be known, and more
impossible to be governed, but of Christ only, the only head of that
universality) should have one only head here in earth. You have heard also,
how ignorantly (if he did not understand) how shamelesly (if he did
understand) he has alleged S. Cyprian, and S. Hierome for him, being, both
in all other places universally, and in the very special places also by him
alleged, most evidently against him, and that most falsely usurped
supremacy of the pope. You have heard how contrary his witnesses be, two
against one: and that one either not so writing, as is alleged by M. Dorman,
but falsified, or forged as so writing, by the Popes commen corrupters and
falsaries of al writers, and writings: or if so writing, yet unworthy credit
even by his own law, as partial in his own cause: and otherwise to be
suspected, for that his testimony is in diverse copies found not only diverse,
but clean contrary: unless M. Dorma^ thought he might put in and out, this
word (non, not) as a little syllable, and nothing material, at his pleasure.
And further, the said witness (who so ever he be) being but one, is confuted
as you have heard, by the veredicte of two witnesses most worthy of
creadite, brought in with him, for testimony of the same matter. You se
therefore not only no necessity, but an impossibility of such an one only
head, as well of the church dispersed throughout all the world, as of one
only king, or prince of all the world it self. You see there was no such
opinion, much less knowledge of any such head, emo^gest the Apostles, or in
the primitive church, but that it is a new deuilishe devise of the late
ambitious Bishops of Rome: who when they were never able yet hitherto well to
rule the church of Rome one city (as by all histories and experience is
euidente) would yet of the world usurp the superiority, and supremacy. And
if S. Paul didthinke he was not meet to have charge of one Church, who 1.
Timot. 3. Si quis autem domui suae praeesse nescit, quomodo ecclesiam Dei
curabit?
could not well govern his own house: of what monstrous ambition and
presumption is he trow you, who, never yet able to govern one peculiar
church, does claim, and would take upon him the regiment of all churches
throughout the whole world? Whereas he is not able, were he thereto required,
to tell the only names of a small part of the said churches, neither knows
in what part of the world, a great many of the^ be.

Dorman. fol. 6.
I can not hear stay, to examine curioussie every word in these ancient
fathers, but leaving that good readers to your discreatio^, and not doubtyng
but that in these grave witnesses, in a matter of such weight and importance,
as whereupon depends the health of the whole Church: you will be no less
diligente, then you would be in examinyng the depositions of your own
witnesses, or your adversaries in a trial of lands, or other temporal
commodity.

Nowell.
M. Dorman is in haste, and lacks leisure for the examination of these
matters: there is some play belike toward, and his par^e therein the
busieste of all other: and therefore you must examine these witnesses your
selves, and that with more diligence, then you would do in controversies
about lands, or worldie matters. Now surely M. Dorman, a little examination
will serve to try out, that you, and all your fellow collectours and ouersears
of this book, were either of have shamefully ouerseene, or so ignoraunte, that
you could not see, though you had had good leisure: or most impudent and
shameless (so that you cared nothing, what or how you did write, so it were
some thing) or else all three together. And had you done well, you should all
have bestowed your leisure and cunnyng together, in some one piththie book (if
any thing can be piththilie written of such leude and trifelyng matters, as
you take in hand to maintain) rather then by launcyng out such havoc of
books (like to this yours, and most meet for you) in post pase, as though
all speed were in the haste, only to get for the time the commendation of
celeritie and readiness, either of your fanourers, altogether blinded with
partiality, or of such vndiscreate readers, as delight most, in most trifles:
and withal to obtain a perpetual note and blotte of great ignorance, mixed
with more shamelessenesse and impudency, in the opinions of all wise and
learned men. For it will fall out (M. Dorman) that you alone shall be more
able to write, and send us over a doosen such books at this is, by the
leisure and faculty that you have, sufficient enough thereto, then D. Hardyng
and you, with all your adherentes, shall be able to maintain one little
pa^cell of this your, or his book, as truly and sincerely written. So mucke
harder it is, either to write a little well, and truly, or to defend a
little, of much written lightly and falselie: then to write never so many,
and so great books, both lightly, leudely, and falsely too: such as, I
trust, it shall appear to the world, this book (named woorthily yours) is in
deed, M. Dorman.

Dorman. fol. 6.
I shall proceed to the consideration of the second reason, which before I
touched, of the people of Is^ael, if I first warn you to consider but this by
the way Nowell. Borrowed out of Hosius li. 1. contra Brentium, fol. 1. a. 5 6.
etc. And out of Pighius de Hierarch. lib. 6. cap 13 fol. 325. d. etc.
[that ye may trust those aunciente fathers by their word the better an
other tyme] how many schisms be burste in upon us in our country of
England, for one common received truth in the days of our fathers [when we
remained in the obedience of one chief priest and iudge] which shake now so
miserably the same: how quietly in one love, in one truth, in one doctrine,
in one Church, in one head thereof God almighty, and his minister under him
appoincted over the same, weliued then, and other in other places do now.

Nowell.
Yet for all the haste M. Dorman has, he will by the way warn you to credit
the aunciente fathers by him alleged. The same do we also desire of the
discreate readers, that they will creadit those ancient fathers, who, though
alleged by M. Dorman, being directly against him, do declare that he is
worthy of no creadite at all. And he does unjustly charge England specially
with so many schisms: where it is well known, that there is as much consent
in true doctrine in the church of England at this time, as ever was in any
realm at any time. And though there were not a perfect consent of all men in
all poinctes, what marvel yet were it, if that should happen emongeste us,
which was not altogether lackyng emongeste the Apostles themselves? Let the
conte^tion between Paul and Peter, and between Paul again and Barnabas, be
a proof thereof. What wonder if that were amongst us touching some poinctes,
that was not wanting in the primitive church emo^gest the old fathers?
Histor. Eccl. Rufini, lib. 1. cap. 2.
Let the variaunce emongeste the bishops assembled at Nicene council: Eusebius.
de vita Constant. li. 3. Socr. li. 1. ca. 8. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16.
let the contention between the bishops of the East and of the Weste church
about the keepyng of Easter day, a matter not worthy of such variaunce,
be a witness thereof. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 9. and 10. etc
Let the sharp conte^tion between S. Chrysostom, and Theophilus bishop of
Alexandria, and Epiphanius bishop of Cyprus, In epistolis Hiero^. ad Augustinum.
the bitter strief between S. Hierome and S. Augugustine, Hiero. tom. 2. in
Apolegia and al^^s li. contra R^finum.
and between the said S. Hierome again and Rufine, Eusebius. His^o. li. 10. ca.
5. etc. and vitae Constant lib. 4.
and like contentions between the best men of all ages, testify the same.
What needs much repetitio^ of antiquities? As though it were unknown what
contentions have ever been amongst the Papists themselves, as between the
Canonistes and schole doctors: between Scotus and Thomas: between Alliacensis
and Occam: and of late time between Catetanus and Pighius: and as though at
this present time all Papists agreed amongst themselves in the principal
poinctes of their religion: where they (as shall in place conueniente be
declared) do exceadingly not only vary, but repugne one against an other.
And what be these names, Thomistes, Scotistes, Nominalles, and Realles, but
names of schisms? What be these Benedictines, Cistertians, Carmelites,
Chartusians, Dominicans, Franciscans, with others like an huge number, but
names of Popish schisms and sects? Who all forsakyng the religion and name
of Christ common to all true christians, have chosen to be called religious,
as by a special name of a several religion, and to be named after men their
fathers on earth, forsakyng Math. 23. a. 9.
the heavenly father, and continuyng and accomplishyng the schism first
begun in S. Paul's time, after the example of those, who said, I am of Paul,
1. Corin. 1. b. 13
I of Cephas, I of Apollo: saying, I am of Dominike, I of Benedicte, I of
Francise, who also may directly answer S. Paul askyng, was Paul or any
other, saving only Christ, crucified for you? Yea, may the Franciscanes
say, S. Francise was crucified for us of his family, and behold the wounds
in his side, hands and feet. If S. Paul ask again, is Jesus Christ
divided? Yea, may a false hypocrite one of the sect of the Jesuits say: for
we have the one part of Jesus, thereof called Jesuits, and have left the other
part Christ, to the seely souls abroad, to hold them selves contented
therewith, and with the name of christians thereof derived. Why, is Jesus one
then, and Christ an other? Be there two Christ's then, or one divided into
two? One of these must needs be: else if Jesus Christ be not two, but one,
(as he is most certainly one) and being not divided (as he most certainly
is whole) then are you Jesuits, were your religion good, nothing else but
Christians: then are all Christians Jesuits also: then do^ you in vain brag
of a several name of religion, if your and our religion be one. But if your
religion be hypocrisy, (as it is in deed) then have you stirred up an
horrible schism, dividing and cutting the glorious name of Jesus Christ, in
the which only is salvation: yea tearyng Christ himself in pieces,
infinitely more wickedly and cruelly, then ever did the wicked souldiars that
crucified Christ, who had a remorse to cut his coat asonder. And least all
these sects of hypocrites should not be known sufficiently by only
diversity of names, they have by other infinite ways and means iraueiled to
sever their sects asunder, studiyng for division as for the best, and fliyng
all show of unity as the worste of all things. Wherefore to their diversity
of names, they have ioigned diversity of fashions, and diversity of colors
in their apparel, diversity of girdles, hose, and shoes: diversity of
shauyng, diversity of going, beckyng and bowyng, diversity of diete and
meats, diversity of readyng, syngyng, and tunyng, diversity of Church
service, and diversity of rules of life. All times would fail me, if I
should, or could rehearse all their diversities, which is the very property
of schisms and sects. These be those schismatikes, and sectaries, with an
infinite multitude whereof, of late England was repleanished, of the which
now, thanks be to God, the realm is well rid: so that if you mete a
thousand men and women one after an other severally, and ask of them, of what
religion be you? They shall all and every one answer you, I am a christian,
we be all christians: there shall not one answer to you (as was wont under
your head) I am of the religion of S. Francisce, a Franciscane: an other, I am
a Dominicane: the third, I am a Carmelite. Et sic de singulis. One woman shall
not answer you, I am a Brigittine: an other, I am a Clarane: the third, I am a
Beguine, which are all names of abominable sects and schisms, not only
diuidyng, but deniyng, but forgettyng, but reiectyng the religion and name of
Jesus Christ, and choosyng the names and religion of sinful sinners, and
counterfaite hypocrites most wicked, and so much the more wicked, for that
they cloked their wickedness under names of holiness and religion. These so
diverse sects of false religion being well abandoned now out of England, and
the one true religion of our savior Jesus Christ only here remainyng: I
marueill with what face you can charge us with schisms and sects, which is
your own special sore? And where you warn the readers upon experience of the
multitude of schisms lately risen, sithen the forsakyng of that one Popish
head, to creadite the ancient fathers as witnessyng with you against us: you
might as justly warn them to creadite the aunciente Phariseis, rather then
Christ and his Apostles: both for that the first heresy, as S. Augustine
says, sprange amongst August. in Psalm. 54. Prima heresis in discipulis
Christi facta est etc. Joan. 6. 1. Cori. 1. b. 13.
the disciples of Christ, many of them departing from him upon the occasion of
his preaching, seemyng to them to be heard: and also for that in the Apostles
time some used such schismatic sayings, as these: We hold of Paul: some
other, we hold of Cephas: the third sort, we hold of Apollo: whereas there
was no such dissension amongst the high priests and Phariseis, but great
unity and concord amongst them against Christ's Apostles: and again for
that diverse Irenaeus co^tra haereses lib. 1. August. lib. de haeresibus.
greater schisms of the Nicolaites, the Symonia^s, the Cerinthians, the
Menandrians, the Saturninians, the Carpocratians, the Basilidians, with an huge
number more, did rise with, and shortly after the first preaching of the
Gospel, as Darnell secreatlie sown by the enemy, springs up with the good
corn sown by the husbandeman: and specially for that great schism, which
Christ and his Apostles made from the high Priests and their Church, which
S. Paul made against the Phariseis, who^, he (being brought up from his
childhood amongst them) did so schismatically forsake, and cleave unto Christ
their adversary. Whereupon in steed of great quietness in one doctrine, and
traditions of their fathers, of great love amongst all Priests and Phariseis
throughout all Jury and the whole Iewishe church before, did follow great
divisions, and trubles did arise, not only in Jury, but shortly after over all the world. Whereof our savor Christ Math. 27. Luc. 23. Joan. 7. Act. 5. 17.
24. and. 28.
himself was accused, as appears in the history of the Gospel: and S. Paul
with other the Apostles, were likewise accused, as is to be seen in the Acttes
of the Apostles: and in like manner the whole christian religion, was in the
primitive Church of all enemies both derided, as divided into many schisms
and sects (as Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 10. cap. 5. and vitae Constan. li. 4.
Socrates hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 6. and lib. 3. cap. 24. and multis locis.
does by histories ecclesiastical appear) and also charged as the cause of
all mischieues and troubles, that overwhelmed the world, as by Origenes co^tra
Celsum. August. de Ciuitate Dei. Ambrosius, and Prudentius contra Symmachum.
Origin, saint Augustine, S. Ambrose, Aurelius Prudentius and other Christian
writers, answeryng that false sclaunder, is most euidente to be seen. And as
justly might you charge the Apostles and their doctrine with those schisms,
sects, and troubles, as you do charge us with these that have risen in our
days. Where it is well known to the world, that our learned men have by
their writings more oppugned and repressed the said sects, then all the
Papists have dooen. In deed we must needs confess a truth: that whiles we
al remained under the quiet obedience of your Romish head, in one doctrine of
his traditions, there was a colored kind of quietness, concord, and love
amongst all the members of that one head, the subjects of that one governor
and ruler, and specially emo^gest the clergy of that one church: who had in
possession the riches and rule of the world, with not only quietness, but
thanks also of the^ that were both oppressed and robbed. So blinded were they
with ignorance, the mother of such devotion, brought in by the said Popish
clergy, by hidyng in unknown tongues, and withdrawyng of the light of Gods
word, which should have shined, and guided our steps better. But when that
Christ the author of that light, as he himself, and by his Apostles bewraied
the errors of the Iuishe traditions by the said light first springyng, and
withal troubled their unity and concord in the doctrine of such traditions,
and their quietness in their Synagoge so settled before: so now the same our
savior in the time by his wisdom appoincted (who of his goodness would not
suffer us seely straiyng sheep to wander in darkness of such errors, nor
of his justice could suffer your head the Pope with his adherentes to deceive
his people any longer) by the same light of his holy word again springyng
and shinyng to us sittyng in such palpable darkness, and in the shadow of
death, has disclosed, that your head and you, for the mainteinaunce of his and
your fathers false traditions, have obscured, hidden, broken, and forbidden the
law of God our heavenly father: and shinyng before us, has exhorted us to
follow and walk in the said light, and has warned us to forsake both your
doctrine, and works of darkness. By this occasion is there risen a like
schism between you and us, as was between S. Paul and the Phariseis, with
whom he was brought up from his childhoode before. By this occasion of the
light, your great gain and riches maintained by the darkness of ignorance,
and devotion of seely souls deceived, sufferyng themselves to be robbed, is
decayed: as was the gain of Image makers, shrine makers, and other Act. 19. c.
2^.
artificers of superstition in Ephesus, by the preaching of S. Paul. By this
means is your quietness troubled, your rest interrupted, your good cheer
marred, your pomp abated, your estimation decayed, and the yoke of your
tyranny shaken of our necks. This makes your Romish head and you cry, as
you do, and bark against us, as heretics, and schismatikes, as did the high
priest, and other Iuishe priests and Phariseis cry out against Christ and
his Apostles. This makes your head and you to persecute us most cruelly, and
to adiudge us to death, as did your aunciente fathers persecute and judge
Christ, and his Apostles. If this be to make schisms, we confess our
selves schismatikes from you, who have first made your selves schismatikes
from Christ, and his Apostles. To who^ as we doubt not but we have ioigned
our selves in the truth of his Gospel, so have you in deed in persecuting of
us for professyng Christ's Gospel, and the doctrine of his Apostles, ioigned
your selves with the old Synagoge of Satan, and the Iuishe Priests and
Phariseis: who for the same cause persecuted Christ and his Apostles to death
most cruelly. But if that you could with us embrace the truth of Christ's
Gospel, and walk with us ioinctly in the light of his word, there should
be more true quietness, as well of consciences, as of bodies, more sincere
love, more godly unity, peace and joy, then ever there was wordlie
quietness, love, and joy in the darkness of Popery. Which because you
refuse to do, despisyng the peaceable ways of the Lord, you are guilty of
all these schisms and troubles, and not we. And so finally for this part of
purgation of our selves against your sclaunders of schisms and troubles, as
by us raised, do we allege the effect of the same Parable of the strong
manne so Luc. II. c. 21. etc
quiet in his house, until a stronger then he came, and disturbed him, which
Christ our savior in like sclau^der rehearsed for defense of himself. If the
reader shall think that I have been to tedious in answeryng this matter here
but touched by M. Dorman, as it were by the way, I trust he will bear with
me therein, for that M. Dorman as he began and floorished the first face of
his book, with blotting us by this sclaunder of In front libri ex Augu.
contra Peulianu^, de quo vide b. 3 statim post praefacionem.
schisms, so has he hitherto continued in the same, and applied all his
allegations out of S. Cyprian, Basil, Hierome, Nicephorus and others, chiefly
to that purpose: and omitteth not in every other leaf hereafter, importunately
to repeat the same: following therein Eckius, Pighius, Hosius, and generally
all the adversaries that speak or write against us, who do most vehemently
and continually burden us with the crimes of schisms and fectes, and of the
disturbaunce of the quiet state of the church, and world: at their pleasure
termyng us Heretics, Schismatikes, Huguenotes, Caluinia^s, Lutherans, and
Zuinglians. Neither are they contented herewith, but do also play with
pictures very pleasantly, as they think, in the which they painte out a
multitude of such heretics or rebels, as our confederates or alies, whose
opinions we do most abhor, and against whom we continually both preach
and write. And all this do they, for that they are not ignoraunte that such,
though most false sclaunders, being yet so importunelie and continually laid
to our charge, are of much effect to offend the minds of the weak and
simple, and to stir up their hatred against us. And therefore they use such
constant asseuerations for arguments, as in their schools they are taught to
do, when they are destitute of due proufes, which has also caused me for the
simplear sorts sake once at large to answer, and earnestly to repel that
false usual sclaunder of schisms and troubles laid upon us by those, who are
themselves most guilty thereof. For I trust that no reasonable reader will
think us to be such, only for that it pleases them maliciously so to
misname us, and only to say we be such: seeing their tongues and pens are
their own to use as they list, and not in our power. For, as we have no
religion but only Christ's, so desire we to be called after the names of none
but his, and as we be, so to be named christians: and being Christians, we
care not to be called heretics, of heretics: or schismatikes, of
schismatiques: such as in deed our adversaries be. Think they that if we
list and had leisure, as they have, we could not frame an arbor or tree, twice
as great as they have devised? Would not the Popes with their triple crounes,
cross keys, and cross swoordes, whereof sundry were heretics: the fat
fed Monks, and lean faced Friars, the nice Nuns, the seely sir Ihons
soul priests and other, with their diversities of schismatic names chosen
to themselves, Christ and his name being forsaken, with the diversities of
apparel, of coules, colors, meats, Church service, rules of life, and
infinite more diversities, with the Popes Bulls (whereby such sects were
either founded or confirmed) displaied bannerlike upon the several arms and
branches of the tree, where such sects shall severally sit: would not,
think you, this gear furnishe the said tree far more fully and truly
too, then is M. Stapletons Staphilus forged plant, in the which he has
placed such as are to us most strangers, as next of our kin and blood:
whereas I am sure, that the Pope can make no exception to any one of this
shamfull rabble, that I speak of, why he should not be placed in the arbor of
Popish schismatikes? Wherefore I conclude that your crime of schisms, most
falsely laid to our charge, may most truly, justly, and plentifully be
reuersed upon your own heads.

Dorman. Fol. 7.
But to proceed. For the estate of the Iues, God by Nowell. Borrowed of Pigh.
Hierare. lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 149. b. c. And Hosius lib. 2. contra Brentium,
fol. 59. a. b.
his servant Moses did so provide, to take away schisms that upon the
doubtful words of the law might arise, that he appoincted the^ a place to
resort unto, and a judge to fly unto, in all such ambiguities and doubts.
For so is it written in the book of Deuteronomium. Cap. 17.
And shall we not by good reason thinck, that he has provided as well for his
church? Except we will say, that he has been less careful of it, then he
was of that. Which must necessarily follow, if he provided for the^ one chief
judge, to have recourse unto in hard and doubtful questions, and to us having
no less, yea far much more need then they: he left either at all none, or
many to make the matter more doubtful.

Nowell.
Concerning this place of Deuteronomium alleged by M. Dorman, these
circumstaunces are to be noted: First, that the high priest must be in Deuteronomy.
17. b. 8. Ascend ad locum, quem elegerit Dn^s.
the place which God has chosen, which they can never prove to be Rome,
more then any other bishops see. Secondarilie this priest must be of the b. 9.
Veniesque ad sacerdotes. Leuitici generis, and ad iudicem qui fuerit in illo
te^pore.
Leuiticall sort, which the Pope does deny himself to be. Thirdly the
place is doubtful, whether the whole determination do perteine to one, or to
c. 10. Et facies quod cu^que dixerit qui praesunt loco, etc.
many: for it is written: thou shall come to ye priests of the Leuiticall sort,
and thou shall do whatsoever they say, and thou shalt follow their sentence.
And again: He that will not obeie the priest, let him die by the decree of the
c 12. Nolens obedire sacerdo it is imperio, exdecreto iudicis morietur.
Judge: so that the Judge of the nation seems in this case to have to do
^oinctlie with the priests. Fourthly it is requisite that the said priests
or priest do teach, or judge according to the c. 10. Facies quod cunque
dixerint and doeuerint, iuxta legem eius.
law of God, and not at his own pleasure, as the old translation has in that
place: against the which though Pigh. Hiera. lib. 4. cap. 3. Fol. 149. b.
Hosius lib 2. contra Brentium. fol. 59. ^.
Pighius, and Hosius do quarrel, yet it is certain if the high priest do
against the law of God, both does Act. 23. 2. 3.
saint Paul threaten unto him Gods vengeance: and Act. 4. d. 18.
saint Peter also and saint Ihon the Apostles, called before the high
priest, and commanded not to preach any more in the name of Jesus, for that
this last condition of commaundyng after Gods law, was here lackyng, did
say: An iustum sit in conspectu dei vos potius audire quam deum, iudicate etc.
That is to say: Judge you whether it be right in the sight of God to hear
you, rather then God: for we can not but speak the things which we have
seen and heard. Thus answered the Apostles. And neither did ye high^ priest
himself, nor any of the Scribes or Phariseis present, for that disobedince,
charge the^ as guilty of death. But M. Dorman, as it appears, does think
that neither Aaron for that he was high Priest, and therefore could not err
belike, did not amiss in commaundyng the people to deliver their golden
earynges, and in making Exodus 32.
the golden Calffe thereof, and in buildyng an altar for it, and wo^rshippyng
it: and that if any of the people had disobeyed him, commaundyng them to
deliver their said earynges to the making thereof, they had offended for so
disobeiyng the voice and commandment of the high priest: Neither that Vrias
the high Priest in committyng Idolatry did offend, but was therein as high
Priest to be followed. And for the same respect peradventure M. Dorman will
prefer Caiphas, for that he was high Priest, before Christ: and Ananias
before saint Paul: and with Hosius will Hosius lib. 2. contra Bren^ium. fol.
54. b
hold that the verity or truth of judgment was with Caiphas, and the other
wicked judges, against Christ: and that Ananias commaundyng Paul to be stricken
did well, and was not in his commandment to be disobeied: and that the
commandment of the high Priest forbiddyng Peter and Ihon to preach
Christ, was to be obeyed: And generally that all the accusations,
testimonies, Judgments, and doings of the high Priests against Christ and
his Apostles were true, and right. For thus must M. Dorman judge of these
things: or else make his high Priest of necessity subject to the obedience of
Gods law, before he do make all men of necessity subject to his
commandment, as an inviolable law. These things well considered may easily
inform the reader, that the Popes tyranny to say and do what he list, can
not be grounded upon this place of Deuteronomium: and that if the Pope or any
creature do command against Gods word, he may and ought to be disobeied
therein: And that therefore both Pighius and M. Dorman have in vain alleged
this place, for any such supremacy as the Pope claims. And further
whatsoever M. Dorman, either out of Deuteronomium, or any other place of
scripture, does untruly apply to the proof of the supremacy of one head,
to wit, the bishop of Rome: the same does S. Cyprian, M. Dormans own
usual witness, every where allege for the proof of the superiority of every
bishop in his own diocese, and for the obedience due unto him there. He
does never apply it, as does M. Dorman, to the supremacy of one bishop
over all other, but rather against such supremacy of one. And it agrees
very well with the estate of the Iues, that as they being one nation had one
chief priest, so is it good likewise that every christian nation have their
chief priest or Bishop. It agrees not, that because the Iues one nation had
one high priest to govern the^ in doubts, therefore all nations throughout
the world should have one high Priest over all other. For not only the
vnlikelihoode between these two, but the impossibility of the later is most
evident. But now let us hear S. Cyprian in his epistle to Rogatianus. Lib. 3.
epist. 9.
Habes [inquit Cyprianus] circa huiusmodi homines praecepta diuina, cum Dominus
deus in Deuteronomio dicat* Et homo quicunque etc. Thou have (says saint
Cyprian to Rogatianus his fellow bishop in Afrike) concerning such men (to
wit disobediente, as was his Deacon) the commandments of God, whereas the
Lord God in Deuteronomie does say: Deuter. 17.
And what man so ever shall be so proud, that he will not hear the priest or
judge, who so ever he be in those days, that man shall die, and all the people
shall fear, and shall do wickedlie no more. And we may know that this voice
of God proceaded with true and great majesty, to honor and to avenge his
Priests, by the horible destruction of Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, who rebelled
against Aaron. Thus far S. Cyprian. Where you may see that both this law
of Deuteronomium, the example of Aaron, the estate of the Iuishe Church, and
all other places of scripture falsely wrested by D. Hardyng and M. Dorman to
the proof of the supremacy of one, to wit, the bishop of Rome, are by S.
Cyprian (who died an holy martyr, and is no doubt a saint in heaven) applied
to the maintenance of every Bishops authority in his own diocese, and the
obedience there due unto him. And note withal that S. Cyprian says, that
this and like places of the scriptures, apperteine to the honor of Gods
Prtestes: he says not, to the honor of one high priest, head over all
other. Naie he confesses in the beginning of this epistle, that Rogatianus did
but of courtesy, and not of duty refer this matter of his disobedient
deacon by complainte to S. Cyprian (though he were the Metropolitan of Afrike,
being bishop of Carthage the chief city thereof) and grants that
Rogatianus by the vigore of his bishoprike, and authority of his Chair, had
power to order the matter himself: and for the vigore of this Rogatianus
bishoprike, and authority of his chair, and consequently of all other
Bishoprikes, and bishops chaires, does S. Cyprian allege these and all other
places of scripture, falsely detorted by the Papists to these of Rome, and
saint Peter's chair there, as they call it. Saint Cyprian allegeth the same
place Lib. 4. epist. 9.
of Deutero. cap. 17. and all such like, for his own authority, against
Pupianus despisyng him being Bishop of Carthage, whom saint Cyprian charge
to transgress this law of God of obeiyng the high priest, for that he makes
himself, Episcopum episcopi, and iudicem iudicis, ad tempus a Deo dati, a
bishop over the Bishop, and a judge over the judge, appoincted of God for the
time. Which is the very property of that false usurper of Rome, who makes
himself head bishop over al bishops, and head judge over all judges by God in
every their jurisdictions appoincted to be obeyed of all their own flock,
and not to be under a foraigne usurper. And as he does by saint Cyprian his
judgment transgress this Gods law in making himself judge of the judge by
God appoincted, so doubt I not but the judgment of the said law, He shall
dye the death, will light upon him for his pride, arrogancy, and tyranny over
his brethren, and equalles by Gods law. And though such horrible Luciferian
pride an^ other wickedness unspeakable, as is in the Pope, seem to be
reserved to Gods everlasting judgments, for that no worldly penalty can be
sufficient for such deserts, yet does God in our days, not long before
the coming of his son to judgment, denounce the same most manifestly, and
as it were peremptorily to him, and his.

Dorman. Fol. 7.
For I remember a saying of Cregorius Nazianzenus. Vbi nullum est imperium,
nullus ordo, vbi multorum, ibi seditio, vt and Lib. 3. de Theologia.
sic nullum imperium nullus ordo existat. Vtrumque enim eodem abs^rditatis
perducit. Where is none to rule, there is no order: Where many rule, there is
sedition: so that after Nowell. Borovved out of Pighius Hierarch. lib. 2 cap.
3. fol. 65. ^
that manner of gouernemente also, there is no government, there is no order.
For both to have none to rule, and to have many, lead us to like
inconuenie^ce. How shall we then say, Diligit dominus Syon super omnia
tabernaculae Jacob? Our lord loves Syon above all the tabernacles of Jacob?

Nowell.
You may note that M. Dorman has a good memory, who can and dare without the
book rehearse to us sentences out of doctors for his proofs, and publishe
the same to the world: and boldly in the steed of one God gouernyng all,
(for of him speaks Nazianzene in that place) to dashe us in the teethe with
one Pope to govern all the church. I would M. Dorman had enlarged his memory
somewhat to a few words of Nazianzene going next before, and making all the
matter most plain: which M. Dorman therefore of purpose to blind the reader
has omitted, such a shreude memory has the man. The words of Nazianzene
confutyng two false opinions that men had of God, are these: Prima opinio
nullum Deum, nullum Dei imperium: alia Deos multos, and cuique suum imperium
statuit etc. Sed vbi nullum est imperium, ibi nullus ordo etc. That is to say:
The first false opinion of God is, that there is no God, no governance of
God: the second, that there are many Gods, and that every of them has his
governance by himself. But where no rule is, there is no order: where many
rule, there is sedition. These are Nazianzene his words against those that
think that either there is no God, or many gods: which M. Dorman out of his
memory reports as spoken against those, who would have no pope, or many
Popes. But you see it is not good trustyng to M. Dormans memory, who does so
readily without book allege things neither against us, nor with himself, but
altogether impertinent to the purpose. Now if M. Dorman list transfer the
sentence from God, gouernyng all the world, to men under him rulyng in the
world, and would thereof frame us this argument: Nazianzene says, there is
one only God who governs all: Ergo there must be one only Pope, or head
bishop to govern all the Church: I deny the argument: and affirm that it
follows no more, then that there must be one only Emperor to govern all the
world. And to brag somewhat of memory too, as M. Dorman does: I remember
that M. Dorman Fol. 4. b.
himself has alleged, that for auoidyng of confusion in the world, every
kingdom, every country, every city, every company of men must have an
head to rule them. Whereof I infer, that for auoydyng of schisms, and
explication of doubles, every church of every country and diocese ought to
have an head, and a judge to resort unto. And as there is no confusion in the
world, nor discord, for that sundry parts of the world have sundry civil
governors, as is most necessary that they have, and is in the scriptures
declared to be so by God appoincted: so is there no disorder, that several
churches have several bishops to their heads, Eccl. 17. b. 14.
but is most necessary for all good order so to be. And so is that sentence
of Nazianzene generally taken, nothing against the governance of several
bishops in several diocesses: no more then it is against the civil regiment
of several governors, in several countries. For as it is apperteinyng to God
only, and to our savior Christ his son, by their almighty power and
wisdom to govern all ye world, and all the church: so is it enough, and to
much for any one man well to govern a little parcel thereof. And so to
return to Nazianzene his saying: Where is no rule, there is no order: Truth
it is: but where one Bishop as one head, is in every diocese, there is some
rule: therefore there is some order. Where many rule, there is sedition: It is
true, if many magistrates have equal rule in one common wealth, or if many
ecclesiastical persons have equal authority in one several Church, we
confess it is like to their fantasy, who would have many equal Gods to
rule the world. But one several ruler in one several dominion, one several
bishop in one several diocese, do resemble one God rulyng one whole world,
and one Christ ruling one whole church, so well as earthly creatures may
resemble the heaue^lie creator. But one earthlic man by gouernyng all the
whole world, or the whole church throughout the world to resemble God or
Christ, is a presumption unheard of, but only in the Pope of Rome. Let
therefore several rulers and Bishops hold themselves contented with
several dominions and diocesses, according to Gods Ecclesia. 17.
ordinance. For it is false that such several rulers in several places do
cause sedition, and it is proved false by the civil gouernemente of diverse
rulers in diverse countries, for so it stands for the most part throughout
the world at this day. Wherefore M. Dorman and D. Hardyng may as well say
that the world is seditiously governed by diverse princes, as the Church by
several Bishops. But as Nazianzene ever dreamed of one Emperor over all the
world to avoid sedition, though he teaches there is one God: no more did he,
though he teach one Christ, yet ever dream of one only head bishop or
Pope, over the whole Church throughout the world to avoid schisms, as
dreamyng M. Dorman phantasieth, and thinks all men that be awake, to dream
too, as he does. He speaks further in his sleep, and sa^eth. How shall
we then say, Our Lord loves Syon above all the tabernacles of Jacob? What
this does mean, or to what purpose it is, I know not. And I believe M.
Dorman, when he waketh (if ever he wake) can not tell himself. For Pighius out
of who^ he borrowed it, is a sleep, Hierarch. lib. 2. cap. 3.
and never will wake to tell his dream.

Dorman. fol. 7.
There is no doubt therefore, but that Christ has Nowell. Borrowed out of D.
Harding fol. 82. 2. and 93 b. And Pighius Hierarch: fol. 155. a. 196. d. 235.
c. 318 d. and multis loc^s.
provided for his church, which he redeemed so dearly, as with the expense of
his own most precious blood, a judge and chief ruler, to end and determine
so many controversies, as he knew should molest and infest the same. They ca^
not say, that are adversaries, and kick against this truth, that this
which I allege, was in the old law, and in a shadow, that these days and
this time requier other manners. For that argument has their English apology
soluted, and pronounced that so to say, were Plusquam ridiculum, seeing there
was then, idem deus, idem spiritus, idem Christus, eadem fides, eadem doctrina,
eadem spes, eadem haeredit as, ide^ foedus, cadem vis verbi dei. the same God,
the same holy ghost, the same Christ, the same faith, the same doctrine, the
same hope, the same heritage, the same couenaunte, the same strength of Gods
word.

Nowell.
M. Dorman is so mighty in reasonyng, and has so many and so good grounds,
that he is full of conclusions as you see. We grant Christ has provided for
his church so dearly bought and beloved of him, as well as he did for the
Iues, and better too. For whereas they had but one chief bishop for their whole
nation, he has by the ministry of his Apostles, provided every great city,
every Diocese of such a one, that they may be the better governed, and
less pained to traueill far for the decision of their doubts and
controversies. Wherefore in these poinctes we make no exception to your old
shadow, nor require no new manners. But as they and we have one God, one
spirit, one Christ, one faith, one doctrine, one inheritance, and so
forth, that so in like manner there be one like ecclesiastical ^eg^ment,
that every one diocese, country or nation have in like wise one bishop to be
their judge and determiner of doubts, as had the nation of the Jews. But M.
Dorman deals not truly with the Apology. The Apology declares that the
church of God was much obscured, and brought to a small number emongeste the
Jews: and it sh^weth tha^ it has in like wise also been obscured, and
brought to a small number amongst Christians. The adversaries of the Gospel,
who are the corrupters thereof, and would have no corruption nor decaie of the
Church now noted or known, say: although the Church of God was obscured,
and brought to a little number in the old law, and in the shadow, and figure,
when nothing was perfect: yet can it not be so in the time of the Gospel, the
time of grace and perfection, etc. The Apology replieth: That defense can not
serve, for there was the same God, the same spirit, the same Christ etc. then,
as is now: and therefore as the Church decayed then, so may it, and has it
decayed now. M. Dorman handles the matter as though he could prove by the
Apology, that because there was the same God, the same Christ, the same holy
ghost etc. in ye Iuishe church, as is now: therefore must there be one head
bishop over all the christian church dispersed throughout ye world, as there
was one head bishop over all yt Iues. Which follows no more, then that we
must have circumcision now, for that the Iues had it then. Unless M. Dorman
think he may mingle In lent vnguentum, things most impertinent together:
and prove quidlibet, ex quolibet: all things of every thing, at his pleasure.

Dorman. Fol. 7.
But yet this I proteste, that upon the authority of there Apology [whiche
with me is in that conceit, that it is with all honest and learned men, that is
to say, taken as in deed it is, for a fardle of lies:] I am no whitte the
bolder to reason thus.

Nowell.
Here is at once a protestation, and also a confutation of the Apology. For
other confutation or answer to it then this, and such like, as you shall
hear hereafter, have they not hitherto made. Wherefore as justly might we
challenge all the whole company of Papist^s, being at so good leisure as they
are, that they have not hitherto answered the Apology so long abroad in their
hands, as we are blamed of many, for that your books lately set forth are
not forthwith answered. It is a pleasure for M. Dorman to shoot at rouers,
and to range as he list in railyng here and there, and to call the Apology, a
fardle of lies. But it is not so easy for master Dorman, nor D. Hardyng to
answer it piththilie, to the satisfiyng of the learned readers. Which neither
they both, nor their whole Romish clergy shall ever be able to answer to
any purpose. But I may justly reply to M. Dorman as the truth is, that this
his book is nothing else but a fardell of lies, and ragyng railinges packed
together, as I trust I have in deed notified to the discreate reader for that
is passed over of it hitherto, and doubt not of like success in the rest. And
I think that all honest and learned men in deed, will so much more like the
said Apology, when they shall understand that it so much mistiketh M.
Dorman, and other of like honesty and learning as he is.

Dorman. fol. 7.
But because I have perceived, that God in that people, in their law and
priesthood, shadowed out unto us, like a cunning workman the whole form and
proportion of his church, as witnesses saint Paul. Lex Novvell. Borrowed
out of Pighius Hierarch. lib. 2. cap. 3. fo. 65. ^* And out of Hosius contra
Brent. lib. 2. fol. 58. b.
vmbram habet futuroru^ bono^^ non ipsam imag inem rerum, The Hebr. 10.
law contains a shadow of the good things to come, but expresses not
manifestly the truth of things: therefore I thought I might well reason from
the shadow to the body, from the resemblaunce and image, to the truth thereto
answering. From the which kind of reasonyng, saint Paul sometimes
absteined not, as when he labored to prove, that the law of the gospel 1.
Corin. 9.
would bear, that they which preached the gospel should live thereby: he
reasoned after this sort. Nunquid secundum hominem haec dico* Speak I this as
a man? That is to say, prove I, this by worldly reasons? An and lex haec non
Deuter. 25.
dicit? Says not the law so toe? And so goes he forewarde, and proves yet
by this text of the old law. Thou shall not moosell or bind up the mouth of
the labouryng Ox, as though he should have said: it was so in the shadow,
therefore it must be so in the body and in the truth signified by that
shadow. Thus ye se good readers, that I may say with saint Paul, have I
proved only by reasons fetched from the doings of men, by examples of all
common wealths and societies well governed, that in Christ's common weal
there must be also one to rule? Have I affirmed this because saint Cyprian,
saint Hierom, blessed and holy Leo so said? Who yet were while they lived
here but men, although now saints in heaven. Nunquid non and lex haec dicit?
Says not the law so toe?

Nowell.
You take to much pain M. Dorman, to prove yt you may lawfully with S. Paul
allege out of the old testament, for the proof of good causes, as he did. We
blame you not for that you allege out of the old testament, but for your
guilefull, and untrue application of places of the old testament and of the
doctors, to such purposes as they apperteine nothing unto at all, naie are
most contrary to the same. I would you and all other adversaries of the truth
would, as you say, with saint Paul reason from the shadows of the old
law, to the truth thereby figured: but you have dooen otherwise. For you do
not with saint Paul, but with Pighius and Hosius Pighi. Hierar. lib. 2. cap.
3.
use this place, not bringing us by shadows to the truth, as did S. Paul,
but by your shadows of Ceremonies Folio. 65. c. Hosius lib. 2. contra
Brentiu^. fol. 58. b.
you have darkened the truth, and brought us quite away from it. You have by
this your reason, so was it in the shadow, therefore it must be so in the
body, and in the truth signified by that shadow, not only placed your
Romish head over the whole Christian Church, but also of Christians you have
made us Jews: and your selves of ministers of the Gospel, have you made
Iewishe and Aaronicall Levites. You have on Aarons robes, you use his gestures,
you have brought in his incense, his censers, his altars, his candelles, his
candlestickes, his belles and his banners, his gold and his silver into the
service and Temple of God. Of the which then beginning, S. Hierome in his time
much Hiero. ad Demetriadem, and ad Nepotianu^.
complained. And would to God you had done no worse, then thus made us and
your selves altogether Iuishe, by your shadows imitatyng and counterfaityng
the old law: I would ye had not also, by bringyng in of Idols, by inuocations
of dead men, by your charms and witchecraftes, contrary to all Gods law,
both old and new, made us altogether most wicked Ethnishe Idolaters, and
withal made a mart, and set a sale all this your religion, thereby to rob
seely Christians, both of their wit and money, yea and of their souls
health too, which is most of all: as it is euidente to all the world you
have dooen. But now to proceed with M. Dormans reason from the shadow to the
body, from the figure to the truth, from the Iuishe church, to ours: In the
Iuishe church all the people, Exo. 24. b. 7. Deu. 31. c. 12. 13.
men, women, and children had the Scripture in a language that they did well
understand: the Levites and priests in the Iuishe church Exodus Leui. Deu.
per totu^.
had wives and children: Exodus 20. and infinitis locis.
in the Iuishe church there were no Images: ergo it must be so now in our
church. For God like a cunnyng workman in that people, in their law and
priesthood, shadowed out unto us the whole form, and proportion of his
church now: it was so in the shadow, therefore it must be so in the body,
and in the truth. These be your own words M. Dorman. To proceed: May it
be proved by reason only, that they, who are bounden to obeie Gods law,
ought to understand and know Gods law? Does not the law say so too?
Deuteronomy. 31. c. 12. 13.
May it be proved by reason only, that ministers of the Church may have
wives? May not one reason with S. Paul, Vnusquisque propter vitandam
fornieationem habeat vxorem suam. Et, qui se non continent, nubant: Nam melius
1. Cori. 7. a. ^. b. 9.
est nubere, quamvri. That is to say: Let every man for the avoiding of
fornication, have his wife. And, such as cannot contain, let the^ marie: for
it is better to marie, then to burn. Does not the law say so too? May it
be proved by reason only, that Images ought not to be in the temples, and
that men which have life and reason, ought not to boow and scoupe to
insensible blocks, or stones? Does not the law forbid it to? If you will
deny my arguments, and think these reasons Exodus 20. Non facies, non coals.
unreasonable, as I think you will, yet I trust you do against your own
words, and form of reasoning. And good M. Dorman as^oile me of this doubt,
how this argument of yours holds, As it was in the shadow, so must it be in
the body also: but all the Iues had one head priest, Ergo all christians must so
have also. Why this, I say, should hold, and not the other, I would gladly
learn the reason of you, at your leisure: if there be any other reason then
this, that you may take of shadows what you list, and leave and refuse what
you list, and as pleases you, without al color or shadow of reason or truth,
that ye may be the children of your Romish father the Pope, with whom (as by
Daniel was before Danie. 11. f. 36.
prophesied of him, and as in his own Canon law is Clementin. li. 3. tit. 13.
cap. 1. and lib. 5. tit 10. cap. 4. glossa in verba (volumus and velle.)
recorded) will stands for reason: and so does it with you all, in all
things likewise. Now where M. Dorman concludes thus for his one head,
saying: Have I proved only by reason, and by examples of common wealths that
there must be one head over all Christ's church? Have I affirmed this because
saint Cyprian, S. Hierome, blessed and holy Leo saints in heaven now, so
said? Says not the law so too? I answer, Noforsooth M. Dorman: you have
neither proved it by reason, nor by examples of common wealths: for both all
reason and all examples be against you, and do prove and declare that every
particular kingdom, dominion, city, and company have their several
governors, and not all the world one earthly governor. Saint Cyprian, and
S. Hierome say not so, but clean contrary to your saying: to wit, that
every diocese, every province ought to have his peculiar bishop to govern it.
And as for blessed and holy Leo, though he be by you adourned with a double
epitheton (where S. Hierome, and S. Cyprian must be content with a single S.)
though you put to the third title too, in woorship of the three circles in the
Popes Imperial mitre, yet have I alleged sufficient cause why he ca^ not serve
your turn. And as for the law, it likewise says against you: and your
own witness S. Cyprian testifies that it speaks against you, for the
equal authority of every bishop in his own diocese, and therefore
overthrows your supremacy of one head Bishop over all. And the lewdness
of your collection, that because one nation had one head bishop, therefore
must all nations have one head bishop over them, is besides so manifest, that
it needs no confutation.

Dorman. Fol. 8.
But here I know our adversaries will say that these proofs neded not, to
prove that christ's church must have a head, and a judge to order and
determine doutfull questions, which happen emo^gst us, and whereof the world is
now so full. For that will they say, they know as well as Cyprian, Hierome,
Leo, or any of the^ all, although they will not admit the same judge or the same
head that they do. But what head thinck you good readers appoinct they to
govern Christ's Church here in earth? what judge to determine controversies?
Forsoothe the head of the church they say [wherein we find no fault but
Nowell Borrowed of D Hardyng, Folio. 81. b.
say the same our selues] is Jesus Christ, and the judge of all controversies
arisyng therein, they call the scriptures. Apolo. Eccles. Anglic. fol. ^.


Nowell.
Although you question with the reader, as merueiling at the strangeness of
our head, yet are we bound to you that you find no fault with us, that we
say, Christ is our head, as in deed he is the only head of the catholic or
universal church of all places and ages: and none but he alone neither in
heaven nor earth, what so ever you say to the contrary. That you do think
it so strange that we call the Scriptures the judge of all controversies, we
marvel not, seeing you follow your own fantasy in matters of religion
directly against the scriptures. But what soever you do or say, we say and
believe that the word of God, and of our savior Christ ought to be judge here
between us in our days. For it shall judge both you and us too, in the last
great day, according to the saying of our savior. Qui spernit me, and non
accipit verba mea, habet Joan. 12. g. 48.
qui iudicet eum. Sermo quem locutus sum, ille iudicabit eum in nouissimo die.
That is to say: He that despises me, and receives not my words, has that
shall judge him. The word which I have spoken, that shall judge him in the
last day. M. Dorma^, avoid the contempt, that you may escape the judgment.

Dorman. Fol. 8.
Here suffer me a little I beseech you to shake these maskers out of there
cloutes, and to make open to the world their great dissimulation and
sotteltie, whereby under the name of Christ, and his most holy word, so
glittryng at the first show in the eyes of the simple, yea perhaps of some
of the wiser sort also, that it is to be feared lest it strike them blind
all together: they seem to have purchased to them selves a double benefit at
once: first, great credit by pretending and vsyng, naie rather abusyng, the
name of Christ and his word: next great security, both for there own
persons, and also for all such diuelis he doctrine, as they or any other
heretics list to utter. VVhilest on the Nowell. Borrowed out of Hosius contra
Brentium. lib. 3. fol. 173.
one side, they take themselves to be out of all check of man, and may be
controlled of none, as they say, but of God only, [who if he let the^ alone
till that time that they thinck he will, then bid they us let them shifte for
the^ selves, theie shall have time enough, in the mean season to preach, and
teach without controllmente what they list:] and on the other side, whilst by
prouokyng to the scriptures as there judge, they thinck themselves to stand
upon a sure ground: seeing they are already with themselves at a poinct, to
receive no other interpretation thereof, then shall make for there purpose, and
they also see, that amongst so many heresies as have hitherto troubled the
church of God, there was never yet any one so horrible and absurd, that the
author thereof has not by this means, in his own judgment, been right well,
able to sustain and defend.

Nowell.
Hold not the man for Gods sake: he seems to fantasy that he is plaiyng
his part in the stage, and will by privilege of his office vnuisour and uncase
some of his play fellows to make sport, and to move laughter. But where he
calls Christ and the scriptures our cloutes: I would he wist, we rejoice of
those cloutes as much, as does M. Dorman, either when he is in a glorious
golden Cope, with a pair of glitteryng gilte Censers in his hands, perfumyng
and withal woorshippyng a golden God, no boliar, nor wiser then the golden
calfe: or when he is in his robes on the scafolde, and plaiyng his part in a
Christmas game: and I trust he shall sooner reueste himself again in these his
royal robes, then pluck us from Christ our head, and from the scripture our
judge, which he calls our cloutes. Good reader marvel not that I answer
this merry manne, thus rufflyng in his maskes, after this manner, but weighe, I
pray thee, his writing from this place forwards, where he prays that he be
not holden, and mark what a shreude shaking he makes, specially for a whole
leaf and more, next after following. Where you say, M. Dorma^, that we blind
the people with glitteryng shows, you do obiecte to us your own crimes. It
is you Papists, who, by your glitteryng, glorious, maskyng garments, and
other costly and fine furniture, as copes, vestimentes, gilted crosses,
candlestickes, dead men's, and often, dead beasts boones burnished over with
burning gold, by your Ceremonies, your minstrelsie, your belles, banners, and
other bables, have bewitched, and stricken not only the simple, but a great
many of the wiser sort also, stark blind and deaffe too: that neither they
can see any thing of Christ their savior, nor hear and understand ought of
his most holy word. And you have compelled the^ in the steed of sincere and
spiritual woorship of the true God, with you to put all religion in outward
and dumb Galat. 4. b. ^. Infirma and egena cleme^ta. Daniel. 11. f. 36.
ceremonies, the seely weak and wretched elements of this world: and not to
regard the God of their fathers, but in steed of him to honor the God
Maozim, and to woorshippe a God, whom their fathers did not know, with
glitteryng gold, silver, precious stone, and other precious things, in place
of true unfeigned faith, and a pure heart. With what security we do utter
the truth forbidden us by you, as it was to Christ's Apostles by the high
Priests and Phariseis your forefathers, all prisons in England replenished of
late with our captive bodies, all markette places and other more viler
sprinkeled with our blood, shed by the crueleste kind of death that the Devil
the homicide your great graundfather could divise, does plentifully testify
to the whole world. And the most part of us losyng our lives together with
all worldelie hope, by death more dreadful, then is usual either to Felons,
murderers, or to most savage and noisome wild beasts, might give you to
understand, if you would consider, that it is no new fangled appetite, or
lust of vtteryng errors, or hope of worldly gain, that does move us to
preach against your heresies and superstitions: but even the same mere
necessity of conscience, which in like case enforced the Apostles, likewise
forbidden Act. 14 d. 18.
upon pain of death, to preach: who made answer, that it was more reason to
obeie God, then man, Act. 4. d. 20. No^ possumus no^ loqui quae vidimus and
audiuimus.
and that they could not choose but teach those things, which they did know
certainly to be most true. And the same answer do we make to you: for the
which you will suffer us to have no security in this life.

Concerning the scripture and the sense thereof, the reader may in a like case
consider. Whereas there was a controversy between the Apostles and the high
priests, Scribes and Phariseis, about the interpretation of the Scriptures,
touching the true Messiah, by the which Scriptures the Apostles proved that
Christ our Savior, whom they had crucified, was he: but the high Priests and
Phariseis by their interpretations attempted the contrary, and would not have
such a poor and abject man, as to them and the world it seemed that Christ
was, to be their Messiah. Now had the Apostles (as M. Dorman, me think,
thinks it reason) leauyng the Scriptures in this case most plain, referred
the matter to the interpretation and determination of the high priest and his
consistory: we might at this day with the Jews have looked yet for a
Messiah to come, and should with them have lacked, to our utter damnation, the
savior of the world Jesus Christ the son of God, who is at this da^e to
them, by reason of such their interpretations, the stone of stumb^yng, Esai.
8. c. 14. Rom^. 8. g. 33. 1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7. 8 1. Cori. 1. d. 30.
and the rock of ruin: but to us, who do believe in him, he is become
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and salvation. And as there
was then a co^tronersie between the Apostles, and the high Priests, whether
they had unjustly or justly slain that righteous one and innocent Lamb of
God, and no reason it was that the murderers themselves should be judges,
being not only accessaries, but the principal parties to the murder: so
there being now risen a controversy between us and you, about the true
religion of the same our Saniour (which how shamefullie you have with your
traditions corrupted, even as had your forefathers the Phariseis before
corrupted the law of God, he that has but half an eye may well se^) you
think it reason yet that you, who are the corrupters, and therefore parties,
should be judges therein also, and specially your chief and most high
Priest the Pope, the poodle and sink of all these abominations, and therefore
most guilty of all other, and consequently most unmeet to be the Judge
therein. And yet M. Dorman will needs have him the Judge, and the word of
God so indifferent to all men, and partial to none, rejected. And why
rejected, I pra^e you? Forsoothe for that we may by the Scriptures defend (as
you say) what error we list: as though that you may not by the judgment
of the Pope, and by your own judgments under the name of the church, far
more easily, as you have brought in, so also maintain and defend all errors
and superstitions. Is not the Pope more partial to himself, and you his
Papists, then are the Scriptures to us? Wherefore it were as good reason, that
Annas and Caiphas should be Judges, whether they themselves had dooen justly
and righteouslie, or wickedlie and murderouslie, in sleayng Christ, as that
your Pope, or you, the corrupters of true Religion, should be judges, whether
in so dooyng you have dooen well or no. If it be no reason (as the proverb
goes) to ask whether one be a thief or no, of his fellow: much less
reason is it to ask the same question of himself, seeing it is certain that he
will not bewraie himself. But the adversaries of the Gospel deal thus with
us: the Pope and all his eleargie, being guilty of many heresies, corruptions
of religion, and false superstitions, and thereof accused, do assemble
themselves together in a council, in the which nothing may be moved, Pighi.
Hierar. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 275. b.
much less determined, but such as pleases the Pope himself: there is
inquiry made of us (who do accuse them thereof, and offer to prove it) and
there unheard, and unseen, we are condemned of our adversaries (who will
needs be our Judges) as false accusers, schismatikes, and heretics also, for
that we are against them, who are (as they say) the Church. You will say,
we might be heard if we would, for they call certain of all Christian
realms to their councelles. How we are called, and how we may be heard, let
Ihon Husse, called by the Emperor Sigismunde his saulfe conducte under his
great Imperial seal to the Council of Constance, with Hierome of Prague,
(who both were, contrary to the faith given them by the greatest Christian
prince in the world, condemned and burned to ashes) be an eternal witness:
Yea let Co^^i. Constantiensis sess. 19.
their own decree made in the said Council, which was: That no faith nor
promise is to be kept to any heretic, nor that any manne by any promise
stands bound to an heretic (for so they call all those that dare speak
against them) be a perpetual testimony of the same. They say, we are
heretics: we do deny it: if our naie may not defend us, why should their
yea condemn us? They say, because they be the church: but we deny the
same: shall here their yea secue for the^, as it did before against us: and our
naie neither touch the^, nor help us? In some countries if the party accused
plead not guilty, and say naie to the crime objected, if he, by diverse
torments enforced to confess, do still maintain his naie, and pass through
the appoincted torments, constanly mainteinyng his naie, he is discharged and
let go. But it ca^ not healp us, accused as heretics, to deny the false
accusation, to maintain our denial in all torments, and most cruel
deaths, neither to bring good testimony of our innocence out of Gods word:
all these can help us nothing against their only bare saying, that we be
heretics, for that is all their proof. In what case are we then? How easily
may they then both defend themselves, and condemn us: and maintain what
they list, be it right or wrong, truth or falshoode: being accusers,
witnesses, examiners, and judges themselves, in the causes wherein they be
parties, and parties accused also? Wherefore what can we do else, but as did
Christ our savior and his holy Apostles, against the high Priests, against
the Phariseis and Scribes, appeal to God, not absent, not dumb, as M. Dorman
deuiseth, and saying nothing at all for us, as he would have it seem: but to
God, yea and to our Savior Christ his soonne, speaking his mind most
largely and plainly in the scriptures, and being no party, but most
indifferent judge between them and us. For if the controversy be about true
Religion, and scruice of God, what better trial can there be then Gods
word? God himself commaundyng Deuteronomy. 5. d. 32* and 12. d. 32.
us, that in his service we shall do that which he commands us, that we
shall neither add thereto, nor take any thing therefrom. What better Judge can
there be in this world between us, then Gods word, which, as our savior
Christ says, shall judge us in Joan. 12. g. 48.
the world to come? If the controversy be about the true church, what
better judge can there be then the Scripture, written by the Prophets and the
Apostles, Ephesians. a* d. 20.
seeing it is testified to us by the spirit of GOD most plainly, that the
true church is builded and stayed upon the foundation of the Prophets, and of
the Apostles? And though this do not like M. Dorman, and such as he is, yet
you shall hear that it did not mis^^ke the old, and holy fathers of the
ancient and true church, that such controversies should be so quietted by
the scriptures. Saint Augustine co^tendyng against those, Augu de pe^catorum
meritis li. 1. ca. 22
who do attribute Gods grace and gifts to the worthiness of men's merits,
concludes thus. Cedamus and consentiamus autoritati scripturae sancte, quae
nescit falli, nec fallere. That is to say: Let us give place and aagree to
th'autoritie of the holy scripture, which ca^ not be deceived, nor deceive
others. The same S. Augustine contending with the Donatistes, has these
words. Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaslibet literas a
canonica Diuinarum scripturaru^ autoritate Idem ad Cresconium. lib 2. cap. 31.
and, 32.
distinguimus: neque sine causa tam salubri vigilantia Canon ecclesiasticus
constitutus est, ad que^ certi prophetaru^, and Apostoloru^ libri pertine^t,
quos omnino iudicare no^ audemus, and secundum quos de caeteris fideliu^ and
infideliu^, iudicamus. and mox ca. 32. Ego huius epistol autoritate no^ teneor,
quia literas Cypriani no^ vt canonicas habeo, sed eius ex canonicis considero:
and quod i^ eis diuinaru^ scripturatu^ autoritati co^gruit, cum laud eius
accipio: quod aute^ no^ congruit, cu^ pace eius respuo. Which is to say: We
do Cyprian no wrong, when we make a difference between every letter and
writing of his, and the Canonical authority of the holy scriptures: Neither
without cause thecclesiasticall Canon with so wholesome care has been
appoincted, to the which the certain and assured books of the Prophets and
Apostles pertain, the which in no wise we presume to judge, and according to
the which we judge of all other books and writings, both of the faithful and
of the infidels. And straight ways after in the 32. chapter: I am not bound
to the authority of this epistle, because I hold not Cyprians letters and
writings for Canonical: but consider his writings by the Canonical: and
what accords in them to the authority of the divine Scriptures, I allow
with his praise: and what disagreeth from them, by his leave I refuse. These
are the words of S. Augustine. You may see here, how S. Augustine prefers
the scriptures before the doctors, yea before S. Cyprian so often by you M.
Dorman alleged, who was in deed a blessed martyr, and is no doubt, a saint in
beauen: and who also is moss against you, even where he is alleged by you. You
see, S. Augustine will have saint Cyprians writings, and all other doctors,
and men's sayings and writings examined and Judged by the scriptures (which
you yet reiecte as no convenient judges) and that the scriptures may be judged
by no man. Yea S. Cyprian himself agreyng hereto, shows the causes why
heresies, schisms, corruption of the truth, and breach of unity do come
into the Church, and why so many are deceived by the devil, transformyng
himself into an angel of light, by these words. Hoc eo fit fratres
dilectissimi, dum ad veritatis De simplicitate p^aelato^u^*
originem non reditur, nec caput quaeritur, nec magistri coelestis doctrina
seruatur. Quae si quis consideret and examinet, tractatu longo at que
argumentis opus no^ est. That is to say: This comes to pass hereof, most
beloved brethren; for that we do not return to the origene ^^ beginning of
the truth, neither is the head sought nor the doctrine of the heavenly
maistor kept. The which things if a man do consider and examine, it shall
not need any long treati^ orargumentes, Thus far saint Cyprian: Who
calls Christ originem veritatis, caput, vnum Ibidem Pa^lo infra.
caput, and originem vnam, and magistrum coelestem etc. To say: The beginning
of the truth, the head, the only head, the only beginning, the heaue^lie
schole master, whose doctrine if we would observe, we should not (says S.
Cyprian) need any long treaty or argumen^es, But for that this beginning of
the truth is not returned unto, this head is not sought for, the doctrine of
this h^auenlie schoolemaister is not kept, he affirms it, to be the cause
of all heresies, schisms, endless contentions illusions of the devil, and
other mischieues in the church^ in his time: as we likewise prove it now to
be in our time. And therefore they that seek other beginnings, beside this
only beginning, other heads, besides this only head, other doctrines
besides this doctrine of this only heavenly school master, are the very
authors of the said schisms, heresies, endless contentions, and all other
mischieues, which trouble the Church of God. Now let us hear S. Augustine
concerning the scriptures and Councelles, who contendyng with the Artians,
allegyng the Ariminense Contra Maximi^um Arrianorum episcopum lib. 3. cap. 14.
concilium for them, has these words: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes
Ariminense, tanquam priudicaturus proferre concilium: nec ego huius autoritate,
nec tuillius detineris: scripturarum autoritatibus non quorumque proprijs, sed
vtrisque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa cu causa, ratio cum ratione
co^feratur etc. That is to say: But neither I ought to bring forth the
council of Nice, nor thou the Council of Ariminum, as one thereby to
prejudice the other: neither am I bound to the authority of the one, nor thou
of the other. By the authority of the scriptures, not peculiar witnesses unto
either of us, but common and indifferent to both, let matter with matter,
cause with cause, reason be compared with reason. Thus far S. Augustine. You
see that your Councelles (by S. Augustines judgment) ought not to prejudice
us, being at controversy with you: you se how your councelles are partial to
you, as was the Ariminense council to the Arrians, yea and much more too: you
see that S. Augustine would not in this case use the authority of the Nicene
council, which yet of all other, had and has the greatest authority: and
that therefore the authority of the Scriptures partial to none, but common
and indifferent to all, is to be used of all, and above all as judge. Saint
Chrysostom concerning the same writes thus: Grauior est scripturarum ac
prophetaru^ doctrina, qua^ Chrysostom. de Lazaro concione. 4.
siquid a mortuis resuscitati renu^cient, quam si angelus e coelo descendat:
quae illi dicunt, serui sunt, qui loquuntur: quae vero scripture loquuntur,
loquutus est Dominus. Docet ergo nos Dn^s, vt scripturis potius credendum
existimemus, quam caeteris omnibus. Which is to say: More weighty is the
doctrine of the Scripture and the Prophets, then if such as be raised from
the dead do report any thing, or if an Angel do descend from heaven: as
for the things that they talk, they be but servants that speak them: but
whatsoever the Scripture utters, the Lord has spoken it. The Lord
therefore does teach us, that we should think, creadite should be rather
given unto the scriptures, then to all other things. These are the words of
Chrysostom in that place. And in an other he says. Nemo vult ad scripturas
attendere: si enim aduerteremus, Ch^ysost. in epist. ad Hebr. Homilia. 8.
non solum no^ incideremus in fallaciam, sed etiam alios deceptos inde
liberaremus and periculo abstraheremus. That is to say: No man will give heed
unto the scriptures: for if we did consider them, we should not only not
fall into error our own selves, but also thereof deliver other that are
deceived, and pull them from peril. So much affirms Chrysostom. Saint
Hierome also agrees to the same, who, speaking of a Hieron. in Math. 23.
matter contained in the writings called Apocrypha, says: Hoc, quia de
scripturis non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur.
That is Probatur, is proved or approved.
to say: This, because it has not the authority of scripture for it, is as
easily conte^ned, as proved. The same saint Hierome, even in an other place,
alleged also in Causa. 24. Quaest. 1. cap. No^ adferam^.
the Popes own Canonnes, has these words: Non adferamus stateras dolosas,
vbi appendamus quod volumus pro arbitrio nostro, dicentes, hoc grave est, hoc
leave est: sed adferamus diuinam stateram de scripturis sacris, tanquam de
thesauris dominicis: and in illa quid sit grauius appendamus. Which is to
say: Let us not bring deceiptfull balances, wherein we may weigh whatsoever
we lust at our own discreation, saying this is heavy, this is light: but
let us bring the heavenly balaunce of the holy Scriptures, as from the
treasure of the Lord: and therein let us weigh, what is of more weight. Thus
much concerning the soueraintie of the Scripture, I thought good to bring out
of the Doctors. Now touching the expoundyng and sense of the Scriptures, S.
Augustine has these words: De doctrina Christiana lib. 3. cap. 26.
Vbi apertius ponuntur [in scripturis sacris] ibi discendu^ est, quomodo i^
locis intelligantur obscuris etc. Where things are more plainly uttered in
the scriptures, there must we learn how they are to be understood in dark
places. These be saint Augustines words, who does often in sundry places
of his works inculcate and repeat the same. Saint Chrysostom Augu. lib.
83. quaest. Quaest. 53. etc. Chrysostom. In 2. cap. Genes. Homilia. 13.
agreeyng with saint Augustine concerning the same, has these words. Ad
ipsum diuinae scripturae scopum accedamus, quae seipsam interpretatur. and mox.
Sacra scriptura seipsam exponit, and auditorem errare non sinit. Which is to
say: Let us come to the level and mark of the holy scripture, which does
expound it self. And by and by after. The sacred scripture expounds it self,
and suffers not the hearer for to err. Hitherto Chrysostom. Now concerning
the authority of the scriptures and the Church, there is a most notable and
true declaration thereof in the ancient author printed with Chrysostom, and
of long time taken for him, who upon these words of our savior in the
Gospel of saint Mathewe, Qui sunt in Judah fugiant ad montes, That is to say:
They that be in Iewrie, let them fly to the mountains, says thus. In opere
imperfecto.
Id est, qui sunt in Christianitate conferant se ad scripturas. Et quare in hoc
tempore omnes Christiani confer se ad scripturas debent? Quia in tempore hoc,
ex quo obtinuit haeresis illas ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse verae
Christianitatis, neque refugium potest esse Christianorum aliud, volentium
cognoscere fidei veritatem, nisi scripturae diuinae. Antea enim multis modis
ostendebatur, quae esset ecclesia Christi, and quae gentilitas: nunc autem
nullo modo cognoscitur volentibus cognoscere quae sit vera ecclesia Christi,
nisi tantummodo per scripturas. Quare? Quia omnia hc quae sunt proprie Christi
in veritate, habet and heresis illa in schismate. Similiter ecclesias,
similiter and ipsas scripturas diuinas, similiter episcopos, caeterosque
ordines clericorum, similiter baptismum, similiter Eucharistiam, and ctera
omnia, denique ipsum Christu^. Volens ergo cognoscere, qu sit vera ecclesia
Christi, vnde cognoscat i^ ta^ta co^fusione similitudinis, nisi tantu^modo per
scripturas? Ite^ ex moribus ipsis prius i^telligebatur ecclesia Christi, quando
co^uersatio Christianoru^, aut omniu^, aut multorum erat sancta, qu apud impios
non erat. Nunc aute^ aut tales, aut peiores facti sunt Christiani, quales su^t
hretici, aut gentiles: adhuc autem and mayor contine^tia apud illos inuenitur,
quamuis in schismate sint, quam apud Christianos. Qui ergo vult cognoscere quae
sit vera ecclesia Christi, vnde cognoscat, nisi tantummodo per scripturas?
Sciens ergo Dominus tantam confusionem rerum in nouissimis diebus esse futuram:
ideo mandat, vt Christiani, qui sunt i^ Christianitate, volentes firmitatem
accipere verae fidei, ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi ad scripturas. Alioqui si ad
alia respexerint, scandalizabu^tur, and peribunt, non intelligentes quae sit
vera ecclesia. That is to say: Let them that be in Christianity, fly to the
scriptures. And wherefore ought al Christians at this time, to fly to the
scriptures? Because in this time since heresies possessed those Churches, there
can be no proof of true christianity, neither can there be any other refuge
of Christians, desiryng to know the true faith, but the divine scriptures.
For before it was declared by many means, which was the true church, and
which was Gentilitie: but now, they who would know which is the true
church, can know it by no means, but only by the scriptures. Why so? For
all these things, which are properly Christ's in ye truth, the same has
heresy also in schism. Heresy has churches likewise, and the divine
Scriptures likewise: Bishops likewise, and other orders of clearkes: Baptism
likewise, the sacrament of thanks geuyng likewise, and all other things: to
conclude, even Christ himself. He therefore that would know, which is the
true church of Christ, how can he know it in so great confusion of
likelihoode, but only by the scriptures? Further, the church of Christ might
be known before by the manners of it, when the conversation either of all, or
of the most part of Christians was holy, which was not so amongst the
wicked. But now Christians are become either such, or worse then be the
heretics or Gentiles: yea there is greater continency emongeste them, though
they be in schism, then is amongst the Christians. He therefore that would
know which is the true Church of Christ, how can he know it, but only by
the scriptures? The Lord therefore knowing that in the last days there would
be so great confusion of things, does command that Christians, which be
in Christianity, willing to have the suertie of true faith, do fly to no
other thing but to the scriptures. Else if they have respect to other things,
they shall stumble, or fail of the truth, and perish, not understanding
Scandalizabuntur.
which is the true church. Thus far that aunciente author: whose sentence
and very words, though for auoidyng of prolixitie alittle intermitted, I
have truly rehearsed. You may see that this ancient writer will not allow,
that you being the one party should claim to your self the name of
Christians, the name of the church, the names of bishops, and the names of the
clergy, and so to take upon you as judges to condemn the other party: but
that both you and we must be judged and tried whether we be in Christianity,
and in the true church, by the scriptures. You see the names of the church, of
Bishops and clergy, which are common to heretics with Christians, can not
prove you to be catholics, for that heretics use the same names: but that
both you and we must know by the Scriptures, whether we be in the true
faith, or no: for that (as he says) in this confusion of things both the
true church, and the true faith must be known by the Scriptures only, and
by no other thing: and that whosoever goes about otherwise to know them,
shall stumble and perish. Wherein this author does agree with S. Augustine,
S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, and with all the old Doctors of the ancient
church. Whereby al men may well understand, that it is not our new opinion
(as M. Dorman would have it seem) but the old true persuasion of all the
ancient doctors and godly fathers of the primitive church, that the
Scriptures, as most indifferent and certain, ought to be judges in
controversies in religion, rather then Doctors, then Councelles, then your
Church, then dead men, then angels, yea that the scriptures should be
judge, and not they. And that the true sense of scriptures, if doubt rise
thereof, may be and must be gathered by the conference of the scriptures, who
do clearly expound themselves. For the declaration whereof the said doctors
do so often and largely write, that the rehersall thereof would fill an huge
volume: but I did think that this much would suffice. But you Papists will
never allow the Scripture as judge, nor the sense thereof to be certain,
until it come to the exposition of the Church: and you will be that church,
that must so expound it, your self: that is, you will grant no sense to be
true, but your own sense. But we deny that you are the true Church, that has
this authority of determinyng of the sense of the scriptures. And if you will
say still, your are the church, and neither will, nor can prove it, but only
by so saying, we be not so void of all sense and understanding, but that we
perceive you will have no sense but your own, and that you will be still,
both parties and judges in your own causes against us, as the Iuishe high
Priest, Phariseis, and Scribes would needs be against Christ and his
Apostles: who did (by your judgment, as it seems) allege the scriptures for
themselves against the said high Priest, Scribes and Phariseis in vain, for
that they being the church, as you now be, were the judges of the sense of the
said scriptures by Christ and his Apostles alleged. And I am sure that the
high Priest, with his Iuishe church, was able to say as much for the
ordinary succession of the high Priests his predecessors, even from Aaron
until his time, for antiquity, for consent, and for universality, against
Christ and his Apostles (so few in comparison, and, as it seemed, lately
starte up): as you are able to say for your church, or against us. But yet we
do think that the word of God, as it was alleged by Christ and his
Apostles against the said high priest, and his church, so may it and ought
also to be alleged by us, against your high priest, and your church: and that
the same words of God which shall judge both you and us in the world to
come, as is said, ought also to be judge between you and us here in this
transitory world: for so does our savior Christ teach, so do S.
Chrysostom, S. Augustine, Joan. 12. g. 48.
and S. Hierome, with all the ancient doctors of the Church teach also, as
has been partly besore specified, cry you never so much to the contrary,
and make you never so many exceptions to the scriptures, and claim unto your
selves, as being the church, the interpretation thereof: yet such are both
your doctrine, and doings, and so contrary to the word of God, (whereupon
the true church is builded) that we must needs think that you are not the
true church of God. And whether you so be or no, seeing it is in question, and
a greater doubt and controversy amongst men, I am sure, then can be about
the sense of any place of the scripture, you shall never be able to make any
exception unto the Scripture, as no competent judge in controversies, but we
shall be able ten times more to make exception to your Pope, and his church,
as no indifferent nor meet judge. Wherefore cease once to brag of that, as
the undoubted judge of all doubts, which is it self amongst men, of all
other doubts the greatest doubt: that is, whether you be the true church of
God, or no. Which is with us in deed no doubt, nor with any that has any
understanding in Gods word, and judgment in true religion. For we
certainly know by the word of God, upon the which as the true church is
builded, so is it by the same to be known, that you be not the church of
God, for that you so swerve from the word of God. As for us, that we are at
your hands, though we bring so euidente scriptures for us, so rejected and
condemned, we take it the better, for that we understand that our savior
Christ, and his holy Apostles, likewise allegyng the scriptures, yea and
further by their wonderful works, and most godly life, confirmyng the
same, were by the high Priests, Phariseis, and Scribes, rejected, condemned,
and siaine: an eternal documente, that in this world no person, nor doctrine
can satisfy al men, or shall be taken for a judge of controversies above all
exception and quarellyng: seeing that Christ himself, so teaching, so woorkyng,
so living, was excepted unto, as a Daemoniake, or one possessed with the
Devil, as a friend to sinners, as a wine drinker: and seeing Math. 21. d. 42.
1. Pet. 2. b. 6. 7. 8
that head corner stone was, as unprofitable to the buildyng of Gods church,
and his holy word also, as false doctrine, rejected by the high priests,
Scribes, and Phariseis, who would needs be the judges of all, themselves. And
we conceive good hope, that as our savior himself, with his holy Apostles,
teaching the truth, though rejected, and murdered by the said high Priests,
Scribes, and Phariseis, have won unto them the judgments of all godly men
and women, against such unrighteous judges: so we likewise teaching the same
truth of our Savior, reueiled in his holy Gospel, though of this high
priest and Romish Caiphas, with his adherentes, Popish Scribes, and
Phariseis, rejected, condemned, and murdered, shall against such unjust
judges, win unto us the judgment of all godly men and women: as, to the
great decaie of their false superstition, and success of the truth, is this
day, thanks be to God, partly come to pass, in a great part of the
Christian world.

Dorman. fol. 8.
But of this I will entreat more largely hereafter. In the mean season, that
theie will have of Christ's Church here in earth, no other head but Christ
himself, therein they fare me thincketh not much unlike, to a certain felon,
of whom I have No, you read it in eff^cte, in Hosius, lib. 3. fol. 173.
heard, that being areigned at the bar for a felony, when he had pleadid to
the indictement not guilty, and was [after the manner] demanded how he would
be tried, he would [suspectyng his own case, and knowing that if he satisfied
the law in putting himself upon the trial of the country, there were no more
ways with him but one] make thereto no other answer, but only that he would
put himself upon God, the righteous Judge of all* who although he said truly
that God was the chief judge of all, as the protestants do, in calling Christ
the head of the church: yet was there in his case an other judge here in this
world under god, by who^ he must have been tried, as there is in theirs an other
head here in the church to order them and keep the^ under, and in who^ Christ
the chief head of all, uses in all necessary knowledge to give answer. And
as the felon knew well that there was an other judge beside god, and appealed
not to him, as though before him he should have been acquitted, and proved not
guilty: but only to gain a longer time of life and liberty: so do [I doubt
not] our adversaries the protestants. And truly to both these kind of men
being both thieves, the one sort doing violence to the body, the other to
the soul, if such pleas might be allowed, how soever they be colored with
the name of Christ, between them both, they would freely rob the body, and
murder the soul.

Nowell.
Now proceadeth he pleasantly, and by a parable of a certain felone, all to
shakes us out of our cloutes, as he prayed he might be suffered to do. In
the handlyng whereof, it may seem he has dealte as he was wont, when some
of his fellows had forgotten their parts in the play, to hold men occupied
for the time, by suppliyng that defecte with some pretty conceits, or tellyng
of some merry tale, thereby to make the auditors to laugh, and the less to
mark the mased memory of his mates, and so to save the matter from utter
marryng, as much as in him might lie. In like wise does master Dorman here:
for where he has to prove, that of necessity there must be one only chief
head here in earth, over the Church (which is in deed, the first and most
necessary part of the whole treaty of the Popes supremacy, and the very
foundation of all: which not proved, or else leudly proved, all the rest
comes down upon their heads: For the which so great a matter, little
being as yet said by M. Dorman, and nothing in deed, and less remainyng
behind to be said): the man being destitute of all carnest matter, piththie
reason, and good authority, turns himself to his accustomed art, and by a
pretty tale of a certain felone, all to shakes us (as he before threatened he
would do) out of our masking cloutes, as he terms them: and this he does
to supply other defectes thereby, and to make this first part (most
necessary of all to be piththily proved) by such patchyng of i^ up, at the
least, a quarter as big as his second part of this treaty, to wit, that
no prince, or lay man may be the only head of the whole Church, for that
priests have more to do in ecclesiastical matters, tha^ they have. Which so
long an impertinente part, had M. Dorman put up in his purse, and passed over
with silence, he had spared a great deal of paper, ynke, and labor, and of
other men's time also a great deal more: and had hurt his cause no more
thereby, then if he had left his dagger sheathe behind him, when he came out
in haste to play his part in the pagiaunte. But now to help the poor
surmised felone somewhat: if he appealyng for the trial of his innocence to
God, can bring for him so many testimonies of Gods own mouth, as we are able
for our innocence to bring testimonies of words proceadyng from the mouth
of God, and of our savior Jesus Christ, and yet it will not serve the seely
fellow, nor healpe him any thing in his plea of not guilty: then I think
there can not be a fitter law, whereby to proceade against him, then the
Popes Canons: (which you know well M. Dorman, for you have therein spente
more time, then in the study of the Scriptures) neither can he have a meeter
judge to condemn him, then the Pope himself: and an handsomer man, amongst
all men to be, I will not say, his hangman, but the foreman of a Popish
quest, to pass against the seely soul, shall not any manne I believe easily
find, nor a fitter then is M. Dorman. And thus I let this his parable pass.
For that he by the way says, that there is in our case, beside the
scriptures, an other head to order us, and keep us under, meaning the Pope:
it is true, there is such a one in deed, that has too long kept us, and
all the world too under, by his false hypocrisy, and horrible tyranny: and
he may also be called an head of the church, by the same phrase, as
Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus, and such like monsters were named heads of
the common wealth, which they utterly subverted: and he is in deed the head,
and husband too of that cruel stepdame the Popish Synagoge, being a most
horrible murderer of those, whose mother she would be accounted to be. That he
says, Christ the thief head of all, uses in all necessary knowledge to
give answer by this head, to wit the Pope: it is M. Dormans position, and a
false fable. The filthy spirits that are called Ventriloqui, are more meet
to give answer by such a polluted mouth. Now that it pleases M. Dorman to
ioigne us with felons, and to conclude, that we as well as they be thieves:
and that, as felons would without controlment rob the body, so would we, and
do murder men's souls: he fares herein with us, as did an hasty scholde
once with an honest woman, calling her whore at the first word, for fear
least the other should have happened first upon her name, which was the
same. For it is well known to the world, that the Papists themselves be
rather thieves, and murderers: who, by their pardons and Masses, and other
such their pedlar pilfrey, set a sale, have picked all men's purses, and of
the temple of God, by such buiyng and selling have made a de^ne of thieves:
Math. 21. b. 13 Math. 23. b. 14. Mar. 12. d. 40.
and under the color of long prayers, of Diriges, soul Masses, and
Trentalles, have spoiled poor widows houses, often times taking away by the
name of a Mortuarie the only Cow, which with her Milk should have fed the
sorrowful poor widow, and a seely sort of fatherless children. Which
Papists also, as they have with all cruelty murdered infinite numbers of
Christian men's bodies, so have they by their poisoned doctrine slain
infinitely more thousands of men's souls, then they have murdered bodies:
and so have played all parts, and fulfilled all poinctes of perfect thieves
and murderers too. So that a Popish priest might most justly be termed by
a Plautine periphrasis, trifur trifurcifer.

Dorman. Fol. 9.
But let us examine this reason of theirs whereof they The comm^^ reason of the
protestan^^^ place in two leaves and more in M. Dorma^s book is wholly taken
out of Hosius contra Brent. first ex lib. 5. then ex lib. 1.
Nowell. All that follows from this against the supremacy of the Pope.
are wont so much to triumph: Christ is head of the Church, Ergo the Pope
is not, Ergo it can have no other head. That Christ is the head of the Church
we granted before, and none of our side did ever yet deny it. But as it is
most manifest that Christ himself is the worker of all his sacraments [for he
baptizeth, he forgeueth sins, he co^secrateth his blessed body, and blood he
ioigneth together in Matrimony the man and his wife] and yet, forasmuch as he
should needs depart out of this world, and could not always dwell with us,
after a corporal manner, he has chosen ministers, to dispense those gifts by:
and we say, and no fault found therewith, that the priest his minister
baptizeth, that he forgeueth sins, that he consecrateth his most precious
body, and blood: So after the same manner and for the same cause, that is to
say because he could not be always present with us, in such sort as we
might see him, and speak with him face to face, to be resolved at his mouth
of such doutes, and questions as should arise amongst us: he left us also one,
that in his absence should govern, and rule his whole church. He remains
nevertheless head thereof, he rules, he reigns, he exercises his power and
authority in the same, but yet by man his minister, who^ for that cause, most
aptly the Scholasticall writers have termed, caput ministeriale, that is to
say a head, but yet by the reason of his service How Christ is head of the
Church, and how the pope
and ministry under an other, that is Christ: who is only absolutely,
simply, and without all relation to any other, the head thereof. Not, as though
he were not able to rule the same, without any such help or instrument [whiche
he could have dooen also in the old law, where his pleasure was that the people
should resort to the chief priest, to be resolved in all doutes arisyng apo^
Deuter. 17.
the law, and had no more need of help then, then he has now] but, for that
this way it has pleased him, to show his exceeding great love toward
mankind, by choosing out of amongst men, such as he will execute his will by
in this world, such as he will use as his mouth, to interpret the secrets
of his holy pleasure to us, and finally such as should represente to us his
own parsone.

Nowell.
Now that M. Dorman has refreshed his readers with his pleasant pastyme,
following the precepts of his Rhetorike, he retourneth to earnest again, and
falls to examination of this reason, Christ is head of the Church: Ergo the
Pope is not: Ergo it can have none other head. The antecedente he grants,
confessyng Dorman. fo. 8. a Et ante, h^c libro. fol. 67.
that none of their sort ever denied it, though a little before he made a
great wonderyng at it, inquiryng by a musing interrogatorie, what head think
you good readers appoincte they to govern Christ's church? etc. And the
argument also is good, the church being taken as it is there in the Apology,
for the universal church, which has not, nor can possibly have any one
earthly head over it, to govern it: as has been often at large heretofore
declared. Master Dormans examples of Christ's ministers of his holy
Sacraments here in earth, make rather against him, then with him: for one
chief head has many vnderministers in diverse services and places usually:
but what pertains that to prove that there must be one ^eade over all
places, and services ecclesiastical throughout the whole world? Which is
impossible to be. Neither can your Scholasticall distinction of caput
absolutum, and ministeriale, healpe the matter: nor yet Hosius declaration
Hosius contra Bre^t. li. 1. fo. 38.
tendyng to the same end, how Bishops be both servants and lords, can in
this case any thing further you. For there can not possibly be one only
head minister in earth over all the church throughout the whole world, more
then there can be one universal civil head in earth over all the world it
self. But note the intolerable ambition of the Pope, who when he saw he could
not defend the name of the Head of the universal church, rather then he would
loose that only sound of this name, Head of the church, he quali^ieth it with
ministeriale, to say, a serving head of the church: he might as good cheap
have been content with the single title of a minister of ye church. And so he
seems sometime colourablie in show to be content, calling himself, seruum
seruorum Dei, the servant of the servants of God. But he plaieth in deed,
Rex Regum and dominus dominantium. I know M. Dorman does so qualify this the
Popes supremacy, terming him caput ministeriale, the ministerial head, for
that Christ is the absolute head of all. But yet in respect of the whole
church, as being under the Pope, he will have him called caput, the head. But
I would have him to make that relation of caput, and these words Seruus
seruuorum to agree, and to be both caput, and seruus or minister respectu
eiusdem: the head, and the servant in one respect: specially claimyng such a
kind of capitalitie as does the Pope, which can not agree with the humble
ecclesiastical ministry. And I think he shall find some difficulty, and
much hypocrisy, and more cruelty of such a headie servant, and servile
head: who if he be head, he is a cruel and frantike head, mangling his own
members, as did Lyrurgus in his furious frenzy: if he be a servant, he
plaieth the false traitor, murdering his fellow servants, whose part, at the
coming of the Lord, shall be with hypocrites and homicides. You might
therefore as good cheap grant the Pope simply to be minister ecclesiae, a
minister of the church, and therefore no head, but an inferior to the Church
universal. But the truth is in deed, that the Pope is neither head, nor
minister of Christ's church, but a sworn enemy to both: which he well
declares by his ragyng fury against the true church, and members of Christ
our head. M. Dorman harpeth to much upon this one stryng, out of tune for his
purpose: I mean the example of the Iewishe high priest, which as it
declares that it were good, that every several church of every several
nation had their several head Bishop, so does it prove nothing that all
churches of all nations must have one only head in earth, which is not
possible to be. That he says (as does Hosius) God would by this one earthly
head the Pope, show his exceadyng great love toward ma^kinde, is a manifest
lie: for it is euidente by experience that the Devil the homicide, the head of
hell, has, by this his principal minister the Pope, showed his murderyng
malice against mankind, more then ever he did by any Nerons, Domitians,
Maximines, or such like bloody tyrauntes. And as the devil has used the
Pope his ministers hands to al murders, so has that prince of darkness and
father of lies, by the Popes means most darkened the light of Christ's
Gospel, and has used his polluted mouth and tongue, thereby to utter all
lies and blasphemies against God, and the truth of his word.

Dorman. Fol. 9.
Because Christ is king of all kings, and lord of all lords, because if it
so pleased him, he could rule all this Apoca. cap. 1^.
Novvell. Taken out of Hosius contra Brent. lib. 5. fol. 239.
world much better then it is ruled, without the help of any other [whereof
he has his absolute power considered no neede] shall we therefore say, that
there be not, nor need to be, any kings here in earth? When saint S. Paul
called the man the head of the woman, denied he therefore Christ to be her
head? King Saul when 1. Cor. 11.
he was called by the Prophet Samuel caput in tribubus Israel, the head of the
tribues of Israel, was God thinck you excluded that he should not be their
head? To use 1. Reg. 15.
examples more familier, the archbishop of Cauntorburie is the head of the
Bishopric, and diocese of London [as he is of all the bishoprics within his
prouince] and yet can not a man infer upon this, that therefore the B. of London
is not the head of that his diocese,

Nowell.
We do not stick with you, nor with Hosius your author about this name,
Head, but that it may be attributed to men, as to the kings and Judges of
Israel, Saul, David, and such like. But I pray you consider by the way,
when the scripture says that Saul was by God made head over the tribes of
Israel (which 1. Reg. 15.
place Hosius, and you do allege) whether he were appoincted head over the
tribe of Leui also, that is, over the Clergy, as well as over other tribes:
for that is to be considered. We know that Christ is the only head over all,
and that he uses kings to be several heads under him upon earth in their
several dominions, as sigismunde in Polonia (for Hosius uses that example)
but we know as well again that God uses no one king to be the only earthly
head under him over all the world, which yet both Hosius and you should
conclude, M. Dorman, if you would bring in these examples, to gather thereby
that there ought to be one head in earth under Christ over all churches,
throughout the whole world dispersed: for so should you have proved the
saying of the Apology untrue, and our argument faulty. But where the
Apology and we do thus reason: Christ is the only head over the
universal church, Ergo he needs not any other general head in earth under
him, neither can any mortal man be any such head: You, like a good Logician
stickyng to the matter, do prove that there be diverse several heads in
the Church under Christ, which we never denied, no more then we deny that
there be several kings and rulers in earth under God: though we deny that
there is one only king or Emperor of all the world. But neither by your
Logike shall you ever prove, nor by your Rhetorike persuade to any reasonable
men, by such unreasonable reasonyng, and examples impertinente, that there is,
or can be any one head in earth under Christ, either of all the world, or of
all the Church dispersed thr^ughout the world. For to govern the whole
world, or the whole Church, is the peculiar and only office of God, and
Christ, and a thing impossible to any earthly manne, who has much, and to
much a do well to gouerns one little parcel thereof, as I have said
before. And where you mingle kings and Bishops together, whose offices are
distinct, and use the examples of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
bishop of London: what titles so ever your bishops, when they were in those
roumes, used, or abused, I am sure they, who be now in place, take it for
their chief honor, to be, and to be called also Gods ministers in his
church. And as you shall never prove any one head in earth temporal, or
spiritual, ^u^r all: so do I affirm, that I shall more easily prove the
title of heads of particular churches to appertain to kings and princes, who
have by Gods law the offices of ruling by dominion appoincted the^, then you
shall be able to maintain, that any such presumptuous title can appertain to
bishops, who are forbidden dominion, and have ministry to their office: as
I doubt nothing but it shall hereafter clearlie fall out between you and me,
to the satisu^yng of all godly and discreate readers, and withal, as I
trust, to the confusion of all Romish usurpers of that false supremacy. Yet
deny I not, but that Bishops may be and have been, though improperlie, named
heads even by good writers, as the Scholemaister of a prince, in that the
prince is his scholar, is his head, ruler, and governor, though otherwise in
deed he be the princes subject, by him and his laws, where he offends, to
be punished.

Dorman. fol. 10.
But Christ has no such need our adversaries cry still, to have any man to
be in his steed to succeed him in the whole enherita^ce. Nam and Christum
semper adesse ecclesiae fuae, and vicario homine qui ex ass in integrum
succedat non egere, these be their very words in their Apology.

Nowell.
It is true, the Apology and we all likewise say, that neither has Christ
need of any such one only 1
head Vicar over all his church, which M. Dorman a little before does
confess himself: Neither is it Christ's Fol. 9. b.
will to have any such head vicar. For though M. 2
Dorman affirm that he so would, yet shall he never by the holy Scripture,
wherein Christ's will is declared, be able to prove it. Thirdly it is
impossible for any 3
earthly man to have, and to execute any such office of vicar general under
Christ. And I am sure that M. Dorman, with the aid of all Papists in
Christendom, is nt able to prove these three poinctes, or one of them,
untrue. Which yet they must do, else lies all Romish supremacy in the duste.

Dorman. Fol. 10.
Here would I like a friend advertise them, that for Hosius the Cardinal
sclau^der by the heretics.
their poor honesties sake they harp not to much on this stryng: least by
their so dooyng they come as nere the heresy of Suenkfeldius, as he whom in
their Apology they falselie sclaunder there with, is far both from that and
all other. For Suenkfeldius, amongst other his abominable heresies, has also
this, in my opinion the chiefest, that we ought to banishe utterly from
emo^geste us al scripture: and (as Hosius writes of him) this heresy Novvell.
Here M. Dorman confesses his author. All this place is taken out of Hosius
contra Brentiu^. lib. 1. fol. 21. etc.
Lib. de Haeresib. nostri temporis.
of his, to derogate from the scriptures all authority, he went also about to
prove by scripture. But how I pray you good readers? By what reason thinck you
would he have proved this diuelishe, and most absurd doctrine? Believe me, or
rather your own judgments, seeing and perceiving most plainly that I lie
not, by the self same reasons, that our adversaries do use to prove, that
Christ's Church here in earth, can have under him, no head or chief governor
to govern the same. Thou must not be parfecte in the scriptures, says this
stinckyng heretic Swenckfield. But why? Because forsooth we must be taught at
Gods mouth, because his word teaches truly, the Scripture is not his
word, but dead letters, and no more account to be made of the^, then of other
creatures, amongeste the which they are to be reconed. We must look to
be taught from heaven, not out of books. The holy ghost uses to come from
above without the help of means, as hearing, preaching, or readyng the
scriptures. These be that wicked heretic his foolish and unsavory
persuasions. And what other thing is it, I pray you good readers (judge
indifferently) to say as the Huguenotes and heretics do, then to leave and
rest, upon the same grounds for the banishyng of the head of Christ's
Church, on which the Swenckfeldians do, for the abolishyng of the
scripture? For the one says, we must have no scripture because God can teach
us without: the other, we must have no head of Christ's church because he is
the head himself, and can rule us without any other to be his vicair. The one
says the scriptures are but dead letters, and no more account to be made of
them then of other creatures: the other says that the Pope is but a sinful
manne as other are, and that therefore there is no more account to be made of
him, then of other sinful men. Finally the Swenckfeldians bar God of all
means to work his will by, and so do the protestants, while they allow him
not a minister to govern his church in external government, but tell him that
he is of age and able to do it himself, and that therefore there is no
remedy, but he must needs come down and give answer to all our wise
demaundes in his own person.

Nowell.
A friendly man at need, and a trusty counsailer: and as good and piththie a
reasoner for the Pope, as trusty friend to us: Who has little regard to his
own poor honesty, and less to the cause which he maintains, when of
blind malice, harping upon a wrong stryng, worse then ever did yet any blind
harper before him, he would have us seem like to Suenkfeldius, from whose vile
heresies we be as far, as the Papists be nere unto them: which shall, I
trust, appear evidently, even by M. Dorman his own harpyng upon this string.
Which string yet he confesses here in his marginall note, yt he learned of
Harper Hosius to strike after this sort: no doubt but upon respect of his
poor honesty, he thought it meet once to confess that he always does,
boldly borowyng of other, and braggyng thereof as of his own: which thing is
most usual, as well to his master D. Hardyng, as to al other the adversaries
now writing. But to the matter: first that we are most contrary to
Swenkefcilde and his heresies, by the books of our men written largely
against them, is most manifest: and the same shall be made more evident and
manifest by M. Dorman himself in this place. Suenkfeldius, says M. Dorman,
holds this abominable heresy, that we ought to banishe utterly from
emongeste us all scriptures. We say, that we ought above all things to
retain the holy Scriptures, and that besides them, there is nothing but
error and darkness. Thou must not be perfect in Scriptures, says this
stinckyng heretic Swenckfield. (These be M. Dormans words of him). We say:
every Christian ought to be studious of the holy Scriptures, and to labor to
attain to as great perfection therein, as mortal men possibly may in
Gods wisdom, contained in the same. Suenckfeldius says, as M. Dorman
reports, The scripture is not Gods word, but dead letters, and no more
account to be made thereof then of other creatures. We say, the Scriptures
are the very words of GOD, the word of life: in the which, life
everlasting is to be sought, and found: and that the Scriptures are the
most divine gift of God, and above all other gifts, creatures and things,
except only, his only son incarnate, of whom they testify, and whose
blessed word they be. Swenkfeild says, we must look to be taught from
heaven, not out of books, and that the holy ghost uses to come from above,
without the help of means, as hearing, preaching, and readyng the scriptures.
We say, we may not look for vain revelations from heaven, but must mark
what Christ^ the heavenly doctor and schoolemaister speaks to us in his
holy word, in that divine book of his blessed testamente, as we have
received commandment fro his father, ipsum audite: hear him: we say what
revelation so ever be made contrary, or not agreeyng with Christ's blessed
Gospel, be it by an angel from heaven, it is not of the holy ghaste, but
from that angel of darkness, tra^sforming himself into an angel of light:
and that therefore we must come to knowledge of Gods will, and to our salvation,
by hearing, preathyng, or readyng of the Scriptures. Now concludes M. Dorman,
after the rehearsal of these Swenkfildes heresies, saying thus: these be that
wicked heretic his foolish and unsavory persuasions. We say, and these be
our true, and to us most sweet persuasions, not only of the
profitablenesse, but also the necessity of the Scriptures, that truth,
health, light, life, and salvation is to be saught, and to be had in them,
and by them, and without them can not be had: and these persuasions have we
gathered not of vain revelations, but of the very same holy Scriptures
themselves, as of the fountain of al infallible verity. Wherefore, M. Dorman,
you have dooen nothing else, but bewraied your most malicious blindness, in
saying that it is no other thing, that the Huguenotes and heretics do: and
that we do lean and rest upon the self same reasons and grounds, as did
Suenkfeldius: and vvithall as in a credible matter, to pray the good readers
to judge indifferently herein, to believe rather their own judgments then
you, and to tell them that they shall see and perceive most plainly that you
lie not. Whereunto we say, we trust that not only indifferente readers, but
all other also most partial of your side, M. Dorman, shall see, and will
judge that fire is not more contrary in nature to water, nor light to
darkness, then are we to Suenkfeldius: and our true persuasions of the
Scriptures, grounded upon the sure rock of the same Scriptures, contrary and
repugnaunte to his abominable heresies, waueryng upon the uncertain sands of
false fantastical revelations. And therefore we doubt nothing, but al wise
indifferent readers will plainly perceive, that ye lie most shamefully, and
will abhor and detest your malice, an deride and hiss out your blindness,
who thought them so blind that they could judge no colors: and your partial
readers will blushe, I doubt not, at your doultishe doings, and peradventure
beshrowe your heart, or rather your foolish head, that has handled their
part in such slender sort. And I for our part, where you deal with us thus
not unfriendly only, but most falsely, maliciously, and pestilenilie also,
and do yet make a preface of a friendly aduertiser of us, do say to you,
as our savior said to a like friend of his, Amice, ad quid venisti? For as
you (like as did D. Hardyng your master) have with Judas forsaken Christ the
truth (whose true doctrine you call Caluins religion) and ioigned against In
the praeface in the beginning.
him with the high Priests, Scribes, and Phariseis, in hope of worldly gain:
so give you us as frie^dlie aduertisemente, as Judas offered Christ a friendly
kiss. Well, now we have truly proved, and clearly declared, that we are not
only unlike, but most contrary to Suenkfeldius, and his vile heresies, by
you rehearsed, let us yet see how M. Dorman would make us to seem like unto
him. Svvenkfield (says M. Dorman) does say, we must have no Scripture etc.
The Huguenotes and heretics say, we must have no Pope of Rome to be head of
Christ's universal church. Lo sir, you see a great likeness between them.
Tarry, you shall hear more matter of likelihoode yet. Suenkfeldius says, the
Scriptures are but dead letters: The heretics say, the Pope is but a sinful
man, as other be. Has he not trow you, showed a very great similitude
between Suenkfeldius and us? But yet he concludes at the last both earnestly
and effectuously as you shall hear. Finally, says M. Dorman, the
Swenkfeldians bar God of all means to work by, and therefore they do
reiecte the Scriptures to teach by, for that God is the teacher himself:
likewise do the protestants, says M. Dorman, whiles they allow him not one
head minister to govern his universal Church in external government,
because that Christ governs it himself. Which reason we are contented that
M. Dorman go away withal, when he has proved as clearelie, that it is Gods
will to govern the whole Church by such a Romish head: as we can clearelie
prove, that it is his will to teach us by the scriptures. And further M.
Dorman may be ashamed to say, so do the Huguenotes (for so it pleases him
to term us) so do they in likewise bar Christ of all means to work by,
as does Swenkfield. Do we so M. Dorman? Do we not allow him a minister
to govern his Church, who do allow him, as he himself has ordained, in
every Church one at the least, to preach his holy will, and to minister his
holy Sacraments according to his own holy institution? But M. Dorman is not
content that we allow Christ every where one minister, except we also allowed
him one al where over all. But good M. Dorman, it belongs to one only
Christ, to govern his Church all where: and one only man, shall have
enough to do, and more then he can do, to perform the office of a good
minister of Christ, some where in one only Parish, or diocese. Wherefore as
we much mislike the vndiscreate ambition of some worldly Princes, who when
they cannot well govern one kingdom, do yet desire many: so do we
utterly abhor and condemn to the Devil the author hereof, the excessive
and insatiable ambition of the bishop of Rome, who never being able yet well to
govern the Church of the city of Rome, as is well known to the world, nor
to rule his College of Cardinals, yet desires the government and supremacy
over all churches throughout the world: and is named in the book of his own
Sext. Decre. lib 5. tit. 9. ca. 5. i^ glossa. Romanus pontifex totius o^bis est
episcopus.
Canon law, the bishop of the whole world. Yea, and not content with that
spiritual Monarchy, chalengeth Sext. Decre. lib. 3. tit. 16. ca. vnico. in
glossa. Papa totius orbis obtinet principatum.
the dominion of all the world it self also to apperteine to him* which never
yet did any besides him, but the Devil himself: of whom whether the Pope hold
it by inheritance, as his eldest soonne and heir: or by ferme, as his
tenaunte geuerall: or as his deputy, and Bailiffe errande, I know not: but
sure I am, that what right so ever he has thereto, and by what tenure so ever
he holds it, he holds it of the Devil, who chalengeth the same as chief
Lord, and has made offer thereof to such as would wholly serve him. But GOD
I Math. 4.
am sure, or our Savior Christ never made any such offer or promise to any
mortal man: naie, our Savior Math. 20. d. 25. and. 26.
Christ, as he himself refused such offer made to him: so he specially
forbids the affectatio^ of such worldly dominion to all his Apostles: and
consequently by them to all the Clergy. Where as M. Dorman proceadeth
saying, that we tell Christ that he is of age, and able to do it himself,
and that therefore there is no remedy but he must needs come down, and give
answer to all our wise demaundes in his own person: I trust all men do
know, that M. Dorman did know, that he lied leudelie when he did write this.
For he knows right well, as shortly hereafter himself confesses Dorman fol.
11 b. and. 12. 2.
the same, that we think it enough that Christ has once come down to
teach us, and that we look for none other answer of Christ, then he has
already given in his holy Gospel, which he preached once for all in his
corporal presence, and confirmed the truth of the same by visible and
corporal miracles: and that therefore he speaking, and answeryng us in his
holy word, to all demaundes necessary for our salvation, needs not any
corporal presence, his word and Gospel written satisfiyng us, as well as
though we did se him, and hear him speak, with our corporal eyes, and
ears. And master Dorman, and all the adversaries to the truth may be
ashamed to charge us, as not allowyng Christ means to work his spiritual
grace by, but vexyng him, by calling for his corporal presence: whereas they
themselves (as those that think he can do nothing, except he be
corporally present) would turmoile him every hour, and minute also from place
to place, yea and would imprison him also in narrow and straight roumes,
passing little ease in the tower of London manifold. And so they allowyng him
no means to work by, but that he must needs come down in his own
person, do as justly ioigne in this poincte with Suenkfeldius, as they
falsely charge us therewith: whereas we do acknowledge that Christ, though
corporally absente, by his divine power, is able, and does daily and
howerly work his manifold graces in us, by sundry ordinary means, such
as himself has appoincted and instituted: and that by his most holy word
he does teach us as effectually, as though he were corporally present:
And by his blessed Sacraments of Baptism, and of his supper he deriueth (as
it were) his graces unto us: by the one regeneratyng and reuiuyng us in
himself, who were before unhappily borne, and dead borne in Adam: by the
other nourishyng and refreshyng our hungry and thristie souls, with the food
of his blessed body and blood, as effectually, as though he were with us
corporally present. This does M. Dorman and the adversaries know, and
therefore when M. Dorman says, that we bar Christ of all means to work
by, M. Dorman and all the world must also needs know, that M. Dorma^ lies
both shamefullie, and wittyngly too. Now that you understand how M. Dorman
has most untruely charged us as allies to Suenkfeldius, who do most
abhor, and are most far from him, and his vile heresies, let me see
whether, as I have showed a very great likeness and conformity to be between
Sue^kfeldius and the Papists, in this last poincte of allowyng Christ no
mean to work by, and therefore requiring his corporal presence: so I can
prove the like co^formitie between them and him likewise in all other points
by M. Dorman here specified. Suenkfeldius emo^gst others holds this most
abominable heresy, That we ought Dorman, Fol. 10. a.
to banishe utterly from emongeste us all Scriptures. Do not the Papists
themselves, forbiddyng the Novvell.
scriptures to be readde of the Laity, keepyng the scriptures hid in an
unknown tongue, burning the scriptures written in known language, go as nere
to this abominable heresy of Suenkfeldius, as we are most far from the
same? Who do judge and teach, that all men, of all sorts ought with
diligence to read, or hear the scriptures. Thou must not be perfect in the
Dorman. Fol. 10. b.
Scriptures, says this stinkyng heretic Suenkfeldius: the scripture is not
his word, but dead letters, and no more account to be made of them, then of
any other creatures, amongst the which they are to be rekened. Thou must not
be perfect in the scriptures, say these Nowell.
false Papists to all lay men: it is ignorance that is the mother of
devotion: it suffices a lay man to have fidem implicitam, an implicate
faith, yea so implicate, that the most part of seely men under Popery, ca^
no more explicate what they believe, then can a Popiniay: yea and Popiniaye
like, both rehearsyng that their implicate faith, and praiyng in a strange
language, they can no more tell what they say, then does the Popiniay, which
bids her dame good night maistres, at midde day. And the Papists speak of
the holy scriptures, not only as irreverently, and abominablie, as ever did
Swenkfield, but do far pass him in all outrage, calling the Scriptures
most contumeliously, and blasphemous^ie a nose of wax: and affirmyng it to be
but an uncertain thing, and like a rule of Lead appliable to every wicked
sentence, and to all purposes, except it have the Popes direction as a most
certain infallible rule. I will rehearse the very words of that blasphemous
beast, and as Popish a swine, as ever was Swenkfielde a stinkyng heretic: I
mean Pighius in his Hierarchy, or defense of the Popes supremacy, written in
our time, of whom Hosius has been as bold to borowe his reasons and
authorities, as your master doctor Hardyng has been bold to borowe of
Hosius, and as you M. Dorman have been bold with D. Hardyng himself your
master, to whom you owe a great part of this your book, such as it is.
Pighius words are these: Sunt scripturae [vt non minus vere Hierarch. li. ^*
ca. 3. fol. 103. d.
quam festiue dixit quida^] velut nasus cereus, qui se horsum, illorsum, and in
quam volueris partem, trahi, retrahi, fingique facile permittit, and tanquam
plumbea quedam Lesbiae aedificationis regula, quam non sit difficile
acco^modare ad quiduis volueris. Et rursum. Supra indicauimus, Liber. 3. cap.
3* Fol. 211. b.
scripturas facile trahi quocunque, and velut plu^beam quandam regulam, haud
difficulter applicari impiae cuiuis sententiae etc. These are his very
words, which in English are thus much. The scriptures (as one man, no less
truly then pleasantly said, are like a nose of Wax, which will suffer it
self easily to be drawn, countredrawen, and framed which way ye list: and
as a certain rule of lead of the Lesbian building, the which it is not hard
to apply whereto ye will. And again the same Pighius in an other place says:
We have showed before, that the scriptures may easily be drawn every way,
and, like a certain Leaden rule, may without difficulty be applied to every
wicked sentence. Thus far Pighius, speaking it twice or thrice, as they say,
as is meet for so worthy a matter. Now compare me the estimation and saying
of the Scripture used by this Papiste, with Suenkfeldius his speaking of it.
The scripture [saith Suenkfeldius] is not Gods word, but dead letters. Pighius
says: the scripture is like a nose of Wax, like a rule of Lead. Is
Swenkfielde, calling the scriptures dead letters, more wicked, then is Pighius
blasphemous, in termyng it a nose of wax, and withal saying, that it is so
called, as truly, as pleasantly? Such a pleasure has this piuishe Papist
in deridyng of Gods word. Is it more to be abhorred that Swenkfielde says,
the scripture is but dead letters, then that Pighius calls it a rule of
Lead? Is there any thing more dull and dead then is Lead? Is there moreover
any thing more uncertain then a long latthe, or rule of Lead, ready to bend
and boow every way? Swenkfielde says, the Scripture is but dead letters:
Hosius your great estate for learning and virtue, being very busy in the end
of his fourth book against Brentius, in comparyng the Gospel Lib. 4. contra
^r^^. fol. 178. a.
written in paper and ynke, with the church which he calls the lively
Gospel (as though the other should be called the dead Gospel) goes as nere
to Swenkfield, as.iiij. pence do to a grote. And where he would feign have
uttered his stomach plainly against the scripture, which has so shreudlie
vexed the Pope and Papists, and durst not: yet he says thus much. Scriptura
Fol. eodem. ^*
quomodo profertur a catholicis, est verbum dei: quomodo profertur ab
haereticis, est verbum diaboli. The scripture as it is alleged or uttered by
the Catholics (to wit Papists) is the word of God: but as it is uttered
of heretics (meaning us) it is the word of the Devil. Thus would Hosius, by
a leude imitation of saint Hieromes words used in his vehemency, persuade
the people to think that the Scripture uttered by any, but Papists only, is
the word of the devil. But the Scripture of it self is ever Gods word in
deed, though the abuse thereof be Deuilishe: and therefore Hosius by hatred
of the Scripture, ouerreaching himself, does in deed speak thus of it
untruly. And as the Scripture is neither nose of wax, nor Leaden rule, nor
the word of the devil, for that it pleases Pighius, or Hosius so to name
it: no more are we heretics, for that it pleases them, and other adversaries
maliciously so to term us: neither be they themselves by and by Catholics,
because they falselie so misname themselves. It is not their only saying, and
proouyng of nothing, that can make either us to be, that we be not, or them
not to be that, which in deed they are, the very Synagoge of Satan: which
is by the light of Gods word made manifest, and proved in such sort now
in our days, that a good part of the Christian world persuaded thereby, has
forsaken their Satanicall sect of Papistrie, and ioygned themselves to the
sincere doctrine of the Gospel: whereof rises all this their deadly hatred,
and blasphemous misnamyng of the Scripture. To proceade, Suenkfeldius says, No
more account is to be made of the scripture then of any other creatures,
emongst the which they are to be rekened. What says the hoggish Papiste
Pighius? The scriptures may be framed, drawn and redrawen, this way, that
way, every way, and applied to every wicked sense, or sentence: and
therefore, as it seems by his judgment, the Scriptures are not only not
profitable (as be all Gods creatures, to the which Suenkfeldius does compare
them) but are hurtful and deceitful also, appliable to every wicked sense,
like as is a long lithie Latthe, or rule of Lead, to every crooked wall:
such a rule as hitherto never did yet good Carpenter use I trow: and like a
nose of ware, such a creature as was never by God made. Wherefore the Papists
are not only in blasphemous words against the scriptures like to
Suenkfeldius, who compares it to other Gods creatures: but in scoffing
against the word of God in such abominable sort, and comparyng it to such
leude instruments and mad members, as are leaden rules, and ware^ noses, are
more horribly blasphemous, then ever was Suenkfeldius. And whereas Pighius had
a natural nose, and other members of his body, by the virtue of Gods word,
and yet in mockage does compare Gods word so beneficial to him, to a nose
of wax, by his swinishe tongue vttring such blasphemous words, it is great
pity, that he had not had according to his Pighishe name, an hoggishe groine
in steed of his nose, and a swinish body accordingly: that he might altogether
as he was hoggish in mind, so likewise in outward shape of body also, have
answered fully to his swynish name. No less contemptuously and contumeliously
also speaks Hosius of the Scriptures, who answearyng Brentius, alleadgyng
that kings also Lib. 2. fol. 66. b.
had to do with gods word, and prouyng the same by the example of David, and
Solomon kings of Israel, who by the motion of gods holy spirit, put in
writing those godly psalms, and heavenly instructions, which have been of all
ages and times accounted in the body of the Canonical scriptures, has these
words.

Scripsit David psalmos aliquot, si quid Athanasio credimus, quinque tantum.
Qui ni scriberet? ne nunc quidem regi prohibetur aut principi, quo minus aut
rythmos, aut Psalmos, aut carmina scribat, quibus Dei lauds celebret.
Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata Horatius.
passim. Which in english is thus much to say: David did write a few Psalms,
if we give any creadit to Athanasius, but five only. Why should he not so
write? neither is a king or prince forbidden at this time, but he may write
rimes, or Psalms, or verses to praise God thereby: Learned and unlearned write
poetries every where. Thus far Hosius: who is not content, to the derogation
of the authority of kings and the Scriptures ioinctly, to compare David his
psalms, being of undoubted authority, (as written by the inspiration of the
holy ghost, and of the body of the canonical scripture, and approved and
alleged by our Savior Luc. 24.
Christ) with rimes only written by Princes in our days: but also by a
blasphemous derision, to match them with fabulouse poesies, written by learned,
unlearned, it makes no matter with him. I am sure, had any written or said so
much in gods church under the old law, against the Prophets, Psalms, or
the law (for so Christ does divide the holy Scriptures of Luc. 24. f. 44.
the old Testament) as here has Hosius written, he should, according to the
judgment of the law, have, like a wicked blasphemar, be stoned to death. But
blasphemy Leuit. 24.
against God and his holy scriptures, is with our adversaries a sport. Daily
and most horrible blasphemies against Christ are suffered in the Iues by the
Pope, and they nevertheless remain the Popes friends, specially in need of
money. Only a word against that false vsurpar of Rome, and his leude
traditions is avenged with swoorde, faggot, and fire most cruelly, upon those
that do profess Christ's name, and all the articles of the Christian faith.
Which, emongst many others, is not the least proof that ye Pope is
Antichrist: for that he does thereby declare, that he prefers him self, and
his own traditions, before Christ and his gospel: auenging himself so
extremely upon the co^temners of his said traditions, and permitting
blasphemers against God, our savior Christ, and the holy scriptures to remain
not only unpunished, but also his dear friends. But let us proceed with
M. Dormans rehearsal of Suenkfeldius heresies: The holy ghost uses to come
from above, without the help of Dorman fol. 10. b.
means, as hearing, preaching, or reading the scriptures. We must look to be
taught from heaven, not out of books, says Suenkfeldins. Do not you Papists
say the same? have not you given over preaching of gods word your selves, and
barred the people from reading, and hearing of it, by your cruelty, and close
keeping of it in a language unknown to the people, and burning the books of
the scripture transiated for the peoples understanding? Are not you the right
heirs of those Phariseis, whom Luc. 11. g. 52
our savior speaks of, that have taken away this key of knowledge of gods
word, and neither will enter in your self, nor suffer other that would, to
enter? And thus laying aside preaching your selves, and burning other that do
preach, and barryng the people of God from reading and hearing of his word,
you do say even as did Suenkfeldius, that the holy ghost uses to come from
above into your Popish church, without all help of means, as hearing,
preaching, or readyng of the Scriptures, which you will by no means suffer so
to be used in the church, as it may be understood. Are not you those, who,
contrary to gods commandment, that the book of the law should not
depart Deuteronomy. 6. b. 6. etc.
out of the hands, and from the eyes of his servants, have either such
books as few can understand, either burn such books of gods law as all may
understand: for that you will not have them to learn of gods book, but
only of such traditions, as are revealed to your church from heaven, as you
say? Thus you see good readers, I trust, evidently, how that M. Dorman has
most unjustly charged us, and that we are as far from Suenfeldius vile
heresies, as the Papists in all poinctes by M. Dorman rehearsed, agree and
join most justly with them: as I have declared by the very words of
Pighius, D. Hardinges chief author, and by Hosius, M. Dorman his peereles
pearl for learning and virtue, as he says. Which Hosius gave occasion to M.
Dorman to make mention of Suenfeldius in this place: as partly before, and more
plainly now hereafter does appear.

Dorman. fol. 11.
And thus vvhilest most shamefully to the great dishonor of the whole realm
(under whose name as it were that fardel of lies, their apology was sent
abroad) they have not ben ashamed, to charge with this heresy of
Suenkfeldius, one of the greatest estates, both for lerning and virtue that at
this day Christendom has: we may se that they have not only shovved the^
selves to be very wicked, and shameless men, (the truth to their utter and
perpetual infamy and shame, had they any, plainly to the contrary, in the
vvorcks of him, whom they so sclaundred, bearing witness against them) but
are also run into the same grounds vvhereon Svvenkfilde builded his heresy,
their own selves.

Novvell.
I trust that who so ever shall read that conformity between the papists and
Suenkfeldius, and both their heresies before declared, and specially by the
words of Pighius, and Hosius him self, shall understand that Hosius was not
without cause charged with some affinity to Suenkfeldius his heresy, and with
contempt and blaspemie against God and his holy scripture, wherewith Hosius
writings do abound, and bear witness most plenteously thereof: and that
therefore it is no shame at all to the author of the apology, to bear
witness of the truth: the which apology yet once again M. Dorman with one
word, after his manner, confuteth, calling it a fardel of lies. But every
word that M. Dorman speaks, is not gospel. Although he have here in this
his book packed us up such store of lies, that he might more justly have
entitled it a Lighter laden with lies, than a fardell of lies, yet shall he,
and all his fellows find it more easy for them, to send us over a Hulke or
twain full fraughted with such lies, as this and other their books swarm
withal, than to answer that little apology to any purpose, term he it never
so contemptuously. Concerning Hosius, so great an estate of Christendom, I
wist not of it before. Sure I am that in Polonia his country he is of the
meaner sort of bishops there: and what should make him so great an estate
besides, I know nothing, but his Cardinals hatte: which how much so ever M.
Dorma^ estemeth, yet the truth is, that originally a Cardinal is but a person
or vicar of one of the parish churches in Rome, or there about in the
country. For after that Histor. Floren tinae lib. 1. fol. 40. b. and 45 b.
the Popes had injuriously, and violently put the people of Rome from the
election of the said Popes, being but bishops of Rome (which election of
right apperteined to them ioinctly with the clergy) and had given full
authority to the persons and vicars of the parishes in Rome, that they alone
should elect the Pope: Pope Paschall the first of that name, to adourne these
Papal electours with some solemn title, named these single soled clerks,
Cardinals: and Pope Nicolas the second of that name, confirmed the same: as
is in ye Florentine history declared. But yet hitherto were these Papal
electors footmen, for that they were not Lib. ^^*
as yet hable to pay for their horse meat in Rome, where prouander is dear:
and because they had changed their name, and not mended their liuinges, they
went appareiled as yet, like other commen curates, no better than our
Cardinals in Paul's cathedral church, yea many of them far wourse. This
uncomeliness pope Innocentius the fourth of that name wisely considering, says
Platina, Statuitvt Cardinales equo in publicum Platina in vita Innocentij. ^.
vecti, galero rubrovterentur, honestandi ordinis causa. That is to say: He
made a statute or order, that the Cardinals should ride on horseback when
they came abroad, and should were a red hatte, for the honesty of the
order. Loo sir, a merueilous estate in the Christen world that Hosius has
attained too, to ride on horseback (which by like, he might not do before,
by virtue of his Varmiense bishoprike in Polonia) and to wear a red hatte. I
think the seruyng men of England of late years, vsyng scarlet cappes, as
broad as hattes, and, when they went abroad any thing far, ryding also,
have well left that usage, though not of riding, yet of wearyng read upon
their heads: else might they have perhaps run in danger of the Popes curse,
by such presumption, so to ride, and to wear read, as do his Cardinals.
And lest ye think I do but ieste, Pope Paul the second, about an. 100.
years ago, as says the same Platine, Publico decreto mandauit, proposita
poena, ne quispiam bireta coccinea (ita appellant capitis tegmen) praeter
Cardinales In vita Pauli secundi.
ferret: quibus etiam primo pontificatus sui anno pannum eiusdem coloris dono
d^dit, quo equos, vel mulas sternerent, dum equitant. Voluit praeterea in
decretum refer, vt galeri Cardinalium ex serico coccineo fierent, sed id quo
minus etc. That is to say: Pope Paul the second, by public decree
commanded, and that upon a pain appoineted, that no man should wear a
scarlet birret, cappe, or hatte (so they call the coueryng of the head) saving
only the Cardinals: to whom also, the first year of his Papacy, he gave
clothe of the same color, to cover their horses, or mules withal, whiles they
ride. Yea and further he would have made a decree, that the hattes of the
Cardinals should be made of silk s^arlet. But that this was not decreed,
those let, which iudgeyng rightly, said, that the pomp of the church was
to be diminished, not to be increased with the hurt of Christian religion.
Thus far Platine. Now you see the parish priests of Rome, who from Peter's
time, until Paschalis the first (which was about eight hundredth years) were
not able to pay for their horse bread, mounted now upon Mules, and not only
them selves, but their Mules also ouerspredde with scarlet: that they may be
worthy chapleines of that purpled strumpet, that S. John in his revelation
speaks of, being Apoc. 17.
clothed in read scarlet, and dronken with red wine, and more dronken with
the red blood of the sainetes of God. This is that great estate, which M.
Dorman braggeth that Hosius is come to, of a Bishop in his country, become a
parysh priest in Rome. For that is the office of a Cardinal in deed: as to
this day the very titles of their Cardinallike dignities do testify.
Cardinalis tit. Sanctae Priscae, as was this Pope Pius the Platina in vitis
Pontificum, and Onuphri^.
fourth that now is, before his Papacy. And Pope Paulus the third, and Pope
Paulus the fourth, were before Cardinales Ostienses, either of Ostia a town
not far from Rome, or of Ostiensis porta, a gate in Rome, of the parish next
to the which gate, they were by like persons. Pope Marcellus. 2. Cardinalis tit.
S. Crucis in Jerusalem, which is a parish church in Rome. Pope Julius. 3.
before Cardinalis Praenestinus, of Praeneste a town near to Rome. Pope
Clemens. 7. Cardinalis tit. S. Laurentij in Damaso, a parish church in Rome.
Pope Hadrianus. 6. ante Cardinalis tit. Pa^machij, a parish church in Rome.
Pope Leo. 10. ante Cardinalis S. Mariae in Dominico, a parish church in Rome.
And our two country men, Cardinal Poole, and Cardinal Wolsey, the one
Cardinalis tit. S. Mariae in Cosmedin, ye other tit. S. Ceciliae, two parish
churches in Rome. Pope Pius. 3. ante Cardinalis tit. S. Eustachij. Pope
Innocentius. 8. ante Cardinalis tit. S. Lucinae. Pope Xistus. 4. tit. S.
Eudoxiae. Pope Paulus. 2. tit. S. Marci, four parish churches in Rome, with
many such like, extant in Platinae and Onuphrius: but I thought it sufficient
to note the Cardinalities, which these last popes possessed before their
papacy. Finally, Hosius himself is Cardinalis tit. S. Laurentij: of a
bishop in his country, by a notable promotion, become curate of S. Laurence
parish. I meruell that M. Dorman does not brag of the ease, as well as of the
honor that Hosius has gotten by his Cardinals hatte: that he shall not be
compelled in his own proper person to meet great estates on the way, but by
the privilege, and after the manner and custom of the court of Rome, may
send his moyle with a lackie to meet them, so that his Cardinals hatte hang
upon the pommell of his sadle for honors sake, by the figure Synecdoche,
continens pro contento, a Cardinals hatte for a Cardinals head: such is
the guise of the court of Rome, deridyng princes and great estates, yea and
all the world too. This ease with this honorable hatte has Hosius atteined:
other great gain I think he has none. For the greatest pension that the
Popes holiness gives yearly to his Cardinals, is a 1000. crowns: and that
pensio^ he gives to such poor chapleines, as have not yet two or three bishop
rikes, or abbacies to find them Cardinallyke. Neither gives he it freely, but
they pay sweetly for it to the holy father, who sells sacra ac prophana
omnia: iuxta regulam, Omnia venalia Romae: according to the lore of his first
predecessor, whose known sentence is, Quid vultis Judas Ischarioth.
mihi dare? Unless Hosius, for his pains taken in writing for the defense of
the Papacy, now in danger of utter ruin, be more lubberally dealth with,
than others hitherto usually have been. Though I have been long about this
great estate (good reader) yet I think it neither unpleasant, nor unprofitable
to thee to understand the origin, progress, and fine of this great estate
of Cardinals: who, being originally poor parish priests, leauinge their
cures, and vsurpinge all worldly dignity, are become meet chapleines to that
false vppermoste usurper, who being in deed the bishop of one only cite, a
little parcel of the universal world, chalengeth the supremacy not only
over all the church of Christ, dispersed throughout the world, Sext. Decret.
lib. 5. tit. 9. ca. 5. in glossa. and lib. 3. tit. 16. cap. vnico, in glossa.
but also the dominion over all the world it self, and all the kingdoms
therein: and therefore has he made his pelting parish pries;tes, princes
peers, nay, their superiors, that he might have Chapleines meet for so great
a Lord as he is. Now concerning Hosius his great learning, it is not
without cause that M. Dorman does so exceedingly auance it. For as M. Dorman
has borrowed this his book of D. Harding, so has D. Harding borrowed all this
his and your treaty of the Popes supremacy of Hosius: And Hosius has borrowed
it of Pighius Hierarchy, and Pighius has borrowed it of dronken Eckius, the
founder of all these mattiers in our days. And most true it is, that there is
not one reason, nor authority almost in all that great volume of Hosius
against Brentius, containing five several books, but that he has had out of
Pighius Hierarchy, and Alphonsus de haeresibus, after which sort any mean
man may be counted learned. This I am hable to prove as true, as I have
hithertoo, I trust, proved you M. Dorman a lier in all you have hitherto
written, and doubt nothing so to proceed with you to the end of your leude
lies, laden in this your Lighter of false fables. Wherefore Hosius deserves the
name of the Compilator, rather than the author of that great book, written
against Brentius little book, entitled Prolegomena, for that he has stolen all
his authorities, and reasons out of the said Pighius his Hierachie, and
Alphonsus de Haeresibus, as all learned reading the said books shall most
easily and plainly perceive. Yea and in compilyng them together, it is judged
upon probable conjectures, by the style and poetical phrases, and verses
unmeet for Hosius age and vocation, that as he has borrowed the matter of his
books, so has he had the help of other in penning of the same: and yet may
he well call the books his own, as bought with his own money, and large
rewards bestowed upon his style wrightes.

Concerning his great virtue, though I know not his life, yet I judge it a
worthy mattier for M. Dorman his commendation, and him self worthy of the
court of Rome. But I can say little herein: only this can I say, that his
neighbors dwelling nearer him, than I Iacob' A^dreae co^tra Hosiu^. fol. 155.
and multis locis.
do, a good sort of hundredth miles, do in printed books object to him,
that his Cardinals hatte, I would say, head, will be now and then ouerladen
with Polonishe pottes: I know not truly, or otherwise, but as his neighbors
do say.

Dorman. fol. 11.
For gods sake good Christian readers, for your own souls sake, and the love
that you bear thereto, give ear to no such sedicious voices, how ever they
be cloked with the name of Christ, which the devil then does most
inculcat, when he would drive us sonest from him.

Novvell.
I trust that all good Christian readers, for that love that they bear to God,
who is the truth, will give no ear to such false fables, as M. Dorman and
other adversaries of the truth do publishe in such leude liynge books as
this is: and that upon respect^ of the health of their souls, they will fly
far from the blouddie Butcher of Rome: who, vsinge the cloak of Christ's name
only, denies him in deed: and placing in his place his piuishe pardons, and
other popish pelfrie, destroys as well Christian men's souls by his poisoned
doctrine, as he does murder their bodies by the most cruel kind of death,
that the Devil his father and he can devise. And by the way note, that to
speak truly of a foraigne false Polonish Papiste, is with M. Dorman accounted
sedition: as though, because he is a Cardinal, he were therefore our laufull
magistrate: which, wist I, were true, I would give more reverence to our
Cardinals in Paul's church, then I hitherto have done. And sure I am, they
deserve for their Cardinalshippe, as much honor, as does Hosius, yea and
more too, were false opinion banished, and things truly, as they are in
deed, weighed, and esteemed. For they yet according to their origin, minister
the sacraments, and visit the sick, as is the propre office of Curates to
do: whereunto Christian princes, once at the last I trust awaking, will bring
these personate, and visered Roman parish priests, from their usurped
worldly pomp and dominion: and that the said Princes will reduce the Pope
himself likewise, from his phantasied supremacy over the universal church,
to his peculiar cure of the church of Rome. And thus I let this Hosius, one
of the greatest estates, both for learning and virtue, that this day
Christendom has (for so M. Dorman says) for this time alone, with his
Cardinals scarlet hatte, and his moile trapped according for his estate.

Dorman. fol. 11.
What other thing did their forefathers Chore, Dathan, Numer. 1^.
and Abyron, in rebelling against Moses, and Aaron the ministers of almighty
God? What other persvvasion used they to the people? what other reason
brought they to allure from their obedience to rebellion, from quiet rest, to
seditious wandering without a head, the flock of God: then the very same,
that these miserable men of our time do? Their apology says, that there
The protestants reason as Chore Datha^, and Abyro^ did. Numer. 16.
needs here in the church no head to govern it, because Christ is alvvayes
with it. And did not those wicked men in their rebellion against Moses and
Aaron use the same reason, when they told them to their face. Sufficiat
vobis, quia omnis multitudo sanctorum est, and in ipsis est dominus? Let it
suffice you, that all the multitude is holy, and they have God present with
them, Cur eleuamini super populum domini? And why then take you upon your
selves the rule over the people of our lord? As who would say, having no
need of any other ruler, God being with them. But as almighty God was then
amongst his people and used yet nevertheless the ministry of men: so is
Christ (no doubt) our savior now present alvvayes with his church, and
chief head and governor thereof, and yet governs he the same by man. And as
Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, be gone before, svvalovved alive by hell, there to
taste of those rewards which for such rebellious vvretches are prepared:
so must our Chore and his companions follow their trace, unless by their
repentance they mollify, and assuage the just wrath of God.

Novvell.
This history is by many adversaries alleged against us, as unlawfully
rebellyng against the Pope: specially by Cardinal Poole against king Henry
the Cardinalis Polus lib. ^. de eccle. Romanae primatu. fol. 19. and. 20.
eight. Concerning the matter it self, seeing Chore, Dathan and Abiron, were
so horribly punished for rebellion against Moses and Aaron, and certain it is,
that of these two, Aaron was the high priest, and that yet Moses was his
superior, it follows therefore, that Moises, to say, the prince of the
people, is above the bishop, or high priest (which you can not abide) or else
to avoid that mattier, you must say (as you some where do) that Moises was
priest also: which, if it be true, inforceth that there were two high
priests at once over the people of God, and so is your assertion of the
supremacy of one only high priest over the whole church, quite overthrown.
For you say, M. Dorman, That you have perceived, that God in that people in
Dorman, fol. 7. b^.
their law, and priesthood, shadowed out unto us, like a cunning vvorkeman,
the whole form and proportion of his church. Wherefore, M. Dorman, I pray
you mar not gods proportion, and form of his church: but as you will needs
have an Aaron, or high priest in the said church, so let us also have a
Moises to be his superior in the same. For which way soever you turn Exodus 15.
a. b. 1. Pe^ri ^.
you, sure I am, that by the scriptures, the title of priesthood may as well
apperteine to a christian Prince, as it did to Moises: so that there is no let,
nor lack therein, but that a christian Prince may as well be superior to the
high priest, or bishop, as was Moises to Aaron. To proceed: Chore, Dathan,
and Abyron, rebelled against Moises and Aaron, who were specially by God
appointed to be their governors, and his ministers: but what apperteineth that
to us, who do obey our natural Prince, appoincted by God to be our governor,
and all as well civil magistrates, as ecclesiastical ministers of god under our
Prince? And therefore do we, as we must needs, renounce the authority of yt
foraigne usurper of Rome, sworn enemy to our prince, and country: who is not
our governor, nor the lawful minister of almighty God, but a foraigne false
usurper, and the Devils bailie general, chalenging such a superiority, as
none can hold by any tenure, but from the Devil him self. It is you Papists
that are the successors of the rebels, Chore, Dathan, and Abyron: who
leaving the obedience due to your own natural Princes, for the serving of a
foraigne false usurper of Rome, do rebeli not only against Moises, that is to
say, your governor by God appointed, but against God himself also. You
rebel Romans 13.
against God, and his servant Moises always: you set up and maintain
Idolles, and Idolatry, contrary to the manifest word of God given by his
minister Moises. You do charge the Apology unjustly: For it says Exodus 10.
truly, that Christ needs no such one only head over all his church, as
the Pope would seem to be: neither can there be any such, but Christ him
self only, as has at large been before declared. But when M. Dorman so
speaks, as though we would have no governors at all in Christ's church (for
that we refuse that one vsurpar) he does deal deceiptfully with the simple,
and impudently with us. For we acknowledge, that as Moses and Aaron were gods
ministers, by him appointed to govern his peculiar people Israel: so has God
likewise appoincted to every several country Eccle. 17.
their Moses and Aaron, their own Princes, and pastoures or bishops, which
ought likewise to be obeyed, as Moises and Aaron were to be obeyed of the
Israelites. And that those who do disobeye them, do sin by rebellion, as
did Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. This appears to be true by S. Cyprian, who
does allege Lib. 4 epist. 9. and lib. 3. epist. 9.
this example of the rebellion of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, against such as
be stubborn and disobedient to their own several bishops, as was one
Pupianus to himself: and as was the African Deacon against Rogatian his
African bishop. In the which epistle also S. Cyprian alleges many other
places of the scripture (falsely applied now adays to the proof of the Popes
supremacy) for the authority of every bishop in his own diocese. But this
place of Douteronomium is neither by S. Cyprian, nor any other but only
Papists, alleged for proof that the bishop of Rome is to be obeyed by any,
saving only Romans, or Italians his inferiors. Concerning the reason made
by Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, that the people ought not to obey their
governors, because they be al holy, and that therefore the magistrates ought
not to lift them selves above the Lords people, it is not our reason, as M.
Dorma^ says: it is the reason of the popish swarms of their counterfeite
hypocrites, falsely called religious: yea and of the whole popish clergy, who
have procured of their father of Rome, immunities from all obedience to their
natural Princes appointed by God over them, as was Moises over the Israelites.
It is therefore, Chanon Chore, Dathan Dane Monk, and Abbot Abiron, with their
accomplices of false Friars, and Multitudo fanctorum.
other hypocrites, that were so holy shauelinges, that they might not for any
crime, were it never so heinous, be tried by the laws of their country, nor
answer before their natural prince. They cried, as did Chore, Dathan, and
Abiron, they were the holy people of the great lord of Rome, and that no
temporal Populus domini Papae.
lord might lift up him self above them. And thus they showed themselves to
be the very children of their forefathers Chore, Dathan, and Abiro^, as truly,
as M. Dorman does falsely object it to us. Now whereas M. Dorman alleges the
apology, as thus reasoning, that the church has no need of any other ruler,
because Christ is with it: Truth it is, if M. Dorman do mean one only
head of the universal church. For Christ needs no such general governor,
seeing he is both present himself continually by his spirit, as he promised,
and also for that he has in every peculiar country and church, his Moises and
Aaron, that is to faie, his several deputies in his steed every where here in
earth: for that no one mortal man can possibly suffice to the governance of
the whole world or church, which words followyng in the Apology, M.
Dorman of Apolo. Anglican b. 1. page 2. Sapientiae. 8. a. 1. etc.
his accustomed sincerity omitteth utterly. For it is the especial work of
Gods omnipotent wisdom, as first to have created the whole world, and
instituted the whole church, so universally to govern the fame, reachynge
mightily from end to end over all, and sweetly disposing or governing all
things: where as seely man ouercharged with the goueruaunce of a little
percell, is ever found guilty, when it shall be said unto him, Read rationem
villicationis tuae: Render an account of thy Stewardship. At the las^e he
concludes Luke. 16, a. 2.
with a terrible denuntiation, as it were thunderyng in a kinderkinne, and
lightnyng out of a brighte Basen most terribly, that we must follow Chore and
his fellows swallowed quick by hell, as rebellious wretches against the
Popes Monarchy, unless we repent. But we fear no necessity of such
horrible damnation, upon M. Dormans Must. For as we are most far from
rebellyng against our natural sovereign, and other Gods ministers
appoincted to govern us, and therefore no partakers of Chore, and his fellows
rebellion, so trust we in God to be most far from their most horrible
destruction. And we give warnyng to M. Dorman, with his master doctor
Harding, and all such as they be, who for maintenance of a foreign Pharao,
against their conscience (as is to be feared) do disobeie their own natural
prince, and that upon the pretense of holiness and spiritualitie, and are
therein most like to Chore, Dathan, and Abyron (rebellyng against their own
special governors by God appoincted, as they did) that they make speed by
unfeigned repentance to mollify Gods most just wrath, that they follow not
Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, in horrible damnation, as they have followed them in
damnable rebellion.

Dorman. Fol. II.
But yet let us good readers, that nothing may remain, that might in any wise
seem to blemis he this truth, go one step farther. For as yet will our
adversaries I know well say, that I never came where it grew. For our case,
say they, is far otherwise, then you take it: seeing that we utterly deny
not, that Christ woorketh by means, but only swerve from you, in that we
take those instruments and means, to be other then you do. For the
scripture, we say, which Christ has left to us, is the true mean, whereby
in all doutes and controversies, we may sufficiently content and satisfy our
selves. This is that Judge, which can not deceive, this is that touchestone
that can not lie. Thus say our adversaries, with whom in that that they
appeal to the scriptures no man is offended, yea we praise the^ therefore, The
scripture not able to determine all the controu^^sie^ that ma^e ^^^apon the
m^^nyng of the letter.
and do the like our selves. But in that that they hold the Scripture to be
of it self alone, to end and determine all controversies, risyng upon the
doutefull meaning of the letter, able and sufficient: therein we utterly
dissent from them, and as we think, not without great cause.

Nowell.
Concerning the discussyng of doubts and controversies by the Scriptures, it
has been before sufficiently Fol. 69. etc.
entreated of. But M. Dorman abuses all men to much: for as we do say
that the Scripture being the word of GOD, is a lantern to our feet, a
Psalm. 118.
light to our steps, a touch stone of trial, the loadestarre in the dark
nights, the way to walk in to life everlasting etc. so do we acknowledge,
that we must have bishops, and pastors well learned in the same Scripture,
or word of God, to expound the same unto us, to rebuke our vices by the
same, to exhort us to all virtues by the same, and finally, by the same, as a
salve for all sores, to cure all our diseases, as becomes such heavenly
Physicians, and by the same words of God, as the food of our souls, like our
Spiritual pastors, to feed us unto life everlasting. And so we refuse no
lawful healpes with the scriptures, for the determining of doubts and
controversies, and the atteinyng of other benefits (though we refuse one
unlawful vsurpar) but do agree most directly with Gods ordinance expressed
in Deuter. 17. in resortyng to our own bishops, and pastors, as did the
Israelites to theirs, in all doubts, or other necessary cases.

Dorman. Fol. 12.
For omittyng here, that almighty God commanded Nowell. Borovved out of
Pighius Hierarch. lib. 4. cap. 3. fol. 149. and Hosius lib. 2. contra Bren.
Fol. 59.
in the old law as before you have heard, that his people the Jews, in
doutefull questions arisyng upon the law, should resort to the priests, and
to him that was the chief judge for the time, to be resolved therein: and bad
them not, for the trial thereof which sense Deuteron. 17.
were most true, to lay and confer one text with an other [whiche without
doubt had he known it to be the best and surest, as it is the readiest and
easiest way he would not have let to have dooen:] experience also has taught
us the contrary thereof.

Nowell.
It is true M. Dorman, we have heard this your only Deuteron. 17. Dorman. f.
4* touched folio 7. prosecuted at large, fol. 9. b. and foli. 12. ^.
place of Scripture (which yet is most impertinent to your purpose) before:
yea and that four times, in five leaves space too: which argues your
miserable distres, who in this so necessary a part of your treaty of the
Popes supremacy, and the foundation of all, having but one only place of the
Scripture, which in your opinion made a show for you (though the same in
deed is not only impertinente to your cause, but directly against it also,
as has been before at large declared) Fol. 59. etc.
are driven to your art, by often repeatyng of that one, to make a show to the
simple readers as of many places. And here bilike M. Dorman remembryng the
proverb, Crambe bis, (much more ter, quater and amplius) that to much of one
thing is naught, specially, if it be unsavory, mollifieth the matter by a
pretty figure, saying, that he will omit it, and yet does largely
prosecute the same, and will needs still wrest this place to, the proof of one
only head Priest over all churches of all nations, and languages, whereto
it serves no more, then does Butter to stop an Oven. For how can all
nations resort to one only man? How can all nations understand one man, had
he more languages then ever had Mithrydates? How can one man, never yet able to
suffice to the regiment of one chuche, be able to sustain the charge of all
Churches? How can he that is not faithful over a little, be found worthy
Luke. 19. c. 17.
to have the whole world committed unto him: seeing the diligente and
faithful servant was made ruler over ten cities only? Solomon endued
with 2. Para. 1. b. 10.
all wisdom, said of one nation being under him: Quis potest hunc populum
tuum digne, qui tam grandis est, iudicare? That is to say, Who can be able
well to judge and govern this thy people, which is so great? But who is so
bold as blind Baiarde the Pope, who thinks himself of ability to judge,
and govern al people? Showyng himself most unlike unto unto Solomon, who
having but one nation to govern, asked wisdom of God, as most necessary
thereto, rather then riches: The Pope having one Church of Rome to govern,
and lackyng wisdom thereto (as by the dissolute disorder, and detestable
enormities of that Church above all other, appears) would yet have the
regimente of all Churches: not well to govern all (which is impossible) but
to scrape to himself theriches of them all, as the experience of his practice
has well proved. But as the Pope herein is most unlike to wise and humble
Solomon, so is he most like to subtle and proud Satan, ascendyng with him in
presumption, and desiryng to be like in the governance E^^ie. 14. c. 13. 14.
etc.
of the whole Church, and world, with the higheste God, whose only and
proper office this universal regimente of all is, impossible to any manne,
though the Pope never so much, with his graundfather Satan, Luke. 4. a. 6.
Esa. 14. d. 15. etc
do claim all to be his own: and therefore with him troubles all
countries, kingdoms, and nations: but according to his presumption with
Satan, shall his ruin with him be. Saint Cyprian, and after him Cyprian.
lib. 1. epist. 3. Africa^. Council. circa tempus Bonifacii. 1. ca. 251.
saint Augustine, with. 217. Bishops more in the Africane council, seeing
the inconvenience of foraigne far Judges, and governors, and the commodity
of several judges and governors in several countries, and Cities, decreed,
that no man of their Country, should sail over the sea, to go to Rome, or
other places, there to be resolved of their doubts, but that every several
bishop should have the people of their several Bishoprikes, or Diocesses,
obedient unto them selves, and all controversies amongst them arisyng, to be
determined at home. And Saint Cyprian and other aunciente doctors allege this
place of Deuteron. constantly for the several gouernemente of every bishop
in his own diocese: but none of the old doctors ever alleged it for the
universal regiment of one over all Bishops, and in all diocesses: as has been
at large Fol. 60. in priore editione.
before declared. Wherefore the appliyng of this place to that use and purpose,
being a new devise and inue^tion of the Popes proctours in these latter days,
as it lacks all antiquity, so is it void of all authority. But seeing M.
Dorman has so often alleged this place, for that he had none other, and I in
every place have said somewhat to the same: For auoidyng of tediousness, I
will omit to rehearse at large things before said, and will remitte thee
(good reader) to the. 59. leaf of this book before: where this place is both
al^eged by master Dorman, and consequently answered at full, and as I trust,
to the satisfiyng of all reasonable readers. Only this will I here again
rehearse (seeing M. Dorman calls us from the Scriptures to the Pope, and
would abuse this place thereto) that the Iewishe Deuteronomy. 17. b. 10. Facies quod
cunque dixerint and do^uerint te iuxta legem eius.
high Priest himself, by the very words of the same place, is bound to
teach, and Judge according to the word of God, and not at his will, and
pleasure. Pighius Hie^arch li. 4. ca. 3. fol. 149. b. Hosius contra Brenti.
fol. 59.
Pighius I know, and Hosius also, do here find fault with the old
translation, for that it makes against their purpose. But all other Papists
will allow none, but the old translation only: which M. Stapleton also
earnestly in his late Englished book, does constant^ie affirm anclie to be
allowed: which might suffice Pighius and Hosius I trow. But though nothing can
suffice the^, yet to the satisfaction of the good reader, I do trust, that it
ca^ not be denied, but that the high Priest (as well as all others) stands
bound by other places of the Scriptures, to the obedtence and following of Gods
laws, in all his teachynges and judgments: according as is by God commanded
to all men, without exception, by these words. Non declinabitis neque ad
dexteram, neque ad sinistram, ab ijs Deuter. 4. 2. 2. Deute. 5. d. 32. Deuteronomy.
12. d. 32.
quae praecepit Dominus Deus vobis. Et non addetis ad verbum quod vobis loquor,
non auferetis ab eo. That is to say, Ye shall not decline from the thing,
which the Lord your God has commanded you, neither to the right hand, nor
the left. Thou shall add nothing thereto, nor take any thing therefro. I trust
(I say) that Pighius, and Hosius, with M. Dorman, and such others, will
confess that these sentences, and such other like, do bind as well the
high priest, as all other me^, that he may not do what he list, but
according as Gods words do lead: else if he sit iudgeyng according to the
law, and command things to be dooen against the law (as is usual to the
Pope to do) I believe S. Paul's curse will light upon him: Percutiet te deus
Act. 23. a. 3.
paries dealbate: God will smite thee thou ouerwhited Act. 4. d. 18.
wall: and that we with S. Peter, and S. Ihon may boldly say to him, and his:
whether it be right in the sight of God to hear you, rather then god, judge
ye. So yt consequently, we be at liberty to disobete the commandment of that
high priest, that shall give in commandment any thing contrary to Gods
word, and commandment: to the obedience whereof, as well the high priest,
as any other, does slande bounden. Now emongeste other profitable studies of
the seriptures, what can be more profitable, yea necessary, then by
conserryng the textes and places of the scriptures together, thereby to gather
the true sense of every place? Which, though it sa misliketh M. Dorman, yet
has it best liked all the old writers, and doctors of the Church hitherto.
Saint Augustine amongst others, whom I had rather like, and follow, then.
500. Hardynges, and Dormans, showing his likyng of that co^serryng of places of
scripture together, has these words: Vbi autem apertius ponuntur, ibi
discendum est quomodo in locis intelligantur De doctrina Christiana. li. 3.
cap. 26.
obscuris etc. That is to say: Where things are more plainly uttered in the
scriptures, there must we learn how they are to be understood in dark
places. For that can not be better understood, which is said of God in one
place: Take thine armor and shield, and rise to healpe me: then of that other
place, where it is read: Lord thou have crouned us, as it were with a shield
of thy good will, or favor. Thus far saint Augustine: who in the.xxvij.
and.xxviij. chapter of the same book, prosecuteth that most prositable way
of collation of textes of scripture at large. And the same saint Augustine in
an other place, has these Libr. 83. Question. quaest. 53
words. Quibusdam scripturarum locis apertius aliquid exponitur, quod
diligens, and pius lector etiam in alijs locis in quibus minus aperitur,
intelligat etc. that is to say: In some places of the Scriptures a thing is
more plainly expounded, the which a diligente and godly reader may also
understand in other places, in the which it is not so plainly opened. For our
God, to the health of our souls, has by the holy ghost so ordained the
divine books, that he would not only feed us with plain textes of
scriputures, but also exercise us with dark places of them. Thus much in that
place Saint Augustine: who calls such as so compare the scriptures
together, godly, and diligente readers, whatsoever master Dorman says of
them, and he says that such doings are healthful to our souls, though M.
Dorman think, or say otherwise: and therefore by Saint Augustines
judgment it follows, that M. Dorman with others, persuaded as he is, are no
godly, nor diligente readers of the Scriptures, neither do regard the
health of their souls: and therefore no marvel that they apply the
Scriptures, so frowardlie, and wreste them so violently, and falselie, as they
do, whereof this book is an evident example. Saint Chrysostom also (as
before was noted) agreeyng In. 2. ca. Gene. Homili. 13. Sacra scriptura seipsam
exponit, and auditorem errare no^sinit.
with saint Augustine, says: that the holy scripture expounds it self,
and suffers not the hearer to err. Wherefore we can not but with saint
Augustine, and saint Chrysostom, and other aunciente and godly doctors,
and fathers, much like, and praise this most profitable and wholesome
conference of diverse textes of the scriptures. And no doubt but the Iewishe
priest, appoincted to resolve other men of their doubts, Deuter. 17.
did himself use the said conference of scriptures, as did those most godly
and learned priests, saint Augustine, and saint Chrysostom both use it
themselves, and also counsel other so to do: as being the best way, to
them known, whereby to attain to the true understanding of the scriptures.
But M. Dorman has a great desire to bring us from the Scriptures, to the
judgment of his high priest the Pope, and therefore this conference of the
Scriptures together, is so far out of conceipte with him, that he untruly
charge us, for that we like it very much, as though we did therefore
mislike all instructids of gods ministers. But though we do not receive the
Popes instructions (for that he is neither Gods, nor our ecclesiastical
minister) yet it is well known to the world, that we seek instructions, and
explications of doubts, of Gods ministers and preachers of his word
continually, whereas the Papists use it more rarely: and, until of late they
were by us a little stirred up, they used it nothing at all: so that it seemed
by their leauyng of preaching, and keeping of Gods word unknown in a strange
language, they would neither have the doubtful questions of Gods law
explicate, by conferryng of textes of the scripture together, nor by the voice
of the priest, nor minister neither: but would have had Gods holy word
wholly unknown to all the world, and all men to live, not only without
explication of doubtful places of the scripture, but without knowledge of any
place of the scripture at all: and in steed of Gods word, to have pampered
up Gods people with their poisoned pappe of Popery. But, says M. Dorman, God
did not command any such conference of scriptures, but only to resort to
the high Priest: yet I trust M. Dorma^ is not ignorant, what it means that
God, and our savior Christ do so earnestly exhort Deuter. 4. Per totum and
all men to the diligent readyng and study of the scriptures, multis locis.
Psalm. 1. a. 2. 3. and 118. a. 2. and multis locis. Joan. 5. f. 39. Act. 17. c.
11.
and do condemn the ignorance or want of knowledge thereof. And where he
says, God has not commanded such conference of the scriptures (which yet
in effect he has commanded) it is happy that he can not show where God
has forbidden it, which if he could, he would not have failed to have dooen.
But seeing M. Dorman sets so much by Gods commandments, and would so
feign have us leave the conference of scriptures, as not commanded by God (as
he thinks) I would he should advertise the Papists his fellows, that they
would once leave their Idolatry to Images, with other their superstitions, so
often, and expressedlie by God forbidden, as to all godly men, is well known.

Dorman. fol. 12.
For amongst so many as at all times have disquieted Nowell. Translated out of
Ho^ius contra Brentium li. 5. fol. 237. b.
the Church, what one heretic are they able to recon overthrown by the
scriptures? Was Arrius vanquished by them? Naie, if you brought to convince
him this text, Pater and egovnum sumus, my father and I are one: he would tell
you again that the same Christ that so said, said also pater meus mayor me
est, my father is greater then I. What had you then won at his hands, that
would tell you, that one place of Scripture must expound an other, and that
therefore your place must be expounded by his? And if you would wade farther
with him, he would interpret your place [as he did with the catholikes] to be
understand of v^itie in will and not in substance, and bring you scripture
toe, although wrested from the true sense, that should seem well to prove his
distinction. As when our Savior prayed unto his father in this sort, pater
sancte, serua eos Johan. ^^*
in nomine tuo, quos dedisti mihi, vt sint vnu^ sicut et nos, keep the^ o holy
father in thy name whom thou haste given to me, that they may be one, as we
two are one.

Nowell.
First to M. Dormans demand (which is the pith of all that he says in a
leaf and more next following) I answer, the Arrians, Anabaptists, and all
heretics, without exception, were vanquished and overthrown by the
Scriptures: and that if they were not vanquished by the scriptures, they were
not vanquished at all. For what though they said they were not vanquished,
were they therefore not vanquished, because they would not confess it? Did the
Iuishe high priests, Scribes, and Phariseis confess themselves vanquished by
Christ and his Apostles? Were they therefore not vanquished, for that they
would not grant it? I would ask again of M. Dorman, what one heretic of so
many can he reckon overthrown, but by the scriptures? But whereas M. Dorman
has been continually harpyng upon this stryng, against the scriptures,
labouryng to bring us from them to the Pope, and his church, as he still
holds on so to do: least I should at every occasion by him offered, with
tediousness repeat the same things again, I remitte the reader to the. 68.
leaf of this book before, where, and in the process Folio. 68. b. 69. and.
70. etc.
following, it is at large declared, that if we doubt whether we be Christians,
or no, we must be resolved by the scriptures: if we doubt whether we be in
the true faith, or no, we must resort to the Scriptures: if we doubt,
which is the true Church, and whether we be in the same, or no, we must be
certified by the scriptures: and that such as seek other means to be
resolved of these, and such like doubts, otherwise tha^ by the scriptures,
shall be deceived and perish. Where also is declared that neither the Pope, nor
Popish Church can be convenient and competent judges in controversies now
risen, for that they are both parties, and parties accused therein: no more
then the Iewishe high priest, with his church of Scribes and Phariseis were
convenient and competent judges in the controversies between them and Christ's
Apostles, for that the said high Priest, Scribes, and Phariseis were parties,
yea and parties accused, and guilty too, of the death of Christ, about whom
was all the controversy between them, and therefore were they most unmeet to
be judges thereof. Touching the conference of the scriptures together, I did
so late before at large entreat thereof, that I need not now to repete the
same again. And thus much to M. Dormans question. Now if M. Dorman have
brought in this example of the Arrians to bring us in suspicion with the simple
people as fauouryng the Arrians, all learned and godly can cleer^ us, who do
know how much we do abhor the Arrians heresies, and how earnestly in
our sermons and writings we do oppugn them: yea, Hosius your Hosius contra
Brentiu^, lib. 1. foli. 24. and lib. 5. fol. 249.
chief champion shall answer for us, who does much praise our writings and
doings too, against the Arrians.

Dorman. Fol. 13.
In the exposition and right understanding of these Nowell. Translated out of
Hosius co^tra Brentium lib. 3. fol 170. b
few words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body: how happens it that the
Caluinistes and the Lutheranes agree not, by conferryng one place of the
Scripture with an other, if that be so ready a way? Does not Calvin, with
all his, teach us, that the sense and true interpretation of these words,
must needs be atteined by the conference of one place of Scripture with an
other? And to that end do they not fondly allege saint Paul calling
Christ a rock, yea Christ 1. Cor. 10.
calling himself a vine, when he was in deed, neither the one nor the other,
but by a similitude? As though ^ohan. 15.
because The Apostle, or Christ himself uses a figure in one place, we must
think that in all other he never spoke otherwise. By which abominable
doctrine what lets, if a man would be so wicked, to affirm that Christ
the son of God, and second person in Trinity, were not the true and
natural son of God, but by adoption only: and for that wicked heresy to
bring this text, Dedit eis potestatem filios dei fieri, he gave them Johan. 1.
power to be made the sons of God. Which words we know being spoken by
us men, must be understand by grace and adoption: and frowardlie to
maintain, that all the places which any good manne can bring for the defense
of the contrary, should be drawn to this text alleged by them, and
expounded and understood thereby.

Nowell.
This is M. Dormans usage, when he can say nothing of the present case, to
intermingle foraine matters, thereby to auert the readers mind from his
principal cause remainyng unproven still. But how soever Calvin and Luther
agree in the exposition of these few words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
body: they agree both in this, that the Papists expound them falsely. For,
to use the places by M. Dorman noted out of Hosius, he, nor all Papists with
him, shall never be able to show cause, why these words, Ego sum vitis vera,
I am the true vine, do not prove as well a transubstantiation, as, Hoc est
corpus meum, This is my body. Is not this as plainly spoken, and as
piththilie, I am a true or a very vine, as, This is my body? Naie, if Christ
had said likewise, this is my true and very body, as he said, I am a true
or very dine: what a rule had we then had? Christ says, Ego sum panis: I am
bread: and yet no transubstantiation of his body into bread. Why should
these words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, more transubstantiate
bread into his body? This is fondly alleged, says M. Dorman. If we say
likewise, that all that he has here said of the controversy of the
Sacrament, out of place, leauyng his purposed matter unproven, is very fond:
what has he then won? that I may use his own phrase.

Dorman. Fol. 13.
The Anabaptists who deny the Baptism of infantes, Nowell Translated out of
Hosius lib. 3 contra Brentium, Fol. 170. b
lean they not think you to this ground of yours? Yea truly, and good
reason it is that being all heretics as you are, although in some poinctes
dissentyng, yet all ioignyng and agreeing in one cancred hatred against the
Church, you should all use the same rules and principles. For that I may here
pass over that reason of the Anabaptists, which belongs to an other place,
that therefore infantes must not be Baptized because it is not expressed in
Scripture [a principle also of your religion] but delivered unto us by
tradition: say they not also, that they have the scripture plain for them
against us? Where it has, Qui crediderit and baptizatus fuerit, saluus erit,
He that believes and is baptized Mar^. 16*
shall be saved: and again in an other place, vna fides, vnum baptisma, one
faith, one baptism. By which places say they it appears, that faith must
go before, and baptism follow after. And when the Catholics to repress, and
utterly overthrow this brutishe and beastly opinion answer: that for
infantes thus baptized the faith of the church is sufficient, and accounted
for theirs: cry they not as you do, that in this controversy one place of
scripture must expound an other? And that therefore, where as the scripture
requires in him that is baptized faith, that they must have it of their own,
according to the Apostles saying, fides ex auditu, faith comes by hearing,
which infantes can not have, and according to the saying of the Roma. 10.
Prophet, Iustus ex fide sua victurus est, the just manne shall live by his
own faith. Abacuc. 2.


Nowell.
First to M. Dormans false sclaunder we answer, we be no heretics: no
Arrians: no Anabaptists: we teach of Christ's divinity, and of Baptism, and
all other things, according to Gods word. Where he says, the Catholics
do repress and overthrow the brutishe opinions of the Anabaptists, we
answer: that it is most certain, and well known to the world, that our
men have said, and written more against them, then ever did the Papists,
Wherefore we be therein, as in all other things in deed, the Catholics,
and not they.

Dorman. Fol. 13.
I am sorry that in answeryng to this fond reason, I have been compelled to
make any mention of such horrible heresies as these are, which I had much
rather, were with their first authors buried in hell, from whence they came,
where neither they, nor their name might ever hereafter offend the conscience
of any good Christian manne. But as I have necessarily laid before your eyes
these, that by a part you may judge of the whole: so have I willingly
stayed my self from rehearsyng whole swarms of such opinions, as being of
all men taken for confessed heresies, only depend upon this one false
ground, that we need here in earth no other judge, to decide and determine
doubts arisyng upon the scripture, then the scripture it self: which being
[thei saie] laid and conferred together one text with an other, will not
fail to bring us to the right understanding thereof.

Nowell.
What other necessity, I pray you, put the man to this sorrow he speaks of,
or compelled him to such mention, but only the defecte of proofs, for his
purposed matter of the necessity of one head over all the church: which
lack he is driven to supply with such digressions of the Swenkfeldians,
Arrians, and Anabaptists, altogether impertinente to his purpose, and with
declaimyng against the scriptures and word of God. Which distress also
drove him destitute of matter, so often to repeat that one seely similitude
and evil likelihood between the Iuishe high Priest, and the Pope. And yet M.
Dorman thus digressyng and swaruyng himself, is not ashamed to speak to the
Bishop of Sarum, after this sort: I most hartelie pray you, Dorman, Fol.
110. a.
keep you without straiyng from the matter, or allegyng of proves
impertinente, as close as you can etc. This is M. Dormans request, whereof
himself has given an example, as you here may see. Now if al heretics and
heresies were, as M. Dorman wishes, buried in hell, then should the Pope with
all his Papists be buried together with them, and we might live still, and
with quietness praise Gods holy name, and preach his blessed word, which
master Dorman does set so light by. To the rest we say, that as for
resoluyng of doubts we do with saint Augustine, as is before rehearsed,
think the conference of scriptures to be most necessary: so do we not
refuse any other help of learned bishops, as our guides and directours by the
same Scriptures, to all truth. But such a one only supreme head, or Judge
over all the Church, as M. Dorman would have to be consulted of all men of
all countries and languages, upon all doubts arisyng, neither do we
acknowledge, neither is it possible any such to be. And we say, that such as
have challenged or pretended so to be, are most presumptuous, and most false
usurpers. Now where M. Dorman would prove the conference of Scriptures a vain
or evil thing, because the Arrians, and Anabaptists used it: and us to be
heretics, as they be, because we use the same grou^des, to wit, co^ferring
of scriptures together: he might as well reiecte all allegyng of scripture,
because the devil Math. 4.
used it: and conclude, that we be of the devil, because we use the same
ground that he does, that is to say, the allegyng of Scriptures. Yea, and
he may by the same reason find fault with Christ our savior, and his holy
Apostles, who do so much use the said allegyng of scriptures. And M. Dorman
in so dooyng should be as reasonable, as he is in calling us heretics, and
blamyng us vsyng the conference of scriptures, for that heretics have used the
like. And what if Arrians, Anabaptists, or other heretics will not be
satisfied with conference of places, and textes of scripture? Is it not well
that all true Christians be satisfied thereby? Do not they allege Doctors,
and Councelles for them, as well as scriptures? As though M. Dorman could devise
us a way, that should satisfy all heretics, without all contradiction or
exception on their part: which shall never in this world be brought to
pass. For our Savior Christ himself, the soonne of God, neither by the
authority of his divine person, nor by the truth of his heavenly doctrine,
nor by the confirmation of the same by his wonderful miracles, neither by his
example of most virtuous life, neither by all these together did satisfy al
men: but that many, yea (those who of reason least should) the Math. 9. d. 34.
and 11. c. 19. and 12 b. 24. and 27. d. 63. Joan. 7. b. 12. and 9. f. 34. and
18. d. 29.
Priests, Scribes, and Phariseis made exception to his person, and life, and
were not satisfied by his doctrine. It M. Dorman therefore do mislike the
Scriptures, or the conference of textes, for that all men will not be thereby
satisfied, sure I am, that he shall never be satisfied in this world, as one
that might by that reason, mislike also of our savior Christ himself, as
no-sufficient judge. And thinks he that Popes of Rome, men of such life,
such partiality, such ignorance, such untruth, such falsehoode, such
briberie, Simoniakes, poisone^^, murderers, shall satisfy all men, in all
their judgments, of all causes, and controversies, yea in their own very
causes, wherein they be parties, and that without all exception? The devil
they shall, and that may I say truly. Wherefore I do conclude, though our
savior Christ were to the high Priests, Scribes, Phariseis, and other wicked,
a stone to stu^ble at, and a rock of ruin, and his Gospel either an offense,
Esa^. 8. c. 14. Romans 9. g. 32. 1. Pet. 2. b. 7. 8. ^. Cor. 1. d. 23.
or a mockage (so far of was it that he did satisfy the^): yet is he and his
holy word (which is the virtue and the wisdom of God) the true judge in
all controversies and doubts of religion, whatsoever the high priest, or his
adherentes the Scribes, and Phariseis do faie to the contrary: or be M.
Dorman never so angry therewith.

Dorman. Fol. 13.
If your hearts good readers be moved with these heresies in the readyng, as
truly God I take to witness mine was in the vvrityng, abhor those that
teach them, shonne and avoid such principles and grounds, as have been the
foundation not of these only, but of all that now reign in the world,
and may be of any other hereafter, that any desperate heretic lists to
inuente. Stick to those by which all heretics have been and these shall be,
to there utter confusion vanquished. Shrink not rashelie from that fundation,
vvhereon your elders and forefathers fastenyng themselves, have passed over so
many hundred years, in the true confession of one God, one faith, one truth,
to them that having yet scarce forty on their backs, have notvvithstandyng
amongst them [creapyng all out of the filthy neast of one Martin Luther] so
many faithes and yet no faith, so many truths, and yet no truth, never a one
agreyng with the other, as there be mad frantike heads amongst them. Give
no ear to that subtle generation vvalkyng in the darck like blind Battes,
without a head, without a Judge, and all to the end their iuggeling might
not be espied.

Nowell.
O pitiful hearted manne, but yet far better Orator, then tender hearted,
who, when he drawyng toward an end of this his first part, that is to
wit, That the whole church must needs have one only head: and thinkyng,
that he ought to have some matter of weighte to move affections upon, and
findyng none in his purposed matter, brings in the rehearsal of the Arrians,
and Anabaptists heresies (which it is known to the world that we do most
abhor) and upon them, as it were upon our heresies, does this Rhetorician
russhe into these vehemente affections, which he moves here, but as I
think, stirs no wise manne, except it be to laugh at his foolishenesse.
Where he speaks of desperate heretics, saint Cyprian Cyprianus l^. ^ epist.
3. Pa^cis desperatis and perditis, minor esse videtur authoritas episcoporum in
Africa constit^toru^. etc.
so calls all such as think one Bishop inferior to an other (as does
master Dorman, and such other Papists) as has been before declared. Master
Dorman adourneth the Popes chair, or see of Rome, with many glorious titles,
but names it not as yet, neither a great while after, partly for that a
periphrasis, or circumscription was here more meet, for amplifications sake:
and partly, for that when he had rejected the scriptures, he thought it not
good by and by to say, that all heretics (which by no means can be
vanquished by the scriptures) must be vanquished by the sea of Rome, or
Peter's chair, or Popes thereon sittyng: but to avoid all show of absurdity
he compasses the matter, and at the last steals unto the sea of Rome, under
S. Hieromes name. That he exhorts you to stick to those by whom all
heretics have been and these shall be, to their utter confusion vanquished,
(meaning the Popes of Rome, as is afterward evident) I answer, If force,
fire, and fagoties fail them not, (for other means to vanquishe have not the
Popes, nor know they any) they will no doubt, use their cruel fury against
us, as they have dooen: (and yet have they, as I think, neither gotten any
great gain, nor made any great conqueste) but if Gods word may be heard,
I doubt not but the Popes chair of pestilence shall be shortly overthrown, and
he with all Papists vanquished, to their utter confusion. Where he calls the
Popes chair (for it he means, as after he does declare) the foundation
whereon our elders and forefathers sta^ed them selves many hundredth years, in
the confession of one faith and truth etc. the contrary is most true: that
the Pope has (as much as in him has lien) subverted the faith, and truth of
Christ, and destroyed Christian men, and Christendom most horribly, since
his false forged supremacy in these our latter days has gotten creadite. Our
faith and doctrine have as many years on their backs, as have the scriptures
whereon they are grounded, as has the Primitive Church, and old aunciente
Doctors, wherewith in all necessary p^inctes of religion they agree
thoroughly. It is the Pope, and his supremacy, and other Popery, that is
builded upon a late and sandy foundation, and therefore shortly to be
subverted, and ^ooted up. Concerning diversities of faithes, disagreeynges, and
Schisms, which M. Dorman so often repeateth, he does nothing else, but cast
their own dounge at our heads, laiyng the peculiar and proper faults of the
Papists to our charges, according as I have at large before declared, and as I
trust sullie satisfied Fol. 55. etc.
the discreate reader therein. That which master Dorman speaks of franlike
heads, has allusion to his masters case, when he forsook the truth, and
revolted to Popery* The world knows we be not subtle, but are sore
encombred with the crafty generation of Papists. The word of God is the
true light, wherein we endeavor our selves to our power to walk. Your
unwritten verities are more meeter for blind Battes to flitter in. We have
our head and Judge in heaven, one Christ only, and in earth one prince, and
other ministers, both ecclesiastical and civil, to govern and Judge us
according to his holy word. To iuggle, and to conjure too, be your own
Popish properties: we have nothing to do with the^. And thus I have answered
M. Dormans asseueratio^s in this place, by short poinctes, which may suffice,
seeing he only says his pleasure, and proves nothing at al.

Dorman. Fol. 14.
Tell them that you have seen them thrive so evil upon that presumption of
theirs, so many heresies, so many schisms and leude opinions, brought in
thereby, that you are at a poincte with your selves to leave them, and take
that way that Saint Hierome in the like case has done before you: who
although his knowledge in the tongues were such, as by the report of most
men, it passed any others in his time: yet would not he take upon him, in the
discussyng of doutes, to S. Herome in doutes referred himself to Peter's Seat.
lean to that rule of theirs, to la^e and confer together one text with an
other, but referryng himself to the sea of Rome he always protested, that by
that seat and faith praised by the Apostles own mouth would he be counceled
and ruled. Beatitudini tuae id est cathedrae Petri communione consocior, To
your holiness [saieth he writing Borrowed out of Hosius lib. 2. Folio. 76. b.
Tom. 2. epist. ad Damasum.
to Damasus then the Bishop of Rome] that is to say to Peter's chair am I
ioigned in communion: and he adds a cause why, Super illam Petram
aedificatam The church builded on Peter's chair.
ecclesiam scio, I know that on that rock [Peters chaire] the Church is
builded.

Nowell.
The Pope and Papists have thriuen so well upon their striuyng against the
truth of Gods word, that I trust all the world shortly will be at a
poinct to leave them. Saint Hierome says no where that he would not compare
the scriptures together for the discussyng of doubts (as M. Dorman would bear
us in hand) and S. Augustine says, he would do it, and exhorts other to
do the same. S. Hieromes words to Damasus Bishop of Rome make nothing
against us, nor with M. Dorman. For what marvel is it, if Erasmus.
Hieronymus in Italiae regione natus: Romae baptizatus: Romae educatus:
presbyter Romanus.
that saint Hierome, borne in a coaste of Italy, Christened at Rome, brought
up at Rome, and made priest at Rome, would in the faith of the blessed
Trinity, rather ioigne himself in communion with Damasus Bishop of Rome, a
learned and godly man, then with Vitalis, and Meletius (whom M. Dorman calls
Miletus) and Paulinus, who were Antiochian bishops, and therefore strangers to
him, and also not clear from the Arrian heresy? What argument can M. Dorman
frame hereof? Hierome a Priest of Rome etc. ioigned himself in communion to
his own bishop Damasus, Ergo we Englishemen musie ioigne our selves likewise
to the bishop of Rome that now is, being both a forainer and an enemy.
Again, Hierome ioigned in communion with Damasus a godly bishop of Rome,
Ergo we must submit our selves to a false usurper, and enemy of God, and all
godliness. Naie, it follows rather thus: As saint Hierome refused to ioigne
himself to Vitalis bishop of Antiochia, and an Arrian, both because he was a
stranger, and also an heretic, and ioigned himself to Damasus his own
Bishop, and a godly Bishop: so ought we to refuse the Pope, being both a
foraine usurper, and a false heretic, and to ioigne against him, with our
own godly bishops at home. But (will M. Dorman say) saint Hierome adds a
cause (which is the pith of the matter) saying thus: Super illam petram, etc.
I know that upon that rock [Peters chaire] the Church is builded: which is
the cause why S. Hierome ioigned with Damasus, will he say. But he may be
ashamed, had he any shame at al, thus shamefully by a false parenthesis to
intermingle these words [Peters chaire] in this sentence of S. Hierome, and
so to falsify it, as though S. Hierome had said, or meant in this place, that
the Popes chair is the rock, whereon the Church is builded. And now may ye
see to what end all M. Dormans long former drifte comes, to wit, to bring
us from the scriptures to Peter's chair, that is, the Popes consistory, there
to be judged, which now at the last, after so long suspensio^ and delaie,
under S. Hieromes name, but most falsely, he has uttered. For the more plain
declaration whereof, I will report here saint Hieromes words a little more
largely, then M. Dorman has dooen: which are these, Facessat inuidia, Romani
culminis recedat ambitio, cu^ successore piscatoris and discipulo crucis
loquor. Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudinis tuae, id est,
Cathedrae Petri communione consocior: super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam
scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est. Si quis in
Arca Nohae non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio. That is to say, Let envy
avoid, let the ambition of the height of Rome depart, I speak to the
successor of the fisher, and a disciple of the cross. I following no chief or
head, but Christ, am ioigned in communion to your holiness, to say, Peter's
chair: upon that rock, I know the Church to be builded: whosoever eats
the Lamb without this house, he is profane or unholy. If one be not in the
arc of Nohe, he shall perish when the flood is aloft. Thus far S. Hierome.
Now if a man would ask of M. Dorman why he left out those two lines,
wherein S. Hierome admonishes Damasus, as the successor of the poor fisher
Peter, to lay aside all ambition, which the greatness of the city of Rome
might move him too, and withal affirms that he will follow no chief head
but Christ (which words are ioigned, and by a participle dependyng to that,
which M. Dorman alleged) whatsoever he shall answer thereto, I know the true
answer: M. Dorman did of falsehood, and corruption of the meaning of saint
Hierome, thus detrunke and mangle his sentence: for he did see that S. Hierome
admonishing Damasus of humility, and withal professyng himself to follow no
chief or head but Christ, not exceptyng Damasus case, but rather affirmyng him
not to be Primum, the chief, makes clearly with us, who in this controversy
of the Popes usurped supremacy say the same: We follow no head but Christ: we
ioigne in communion with none, but such as follow him etc. Furthermore he did
see that the words of S. Hierome following (upon this rock I know the church
to be builded) might and ought to be referred unto Christ, mentioned by S.
Hierome so nere before, and by Peter confessed to be that rock, whereon the
church is builded: and therefore M. Dorman left out of saint Hieromes
sentence the mention of Christ, that he might most falsely and blasphemously
refer the rock to Peter's chair, as though Peter's rotten chair, or ruinous
Rome were the rock, whereon the church of our savior Christ is builded. And
to make the purposed wickedness of these adversaries of the very rock
Christ and his truth (who care not what they allege for the maintenance of
their desperate cause of the Popes supremacy, though themselves do know it
serves nothing for their purpose at all) more manifest to all the world, I
let the reader understand, that Erasmus in his scholies or annotations upon
this epistle (which M. Dorman were he not asleape must needs see) did warn
him that he should not after this sort so falsify S. Hierome in this place.
For though he confess that S. Hierome might seem by this place to think,
that all churches ought to be under the Roman see, or at the least not
strangers from it, yet when he notes upon these words: I know the church
is builded upon that rock, he says. Super illam Petra^ etc. Non super Romam,
vt arbitror: nam fieri potest vt Roma quoque degeneret: sed super eam fidem
quam Petrus professus est, and quam hactenus Romana seruauit ecclesia, qua non
alia minus laborauit haeresibus. That is to say, Upon this rock, not upon
Rome I trow: for it may come to pass, that Rome also go out of kind: but
upon the faith, which Peter professed, and the which hither to the Romain
church has kept, then the which church no other has been less infected
with heresies. Thus far Erasmus, clean contrary to M. Dorman and all
Papists, who would have the Roman see, to be the rock whereon Christ's
church is builded, and that the said see can not possibly err. Yea and
further the same Erasmus in the beginning of his argument upon his treaty
against the Luciferians, which is next to his Tom. 2. contra Luciferianos.
two epistles to Damasus, has these words. Nulla haeresis grauius afflixit
totius orbis ecclesias, quam Arrianorum: adeo vt Romanum quoque pontificem, and
ipsos inuoluerit imperatores. That is to say: No heresy has more greuouslie
afflicted the Churches of all the world, then the Arrians: in so much that it
has wrapped in the Bishop of Rome, and the Emperors themselves. Thus far
Erasmus. It pleases M. Dorman sometime to allege Erasmus against us, whose
authority if it be good, down goes the Pope, and all Popery: for if the
bishops of Rome have been infected with heresy, their Chair is not that
immovable rock, as M. Dorman would have it. Now if M. Dorman did not see
these notes of Erasmus upon the place by him alleged out of S. Hierome, I
praise his diligence, he may of Dorman be called Dormitantius, as saint
Hierome (whom he falsely allegeth) called Vigilantius, and more justly both
by nature and sound of name may M. Dorma^ be so called, then ever was
Vigilantius by saint Hierome. But if M. Dorman did see Erasmus note, and
dissembled it, as he did see these S. Hieromes words (I following no head but
Christ) next and most necessarily ioigned to the sentence by him alleged,
and yet of purpose cut them of by the neck, then is M. Dormans candor, and
sincerity, usual to him throughout all his book, most worthy of
plentiful Popish praise. But if Erasmus judgment, and authority be nothing
woorthe, but only when he seems to speak against us, then I will yet in
Christ's quarrel, that he is the Rock, and not Peter's rotten chair, bring
forth one witness, not only greater then Erasmus, but also equal with S.
Hierome, and above all Papists in creadite and authority. S. Augustine in
his. 13. Sermon upon the Gospel of Mathewe, Tom. 10. col. 58. b.
has these words. Quia tu dixisti mihi [inquit Christus Petro] Tu es
Christus filius Dei viui, and ego tibi, tu es Petrus (Simon quippe ante
vocabatur) hoc autem nomen, vt Petrus appellaretur, ei a domino impositum est,
and hoc, vt ea figura significaret Ecclesiam. Quia enim Christus Petra: Petrus
populus christianus. Petra enim principale nomen est, ideo Petrus a Petra, non
Petra a Petro: quomodo non a christiano Christus, sed a Christo christianus
vocatur. Tu es ergou^quit Petrus, and super hanc Petram quam confessus es,
super ha^c Petram qua^ cognouisti dicens: tu es Chrstus filius dei viui,
aedificabo ecclesiam meam, id est, super meipsum filium dei viui aedificabo
ecclesiam meam. Super me aedificabo te, non me super te. Na^ volentes homines
dificari super homines, dicebant: ego quidem sum Pauli, ego autem Apollo, ego
vero Cephae, ipse est Petrus: Et alij qui nolebant aedificari super Petrum, sed
super Petram, ego autem sum Christi. Apostolus autem Paulus vbi cognouit se
eligi, and Christum co^temni: diuisus est, inquit, Christus? Nunquid Paulus pro
vobis crucifixus est: aut in nomine Pauli baptizati estis? Quomodo no^ in
Pauli, sic nec in Petri, sed i^ nomine Christi: vt Petrus edificaretur super
Petra^, and non Petra supra Petru^. etc. That is to say, Because thou haste
said to me (says Christ to Peter) Thou art Christ the son of the living
God: I do also say to thee, thou art Peter: (for before he was called Simon)
but this name, that he should be called Peter, was given him of the Lord: to
the end, that by that figure he might signify ye church. For because Christ
is Petra, the Rock: Petrus is the Christian people. For, Petra is the
principal name: and therefore Petrus comes of Petra, and not Petra of Petrus:
as Christus, Christ, is not named a Christiano, of a Christian, but
Christianus, a Christian, is named of Christus, Christ. Therefore says Christ,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this rock
which thou have known, saying, Thou art Christ the son of the living God,
I will build my church: that is, upon my self, being the son of the living
God will I build my church. I will build thee upon me, not me upon thee. For
men ye would be builded upon men, did say: I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and I
of Cephas, that is of Peter. And other who would not be builded upon Petrum,
Peter, but upon Petram, the rock, did say: I am of Christ. And the Apostle
Paul when he did know that he was chosen or preferred, and Christ despised by
some men, said: is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you
Baptized in the name of Paul? And as not in Paul's name, no more were ye
baptized in the name of Peter, but in the name of Christ, that Peter might be
builded upon the rock, not the rock upon Peter, and so forth. Thus far S.
Augustine. And the same interpretation, and Retract. lib. 1. cap. 21.
defense, that Christ is the rock, and not Peter, does saint Augustine
again in his Retractations repete, and maintain. Wherefore you see, master
Dorman, by saint Augustine, that Christ is that rock whereon the Church is
builded, and not Peter, nor Peter's chair, unless you take Peter's confession
made before be came at Rome, to be his Chair, and then ye make with S.
Augustine and us, against the Pope: for Rome was not his chair, before he was
bishop there. You see that Peter is here the figure of the whole Church, in
making his confession, not of the church of Rome only: you see that as
Christ is the rock, so represents Peter the christian people, and not the
people of Rome only, much less the Pope only: you see that Petrus, to say,
the Church, is builded upon Petra, Christ: and not Petra, Christ, builded
upon Petrus, Peter: you see that such as will have Peter being a man, to be
their rock to build upon, be sectaries and heretics, diuidyng them selves
from Christ, despisyng him, and choosyng men: and that they only be true
Christians, which will not build upon Peter, nor upon any other man, but upon
the rock only, which is Christ himself: you see, they that build upon Peter
may say, I hold of Cephas, which is Peter: but they that build upon the
rock may say, I hold, or I am of Christ. Wherefore I conclude, that all
that build upon the Pope, or his chair, as it were upon the rock, as they
be called, so be they in deed Papists, not Christians: as were all those
false orders of hypocrites, who forsakyng to build upon the rock Christ, and
buildyng upon men worse then Peter, Paul, or Apollo, a thousand times,
forsook to say, Ego sum Christi, I am of Christ, I am a Christian: and said,
Ego Franciscanus, ego Dominicanus etc. I am of Francisce, I am of Dominike, a
Franciscane, a Dominicane, a Bernardine, yea an Augustinian, contrary to this
doctrine of S. Augustine: which argues, that those hypocrites were never of
his institution, as they falsely feigned the^ selves to be. And as S. Augustine
witnesses with Erasmus, that Christ is Petra, and not Peter, nor Rome
Athanafius and. Hiero. de Liberio Papa.
Peter's chair, or see, so has Erasmus fellow witnesses enough of the ancient
doctors of the church, yea Council. Sextum Constable. and Basil. de Honorio,
Iohanne. 23. Engenio. 4. Papis.
and general Councelles too, that Popes were heretics, and therefore their
chair was not the rock, but waueryng and uncertain sand, the buildyng
whereon did run to the ruin of heresy. Now you may see, good readers, the
cause why M. Dorman has thus alleged unto you saint Hieromes sentence
headless, leauyng out the mention of Christ, whom only S. Hierome
acknowledges for the head, that the words of the rock next following, might
seem to be spoken of Peter's rotten chair, or of ruinous Rome, and not of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns for ever. With like fraud did
M. Dorma^ leave also that, which next follows in S. Hierome, of the house,
without the which, he that eats the Pascall lamb, is a profane, or unholy
man: and the ark of Noah, without the which all that be, perish by the
floudde. For though that place might seem to make for M. Dormans purpose,
concerning the supremacy of the bishop of Rome (as Erasmus has noted) yet he
knowing, or some manne warnyng him, that it is in deed nothing to his purpose,
for that the house, without the which the Pascall lamb may not be eaten,
the Arc, without the which no man can be saved from the floude, by all old
doctors is interpreted to be the one universal church of Christ, and by
none to be the church of Rome: and therefore like a wise man, orels a false
Fore, has he let that following alone also, as he cut of Hieron. Ego nullum
primu^ nisi Christum sequens.
Christ the head going and ioigned next before, and so he has told you a
tale both without head and tail, thereby to prove the Pope, who is
Antichriste, to be the head of Christ's church.

Dorman. Fol. 14.
Say unto them (as, saint Hierome, said unto the Ibidem. heretics,
Vitalis, and Miletus) because they are adversaries to this seat that you know
them not, that they scatter and are schismatikes altogether out of the church,
that gather not with Peter's successor.

Nowell.
By your leave sir you say untruely, that saint Hierome says he knows
not Vitalis and Meletius, (whom you call Miletus) because they were adversaries
to the seat of Rome, but because they were adversaries to the true doctrine of
the most blessed Trinity, which Damasus did defend. Saint Hieromes words
are these. Non noui Vitalem, Meletium respuo, ignoro Paulinum. Quicunque tecum
non colligit, spargit: hoc est, qui Christi non est, est Antichristi. That is
to say, I know not Vitalis, I refuse Meletius, Paulinus I know not.
Whosoever does not gather with thee, he scatters: that is, he that is not
of Christ, is of Antichriste. Thus far saint Hierome. I pray you master
Dorman, what is in these words, but they may as well be spoken to saint
Augustine bishop of Hippo in Afrike, or to saint Ambrose Bishop of
Milane, or to any other godly Bishop, holdyng the truth of the blessed
Trinity, against Vitalis, Meletius, and Paulinuus, teaching erroneous
doctrine, and vsyng unfit terms thereof. Here is neither mention made of
this seat or that, or the adversaries thereto, as causes why saint Hierome
should not know these men: but because they taught false doctrine, and
Damasus taught true, and therefore gathered not with him, but scattered, and
were not of Christ, but of Antichriste, Hiero. Trium hypostaseon nouellu^
nome^ a me homine Romano exigitur.
therefore did saint Hierome not know the^: he being a Roman, would not
acknowledge their errors, cloked under a strange and new invented Greek
ternie. But being a Roman priest, he well knew Damasus the Roman
Bishop, and so consequently his own bishop (as every man is bound to
know his own godly Bishop) he knew his true doctrine, and plain Latin
terms, whereby he uttered the plain truth plainly: and therefore so
knowing him, and his doctrine, he ioigned with him in communion, not for the
seats sake, or for that he was Peter's successor therein, but for the truths
sake, which he (being Peter's successor in truth of doctrine, more then in
seat, or Chair) did profess. Again, the cause why saint Hierome did not
know, but rejected, Vitalis, Meletius, and Paulinus, was not for that they did
not submit them selves to Damasus as to the supreme head of the Church, or
for that cause took them to be enemies, as master Dorman would have it seem
(for there was no such matter then in question) but because they did not agree
with Damasus in the truth, but taught falselie of the greateste poinctes of
our religion, and would have wrapped the same in obscure and strange terms,
thereby to deceive the more, therefore did saint Hierome not know the^. This
is the true sense of this place, good readers, as al learned, that will read
it, shall easily perceive. Wherefore master Dorman thus corruptyng and
falsifiyng Saint Hierome, by taking away from him, and addyng to him, what
he list, and drawyng the words of saint Hierome concerning the doctrine of
the most blessed Trinity, to the Popes usurped supremacy, minglyng us in
lent vnguentum, to wit, matters most impertinente, together, might most
justly be blamed in this place therefore, saving that he does so in all
places. Finally I would have thee (good reader) to note, that as S. Hierome
would not know Vitalis and Meletius, for that they were forainers, and not his
own bishops: for that they taught false doctrine, and therefore were not of
Christ, but of Antichrist: and for that they were of a strange language: so
have we the same causes altogether, not to know, but to refuse the bishop of
Rome, and more too: as this specially, that he, being a forainer, would usurp
such a supreme authority, or rather cruel tyranny over us, with whom of
right he has nothing to do.

Dorman. fol. 14. Novvell. Translated out of Hosius contra Brentium. lib. 2.
fo. 77.

Tell them boldly with S. Austen that you will In quaest. veteris and noui
testament. q. 110. The heretics church a dead tro^ke or a live monstre.
owe neither suit nor service to their chair of pestilence, nor be a member
of that body, that either lacks a head and is a dead tronke, or has many,
and is a live monstre.

Novvell.
Be bold and blushe not, M. Dorma^, as boldly to belie S. Augustine, as ye
straight before have dealt with S. Hierome. For neither be the words you do
rehearse, S. Augustines: neither are the greatest part of them to be found in
the place by you noted: nor ye words which be in that place which you have
noted (whose so ever they be) make ought for your purpose, or against us. You
should have done more simply, had you alleged a proof for your headles
trunk, or live monstre, out of Hierach. lib. 3. cap. 4. fol. 111. a. and. li.
5. cap. 14. fo. 261. c. Hosius lib. 2. fol. 77. Extrauag. commun. lib. 1. tit.
de Maiorit. and obedientia ca. Vnam sanctam.
Pighius, Hosius, and Pope Boniface his Extrauagants: there shall you in deed
find for your purpose: for much adoo is made there, to save the Popish
church, as having two heads, one in heaven, an other in earth (as they say)
from being a live monstre. Erasmus being no simple judge of the true and
counterfeite writings of the old doctors, in his preface before the book De
quaestionibus veteris and noui testame^ti, entitled untruly to S. Augustine,
does by diversity of S. Augustines phrase, and the phrase of that book,
probably, and by very barbarous and false Latin usual in that book,
unaccustomed to S. Augustine, certainly, and by sundry doctrines in that book,
most contrary to S. Augustines doctrine in his books, undoubtedly prove, that
it is not S. Augustines work: so that it were to much impudency for any man,
but only Hosius and M. Dorman, to allege it for S. Augustines. The words of
that author (who so ever he was) a little more largely rehearsed by Hosius,
than by you, M. Dorman, least it might appear, you had followed him to near,
are these: Eorum qui extra ecclesiam, vel contra ecclesiam seeds suas
instituerunt, Cathedram pestilentiae dicimus. Qui enim inconcessa praesumit
etc. We say that the chair of them which have made them sees without, or
against the church, is the chair of Pestilence. He that presumes upon
unlawful things, is guilty: how much more if he also corrupt the
tradition of him, whose seat he usurps?

For they trouble the order begun of Peter the Apostle, and kept to this time
by the continuance of Bishops succeedyng, chalenginge to themselves order
without origin, that is to say, professinge a body without an head.
Wherefore it is agreeable, their seat also to appear to be the chair of
Pestilence. Thus far that incerteine author, alleged by Hosius, and Lib. 2.
co^tra Brentium, fol. 77.
now by M. Dorman, for S. Augustine. First if you would have this place to
make for you against us, you must prove your selves to be the true church of
Christ, which you shall never be hable to do, being in deed the Synagoge of
Antichriste. Further it appears by these words, whose seat he usurps,
meaning Peter's seat, that this was written in later times against some
Antipope, wrongfully chosen, and intruding himself into the Bishoprike of
Rome. For it has been no novelty for these.iii. or.iiii. hundredth years, to
have.ii. or.iii. Popes at once: one chosen at Rome by some Cardinals, an
other at Auinion by other some Cardinals, the third in a third place,
appointed by the Emperor: and one to keep his Papal see at Rome, an other at
Auinion in France, the third at Rauenna in Italy, or some where else. And so
some writer in favor of him, by like, that was chosen, and kept residence at
Rome, has written this against some other, that usurped Peter's seat: and so
they being many at one time, troubled the order of the succession of one,
after an other, begun at Peter, and so continued, till such discord came in
by those, who settinge up an other chair, and so not sitting in Peter's chair,
sat (as he says) in the chair of pestilence. Howsoever it be, the matter can
not be applied to us, who do not usurp Peter's chair. Further, what word is
there here to prove ye chair of Rome to be the head of ye universal church,
but rather to be the head of that peculiar church of Rome only, where Peter's
successors have continued? Such kind of head governor, as we do not deny
every bishop to be in his own diocese, and so yet subject to his prince, as ye
bishop of Rome ought to be to ye Emperor his lord. To proceed, we having
Christ to be our head, our church is no dead trunk, as lacking an head: and
having him our head only, and other his ministers, our governors under him,
our church is no live monster as having many heads: no more than our common
wealth having God the only head in heaven, our prince his servant, our head
governor in earth, is therefore a live monstre: or the whole world having God
to his head, is therefore a dead truncke, because it has no one only earthly
head, nor can have any such: no more can the universal church, throughout the
whole world have any such one earthly head. Wherefore, as M. Dorma^ would
gather our church to be a dead truncke, for that we will not grant one only
head in earth over all the church, though we grant Christ to be the only
head thereof, as in deed he is: so let him gather in like wise, that the whole
world is a dead tru^cke, for that it has no one only head in earth, though it
have God for his head in heaven: and so he may conclude, that god, and Christ
the authors of life, be no heads, or no such heads as can save the bodies,
whereof they be heads, from being dead trunckes, except the said bodies have
a false usurper from Rome, to be their head besides, and to give them life. And
had M. Dorman had so much leisure from his divinity matters, as to have
looked better upon his notes of the Canon law, his peculiar study, he would
have been better advised, than to have called us Acephalos, headles, and
therefore dead trunckes, Extrauag. Johan. 22. tit. 7. de Re ligiosis domibus,
cap. Sancta Romana: Acephali su^t, qui null li praelato subsunt.
who do obey our own Prelates, seeing Acephali (as is there noted) are those
who be subject to no Prelate. And upon the other part again, let M. Dorman
conclude as well against all kingdoms, and common wealths in Christendom,
that they be live monsters, as having many heads (for that they have God in
heaven to their head, and their several Princes in earth to their heads, and
governors) as he for like cause concludes, our particular churches to be live
monsters. And I doubt not, but M. Dorman so reasoninge, shall plainly appear,
though not to all men that have heads, yet to all that have reason in their
heads, to reason more like a tru^ke than a man: who, though he have an head
upon his shoulders, yet does he by such monstrous, and unreasonable reasoning,
show himself to have but small wit, and less learning in his head. All this
adoo has M. Dorman made now by the space of more than three leaves, to deface
the scripture, as no fit judge in controversies: and to persuade us that the
Pope, like an other Pythagoras, by his only bare word, may and ought to
satisfy all me^, heretics, and others, and that it shall be sufficient for him
only to say, without reason, or scripture why he so says: saving this reason
only, Papae est pro ratione Clement. li. 3. tit. 13. de Censibus and Exact.
cap. Cum sit. and lib. 5. de ver borum sig. tit. 10. ca. 1. Si Summus.
voluntas: With the Pope will stands for reason, as is mentioned in the book
of his own Canon law. To this end all his examples of the Suenkfeldians,
Arrians, Anabaptists, matters most impertinent to his proposed matter, do
tend. This is the conclusion of all, that you shrinking from the scripture,
should not shrink from the Roman chair, but stick to the Popes thereon
sitting, by whom all haeretikes have been, and these shall be, to their utter
confusion vanquished. For what one haeretike are they hable to recon
overthrown by the scripture? Was Arrius, were the Anabaptists overthrown
by the scriptures, nay, that were they not. These be M. Dormans own words.
But for that I am not so certain of the certainty of the Popes judgment,
Fol. 13.
as M. Dorman is, I will be so bold after his example, to demand of him
certain short questions touching the Pope as judge, as he has made of the
scripture as no judge.

What if there be two or three Popes at once, as often has been: for
Dnuphrius reckeneth. 26. schisms in in the church of Rome, of which some one
has dured about. 40. years together (in every of the which schisms were at
the least two Popes at once) when there be I say two or more Popes at once,
one cursing an other, one breakyng and disanulling the decrees made by an
other, one persecuting and killynge an other: is it not to be doubted which of
them shall be this certain judge in controversies? And whether in this case
the popish church be not in danger to be a live monster, as having many
heads? And on the contrary part, what if we have never a Pope at all, (for so
has it happened many times, for one or two years together): as after Pope
Gregory the. 7. the sea of Rome was vacant one year: after Coelestine the. 4.
one year and. 8. months: After Clement the. 4. two years. 9. months: after
Nicolas the. 4. two years and three months: After Clement the. 5. two
years, three months: And after John the. 23. it was vacant two years and
five months) shall al our doubts lie for that time undiscussed for lack of a
judge: and your popish church so long lie as a dead truncke, for lack of an
head? Or else whether shall Peter's chair (though empty) be both judge and
head too, good enough for ye popish church, and such a body as it is. What
if the Pope sit not at Rome in Italy, which is Peter's see and chair, but at
Auinion in France, as Popes did for the space of. a Clemente 5. ad Gregorium
11. Platina in vitis ipsoru^.
70. years together? may we not doubt of the certainty of the judge, not
sittyng in the chair, whereof he has all his certainty? or else does he
carry his chair about into all countries, for yt the Sext. Decretal. li. 5
tit. 9. de poenis. ca. Foelicis fol. 144 col. 3. litera k.
whole world is his diocese, as in his Canon law is mentioned? What if the
Pope do err, as all the Canonistes, Gratian, Gerson, Caietane, and many
others think he may? What if he be an heretic, (as De Papa Liberio.
Athanasius, S. Hierome, De Anastasio.
Gratian, In prfatione in Hier. contra Luciferianos.
Erasmus, the general Cou^celles, the de Honorio Papa.
sixth, the Council of de Iohanne 23.
Constance, and de Eugenio 4 and de multis alij^ alij. Platina i^^ vita Johan.
8.
Basil testify that diverse Popes have been) must he yet needs be judge, and
his judgment certain also? What if his election be uncertain, or unlawful,
he enteryng in by force, ambition, symonie, perjury, (as Platina testifies
many of them have entered, and in which case, not only Gerson, Gratian,
Caietane, and all the Canonistes, but also Pope Nicolas the second himself
do affirm, that he is to be deposed, as no lawful Distinct. 69 cap. Si quis.
Pope, and not Apostolicus, but Apostaticus, not Apostolic, but an Apostata)
must he yet be the most certain and only judge? What if we have a she Pope,
such as was Pope Iohane, otherwise John the eight, must the judgments and
word of our woman Pope be certain: and the judgments and word of God
uncertain? What if the Popes successors do disanull their predecessors
Popes decrees, and make decrees most contrary to them: pull them out of their
graves when they be dead, and disgrade them: is here no So did Pope Steph^nus
the sixte serve Pope Formosus. Platina in vita Formosi.
incertaintie which Popes, and Papal decrees are to be followed, which to be
rejected? Now if the matter be the Popes own case, as is this of his
supremacy, he must be both party and judge too, which his own Canon law
forbids. These doubts, with a great many more (whereof you shall also
shortly hear more at large, god wylling) have I (good M. Dorman) about the
Pope, as the only certain judge in all controversies, and I desire to be
resolved at your hands, who are so certain of the certainty of his Papal
judgments, that you are author to us to fly from the scriptures as
uncertain, to them as most certain, and infallible. For seeing the spirit
of God does so often call the scriptures Deuteronomy. 4. a, 1. b. 8. and 6. a. 1. d. 20.
and 7. b. 11. 12. and infinitis locis.
Iudicia, judgments, yea, ^ Iudicia iusticiae Dei, the judgments of the
justice of God, and viam veritatis, the way of truth, for the certainty of
their judgment (as I take it) until you have resolved me of these doubts,
and many other, about the Pope your Roman judge, and his consistory, you
shall hardly persuade me, and Psalm. 18. c. 19 and. 118. a. 7. 13. 30. and a.
75. and. c. 105. and. d. 150. and 159. and d. 163 and. 174.
(as I think) many more, to believe that the scripture, that is to say, the
word of God, should be uncertain: and the Popes, that is to say, man's, and
sometime woman's word, to be most certain. And besides this text Deus verax,
omnis autem homo mendax, I think you shall not find many more for your
purpose. Romans 3. a. 4 god is true: but every man is a liar.


Dorman. fol. 14
Ask of them with what face they could so many years together, call king
Henry the eight supreme head of the church of England immediately under God,
and now our gracious sovereign lady his daughter, supreme governor in all
ecclesiastical things and causes over the same (which how so ever they
please themselves with fine fetches and colored devises, is with the other
title in effect al one) if this reason of theirs were good: Christ is head of
the church, therefore there is no other head thereof under him? And how was
king Henry then? If they say that their meaning is, that no man can, because
Christ is head of the universal church, be under him head of the whole, but
may well be of some particular church, as king Henry was, and the Queen's
majesty now is: Then demand of them what reason they have to lead them
to say, that a particular membre of the church (as the church of England can
be no more may have an other head beside Christ, and the whole body may
not? and why one member may have two heads, more then one body?

Nowell.
Now after his long digressions, and declamations against the Suenkfeldians,
against the Arrians, and Anabaptists, and against the conference of
scriptures, the manne remembryng himself, retourneth suddenly to his matter by
a question. And in deed he takes on with his Herotemata, and other rollyng
Rhetorical figures exceadynglie, now that he draws toward a conclusion.
Fly those, stick to those, (says M. Dorman) Shrink not from those: Tell
those you are at a poincte with them: Say to them, as saint Hierome said:
Tell them boldly, with saint Augustine: Ask of them with what face, then
demand of them again, with what reason: with many other Rhetorical flowers,
wherewith he has given a fair floorishe to his final conclusion: Magno
conatu magnas nugas agens, as they say, making great adooe about great
trifles, as I doubt not but all wise men will judge. Ask of them (says
master Dorman) with what face they could call King Henry the eight so many
years supreme head of the Church of England? etc. As though the man had so
proved the contrary, that none durst show his face to gainesaie him, whereas
all he has said is not woorthe one rushe. Ask of them [quod he] with what
face. Naie ask of your forsworn fathers the old Papists (for some of them
are yet living who gave him that title firste] with what face they did give it
him, did swear it to him, and so long time continued so calling him: if they
did not so think, as they said, and had sworn, but dissembled deeply, ask
of them with what face they played so false dissemblyng hypocrites (to say but
soberlie) with so noble a prince, their sovereign Lord? Ask of them what
manner of subjects they were all that while, feignyng in face, in countenance,
in word, and writing also, yea and taking a solemn oath to be with their
prince therein, and being in heart, and deed, on the Pope, his sworn enemy,
his side? Which passes having of two faces under one hoode. But if they
thought in deed, as they pretended in words, then ask of the^ with what
face they did change their copy, and forswear the same, and themselves with
all so easily afterward: yea and compelled al other to be forsworn with them
for company? If it will please you to resort to the records of the.xxij.
and.xxiiij. years of king Henry the eight, there shall you find who they were,
that first offered this title to the said king: there shall you find that all
Abbottes, and other religious, all the Bishops, Deanes, Archedeacons, and
Clergy of both the houses of the Convocation, then living, gave him that
title. Emo^gest whom if you find one protestante, I can for him find one
score of papists (to speak with the least) and peradventure one hundredth too.
And those protestants, who gave him that title, dealed simply and plainly
with their Prince, as becomed true subjects, as the sequel declared. But
there shall you find an huge number of Papists, who by their writing, not
only saying: by their oath, not word only, rejected all that false usurped
supremacy of the Pope (which you and they, as many of them as yet be living,
without all face, or with a shameless face, do now maintain) there shall
you find who gave to King Henry the supremacy over the clergy, as well as
the laity, within his own dominions: there shall you find who they were that
so falsely dissembled, and that so many years together with their sovereign
lord. There shall you find who they were that changed their copy and turned
with the wind, as the wethercocke: there shall you find, who they were, that
so falsely swear, resware, triesware, forsware themselves, and not content
therewith, did so cruelly by all most terrible torments and dreadful
deaths, compel others to perjury with the^. S^ing therefore thus stands
the case, with what face soever M. Dorman moves such demaundes, and vexes us
with such leude questions, to be enquired otherwhere, surely he does it
without all forehead, or shamefastness. Now to the matter: by what right we
give the Queens majesty the title of the supreme governor in Ecclesiastical
matters, as well as temporal, and with what face we so call her, is to be
answered in the second part of M. Dormans division (where he affirms that
priests only, and not princes ought to have the government of the church)
wherein I doubt nothing to aduouche, and that shortly, the princes due
authority in the church of God within their own dominions, with better face,
authority, reason, and conscience, then you have dooen, or shall be able to
do in the mainteinaunce of the Popes foraine false usurped supremacy. Where
M. Dorman requires a reason, why a particular church may have one head
governor under Christ in earth, and the whole church may not: why one member
may, and the whole body may not have any head: I trust the reason is not to
seek in the good readers memory, seeing it has been so often declared before.
Yet will I answer M. Dorma^ his question by an other question. Why may one
kingdom have one head in earth under God (as daily experience teaches) and the
whole world can not have one only head in earth under God: (that Monarchy
being reserved to himself alone) and why in this case the member may have an
earthly head besides God, and the whole body may not? If M. Dorman say, the
questions be not like, I ask with what face he can so say: seeing that in the
beginning of this his treaty, he brought the example of Folio. 4. b.
civil gouernemente, in the which every kingdom has his King, every
country, city, and company, have their several governors etc. to prove
that the church ought likewise to have one head? But I wotte what master
Dorman and other Papists would say to my question, if the times served them.
They would quickelie answer, that the whole world has, and ought to have
one only head in earth under God, and therefore the Church in like wise
ought to have one only head in earth under Christ. And if they were
demanded, who is, or should be that head? If the time, I say, were for it,
they would plainly say, the Pope Sex. Decr. li. 3. tit. 16. cap. periculoso.
folio 115. col. 4. litera. k. Papa totius orbis tenet principatu^. and Sert.
Decret. lib. 5. tit. 9. de poenis, cap. Foelicis. Romanus po^tifex totius ocbis
est epis.
is Lord and Monarche of the whole world, and head of the whole Church too:
For so it is recorded in the book of his Canon law, and that he has as much
right to all the Kingdoms of the world, as only Monarche, as he has to
the whole Church dispersed throughout all the world, as the only head: and
in so saying, master Dorman might say more truly, then he is ware of: For he
has like right to both, that is, none at all to any of both. But in all his
behavior, riches, pomp, power, Castelles, soldiers, armor, gunnes, and
other artillarie of war, he shewith him self more like a worldly prince,
then in any one poincte like a godly bishop, or a bishop at all, whereof he
has no token, nor sign at all. Wherefore he might with better reason, plead
for his Monarchy of the world, as partly in possession thereof, then for his
bishoprike of the world, being clean out of al possession of any bishoprike,
and without all show of any bishop. And as when the time served him, in King
Ihons days, he made as great title to the croune, as to the Church of Math.
Parifiensis in vita Ioha^n. Regis versus finem.
England: and named the prince his vassal, as well as the Priests his
subjects: so has this Fox changed his hear, but not his manners. And I
pray God that he, being in deed but a false Romish Fox, never have
opportunity nor power, so to play the Lion, or Bear rather, again in our
country.

Dorman. Fol. 14.
Finally, if at that time they flattered the king, and gave him that which
neither they could give, nor he receive, and abused his good nature to the
destruction of so many notable men, as for the only refusal to say as they
said, by most exquisite and painful torments, lost their lives: say unto
them, that they yet at length acknowledge their fault, and admonish that good
Lady our maistres that she consent not to use that title, which because it
belongs to Christ, she may not have, or if they think and will stand in it
that she may without offense, that they do yet at the least confess, that
reason of theirs to be very weak and of no strength: Christ is head of the
church therefore it may have none other. Except they will perhaps say, that
he is head of all other Churches, and has only left ours headless, so
that because he is not head thereof, we are out of the fear of falling into
that inconvenience of having many, and may therefore choose some one amongst
our selves whom we list.

Nowell.
Who they were that flattered king Henry, and abused his good nature, I have
touched before: who as they most deceipfullie dissembled with him, so did they
after most cruelly by all exquisite and painful torments put to death such
as did not slatter their prince, but dealed sincerely with him, and would not
therefore give his enemy, a foraign false usurper, the title due to their said
prince. And in both these poinctes, the false flattering of their sovereign,
and abusyng of his good nature, and in murdering most cruelly their fellow
subjects, they did show the naughtiness of their own nature. The Queens
majesty uses no title, but such as of good right she may use, as shall in
place convenient be d^ely proved. The reason of th'Apologie, Christ is the
only head of the universal church, therefore there is, nor can be no one
earthly head over it, is not weak, but as good as is this reason: God is the
only head over the whole world, therefore there is, nor can be no one only
earthly head over it: which, as I think, is no weak, but a good, and strong
reason, and well confirmed by perpetual experience. And again this reason,
Though Christ be the only head over ye whole church, yet may he have, and
has his ministers under him, head governors of several churches: is as good,
as is this: Though God be head over all the world, yet has he several kings,
and head governors under him in every country: which I think, both reason
and experience will allow, as both reasonable and true. But that one man
should have the governance of al, will trouble M. Dormans brain to make it
seem reasonable (but only to such as is himsef) as the Pope atte^pting to
put it in experience, has by his ambition, cruelty and avarice, troubled,
oppressed and robbed all the world: which M. Dorman, and such as he is, do
maintain, as reasonably and well done: Non quia honestu^, aut probabile, sed
quia vtile, not for that it is honest, reasonable or probable, but because it
is profitable to Popish prelates, partakers of such polling and spoil of the
world.

Dorman. Fol. 15. ^^^
Thus I trust good readers you see sufficiently proved, that Christ's pleasure
is for the repressyng of heresies, and calmyng of tempestuous schisms, that
there be one head of his church here in earth, suppliyng his corporal absence
for the time: his honor in the mean season nothing thereby the more
diminished, then it is in other things wherein he also uses the ministry
and service of men.

Nowell.
Thus I trust (good readers) you see the insufficiency, or more truly, the
lewdness of M. Dormans proufes, of the necessity of one only head over
Christ's whole church here in earth: you see where he says, that he has
sufficiently proved it to be Christ's pleasure, that there should be such an
one head, that he has not, nor could not (for if he could, he would) allege
out of the new testamente (where Christ's will and pleasure is written, and
declared most largely and manifestly) as much as one word sounding to
that purpose: so far of is it, that it is, as he says, sufficiently
proved. You see that Schisms and controversies by Supra. so. 33. b. and. 49.
b. etc.
saint Cyprians judgment, and Supra, folio 48. and. 50.
saint Augustines also, with. 217. Bishops more assembled in the African
Council with him, and by good reason, and experience also, may be best
quieted and decided in the countries where they arise, by the magistrates and
Bishops of the same countries. You see that it becomes man, unable well to
govern a very little thing, Supra, folio. 96. and. 97.
to humble himself, and to yield up the honor and glory of gouernyng the
whole world and Church to God, and to our savior Jesus Christ, who alone
are able to suffice to such a charge. For experience teaches, that those
men are the woorste of all governors, which desire to have most. Also you
see, that in this treaty hitherto, as M. Dorman has not one word out of the
new Testamente, so has he alleged but only two textes out of the old
Testamente, one out of Deuteronomium, cap. 17. which is, as a special place
often D. foli. 4. 7. 9. and. 12. D. fol. 11.
alleged, and repeated: an other out of Numeri. 16. which both make directly
against him: the one prouyng that every nation, country, diocese, or church
ought to have their several head Bishop, as had the nation of the Jews: and
you have seen that saint Cyprian so takes it: The other showing that
Christian Supra, fol. 60. and. 61. Supra, fol. 95. etc.
princes are superiors to Bishops or high Priests (as was Moses to Aaron)
or else if Moses were, as they say, a priest also, that there were two high
priests in the Iewishe church at once, and so consequently ought to be in
our churches: whereby M. Dormans assertion of one head over the whole church
is quite overthrown. And withal you see how the Papists the^ selves,
disobedient to their own sovereign appoincted Supra, folio. 95. etc.
by God to be their governor, are the successors of Chore, Dathan, and
Abyron, rebellyng against Moses and Aaron their governors by God appoincted.
Wherefore you may well understand, that were it either profitable or
necessary, were it Gods, and Christ's pleasure (as master Dorman says it
is) to have such an one head in earth over his church, God would have
certified us of a thing so profitable and necessary for us, and so pleasant
to him, in his scriptures (where he has declared his pleasure) more plainly
and expresselie, then by two old shadows of the Iewishe Church: which also
be such, that they do teach us clean contrary to that, which M. Dorman
says is so necessary for us, and Christ's pleasure also. You se how blindly
he goes about to prove that there ought to be one only head over all the
church, brings in for proof thereof the regiment of several countries,
kingdoms, cities, etc. by several princes, several magistrates and heads,
which makes most directly with us, that several churches should in like wise
have their several heads. And yet he thus dealing auanteth himself, askinge,
who is so blind that he can not see, that he reasons effectuously? Like
blind bayard laiyng D fol. 4. and. supra, fo. 31 b. etc.
himself in the mire, and there walowing, neieth yet for wanto^nesse, as
though he were galoping in the green, and flinging in the plain. You see how
often S. Cyprian is by him alleged for the Pope of Rome his D. fo. 1. 3. and
5. and supra. fol. 1. 2. 20. and. 35. etc.
supremacy, in those places where he speaks of Rogatian, and of himself,
being both bishops of other countries and places, and of the equality of al
bishops, which is directly against the supremacy of one over all. You see in
likewise how he alleges S. Basil, bewailing the D. fo. 1. and 2. and supra,
fo. 3. and. 13.
state of the bishops of the Greek and east church, and the decay of their
authority, and of their sees, as though he had spoken of the Pope of Rome, and
his estimation now decayed, and his see so sore ruined: and how he has
either very ignorantly, or most maliciously by false translation corrupted S.
Basil. You see how untruly he would make Nouatus his oath exacted for the D.
fo. 2. and supra fo. 7. etc.
maintenance of his heresy, to seem the same that is our oath of obedience
to our prince, and renouncing of the Popes foraine usurped tyranny: And how
he D. fol. 3 and supra, fo. 25
would make Vrsitius and Valens, to seem to acknowledge the Popes supremacy:
only for that, they, after long dissension reconciled them selves to Julius
bishop of Rome: as they did in likewise to Athanasius bishop of Alexandria in
Egypt, who by the like reason, should be the head of the whole church, as well
as Julius. Dor. fo. 5. b and fol. 14. a. and supra fo. 41. 42. etc. and. 43. b.
etc 107. etc. Hieron. co^tra Luciferianos. Supra, fol. 41. etc. Hieron. ad
Euagrium. Supra, fol. 43. and. 51.


You see how he has alleged S. Hierome speaking of the authority that every
bishop has over the priests and clergy of his own diocese, as though he
had spoken of the supremacy of the bishop of Rome over all bishops, and the
whole thurche throughout the world. Yea and thus has he not been ashamed to
allege out of such treaties of S. Hierome, as either have not as much as one
word spoken, nor meant of the bishop of Rome (though the said treaties be
very long) either if any mention be made of him, other Bishops are
expressly made equal in authority with him, and therefore his supremacy
over other Bishops clean overthrown.

You see Pope Dor. fol. 5. b. and. 6. a. and Supra, fol. 46. and. 47.
Leo his witness in his own cause can not help him, specially the witness
being corrupted, and the copies of his testimony not only diverse, but clean
contrary one to an other: which takes away all creadite from them all. And
were they, as they are surmised, Pope Leo his words, yet they are, as you
have seen, Supra, fol. 49. 50. 51. 52
by S. Cyprian, and S. Hicrome even in the same places by M. Dorman alleged,
clearly and f^lly confuted.

You see how shamefully he alleges Dor. fol. 7. a. and Supra, fol. 62.
Nazianzene his sayings of one God, as though they had been spoken of one
Pope, of whom Nazianzene never dreamed. You see the words of an uncertain
and unworthy author boldly without blushyng alleged for S. Augustines
words, which words yet, were they S. Augustines, make nothing against us.

And universally, you see his Supra, fo. 3 a. and. 9. b. and 19. b, and. 62*
and. 107. and. 111 and multis l^cis.
falshoode in translating, or fraud in corruptinge, manglinge, or adding to
such authors, as he does allege. Neither is his deceit and guile comparable
to his impudency and unshamefastness, being not abashed to allege those
authors for him, who above all others most make against him. As namely S.
Cyprian, and S. Hierome, being Supra, fol. 49. 50. 51. etc.
both most plain and earnest for the equality of all bishops, and so directly
against the supremacy of one over all. And thus you see good Readers, that
such an one head of the whole church in earth to be, neither appears to be
Gods, and our savior Christ's will or pleasure, by any thing hitherto by M.
Dorman alleged out of the scriptures: neither to be the will of any godly
ancient doctor, by any thing hitherto brought by M. Dorman out of their
writings: neither appears it by any good or probable reason by him made, to
be profitable, much less necessary to Christ's church, that any such head
should be. Nay the clean contrary, to wit, that it is not Gods, nor our
savior Christ's pleasure, that it was not the will of the godly ancient
doctors, that it is neither necessary nor profitable to Christ's church, to
have any such one head in earth, appears evidently by the Scriptures,
doctors, and reasons, yea and by the same scriptures, doctors and reasons
which are by M. Dorma^ for his purpose alleged. And these, good reader, be
those most plain and evident Thra^o: Mu nus nostru^ ornato verbis, quod
poteris. etc.
reasons, these be those urgent causes, which M. Dorman Dor. fo. 4. ^
promised in the beginning of this treaty, he would allege for the
necessity of one head over the whole church. Neither seems it that M.
Dorma^ him self was ignorant of this infirmity and weakness of his sclender
proufes: and therefore has he (to call away the readers mind from this
consideration (intermingled many matters impertinent, as Dor. fol. 2. and. 3.
supra. fo. 7. 13. etc.
complaints, and lamentations for the great persecutions that they, innocent
la^bes, God wot, do suffer: as trifling tales of Dor. fol. 8. and 9. supra fo.
77. etc.
surmised felons: as the defense of Cardinal Dor. fol. 10. 11. Supra, fol. 82.
90. etc.
Hosius, one of the greatest estates for learning and virtue (as says M
Dorman) that this day Christendom has: as long treaties of the D. fol 10.
Supra. 82. 83. etc.
Suenkfeldianss, Dor. fol. 12. Supra. 101. 102. etc.
Arrians, Dor. fol. 13. Supra. 103.
Anabaptists: as Dor. fol. 8. 10. 12. 13. supra fol. ^^. etc.
declamations against the scripture, and conference of tertes of the scripture
together, which he is very often in hand with, declaringe a special offense
and stomach against the same. Al which matters, most impertinent to his matter
of one head (borrowed of his Master D. Harding, Pighius, Hosius, with others as
is in their places noted) he has amplified at large, and gaylie garnished with
the ornaments of his raylinge rethorike. Which stuff were it altogether had
to the dunge hill, as it ought, al his book almost were clean swept out of
the doors, and little or nothing should be left thereof, and yet nothing taken
away from it, that did belong of right unto it. Seeing therefore this first,
and most principal poinct, of one head of the church, the very foundation of
al is not proved by M. Dorman, or so leudly proved, that it fails, and
falls of it self, all the Popes supremacy comes down upon their heads.
For if they can not prove (as they never shall be hable) that there ought to be
one chief head of Christ's whole church here in earth, they can not possibly
prove, that the Pope should be that one head. Wherefore I do advise M. Dorman,
and all the pack of Papists to recoyle from this their Thesis of one head of
the church, to the Hypothesis of the Pope head of the church: and to prove
first that the Pope of Rome ought of right to be the only chief head, and
then after to induce thereof, that there must of necessity be one chief head.
For if they take not this way, I do give them plain warning, they shall
never thrive.

And further seeing this part of M. Dormans book, both for that it is the
first, and the chief part also, requires good, and substanciall proufes, not
only for it self sake, but also that the readers upon the good likynge
hereof, might have the better hope and expectation of all the rest of his book
(according as M. Dorman has, no doubt, out of the precepts of Rethorike
observed) and is yet not withstanding thus sclenderly, untruly, falsely,
fondlye, and dreamingly handled by M. Dorman, it gives the Readers to
understand, what they shall find in the residue of his book: in the which,
as it were in the rerewarde, he has placed bag and baggage, with such pages,
drudges, and slaves to attend upon the same, as are more ready to run away,
than to abide any brunte of battle. The which I have not as yet assailed, for
that I do see the Bishop of Sarisburie his band bent upon them, whose hands
if any of that cowardly company escape, as either not espied, or not regarded
of him, I do promise thee (good reader) that I, God willinge, will shortly
have them in chase, until I have left of all M. Dormans bragging, but most
cowardly army of leude Popish reasons, and allegations, not as much as one
soldier untaken, or put to shameful flight.

Dorman. fol. 15.
It follows now that I show to you who is and of right ought to be that
head: if first I do you to understand, that it must necessarily be a priest,
and that so by just consequence neither lay man, vvoma^ nor child, can be
capable of that office.

Novvell.
M. Dorman by like has readde, or heard of Aristotle, that he gives
counsel, that if one chance to fall Aristot. in Topicis.
into a matter very barren to reason upon, he should by some slight, escape
out to some other more plentiful matter. And therefore finding his matter of
the necessity of one head of the church (which yet is most necessary,
though it be impossible, for the Papists to prove, or else to lose all) so bare
and barren of all proufes, as well out of the scriptures, as doctors, and good
reasons, he makes a escape into a larger camp, and takes in hand to prove
that no lay lay man, woman, nor child, can be It is M. Dormans ^erme.
capable of this office (that he speaks of) to wit, to be the only supreme
head over Christ's universal church: and that will he prove you both roundly,
and plentifully, by making declaration that princes, be they men, women, or
children, may not minister the Sacraments, as Dor. fol. 18. ^. etc.
priests may: may not preach, as priests may: may not excommunicate, and
absolve, bind, and loose, as priests may: can not have so great knowledge in
the scriptures, as priests may. For in proving of these things, which no man
does deny, and which being granted do make nothing to his purpose, or
against us, he is as plentiful, as he was before spare and barren in proving ye
necessity of one head of ye church in earth, which we do all deny, and
which not proved, the Papists have lost all. And as he had very much adoo to
patche up a few leaves by alleging of two poor places out of the scriptures,
and three or four trifling testimonies of the old doctoures (which I so
term, for that they make nothing to his purpose, but clean against him) and
with impertine^t pelfrie to supply ye rest: so in ye second part, to wit,
that no prince, man, vvoma^, nor child, can be supreme head of Christ's church
in earth, for that they ca^ not minister the Sacraments, may not preach, can
not bind, and loose, etc. he doothe lay on lode out of the scriptures,
Doctors, reasons, and plaieth* Rex, reueling, and ruffling roially: so that he
has much enlarged his book with this part. For this accessarie, and suborned
treaty, and counterfeite controversy, without any adversary for the most
part of it (as it were a sixth finger upon one hand, longer and bigger then all
his fellows) is alone larger, tha^ Digitus agnatus.
are both his first and third most necessary parts (or rather the whole
sum) of all Popery, that is to say: that Christ's church here in earth
must of necessity have one chief head: And, that the bishop of Rome is that
head of Christ's church: In which two parts so necessary, that without
them all parts of Popery must of necessity plainly perish, the man is
content to be sobre, and of a competente length, more for lack of store or
stuff, than for want of will, you may be sure. But when he comes to his
Schiomachia, and skirmishing with his own shadow, Lord how he plays the
man in that vnblouddy battle, and triumphs not before the victory, as they
say, but of a conquest made, without duste raysinge, or blood sheadinge,
without enemy slain, hurt, or put to flighte, yea no enemy at all seen,
heard of, or known. For M. Dorman can not be ignorant, that we in all our
Sermons and writings of such mattiers, do make a most clear and evident
difference between the functions and offices of princes, civil magistrates,
and Priests Ecclesiastical ministers: And neither did we ever teach that
Princes ought, neither did they ever desire, to execute the offices
Ecclesiastical of ministering the Sacraments, preachinge, excommunicatinge,
absoluinge, and such like. Wherefore you do lewdly, and impudently abuse your
self M. Dorman, and al others too, so largely to confute that which no man
holds: and so busily to prove that, which no man denies. For when all this
is granted you, what have you obtained: or what have we lost? Is it not well
and plainly declared by the examples of king David, Solomon, Iosaphat,
Ezechias, and Iesias, that princes have authority in governing of the
Clergy, and church matters, though they may not execute all ecclesiastical
functions and offices? What though our most gracious sovereign Lady, being a
woman, have not so great skill in feats of war, as have her capitaines: have
not so good knowledge in the laws of her realm, as her Justices, and other
learmed men in the laws have: (though she have in all good learning, and in
the scriptures too more knowledge, then had any of your Popes this seven
hundredth years I believe, and therefore no let in that poin^te, but she may be
head of the whole church as well, and rather then the Pope) what if she sit
not in public judgment, nor determine controversies, as do her Justices:
or be not general of an army, as are the nobles, her subjects? What, I say,
if she can no^ execute all civil offices in her own person? Would you
therefore M. Dorman, take from her, her civil principality over her subjects,
that she shall not be their Prince, and head under God? Surely you may with as
good reason do it, as you would take away her superiority over her clergy
from her, for that she can not, may not, nor will not execute ecclesiastical
functions. Though the queens majesty have not that understanding of all the
affairs of her realm, that experience in all things, that actiuitie in
executing the^, that has the whole body of her most honorable Council, yet
doothe the whole body of her Council, though most honorable, humbly
acknowledge her to be their head: only proud Priests, because some things
are incident to their office, which the Prince may not, nor list not to do,
refuse their sovereign to be their supreme governor. Let the bishops be
the Queens Majesty's most godly Council in matters of religion, (and I pray
God they may so be) as is the other most honorable Council in civil matters:
but let that godly Council, as well as that most honorable Council, be under
the godly and most high honorable Prince, as superior to them both. To
command things as well ecclesiastical, as civil to be done, to see them
done, to commend, and reward all well dooers of them, to correct and punish
all evil dooers of them, or negligent in their office, is the part of an head,
or supreme governor: to do things commanded, is the office of inferior
members, and obedient subjects.

But M. Dorman would prove, that the head is not the head, because it can not,
nor list not do all offices of all the principal members of the body: and
seeks for an head amongst the members, because they can do some things,
that the head can not. For this is in deed the very effect of that his
second long treaty next following, a matter most meet for M. Dormans
dreaming head: in the which treaty his chief pains is t^ prove that
Priests, and not Princes, ought by their office to preach, to minister the
Sacraments, to excommunicate, to absolve, to resolve men ^n doubts, and
scruples of conscience, and such li^e. (which no man ever denied) yea and he
thinket^ that in so dooinge he has spunne a fair threede. Thus much has M.
Dorman, by his transition annexed to thend of this his treaty of one head,
occasioned me to admonish the readers of that matter: which as it may suffice
for an answer to the whole treaty following, with all discreate readers: so
shall I yet, for the satisfiyng of the meaner sort, particularly answer, as
much as shall be left untouched by the bishop of Sarisburie (for the same
matters, as being before handled by D. Harding, are incide^t to the bishops
answer of his book) specially, if there he any thing sounding against the
Princes supreme government over persons, and in causes, as well
ecclesiastical as civil, or temporal.

FINIS.

