SERMONS OF BARNARDINE OCHINE OF SENA GODLY, fruitful, and uery necessary
for all true Christians translated out of Italien into English.

ANNO DO. M.D.XLVIII. Mensis Iulio.

The contents of this book.
i How a Christy an ought to make his last will and testament. ii How we should
answer the deueil, when he tempts us and namely in the end of our life. iii
How answer is to be made at the judgment seat of god. iiii By what mean to
come to heaven. v How god has satisfied for our sins and has purchasyd
Paradise for us.
THE INTERPRETOVR TO the gentle reader health in Christ Jesus.
DEATH (GOOD READER) as scripture declares, and our daily experience
practeseth, to all mankind is a thing most certain and sure. For who is he
that shall live and not se nor taste of deaths cup: the longest lyuers at
length dyed, neytherkyng ne keysar can avoid the duyte of death, but of
necessity, as al are of earth and ashes, so shall they return into the same.

Notwythstandynge this that sure we be to dye, yet when it shall come, the Lord
has left secret to his own wysdo^, chefelye because we should ever keep
watch, and ward, and be still in aredines with our la^pes burning to wait
upon the bridegrom, which comes we can not tell when, whether at mydnyght, or
at the cocks crowynge, wherefore our master Christ gave us warnyng that we
should be always wakyng, and look vigila^tly for he comes closlye like a
thief, without warning us, at what hour he will come.

Then as he finds every man, so will he judge him, and where the tree falls
whether it be toward the South or North) there it lies: there is then no
respite to be had, but straight way due execution of gods justice shall come
upon all flesh, happy is he therefore, whom his master at his returning
fyndeth waking, for him shall he put in authority over all his treasure.

And for so much as then the ^^tter shall hang al together in clearenes of
conscience, which at that time shall accuse a man, or defend him, acordynge
as he has kept it clean with virtues, or stained with vices (for in the
book of me^nes concience are all their deeds laid up, to be opened at the
audit day of our death) me thynk nothing can be a greatter stay to the
concience of man, then to know how he ought to go out of this present life, and
what to carry wythhym to his account, or leave behynd him in the world.

In consyderation whereof I have translated in to my natyue spech out of Italie^
a sermon of master Barnardine Ochin teaching how a true chryste^ ought to make
his last will: and for so much as the devil is at that instant of death very
bragging busyly with man, and diversely troblith him, and the justice of god on
ye other side fearith him, I have, to stay and stre^gthen the co^sience on
these behalfes, turned in to english two sermons enstructyng us how to answer
the devil when he tempts us at what tym, and by what means to quiet our
minds, as touching gods justice, other two have I also translated, which
inform us of ye true works that god requires of us, and the way to go to
heaven, and that our savior christ Jesus has by his most preciouse death
purchased for us paradise with out our deservings.

Which five sermons taken out of the first part of master Barnar dine sermons,
as they be written and publyshed of good zeal to the wealth of many, so it is
thy curtisye (gentle reder) to accept them in good part, and pardon my gross
terms as of a begynner, and bear with my translation, as of a learner
obteynynge this of the good reader I shall be redye and willing hereafter when
god gives better knowledge (according as my tale^t will extend) to turn mo
godly sermons of the said master Barnardine into English for the enformacion
of all that desire to know the truth. For they truly conteyne much to the
defacyng of al papistrie, and hipocrysie, and to the advancement of the glory
of god, and of the benefytes of Christ Jesus. To whom with the holy ghost be
all honor and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

GOD SAVE THE KING and grant us the truth of his Word.
HOW A CHRISTIAN OUGHT to make his last Will and Testamente.
IT IS COMMONLY THE CVSstome of men in their testamentes, and last wylles to
say I leave, I bequeath, I give, without onse saying I take or carye with
me, wherein certes they be far deceived, because they take that, which they
ought to leave be hynde them, and go without caryinge that which is very
behofefull and necessary. Wherefore to the intent they should no more err on
that behalf: I would we should consider and weyghe how a true Christian should
make his will.

Men that be either fools, mad, phra^tike, neither ca, nor yet know how to
make a will, by reason they have not wit to descerne good from evil, what is
theyrs, or what is not, what to take, nor what to restore or bequeath, nor yet
to who^ nor in what manner. And if happelye they go about to make their
testament, it should be but vain and of no force god allows it not as a
thing made of a person witles. Wherefore he that is willing to make a
testament effectual (as expedient is to him that wylbe saved) behooves to have
very good spiritual judgment, alyuely faith in Christ, and an
understanding and light above a natural man, he must also be the son, and
lawful heir of god.

And then he may say: I sou^de of mind, and redye of sprite and remembrance,
albeit as touching my flesh secke make my testament, and bequeath first of all
my being and substance to god: he gave it to me and also preserved it, and of
him I recognize to have it, and for it I render him thanks, I leave to him
likewise the gifts, graces benefytes temporal, bodily and gostlye, that I have
had, or shall here after receive: for they be his, and from him by grace I
acknowledge to have received all, as Paul says, what have thou, that thou
have not received at gods hands. yea for asmoch as all the sla^ ders,
mysreportes, persecucions, syckenes, and mysfortunes, which I have already or
shall from hence forth suffer, and eue^ death self, I confess (by the
understanding that the Lord has given me) that they have been and shall be his
gifts and graces, given and granted of a great love for my welthe and profyt:
wherefore as his divine rewards I Araunt to have had the^ of god, for them I
thank him, and as his own I leave and restore them to him.

And for so much as I can not but acknowledge that I have goue always
backewarde from him so often as I would rule my self by my blind judgment,
folyshe wisdom, and deuelishe sprite neither did so much as go one step
forth toward God, but when I was moved, diyuen, and thruste forward of his
holy sprite. Wherefore I commytte to the hygheste god my most dear father, and
to his governance, all the world and specially my self: in him (as I may) I
will help my self with mine own wit, and fredome, namely by making it
obedient to him.

Moreover if ever I have spoken or shall from hence forth utter any word, if I
have done or shall do any work, that is to him plesaunte if I have had or
after this time shall have thought desire or will, that good is, I give it to
god, and at his hands I profess that I have had al my goodness, so that if it
were gods will, to take from me all that he has given me, there should in me
remain nothing but only sins: those are mine own, and all other things be
his.

Thus be my sins if I should go before gods presence. I were but damned, if I
were minded to make satisfaction I could not, no nor yet any saint that ever
was, there is none whose love is so great to take my sins upon him and sat
ysfye for them, and appease gods anger save Christ a lone, wherefore to him I
bequeth my sins, I leave to him my pride, unkindness, unbelieve, mistruste,
arrogance, envy, wrath, ambition and all my un numerable wyckednes: I give to
him my evil thoughts, affections, and desiers: to be short I make one fagott
and boundell of all my offenses present, past, and to com, and give them to
Christ having sure faith, and steadfast hope, that he will accept them for
his own, and has even already taken them, and for them has satisfied on the
cross, his father laid them on his neck, Esai. 53.
and he did not ones again say it, but of great love allowed them for his, and
to consume and burn them in the flame of his divine love, he bore them on his
Innocent shulders upon the cross, 1. Petri. 3.
(as peter wryteh) and so was offered a sacrifice for us. Now seeing I have left
almy synns to Christ, and given to god my substance, and being, with all other
gifts and graces, that he bestowed on me. I remain naked without either good
or evil, and truly to say, I am rather nothing, In that I have restored to
god my being that I had by creation and birth.

But for because it is impossible that he should save me without being, and so
it is that he will save me, therefore first I carye with me Christ him self,
which is my life. God has so loved me, (...). 3.
that he has given him self to me. For so has god loved the world, that for
their sins he has given us his only begotten son. I carye also with me
his sprite, that was of his eternal father given me of his most royal
liberalytie, as well declares Paul, (...)
where he says, god has sent the sprite of his son into our hertes whereby
we cry and call father, father.

And in that he has given me him, he has restored me to my self and former
being, with a new substance and nature spiritual, so that for the possibilite
of my salvation, I have a being: but yet lack I treasure to discharge my
great dettes, and to apere rych in gods sight, in consyde racion whereof I
bear with me christ's watchyng, abstinences, traueyls, prayeres, persecucio^s,
scla^ders, I take with me his tears, his swet, his, blood, and all that ever
he did or suffered in three and thyrtty years is mine every deal, and with
lively faith I embrace it as for mine own. I carye bysyde this with me his
patience, mekenes, love, and all other his divine virtues, his gifts and
graces, his tresurs, and and all that he has mereted and deseruid, his life,
passion, death, resurrection and assension be mine, ye all ye ever he has done
or shall from henceforth do is mine. and what needs more to say, if god have
given us his own son, how has not he with him given us all things, wherefore
with faith I embrace my sweet Jesus for mine own, he is my ryghtwysnes,
Corin. 1.
wisdom, raunsom, and holiness he is my strength, he is my sprite, my light,
life, hope, and all my goodness, eue^ Christ himself in his last will bequethed
me all yt he had of the father. wherefore he says, I entertayn you at my table
as my father has used me, (...)
as my father has made me his heir so now I ordeyne you, I will that as you
be my brethren so you shall be my folowers: And in another place he says I
have loved you, as my father has loved me sithe^ I am nouthrough christ so
rych of treasures, vertuse, and graces, I shall be hable not only tosatilfy for
my deites, but also to purchase infinite para dise, when soever they shall be
sold.

Who shall be now either to acuse or condemn me, after that christ has thus
clothed me with his innosency, ryghtwysnes, holiness, love, with all his vertuse,
graces, treasures, merits, and with his ownself, I may with no less boldenes
and surety, the^ christ, apeare before god, I am his son, as he is, and
heir of heaven, semblably I am innocent as christ is now that he has
satystied for me, and paid my raunsom, and rewarded me with his innocence,
Christ said, John. 17.
I hallow my self that they also may be holy, even he is our holiness, and we
be his members. wherefore it is as possible for god not to love me, as it is
possible that he should not love christ by reason whereof Paul says who shall
deuid me from the love of god that is in Christ Jesus. Roma. 8.
it must needs be that he be salued, which with living faith embraces Christ
for his own. And consyderyng that the treasures, and merits of Christ are
infinite, and able to enryche a thousand worlds, I entende not to carye with
me any other merits, or spiritual riches, save those yt Christ has provided
for me, for they be not only sufficient for me, but also over abou^da^ce and
unmeasurable.

Then should I do no small iniuri to Christ, if I should search to store my self
by any other mean or shyfte, although I might do it never so easily, nay
rather with Paul will I rekenne all other things as mire and dyrt so that I
have Christ, Philip. 3.
with whom alone I will appear before god, and of and by him will I glory and
make boast, yea god forbydde, Gala. 6.
that I should make my auaunte of any thing, save of the cross of our lord Jesus
Christ of whom only hangs all our health. And all beit all the saints be
rich by mean of Christ, nevertheless, if they had means of their own
most ple^tuose, and would give the^ to me, yet would I none, my Christ is
enough for me, with him had I rather suffer, the^ take pleasure and joy without
him. It would be a thing pleasant to me, if every man should make prayer to
god for me, not because I might purchase, or have any other treasures the^
those that I have of Christ, but that I might by lively faith every day
acknowledge possess and embrace those that I have received of Christ, and
count the^ for mine and so inform my self, I myself were it not by Christ,
should not know what to ask, for in him is al and with out him all other
things be but mere vanity, only this peticyon I make to him, that he
vouchesafe every day to give me light and understanding, that I may have
wit to accounte and take his treasures for nine own. Wherefore if any man
will pray for me let him not tarry till I be dead, for then I can no more
increase in light and grace. Let him pray now, that I may grow in faith and
more and more instruct my self of Christ's riches. I am well assured that in
purgatory I shalnot come, both because there is found no other purgatory but
christ in whom at the full be purged and punished all the sins of the elected,
and also because in case there were one) yet Christ not by my merytes, but by
his mere goodness does satisfy for all my sins trespasses, and pains, and
for as much as hope never made any man ashamed, nor confounded any person,
Roma. 3
that had it in his heart (as Pause wrote) therefore am I sure and secker that
he will save me without other purgacion. We can not promise our selfs to much
of gods goodness, no we never ca^ vehete us so much, but he will recompense
much more. I will not suffer therefore that after my life any good be done for
me. Truth it is that if I have any goods the^ must I leave to the poor flock
of Christ, not because they should pray for me, that am already saved, but for
the use of other that live, and shall be borne, as Christ did, ^^on. 17.
and also because the rather they may live godly, and know that they shall
never lack that be his, and put their trust in him. To whom be always,
honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

HOW WE SHVLD ANSWER the deuel When he tempts us and namely in the end of
our life.
THE DEVELL (AS PETER uuriteth) seeks aluuay to devour us but chefely he is
busy at the hour of death, Petri. 5.
by reason then it stand the him in hand so to do for his own behooue, and
our greater endomage and harm. Then uses he all might, power, sleyght,
deceyte, and malice: wherefore I think good that we should search how to make
him answer and by the assistence and aid of gods grace to wythstande him, and
get the upper hand of him,

He is constraygned specially when we aproch nere to our death, to throw us in
to the asisse and pyt of desperacion, or else to set us up in pride and
presumpcio^. if he shall perceue that thou either put trust in thy self, or
confidence in thine own works, he will not go inha^de to make ye despair and
mistrust gods mercy, but rather stablishe the in that erronyouse opinion of
pride of thy deeds on the other side if he feel that thou have all thy hope in
god: then will he show the on the one party the multitude and wyckednes of thy
sins, and on the other party gods wrath and severe justice, he will tell
the how thou art in a maze and perplexity not able to be shaken of, or wo^den
out of, and by making the to feel thine offenses, other wise the^ ever thou
deddest in thy health will go a boute to take owte of thy heart the passion of
christ, and all the great goodness, mercy, and love of god, and finally to
prove the damned, he will bring for his purpose-euen the holy scriptures.

But I will that al his te^tacions serve the to the honor of god and salvation
of thy soul as they do serve ye turn of ye elected, Roma. 3.
to whom all things work to gether for their wealth, first of all I warn
the, that thou maynteyn not thy self for good, but admyt and grant all the
evil that he shall rehearse of the and think, that he has not said so
much, 1. John. ii.
but that it is much more: and thank god that now at last he has be so
favorable, to make the consider thy sins, wherein he uses the devil for an
instrument, to the intent that by the knowing of the^, thou should take
occasion to humble thy self, and to call Christ to thy remembrance, which to
scour and cleanse them has not only reputid them for his own, but also dyed
for the^ upon the cross grant thou hardely that thou art a great rybald and
noghtye without excusing thy self in any wise, and that thy sins are in
numerable. confess that thou cold never satisfy for one alone, and that thou
were the most damned sinner of the world if Christ had not delivered she, and
still pro^pte thy self with those matters, which may forther ye to com in to
desperacion of thy self:

But if the devil wayt to bring the to despeyr of Christ, thou may in no wise
co^se^te there to, but stedfastlye put thy trust in him. and my mind is that
thou say to him thus. if it were good for me to mistrust Christ, you never
would have persuaded me thereto but rather have drawn me from it, wherefore in
that you would put me in mind to mistruste Christ, thou makeste me stronger
in my hope and trust.

Thou shall say to him, that when he caused iniustly Christ to dye, which was
an Innocent, he lost al his interpriest and jurisdiction, that ever he had or
possible might have over man. and if he proceed forth to induce the to
dispayer, by setting before the thy great sins, I will the to say to him.
go to Christ, which (as John writes) is mine attorney and Aducoate, 1.
John. ^
he can make the an answer for me, reason there with him, if thou have any
claim or title in me, as thou say, do thou not know that he has taken
my sins for his own, and has for them made satistactyou most plentuously,
therefore have thou no right in me at all.

If he chance to say his death is not enough to save the, answer him, if Adam
by tasting one apple with one only sin was hable to da^ne me: how is it that
so many holy works of Christ, which tasted for my sake of great love the most
bitter death, be not suffycient to save me. Roma. ^
If the disobedience of Ada^ had power to condemn me, much more the obedyence
of Christ is strong enough to save me, yea the gift of Christ is above and
excedeth the sin of Ada^, Christ has more auayled and helped us, the^ Adam
annoied and harmed us by reason the light of Christ is of more force and
effect the^ the darkness of our first parente, the goodness of Christ's
surmounteth and passes the malice of man, and his ver tue prevails about our
fraylty: one tear of Christ has been more pleasant to god, then all the
sins of the world be displeasaunt Christ has be able to do more to appeace
him, then we to provoke him to anger, Christ's living was more formal and
ordinarye, then ours was out of order and frame Christ has done more to the
honor of god, then we have done to his dishonor. Wherefore I may well say,
Christ that is my wisdom, right wisnes, 1. Cor, 1.
holiness, and redemcion is sufficient inought to save me.

And if haplye he should say, it is not sufficient for thy salvation to believe
in Christ, the behooves to keep his commaundeme^ts, thou must love god with
all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self, and desire nor covet any
thing worldly, which things because thou do not, ergo, thou art damned, if
faith only were enough I also and all the devils should besaued, because (as yt
is written) even the deuels believe and fear. lames. ii.
They believe ye god made and created heaven and earth, and yt christ came, dyed,
rose, ascended in to heaven, yt hesent the holy ghost, and that he shall come to
judge the quick and dead, and yet are not we therefore saved, and that because
we observe not his divine precepts. wherefore you also art but lost, he will
thus labor to bring the under the law, to think yt thou be justified not by
christ, but by per fourmynge and fulfyllynge of the law, to the end that thou
should despair.

But I will that thou make answer and say, if thou dyddest believe as by gods
grace I believe: that is, that god for thy wealth has created the world, and
semblably preserves it, in such sort that thou could feel in the creatures
the love of god, and likewise would believe firmly, that Christ came and dyed
for thy sins, for to save the, and for thy sake and profyt, and in like manner
of the other articles, thou also should be saved, and then, when thou had a
lively feling of the goodness and love of god thou would love him, and thy
neighbor likewise, and being ravished into god would begin to set little
store by the world as al good Christen men and women do If it fortune that he
say, Deuteronomy. xx 7
he is cursed that keeps not and observes the law, wherefore thou art one of
mine, say to him again, Gala. 3
for that cause christ dyed on the cross, Roma. 7
for to deliver me from all curses, and in somoche as I am all ready of christ
I am dead to the law.

Again if he reply esaying, where be thy works, whereby thou trusts to be
saved, answer, I trust not to be saved by my works, for they be soch that if
I should have regard or respect to them, I fear me to be damned, yea I were
surely ascerteyned of my damnacion. Roma. 8.
I hope only to be saved by Christ, and his works, which be mine own, and
so much rather mine, then they I did my self, as that ye sprite of christ
given to me is more entyer to me then mine own life or any other thing.

Further if he should endeavor to prove ye to be none of the elect, by reason
of the innumerable, and outragiouse sins that thou have committed, for
prosperites, or aduersites thou have had, for ye great evils wherein thou art
found at thy death, or for the temtacions thou have sustained, saying, that
god preserves his elected from the like euels. make him answer and say: Roma.
3.
rather does god practice them in diverse soche manners, albeit of every thing
they be certifyed to the honor of god, thou shall more over say to him thus. I
give more credit and trust to christ, which when he was dead for me on the
cross, told me I was saved, then to the, that art always alyer and father of
erroures. I will thou tell him, how thou geuest more faith to Christ alone, then
to all the reasons and autorities of the world: thou may bysyde this say to
him, the sprite of god bearyth witness to my sprite, Roma. 8.
that I am the son of god, and to him must I rather trust then to the. when
he shall say, if thou were the son of god he would not leave the in souch
punishments, as thou art in, but would give the some release and easme^t Answer
him, In case it were as thou say Christ should not have been the son of
god, sithen on the cross he had no comfort, nor sensual taste or feling, so
that he said my god, Marci. 15.
my god why haste thou forsaken me: it sufficith to me that he she with me so
much fauouer, for I am contented with all that pleasethe him, as Christ also
was, yea in his sufferynge, he felt excedynglye the infinite love of the
father.

Beside these of he say: ^^he. ii.
thou art the son of Adam, ergo thou art acursed. ^^hn. 1.
Answer thou thus: I am blessed again by being borne of god, and by mean of
that blessed sede Christ as god long agone promised Adam when he said. ^ene.
xii.
In thy sede al nations shall be blessed, thou shall tell him: how thou art
despoiled and berest of the old Ada^, ^oma. 13
and clothed with Jesus Christ as Paul teaches and aduertyseth the.

What time as he shall declare to the that christ is wroth, angry and sharp:
make him answer how Christ is not soch one, for he is the health and hope of
sinners, and whylest we be in this life present he is uttered to us pytiful,
sweet, and our Jesus, that is, our savior and albeit heseme to speak sharp,
and cruel words to the woman of Cananye, Math. 1^
yet in heart he gave her confydence and boldness, and showed him self to her
full of sweetness and love. In deed at the day of judgment to the damned shall
he be showed angry, and wrathful but in the mean time till that day while we
be here in this present life, he is showed pitiouse to al, and principally to
the great sinners.

And if it so were that he would say thou art not truly confessed, nor haste
rehearsed all thy sins, and the circumstances of the same, ne have examyned
suffyciently thy conscience, nor yet have not that pure perfect great, and
unfeigned sorrow for thy sins that thou of duty should have, thou have not
satysfyed for those so great an innumerable dettes, that thou have toward god,
make him this answer and say: thou art a servant and not a judge: or to say
more truly, ^^^n. 3.
thou art all ready judged and condemned, seeing thou beleuest not in Christ,
and would thou indge mettrouble thy self no longer in proving that I have
failed in all, for sure I am, and fully I believe to be saved, not by my works
by reason they be imperfect, nor yet by the worthynes of my faith, for in that
also I am not perfect, because I believe not with so great a faith as I ought,
but I believe I shall be saved by Christ, and not by my works.

He will say: thou art not worthy to be saved, say thou to him for a full
answer: the unworthy be^^ued so often as they acknowledge their own
unworthiness, go hartelye for help to Christ, by whose mean they be come
worthy.

Where as he shall lay to thy charge that thou art one of the worst of the
world: say to him on this wise our infyrmyties be but small in comparison of
the infinite merits of Christ, and of the inco^prehensible mercy of god: and
the more great that my sins be and without number, so much greater shall be his
glory in delivering me, and I with so much the greater trust pray as that if
he will hear me, it shall be more to his honor and glory. And when I consider
and call to remembrance, that my sweet and loving brother Jesus Christ the
son of god, which for my sake dyed on the cross, and would again
innumerable times for me, if need were, and that I am his own for so many
causes, and that he may determine of me after his own mind. For somoch as his
father has given him full power in heaven and earth: when I consider this, I
say, I canin no wise dout of my salvation.

If he efte soones reason thus: thou have done no penance for thy sins:
answer on this manner: that can I never do, if I should always stand in the
fire, Christ has done that for me on the cross more over, Christ is mine,
the father has given him to me with all his merits, all the good works,
that ever he did are mine, wherefore I may with his divine riches, and
treasures satysfye for all.

After this manner I would thou should answer him, when soever he sets before
the thy sins, and infynite dettes, that thou ought to god for the
benefits, thou have received with diverse and sundry vices whyl he tempte the,
but specially with desperacion, wherwyth he tempts eue^ the saints he will
put the in mind and mystruste that Christ has forsaken the: but make answer
that he never forsook person that trusted in him, but because he would forsake
none of us, he was minded to be forsaken him self on the cross, and if he
should at any time forsake and refuse us (the which is a thing impossyble) it
should be for more glory of god, and we ought not only to be contented, but
also to take it for a syngular pryuylege and prerogative. It behooves us to
stand strong in the faith, and think that before god the passion of Christ
can do more to cause him to love us, then our sins can procure his hate
toward us, we had need to be well armed with spryte, says, and grace, for
learning suffices not to know how to answer, and wit thou well that Christ
was tempted, and specially at the end, wherefore he says: ^^hn. 15.
the prince of this world is comene, but he has gotten nothing of me.

And if he can not wy ^h these armor hurt the, he will turn over the leaf,
and say thus, and all because to deceive the. go to thou haste already
vanquished me, I was myneded to bring the in to desperacyon, but I cold not.
thou art saved: and by and by will the angels com to fett the. ii. Corin. 15.
he will apere to the like an angel of light, and say to the as he did to
saint hilarion. haste thou served god so long, have thou done so many good
deeds so great penance, given so many good ensamples, saved so many souls:
and all beit thou have committed synns, yet art thou confessed of them, thou
have done penance, thou have taken pardones, thou haste gone for indulgences,
thou kepest the commandments, and beside these done many volu^tary works
that thou wast not bounden to do, wherefore why should thou fear. thou shall
be safe and sure, if thou be not saved, then shall none be saved. yea thy good
works be over pluse, more the^ sufficith, The deuell is a liar. John. 3.
which thou may sell or give to other, which if thou do not the Church of Rome
shall be thy heir, and thou shall enryche their treasory of indulge^ce. what
ferest thou therefore: have thou happily gone another path or way. al beit thou
have admitted sines, yet seeste thou not how thou art well disposed at the
last, only stand stoutlye in the trust of these thy great and many good
works, suffer this sickness, and death for the remission of thy sins, and
thou shall be more then saved, only often remember thy self. of thy good
works. Then it is expedient for the to say thus. Thou wouldeste that I should
trust in my works, and I have no fere of being damned, were it not for my
works, I give thanks to my lord Christ Jesus, which has given me the grace
to count my works for a thing of naught, and for such, that every one of
them I deserve to be punyshed, thou magnyfy este my works, to draw me back
from the confydence of Christ, but by gods grace, thou shall not be able to do
it. I find that I am upon a little bourd in the sea tossed with mighty wyndes,
and have embraced and beclepped a strong pyller or rock, and thou cou^celest
me to leave it, and to stick to the roten things which if I should do, the
wyndes would carry both me and them in to the sea. rather I will peryshe with
Christ which is a thing impossible I then live with owte him, no I cane not
put my trust holy in Christ oneles first al to gether I dispayer of my self
and mine own works. Wherefore it is necessary that we dispoil our selfs of
all trust in our own works, and by faith and hope, clothe us and arm us
with Christ and in him put our hope, and al though we have not that great
faith, yet in no wise ought we to despair, because if at the first he do not,
yet at le^ghthe he gives it to his elected at their death, as the prophet
Abacucke told aforehande, when he said, Lord when they shall be nere to the
death at the latter end, between this way and the other, thou will make
known to them Christ and his great benefytes, and will open to them the
bosom of thy graces by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

HOW ANSWER IS TO be made at the judgment seat of God.
AFELON OR GVYLTYPARson, that can not fly, but of necessytie must apeare at
the sessions assyse, or lawedaye before the bar, picketh out and choseth him
for his ayed and succoure, attourneys, protectours, and cou^seylours, and gothe
deuisyng how he may be defended, namely in a matier touching elyfe and death:
which thing it stands us in hand more to do. In so much as, that we being
full of sins, must apeare before the high judgment seat of gods justice,
and when judgment by defynitiue sentence is given against us, we shall lose
paradise, soul, grace, god, and all goodness without recouerye, and be thrown
in to the deep pytte of hell, there to remain and abide in fire everlastingly.
Wherefore me seems it were expedient to imagine what way to take, what answer
to make with what reasons to arm us, that we may have the mattyer to pass on
our side.

First of all an undoubted matter is it, Roma. 5.
that we all have sinned in Adam, and beside the origynal sin have
innumerable actual, ne can be saved, onles first we be absolved and forgiven,
and that must needs be whilst we be in this life for after ward is, no more
redemcion at all. Luce 16.
To the gloton was denied one drop of water.

Wherefore necessary it is to know that there be two judgment seats of god:
the one is of ryghtwysenes, the other of mercy, grace, pytie, goodness, love
swetnes, and lyberalitie: Hebre. 4.
as Paul speaking of this last faith. let us go boldlye to the trone, and
bench of gods grace at the first bench sits god, and Christ keeps
resydence at the second. Now as for the sinners, if they wylve saved they must
go all to the benche of mercy to ask and call for pity, and not justice, for
favor and straight reconynge, because we have all been unjust, and with
alour right wysnes, and good works be not hable to withstand gods
rightwisenes, wherefore David said. Psalm. 1^5.
Lord none can be iustyfyed in thy syghte, if there thou wyltsee a reconynge,
and in another place, ^sal. cxxix.
Lord if thou wylt punish our iniquities, who shall be hable to abide: and Job
says, Job. 9.
I know that man can not be justified if he stand face to face before god. And
in another place, Job. 15.
what thing is man that he should be clean: the heavens be not clean in his
sight. Ieremye. ii.
And Ieremye writes thus If thou wash the with nytrus thou shall
nevertheless be stained And Esaye says: our right wysenes be like the
clothes of an unclean woman: Prouer. xx.
and Solomon witnesses the same, saying who is he that can say my heart is
clean, I am pure and innocent from sin, wherefore says god by Ierymy, why
will you strive with me in judgment: As though he should say you are fools, if
you thynk your self hable to wythstande the justice of god, seeing your right
wysnes is unclean, and that somoch vnclener, as that not only the works, but
also the very i^ward thoughts, affections, and desires shall be examined, and
tried. therefore says god: I will search. try and prove. Jerusalem. Sopho. 1
with lanternes. it is most profitable therefore to go to the bench of mercy.
And say with David, Psalm. 15.
Lord I shalcom before the, not with the multitude of my works, but of thy
mercy, and in case thou be sommoned and called to the trone of justice, appeal
to the other bench of mercy, for as from the judgment of a lord subject to
the Emperor a man may appeal to Cesars judgment seat: so may a man appeal
from the benche of justice to the trone of mercy as to the higher court. In
asmoche as James writes mercy ercelleth justice: it is seen that Ezechyas,
James. ii.
after sentence was given upon him at the benche of justice, iiii. Regu.
because he appealed to the other Throne of mercy had granted to him, that he
should live fyftene years longer. And David by appealyng to mercy caused the
sentence to be revoked, ii. Regu. x^
which was given that he should dye. And what time that servant, Math. 3.
of who^ the gospel speaks, said, have patience with me and give me respite:
he appealed to mercy and was herd. In like manner is it and has be of al
sinners that be saved

Now must we do in the same wise, I mean when we be cyted to the court of
justice to render and yield an account, then must we appeal to mercy, and
say: we be dead through Christ to the law, Roma. 7.
and therefore to justice also, which judge after the law are we dead, then
has justice no iurildictio^ upon us at al, no though it were the greatest
sinner of the world: say thou to god, I am Christ's, thou gave me to him, as
Christ says: they were thine, John. 17.
and thou have given the^ to me. Moreover Christ has read medme, therefore am I
his for many causes, I will therefore stand to his judgment: thou have given
him all power in heaven and in earth as he himself says: Math. 18.
to me is given all power in he auen and in earth, wherefore he may do with me
the thing that lyketh him, and as to him seems good, he is my judge as Christ
himself says: John. xii.
the father has given aliudgement to the son, it is therefore his duty to
judge me. But as in another place he says he came not to judge but to save
the world, say therefore to Christ: do thine office, save me, for thou came,
and thy father did send the for that intent, I feel all ready thy voice, and
in my heart thou say to me, that because I trust in the, thou wylt save me,
alredye by thy grace have I put in the my co^fydence and hope, and he, Exodi.
19.
that believes in the can not be damned, save me therefore according as you art
bounden by a covenant made. And albeit thy conscience accused the, and all the
deuels beside laid to thy charge, ye a though judgment were given against ye:
yer so long as you art in this present life, it is always lauful to appeal to
the mercy of god.

And if it were so, that by force thou should be drawn to the court of justice,
cry out with Isay, and say to Christ: ^^ty. 38.
o Lord I suffer violence, make answer for me, help me, forsake me not, I
chose and will have the for my attorney and speech man: not because thou should
defend my just accomptes, and true reckeninges, for I have none soch, but to
thentent thou should take my sins for thine, and reward me with thine
innocencye, holiness, and right witness. Thou have already satisfied for me on ye
cross and appointed me by adopcion to be the son of god, wherefore I ca^ not
be damned, no not one shall be found that dare accuse me, Ioma. 8.
being one of gods elected.

More over if thou be myneded and wyllyng to appear without danger at the
benche of gods right wysnes dyspoyle first thyselfe of the old Adam, and
apparel the with Christ (as Paul exhorts us,) and thou shall be safe. Collosen
For in somoch as you have embraced him for thine own, thou ca^ not be damned
all though thou had committed all the sins of the world. As a woman great
with child can not be punished, no more can thou, Apoca. ^
if thou have Christ in thy heart, John. 3.
or rather (as Christ says) he that believes in the son is not judged he
is so assured of his salvation, that there needs no examinacion to be had of
him, he is one of Christ's members, and has his sprite, wherefore he can no
more be damned the^ Christ, because he is knytte to him by lively faith.

If it be so that god would make there with the a rekenyng, say to him how
thou have made it with Christ, for as he put on Christ all our iniquities and
sins (as I say says) and with great love accepted them for his own, ^^ye.
53.
and bound him self to make satisfaction for them. Wherefore thou shall say,
Lord if thou have any reconing or matter against me, make it with Christ he
knows well how to answer and can declare ye he has satisfied for the^.

In case be that any must be damned for the sins I have done, it is Christ,
that must be damned, and not I good Lord, for albeit I am he that committed
the^, never thelesse Christ bound him self to satiffie for them, and that by
consent and good will of his father, wherefore whosoever be leueth ^^uely in
Christ is al together safe and sure

Beside this if god would needs make the audite and account with us, and would
say: I am not content with Christ's satisfaction for you, I will that your
selfs make recompense for ye you have offended (which is a thing impossible)
already from the beginning he is contented, and has accepted that denine
sacrifice of the undefiled la^be Christ Jesus, which dyed on ye cross to be
obedient to his father (as Paul has written) already is the right wis^es of god
satisfied by christ more the^ sufficient, Philip. ii.
we be airedy reconsiled with god, and made his sons, and so co^seque^tly his
heirs he has already given us paradise, and when god has onse given a gift
it never repents him: Roma. 11
wherefore the gift can not be called again bireason god is not chan^geable I
nevertheless although (as I said) he should say: I will that thou thy self
satisfye. Answer him on this wise: Lord if I were as dear beloved to the, as
is Christ, and had done and suffered louynglye for thy honor. all that Christ
did and suffered, in this case woldesse thou not hold thy self sufficiently
satisfied for me: in case he granted thereto. thou should make him this answer.
then is it already done. for in that Christ suffered I any self suffered, by
reasone I am changed into Christ. ye a the true Christianes, that have Christ
in their hearts (as Paul sayith let Christ dwell in our hearts) may pittiously
lament and complain to of god, ^^^a. ^.
and say to him: thou have punished us more bitterlye then we have deserved,
considering that we offended and not Christ, reasone would thou should have
punished us, our will, and our life and soul, and not that innocent and
undefiled lamb Jesus Christ, and thou have punished Christ which is the life
of my soul. the heart of my heart, the sprite of my sprite (as David says
god my flesh and my heart, Psalm. 73.
god of my heart. thou should, if my death had not been enough for my sins,
turned me into nothing, and letten alone that innocente, and just Christ more
dear and intier to me then mine own soul wherefore I feel more that, that he
suffered for me, then I should have felt, if I had suffered all the tormente
possible on mine own body, but well wist thou, that I could not by reason of
my frailty, a vyde and suffer all, that I had deserved for my sins, and
therefore thou chose that my ghty and strong Christ to suffer for them in my
stead, and more over have set him in my heart to thentent that I should not
only feel that he suffered, but also that he might give me strenghth to be
able to suffer.

Thou may also say: Lord albe it I have sinned, I am regenerate and borne
again by Christ. I am no more the man that sinned, but I am a new creature:
wherefore thou can not justly ponishe me, by cause that spryte of mine, that
sinned, Gala. ii.
is dead, and Christ lives in me. I live no longer my self, but Christ in me.
ponish, kylle, and turn to naught that sprit of mine, that will of mine, spoil
from me that old Adam, that sensuality, and all that in me has sinned: and
ponishe not me, sithen by the new sprite, that I receuid of Christ I am his
most innocente creatur. more over thou Lord have given me Christ with al his
divine treasures and graces, Roma. 3.
and that to be more surely mine, the^ I am my self, and in so much as he is
mine entier I am able to satisfy for all my dettes

What fear thou then O synful soul. see thou not that, as the blood of
Abelcried for ve^gance, (...) ^.
so this blood of christ callith for mercy and he can not but must needs be
herd. (...).
one abisse calls on another I me ane the bothomeles abisse of my sins has
need of ye abisse of Christ's passion, and the abisse of Christ's passion
calls to the abisse of the mercy of god. Psalm. 1^.
say therefore to Christ. O Lord make thy mercy maruelo us and wonderful, thou
sauest them that trust in the: cry save me for thy mercy sake: take and
e^brace thine the rightwisnes of Christ, and then can I be contented thou say.
Psalm. 7.
Judge me lord acording to my ryghtwysnes. Let every man therefore go to the
court of the mercy of god, and if we be called to the bar of justice, let us
apeale all ways to mercy, and see that never a man appear before the throne
of justice except first he be clothed with Christ through faith and then he
may be presented boldelye, as he that is armed with innocencye and truth may be
presented before any place of judgment. And god shall accept the^ for
ryghtwyse. To who^ be all honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

BY WHAT MEAN to come to heaven.
EXPERIENCE PROVES THAT every creature has naturallye a desire and appetyte
to resort to it own proper place, and mansyon, and namely man, because he is
the most souereine creature of al other And for so much as over native cuntrie
is not here upon the earth, Hebre. 15. Collos^n. 1
but in heaven is our place of rest (considering that all men have this
desire to go to heaven) I take yt to be expedyent to weygh and ponder how we
may go thither.

God has given us Christ for an only mirror, glass, rule, squier, Master,
and Guide: wherefore whosoever is wylling to walk thither I mean to heaven, must
go the same path, that he has gone and trodden before us, by cause he knows
the way most perfectly, and tawght it to us withowt any gyle as well by his
examples, as by his words, therefore he that ente^dith, to go to heaven must
follow him. And first as he being in the shape and form of god was not proud,
nor an arrogant usurper, nor ascribed to himself that he might conveniently
have done: but contrary wise, was louelyhumble, of noreputacion, Philip. ii
and took upon him the shape of a servant, or rather of a sinner, Esaias. 53.
and god laid on him all our wickedness, ye and most lovingly admited and
allowed them for his own, as though he had committed them himself.

Now in like manner, a Christen man being alredye regenerate and borne again
by Christ, and graffede into him by a living faith. comes down from heaven,
that is from his own pride, and false excellency, John. 3.
for (as Christ says) no man goes up in to heaven. but he that comes down,
that is the son of man and his members. wherefore by and by as a Christian man
has aliuely light taste and and feling of Christ, and his great benefit he is
humble, cou^teth him self of no value and nothing in his reputacion. for when
he sees by divine influence, the mekenes of christ, his liveralite patience,
love, goodness, innoce^sy, with other of his virtues, he is of force constrained
to feel his oune pride, unkindness, vnpacientnes, wyckednes, ungodliness, and
his other iniquities. And as god put upon Christ all our sins, and he with
most tender love received them: so will this Christen man ascribe to himself
all the offenses of the world: biraeso^ that he perceuith, that if god had with
drawn from him his grace and had not borne him up, but ministrid to him
occasion and opportunity to offend, thee had not been a sin in all the
world but he had done it wherefore he will attribute to himself all, as th
oughe he had committed them in deed so that all be yt in Christ, and by
Christ he perceueth him self innocent and safe, notwythstandyng of himself he
takes yt, that he is most damned, and greatist sinner of all the world and is
forced to say that (which Paul spoke long ago) Christ came in to the world to
save sinners, 1. Timo. 1
whereof I am one of the chyfe.

The second act of Christ was, that, after he was thus humbled, clothed with
our frail nature, borne, and showed forth to the world, he lived al to gether
for his neighbor, and sought only the glory of his father, and salvation of
his brethren, wythowte any regard or respect to himself. (and cause why is)
for that he was so full of love, ^ohn. 1.
grace, favor, truth, godliness, and al light, virtue, and perfection, wherefore
consideringe he had no need to enrych himself, he lived holy to the wealth and
benefyte of others, Collosen. 1 Roma. 15.
as Paul says Christ has not pleased himself he was inflamed in soch wise
with a fervent desire to save the world, for the glory of his father, that he
being clean swalowed up in god, had no mind nor consyderacion of him self.
Now in semblable sort that true Christen man, that sees himself the son
and heir of god, as Lord of al studyeth, not to live to his own use, but is
hollye bente to the benefityng of his brothern ne for gods glory, and being
as it were changed into their nature feels al their good, and evil, as
Paul did.

Next ensues the third act, that like as the world persecuted Christ, so
it pursue him, and that because in saving his neighbor and seeking the glory
of god, he auaunceth and set forth the grace, the gospel, and the great mercy
of god: thrustyng down, submittyng throwyng done to the ground, and making
nothing of man: and because the world repyneth at this, therefore immediatlye
follows persecucyon, in like case therefore as the hoole life of Christ was one
continual persecucion because it was godly, so chances fytely and agreably to
a true Christien, that magnifyeth the great benifite, which we have receuid by
Christ. which thing is open and manifest in sundry places of the acts of the
apostles. ^^t. 45, 9
for immediately as the apostles had preached the gospel, they were pursued,
and so the case goethe in this our time. More over as Christ was done on the
cross, from whence, he would not come done, although in scorn it was said to
him, Math. xx 7
that if he were the son of god, he should come down of ye cross, and they
would believe him: but because he was the son of god, he would not come down,
but abide there, and with his oune death make perfect our salvation. in like
manner also a Christen man must be transformed and changed in to Christ
crucyfyed, Gala. 3.
so that with Paul he may say I am crucyfed with Christ, in such wise also
knit to him on the cross, that nothing is hable to part me from the love of
god, Roma. 3.
which is in Christ Jesus.

Further more as Christ dyed on the cross so a Christen man, yt lives in
Christ, dies to ye world in such sort, that he passith not of riches, honor,
dignity, kynred, friends, worldly pleasures, or prosperitee, considering yt he
sees bifaith that he is safe, happy, and son, and heir of god, yea even as
Christ was buried, so is he, so that the world counts him not only for a
thing dead, Roma. 6.
but rotten, flyngkynge and loathsome, wherefore he must say with Paul, Gala. 3.
the world is crucyfyed to me, and I to the world. He beside this must rise
with Christ in newnes of life, living after another manner then he did before
that he was regenerate by Christ, Roma. 6.
because he is become^ spiritual he lives to the glory of god.

And thus finally with christ he ascends into heaven standing, Collosen. 3.
as touching his thoughts affections, and desires, above in his celestial
country, so that he say with Paul our conuersacyon is in heaven, Philip. 3.
where he enjoys and takes pleasure and comfort in god. To who^ be always al
honor and glory, through Jesus christ our lord. Ame^.

HOW GOD HAS Satisfied for our sins and has purchased Paradise for us.
GOD BY HIS ABSOLVTE AND free pouer might have saved us Without any
satisfaction at all: In as much as the justice of god is contented and pleased
of all that is lyking his good will: nevertheless he has appointed from
everlasting by his divine mind and wisdom, never to save sinner, oneles first
he were full lie satisfied, and sethen he perceived that we could not do it our
selfs, he was minded to se^de into the world his son to make for us
satisfaction, and laid on him the iniquities of us al, as Isay wrote. Esaye.
^^.
And he right lovingly, although he were a very innocent, took them for his
own, and was contented to satisfy for our offenses, to suffer that we had
deserved, and dye upon the cross, according to his fathers will, as Paul
writes he took our infirmities for his own and he has borne our iniquities
and miseries, by reason he came into the world as though he had been an
offe^der, he took a symilitude of syn to serve our turn on the behalf of our
sins and as though we had been most innoce^te, Esaias. 43.
and he committed all the sins on his will was to go alone to the death, and
therefore he said to his disciples in the garden: stand therein peace, Math.
xxuii
rest, and without care, and suffer me alone to enter into the battle, and
abide on my bones that you have deserved. and meting the multitude he said to
the^: who^ seek you: John. 18.
they a^swered, Jesus of Nazareth as though they should have said, we seek for
him, which has upon him all the syns of the world. And christ made answer, I
am he, I have taken on me al ye sins, love has laid the^ on my shulders,
there fore if you seek for me as a man in who^ be al ye sins let my disciples
and my elected pass as innoce^tes ease, satisfy reue^g, and do your worst to
me, which am contented to suffer for all one cause also, wherefore christ being
accused at ye judgment seat of Jerusalem, made no answer was to show yt they
had against him all actions, in somoch as he had embraced for his own al our
sins. It pleased him also to be crowned with thorns, as king of al our
miseries, and set between tow thefes as the starkest errand thief of al,
likewise was he contented to be strike^ and beaten for our syns, as (Esaias
says) he was smyten for our infirmities and brosed for our iniquityes, Esaye.
53.
and osse^ces: god has chastysed and beaten him for the sins of his people
and by his wounds, and passions we be made hole, he paid that he owed not,
^alm. 63.
(as David said I have paid those things that I took not. ^say. 43.
and Esaias also did say in the parson of Christ, you have but me to trouble for
your iniquities. he was contented that upon him should come al those infamies,
scla^ders, and rebukes, which we have deserved for our sins, which thing
David singnified in spryte in the parsone of Christ where he says, ^salm. 68.
the rebukes, and reproaches, wherwyth they slandered the, fell all upon me, yea
and those curses also, that were due to us fell upon him, (as Paul says) he
has redeemed us from the curse, ^ala. 3
in that he became a cursed for us. and like a godly shepherde having on his
back the lost sheep (for he has his kyngedome upon his shulders) ^^ay. 6
has he borne our sins on the cross, 1. Petri. ii.
(as Peter says) he has borne our syns in his body upon the cross and tree.
upon it as it had been an altar, to condemn our sins, with the sin that
was imputed to him, was he offered as a sacrifise to be burned in the fire and
fla^me of gods love, and to the Corinthia^s Paul writes, ii Corin. 5.
he that knew no sin was made sin for us. it was gods will and mind, that
he which was most innocent should be done on the cross as though he were
not only a sinner but even syn it self and thus (as Daniel prophesied was
iniquite consumed) and in one day god took it out of the world, acordyng to
the profesye of zachary, Zachar. 5 John. 3.
wherefore saint John says he appeared to take a way our synns, and saint
John Baptist says of Christ that he is the lamb of god ye takes away the
sins of the world. Therefore when Christ suffered most louiglye all that,
which we have deserved, Hebre. 1
he satisfied for us, and purged us from our sins. he after the manner of the
prodygal son, of an excedyng love, that he bare to the soul, when he had
given his divine treasures of grace to the very open sinners and harlotes and
had taken to him self our sins, as if he had done them him self, he made
prayer to his father that he would pardon them to him and to him he pardoned
the^, for we were not worthy: nether would he yield up his sprite till first he
had bowed down his head that is until he had moved god, 1. Corin. 11.
which is (as Paul writes) his head to pardone us to Christ therefore were
our sins ascribed so ye justly he meryted that death for his sins, not by
cause he committed the^, but because he admited them for his oune and so has
he satisfied for them, not only suffycyently, but also more then was requisite.
for to god is one tear of Christ more pleasant, then all the sins of the
world dyspleasant. and that life and death of his were more to the honor of
god, then our life was to his dyshonoure, yea he has not only satisfied for
our sins, but has purchaced for us life everlasting.

But happly wylt thou say, then need I to take no pains nor traueyl to
satisfye for my syns, nor to deserve paradise, I may take mine ease, or do what
evil ye likes me giving me to pleasur, and good cheer, for if it be as ye
say, I cannot but be saved. I answer thus. first I say ye truth it is ye
ought not to labor thy self for the entente to satysfye for thy sins
nor yet to deserve paradise: for that is only Christ's office, nor thou can
have any such intent with our doing great injury and wrong to god. but where
as thou sayeste, that thou would ^iue idlye or do evil, after that Christ
has now delivered the from all evil, and purchased the the greattest
felicity: I make the answer on this wise. If case were that one were led to
the gallows for his rybaldry and noghtines, and his lord or master of mere
favor and good will should deliver him, and count him for his son, and yet
would say, my lord or Master has delivered me from all evil, and taken me
for his son and heir, the refore will I go my way and be idle, and in
following mine own lusts, and will do in him wrong: how thynk you, in this case
be not these wicked words? even the like sayeste thou Christ has delivered
me from hell, and made me the son of god, and heir of heaven, wherefore I will
stand like an idle parsone, or rather do more evil, Christ certes dyed not
for the, nor satisfied for thy dettes, nor yet merited for the paradise to
thentent thou should stand idle, commit sin, and become a stark ribalde,
but that thou, seeing his great love, and hou greatly sin displeased him
seeing he was willing to dye because to take them out of the world, should
no more do sin, but honor him, love him, thank him, put thy trust in him,
and work vertuose and good works plentiouslye, not as a bond servant to
escape hell, sithe^ christ has delivered the, ne yet to get paradyse, the
which Christ has purchased for the, but as a natural son for the glory of
god, moved thereto by mocyon of faith, love, and spryte, not by man's wit,
sensualytie, or thy behofe or commodytye. Moreover either thou beleuest that
Christ has satisfied for the or not, if thou believe not, that he has
delivered the from hell and gotten the Paradyse, if thou be wise, thou wylt
search to help thy self, and so wylt thou not be idle, mochlesse wylt thou
commit sins: but rather enforce thyselfe to make satysfaccion for thy self
and to deserve paradise, which is athyng impossible, but if thou believe
lyuelye, that he had so loved the, that to save the, he dyed on the cross,
thou should be constrained to love him again, and to do for his glory,
maruelouse works pletuouslye and redyly to believe that we are saved by Christ
makes not us negligente and naughtye, but fervent and holy.

Let us therefore render thanks to our Lord god, seeing he has with so
great love saved us by so high, rich, happy, and gloriouse mean. To whom
be al way all honor, laud and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

IMPRINTED at London by me R. C. for Wyllyam Reddell duellyng at the sign of
the George in Pouls church yard.


