THE FABULIST Metamorphosed, And Mythologized. OR THE FABLES OF ESOP,
Translated out of Latin into English verse, and moralized.

By R. A. Gentleman.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. LONDON, Imprinted by I. H. for
Andrew Hebb, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bell in Paul's Churchyard.
1634.

The Table.
A THe Ant and Fly. Fab. 29 The Ape and Fox. Fab. 40 The Ape and her twins.
Fab. 54 The dancing Apes. Fab. 75 Arion and the Dolphin. Fab. 43 The Ass and
Bore. Fab. 8 The Ass and Spanielk. Fab. 13 The Ass and Horse. Fab. 32 The
Ass, Lion, and Fox. Fab. 70 The Ass and two Travelers. Fab. 72 The gald Ass
and Fox. Fab. 76 The Ape and Swallow. Fab. 58

B The Bear, Lion, and Fox. Fab. 61 The Be and Jupiter. Fab. 55 The Belly and
members. Fab. 39 The Birds and Beasts. Fab. 33 The Bore and Ass. Fab. 8 The
Bull and Lion. Fab. 53

C The Carter and Hercules. Fab. 44 The Cat and Fox. Fab. 71 The Chough and
Eagle. Fab. 10 The Child and Fortune. Fab. 50 The Cock. Fab. 2 The Countrieman
and Snake. Fab. 7 The Countrieman and tame Snake. Fab. 25 The Countryman and
wood. Fab. 38 The Crane and Wolf. Fab. 6 The Crow and Cub. Fab. 11 The Crow
and Jupiter. Fab. 52 The Crow and Wolf. Fab. 73

D The Dancing Apes. Fab. 75 The Dog and Shadow. Fab. 4 The Dog and Thief.
Fab. 19 The Dog and Lion. Fab. 47 The Dog and Wolf. Fab. 69 The Dove. Fab. 63
The Dove and Kite. Fab. 18

E The Eagle and Chough. Fab. 10

F The Falconer and Partridge. Fab. 56 The Fawn and Heart. Fab. 67 The File and
Viper. Fab. 36 The Fish of the river. Fab. 48 The Fisher and his pipes. Fab. 66
The Fishermen and Mercury. Fab. 74 The Fly and Ant. Fab. 29 Fortune and the
Child. Fab. 50 The Fox and Storke. Fab. 26 The Fox and Wolf. Fab. 34 The Fox
and Ape. Fab. 40 The Fox and Grapes. Fab. 42 The Fox and Leopard. Fab. 49 The
Fox, Lion, and Bear. Fab. 61 The Fox, sick Lion, and wolf. Fab. 63 The Fox,
Lion, and Ass, Fab. 70 The she Fox and Lioness. Fab. 54 The Fox and Cat.
Fab. 71 The Fox and gald Ass. Fab. 76 The Frog and Mouse. Fab. 3 The Frogs and
their King. Fab. 17 The Fox and Ox. Fab. 30

H The Hares and Tempest. Fab. 22 The Hare and Tortoise. Fab. 57 The Hares.
Fab. 68 The Heart and Sheep. Fab. 24 The Heart. Fab. 35 The Heart and Oxen. Fab.
41 The Heart and Fawn. Fab. 67 Hercules and the Carter. Fab. 44 The Heifer and
Ox. Fab. 46 The Horse and Lion. Fab. 31 The Horse and Ass. Fab. 32 The Old
Hound. Fab. 21 The Husbandman and his cattle. Fab. 64 The Husbandman and his
sons. Fab. 65

I The Jay. Fab. 28 Jupiter and the Crow. Fab. 52 Jupiter and the Be. Fab. 55
Jupiter and the Serpent. Fab. 59

K The Kid and Wolf. Fab. 23 The Kite fallen sick. Fab. 15 The Kite and Dove.
Fab. 18

L The Lark and her young. Fab. 77 The Leopard and Fox. Fab. 49 The Lion and
other creatures. Fab. 5 The Lion grown old. Fab. 12 The Lion and Mouse. Fab.
14 The Lion and Horse. Fab. 31 The Lion and Dog. Fab. 47 The Lion and Bull.
Fab. 53 The Lion, Bear, and Fox. Fab. 61 The Lion fallen sick, Wolf, and
Fox. Fab. 62 The Lion, Fox, and Ass. Fab. 70 The Lioness and she-Fox. Fab. 54

M Mercury and the Fishermen. Fab. 74 The Mountains birth. Fab. 20 The
Citie-Mouse, and Country Mouse. Fab. 9 The Mouse and Frog. Fab. 3 The Mouse
and Lion. Fab. 14

O The Old man and his wives. Fab. 60 The Ox and Frog. Fab. 30 The Oxen and
Heart. Fab. 41 The Ox and Heifer. Fab. 46

P The Partridge and Falconer. Fab. 56

R The River Fish. Fab. 48

S The Sallow and Axe. Fab. 58 The Serpent and Jupiter. Fab. 59 The Sheep and
Heart. Fab. 24 The Sheep and Wolf. Fab. 37 The Snake and Countryman. Fab. 7,
25 The Spanniell and Ass. Fab. 13 The Storke and Fox. Fab. 26 The Swallow and
other Birds. Fab. 16 The Swallow and youth. Fab. 51

T The Tempest and Hares. Fab. 22 The Thief and Dog. Fab. 19 The Tortoise and
Hare. Fab. 57 The Travelers and Ass. Fab. 72

V The Viper and File. Fab. 36

W The Wolf and Lamb. Fab. 2 The Wolf and Crane. Fab. 6 The Wolf and Kid.
Fab. 23 The Wolf and Painted Head. Fab. 27 The Wolf and Fox. Fab. 34 The
Wolf and Sheep. Fab. 37 The Wolf, sick Lion, and Fox. Fab. 62 The Wolf and
Dog. Fab. 69 The Wolf and Crow. Fab. 73 The Wood and Countryman. Fab. 38

Y The Youth and Swallow. Fab. 51

FINIS.
THE FABVLIST Lately metamorphosed.
The Cock. Fable 1.
WHilst Chanticleare one day a dunghill turns,
He finds a Jewel, which in scorn he spurns;
And says, what luck have I to find such things,
Which me nor profit, nor contentment brings,
Some Jeweller, or expert Lapidare,
Would be over joy'd to find a gemme so rare:
I, for one Barley corn, or grain of Pease,
Will give my share in a whole pecke of these.
Moral.
The Epicure whose belly is his God,
The gem of knowledge underfoot has trod;
And if at ease he lives, and eats, and drinks,
For virtue, nor good Arts, he cares nor thinks.
The Wolf and Lamb. Fab. 2.
A Wolf carousing at a rivers side,
A harmless Lamb a skipping, lower spide;
To whom the Wolf runs in a raging fume,
And fierely asks, how she durst presume
To spoil her drink, the fearful silly sheep
Trembling, entreats the Wolf the peace to keep,
And begs a pardon (having not offended,)
His drink she troubled not, nor e're intended:
The more she was submissive, mild, and humble;
The more the bloody Wolf did storm and grumble,
And vows revenge, nor would admit excuse;
Quoth he, your fathers, mothers, kindreds use,
Has bin to do me injury, and spite,
On you, their issue, I my self will right.
The Mouse and Frogge. Fab. 3.
THe Frog and Mouse, both warriors stout,
And fit to manage Arms, no doubt;
Proclaim a just and open war,
Which of them should be Emperor,
And King of fennes and marrish grounds,
And thereunto give laws and bounds,
Both bravely come into the field,
Resolved alike to die, e're yield:
Each soldier being armed alike,
A sege his sword, a rush his pike;
A while the fight was fierce and boody,
(Fortune belike in a brown study
To give the Palm) the subtle mise,
(For they you know are grave, and wise)
Under a water-lily leaf,
Had placed an Ambush for relief;
Who to the battle freshly come,
The signal given them by their drum:
They furiously renew the fight;
In heat whereof, comes by a Kite,
A fatal Bird; who watched that day,
To make both Cumbatants her prey:
For when she thinks them out of breath,
Faint, weak, and fit for naught but death,
Down she descends, and at the souce,
O're-throwes and kills both frog and mouse.
Moral.
When in a Kingdom factious Princes fall
To homebred civil wars, and cruel brall,
About dominion, and command of State;
Some powerful Enemy that is vicinate
Taking advantage at their weakening wars,
With power comes in, subdues, and ends their jarres.
The Dog and shadow. Fab. 4.
A Dog in's mouth bearing a dainty bit,
A river swims; the Sun which shone on it
Casts over the wave the shadow of the meat,
He greedy yawnes in hope that too to get,
Lets fall the dainty morsel twixt his teeth,
Whilst he snaps at the shadow which he sees:
But when his ravening dog-tricke he had marked
In stead of speaking, thus he howld, and barkt,
Insatiate fool, thou art but rightly served,
If none relieving thee, thou should die sterv'd,
Who had enough to serve thee many a day,
Had not thy greedy folly thrown't away.
Moral.
Fly avarice, this is the fables scope;
Fools only part with certainty, for hope.
The Lion and other Creatures. Fab. 5.
THe Lion would to hunt upon a day
With other creatures go, the tale does say:
But e're they outward set, they did indent
He should but have his Divident,
Where to assenting strait they killed a Heart,
And as the agreement was, began to part:
But when his share away each would have bore,
With fury moved, the Lion thus did roar;
As chief, the first part, does to me belong,
Second and third, because I am most strong;
And none pursude the prey so fierce as I,
Give me the fourth, or farewell Amity:
The fearful Beasts, durst not his will gainesay,
But grieved to be thus gulled, left him the prey;
And durst not urge the Contract, no nor utter
One word; who dares against the Lion mutter?
Moral.
Live with thine equals, if thou wilt happy be:
Might masters right, even in the Beasts we see.
The Wolf and Crane. Fab. 6.
THe Wolf eating a sheep for her repast,
Swallows a rib, which in her throat sticks fast;
And well nigh choakt, she pitifully cries,
Yet none regards, at least her remedies;
But having known the cause of her distress,
Thinks her well punished for her greediness.
A Crane comes by, who after much entreaty,
Or rather promises, on her takes pity;
(For much she vows, and much she does assure,
The Crane shall have for doing of the cure:)
The Crane then undertaketh in a trice,
Performance of the cure, with this device;
Into the Wolfes grieved throat, she puts her bill,
And plucks the bone out, which till then stuck still;
And having done her work, demands her hire;
The thanklesse Wolf grinding her teeth for ire,
Away poor fool (replies) I nothing owe;
Is It not enough thou do in safety go
Dismis't from my fell jaws? I had thy bill
Between my teeth; if I had had the will,
I could have taken thy life, but thou sav'dst mine,
And in requital, I have favored thine.
Moral.
Beware on whom thou do bestow thy cost:
Good turns to bad men done, are ever lost.
The Countrieman and Snake. Fab. 7.
A Husbandman surveying of his ground,
A Snake, the snow being deep, sterv'd almost found:
He brought it home, and laid it by the fire,
Whence taking vigor it began respire;
And when her former strength she gotten had,
She hist and made a noise, as she were mad:
The Countrieman afraid, reaching aprong,
With words and blows, expostulates the wrong,
saying, is this the thanks thou do repay?
I saved thy life, thou would take mine away.
The Boar and Ass. Fab. 8.
THe rude unmanner'd Ass derides the Boar,
Who being moved, does grind his tusks therefore:
Yet lets not choler on his reason trample,
But mildely says, were thou a fit exemple,
I could revenge this wrong, but let it pass,
I scorn to take avengement on an Ass:
Scoff on thy fill, thy baseness gives protection,
Brave Boares contemn an Asses fond invection.
Moral.
Learn hence, if thou do hear base ones thee wrong,
To suffer bravely, and to rule thy tongue;
Exchange not evil language with the base;
Such scabs account it glory, and a grace
To be held worthy of revenge, and ultion:
Slight them, that cramps them more than a convulsion:
The Horse regardlesse, barking curres does pass;
And shall men weigh the braying of an Ass?
The Citie-Mouse and Countrie-Mouse. Eab. 9.
A Citie-Mouse, the season fair,
Went to the Country to take air:
A Country Mouse did entertain
Her, with her victuals, and her grain:
And the best cates she could afford;
Noe doubt she kept an honest board,
And cheer, might serve a better guest:
The Citie-Mouse displeased, (at least
Seeming to be so,) mincing sits,
And Cittzen like, scarce eats two bitts:
The City diet does commend,
Bringing to town unto that end
The Country Shrew, that she may try it,
And learn to rectify her diet:
She Is brought into a dainty room,
With Arras hung, sweet with perfume,
And served with costly delicates,
Preserves, Confects, and Marmalets:
But while they feed, and joviall be,
They hear one turning of a key;
And trembling in a fright away
They run, and neither longer stay;
The Countrie-Mouse amazed stole
Behind the hangings, wanting hole:
The Citie-Mouse to feast reverts,
(The servant presently departs)
Wishing her guest sit down and drink,
And on the fright no more to think:
They feast and tipple; but the stranger
Still thinks upon the fear and danger:
Well, quoth the Countrie-Mouse, I yield
Your fare is richer than the field;
But I had rather eat in quiet
Brown bread at home, than finest diet,
And be in danger of my head:
Give me security with bread,
And take your dainties and rich fare
With peril got, and spent in care.
Moral.
Where danger's sauce to delicates;
The feeders have unhappy fates:
Where safety does attend poor cates;
The owners are in best estates.
The Eagle and Chough. Fab. 10.
AN Eagle found a Cockle in the shell.
And how to get the fish out could not tell:
A Chough at that same instant coming by,
Persuades the Eagle, mount therewith on high,
And let the Cockle drop upon a stone,
It Would break no doubt, she will lay her life thereon;
The Engle mounts, and with her takes the prey,
The Chough at mark, upon the ground does stay;
To watch the Cockles fall, which in a trice,
Fell, and was broke, as Jack Daw did divise;
Who speedily the dainty fish devoured,
Before the cheated Eagle, highly towr'd,
Could down descend; and chartering flew away:
The gallant Bird insens'd, did little say;
But inly grieved, when that her self she saw,
Thus guld and cheated by a paultrie Daw.
Moral.
Beware whom thou do trust, who speaks the fair,
Is not at all times, the true Counselor:
Some give their neighbors smooth and sweet advice,
Seeming sound friends, yet prove false enemies.
The Crow and Cub. Fab. 11.
A Crow with prey flies to a tree,
And there proclaims what he had got;
The Fox perceived what it might be,
And follows fast as he could trot;
And thus the Crow he does salute;
Save thee fair Bird: now I see fame
A lyar's false and absolute,
That black as pitch, dares the proclaim:
Why thou art whiter than the Swan,
Or driven snow, and could thou sing,
Were voice as good as feathers, then
Of all the Birds thou might be King:
With flattery thus the Crow abused
Begins to think upon a noate,
Guld with deceit, the Fox had used:
And as he straind to clear his throat,
The Cheese he got dropped from his bill,
Which cunning Reynard quickly caught,
And having eat thereof his fill,
At the poor Crow he stood and laughed:
The Crow sore vexed at's loss and folly,
Flies to the wood in Melancholy.
Moral.
Unworthy people which do take delight
To hear their own praise, love the Parasites
But in conclusion, get themselves thereby
Loss of estate, and badge of infamy.
The old Lion. Fab. 12.
A Lion who in youth fierce full of rage,
Offended almost every kind of beast:
His former headstrong follies now in age
Repents, and is repayed by the least:
The Boar with grinding tusks, the Bull with horn,
But chief of all, the dull uncivil Ass
Pretending wrongs, as done to him, in scorn
Spurns at the Lion, as he by does pass:
The grieved Lion sighs, and thus with tears
Is heard his youthful folly to deplore:
It grieves me not, thus to be used of Bears,
Or goar'd by Bulls, or pierced by the Boar:
These gallant Beasts, with grief I must relate
Have felt the rage and fury of our youth,
And they but justly now retalliate
Their injuries, but this base Ass intruth
I ever favored, and did nere offend;
Fool that I was to make such Beasts my foes:
Fool that I was to make such Beast my friend;
That without cause joys at my overthrowes.
Moral.
When thou art in prosperity and place,
Beware whom thou do favor, whom disgrace:
And make no man by injury thy foe,
Lest fortune change, and he exchange thy blow.
The Spaniell and Ass. Fab. 13.
AN Ass whose back was almost broke
With loades of water and of wood,
Observing of his Master stroke
His idle Dog, which did no good;
And how the Master, as the Men,
With morsels fed him; weeping then
The moaning Ass did much complain,
And curse his fate, who all the day
Bare heavy burdens, and with pain
Obtained his food, when as for play
The Dog was fed of every one,
And he poor Ass beloved of none:
Resolved to be the Spaniels Ape,
To try what flattery could do,
One day did on his Master leap,
And laid his lips his cheeks unto:
The Master at this trick affrighted
Cried out aloud for help and aid;
The servants with the show delighted,
A little while a gazing staid;
At length each getting him a waster
The complementall Ass so paid,
He had no mind to ride his Mastor;
But groaning on the ground he laid:
And of his kindness does repent,
And never used more complement.
Moral.
The fawning knave is often fed
With plenty, when laborious men
Can seldom have good word or bread:
But many groans, and now and then
Striving to mend a wretched state;
grow likely, more unfortunate.
The Lion and Mouse. Fab. 14.
A Cholaricke Lion being with heat oppressed
Under a shady tree was laid to rest:
A troop of active Mise him spide a sleep,
And at his back their bralls and revells keep:
The Lion wakes and stirs, when in a trice
Away for life run thence these light-foot Mise:
One only slug except, which being caught,
For life, the King the Lion thus besought:
I am a worm not worth your highness rage:
Her plea, the Lions anger does assuage;
He lets his Prisoner go; but in a while
After, himself is taken in a toil;
Who roares so loud, it shakes the very skies;
Yet were the nets not moved with his cries:
The grateful Mouse, that heard his voice and knew
It was the Lion that her good did do;
Runs to the net, creeps in, and with her teeth,
Biteth the knots, and so the Lion freeth.
Moral.
Great ones take heed, how you the poor oppress,
The time may come you will need their littleness:
To none do wrong, presuming on your power;
For strength and wealth, are things which in an hour
Are overthrown, and lost; and now and then,
The greatest need the help of meanest men.
The sick Kite. Fab. 15.
THe Kite who on her deathbed lay
Her Mother supplicates to pray
Unto the Gods, and make request
For health, for why, within her breast
Her conscience drove her to despair,
For she had never used prayer:
Her Dam replies, Child it is too late
Their Deities to supplicate;
Whose Altars often thou did profane
And with thy rapines, foul and stain.
Moral.
Honor the Lord, for in his hands
Thy safety, or undoing, stands
Defer not Prayer in thy best state,
Lest when thou prov'st unfortunate,
And into misery do fall,
He will not hear, though loud thou call.
The Swallow and other Birds. Fab. 16.
WHen first the husbandman Hemp sowes
The Swallow saw what he intended
And to her fellow-Birds she goes
And to their wisdoms, she commended
Her true intelligence, which they
Wise in their own conceits rejected,
And call her fool, and eat and play,
Whilst fatal Hemp-stalkes, high erected
Thereaten their deaths, the Swallow prays
They would think on it, and by the roots
Whilst it was green, with strength assay
To pul't up, lest it breed more shootes:
A second time they her counsel scorn
By this the Hemp full ripe was grown,
She that true love to them had borne,
Wished yet it might be overthrown:
But they her counsel kind and good
Fond foolish Birds, did still reject
Or that it was not understood,
Or understood took no effect:
Taking her leave of fethered friends
Unto the husbandman she flies,
And to his love her self commends;
Who enter league and amities,
His house shall be her nest and tower
And she in liew thereof must sing
Each Summers morn, about the hour
That daylight to the world does bring.
They are agreed, and till this day
The Swallow there her mansion keeps,
And safely sits, and sings, while they,
Poor silly fools, The Fowler sweeps
Into his nets of hemp composed
They might have hindered, if disposed.
Moral.
Many there are that cannot give advise,
As many, mock and scorn at those that give it;
But when they suffer for it too late grow wise,
And wish like fools, they sooner did believe it.
The Frogs and their King. Fab. 17.
THe Frogs a free and populous Nation
One day to Jove made supplication,
^s other Creatures they might have a King
Jove smiles at first, at their petitioning,
But to avoid the croaking of the Frog,
He throws them down a King made of a log;
Which fell with such a dreadful noise and lump,
It put the fearful Frogs into a dumpe;
Who in amazement a good while do stand,
To mark their new-come Sovereigns command;
At last they nearer still, and nearer drew,
But when their King a senseless thing they knew,
His wooden Majesty grew to contempt;
And by each Frog was rid in meriment.
When ended was their sport, to Jove again
They Suitors are for a new Sovereign,
An active Prince, one full of life and power:
A Storke Jove sends them, who every hour,
Some of his Marrish Subjects does devour:
The oppressed frogs a fresh begin to lowre,
And being weary of their active Storke,
Begin to wish their former King of cork,
And unto Jove again prefer their Suite,
Who to their croaking prayers stood deaf and mute,
For with mild Kings who will not live content,
Are justly plagued with Tyrants government.
Moral.
Like Frogs the vulgar people be,
Contented, neither bond, nor free;
Who governed by a gentle hand,
Account their softness, weakness, and
For stirring Magistrates they call,
Then such account tyrannical.
Unconstant as the Moon or wave,
Love change, and loath the thing they have.
The Dove and Kite. Fab. 18.
Upon a time the Dove and Kite,
Did war, and with each other fight;
the Dove too weak in hope of aid,
The Sparrow Hawk, her Sovereign made,
Too late they rue their oversight,
And made peace with their foe the Kite.
Moral.
Whatere thy state is be content,
And long not after alteration;
But wisely learn ill to prevent,
For danger's child of Innovation.
The Thief and Dog. Fab. 19.
A Thief one night meaning to rob a shop,
Unto a watchful Mastiffe flang a sop;
The trusty Dog that smelt the knaves intent,
Thus barks aloud, and does his theft prevent:
False Thief, he cries, I well perceive thy drift;
But know, I scorn to take a Felons gift:
Should I accept thy morsel, I betray
My Master, whilst thou steal'st his goods away.
Moral.
Thus honest servants ever knaves withstood,
For their own credit, and their Masters good.
The birth of the Mountains. Fab. 20.
IN Ages past a rumor went,
Hills were with child, as women be;
Many a day and pound was spent,
In travel the truth thereof to see,
And many one was sore afraid,
What monstrous birthes they might produce,
Prodigious things thereof they say,
As all conceived ominous.
The day of this expected birth
At length being come, they are brought to bed
A Mouse is borne, which causes mirth;
All doubts and terrors are struck dead,
And the Spectators of this Scene,
Do laugh as if they had the spleen.
Moral.
Vainglorious braggards like hills stand
Speak Giant words, and make great shows,
When if their actions be well scand,
They prove vain and ridiculous:
And do our thoughts from wonder call,
To mirth and matter Comicall.
The old Hound. Fab. 21.
A Gentleman who kept a Hound,
One day by chance a Leveret found;
The Dog with age was stiff and lame,
And slowly does pursue the game;
The Master gives ill words and blows,
The toothlesse Hound no faster goes,
Yet all the speed he can he makes,
The Hare gets ground, the poor Cur slacks;
The huntsman following hard to bang him,
Swears, frets, and threatens straight to hang him.
The Dog, who all his youth had spent,
And hunted to the man's content;
Thus makes his moan before he dies:
(Sir) were you either just or wise,
You would remember service past,
Your own youth cannot always last:
It Is time to die, for now I see,
Servants no longer cherisht be,
Than when they trudge, and bring their Masters profit,
Adieu bad world, for I am weary of it.
Moral.
He that in youth does serve his Masters turn,
Ought not in age be slighted when he is done.
The Hares and Tempests. Fab. 22.
WIthin a wood the Hares upon a day,
Whether inforst, or happily gone astray;
A sudden fearful storm of wind arose,
And in the wood so loud, so strong it blows,
As if the rooted Trees it would o're-whelme,
It blows the Oak, and rocks the sturdy Elm:
Their great hare-hearts amazed in a fright,
To escape the storm assume a violent flight
With swallow-footed speed they meet a pale
Which stops their course, and then their hearts quite fail:
Whilst thus they are imprisoned in a pound,
One that survei'd the fense through a rift found
A mighty water on the other side,
She shows her fellows what she had discri'd,
And that which more her fences did confound,
Tells them the very Frogs therein seemed drowned;
Whilst thus through fear, they fall into despair,
Up starts a wily fur-gownd aged Hare,
And to his panting fellows thus he said;
Why are ye fellow-travellers thus afraid?
Pull up your hearts, and think no more of flight,
If you would escape the storm, take heart and spright;
My life for yours, take courage, and stand fast,
It Is but a storm, and Tempests cannot last;
Or say it should, are not our bodies lin'de,
And able to hold out, both cold and wind?
But why talk I of active bodies? sure
The way to shun a storm, is to endure:
This resolute speech, their Sanick fear appeased,
And scarce the words were out, but the storm ceased.
Moral.
This world's the Wood, our troubleous life,
Is full of Dangers, fears, and strife:
Which are not to be shunned by flight,
true resolution only makes them light.
The Kid and Wolf. Fab. 23.
THe she goat going to a wood,
To seek out Provender and food,
Within door locks her tender Kids,
and open them to none she bids
Till her return, a Wolf that lay
In ambush, heard what they did say,
And at the door anon he beats,
And Goats voice quaintly counterfets
Commands the Kids to open door,
For she had brought them victuals store:
Much good may do you quoth a Kid,
But we will do, as we were bid;
For though your voice is like a Goat,
You Are Wolf I know you by your coat.
Moral.
From hence this lesson learn we may,
It Is good our parents to obey;
Old folk do give us best advice,
The young which hearken to it are wise.
The Heart and Sheep. Fab. 24.
A Cunning Heart the Wolf being by
Claims of a Sheep a debt long due,
Pretended for a pecke of Rye:
Intruth the Sheep noe such debt knew,
But the Wolfes danger to prevent,
If so the Heart would give her day,
To make assumpsit was content
A pecke of Rye She would repay:
The day is come, it must be rendered,
The Heart demands the Sheep to pay,
Of which the Sheep not one grain tendered,
Nor none would give, did you not say
The Heart replies, nay further swear
So that I would some time forbear,
You would it honestly discharge:
Yes quoth the Sheep, but I Am at large,
The Wolf was by when I did swear.
Moral.
Many intend t'intrap weak Inocence
Before some crafty knave, a great offense;
And to the height of all extremity,
Will urge the complot of their villainy:
But God preserves the guiltless from the snare
Of such whose ends, and objects, bloody are.
The Countrieman and tame Snake. Fab. 25.
A Countrieman kept a tame Snake,
Which in a fury once he struck;
The Snake by good chance saved her head.
And from him to a thicket fled:
The Countrieman that then to fore
Was very rich, grew wondrous poor,
And with himself does often debate,
What cause should thus confound his state:
Resolv's it was for the Serpents sake,
Which in his angry mood he struck;
And forthwith to the thicket hies
To find her out, whom when he spies
He prays to accept her ancient lodging;
The Snake replies, without more dodging
She never again his house would see,
Where she had found such injury;
And though her wrong she him forgives,
She must remember whilst he lives,
And told him shortly in one word,
She Would trust no more, man nor his word.
Moral.
It Is piety to pardon an offense,
But to prevent, wisdom, and providence.
Aliter.
Let not thy choler so much over-flowe,
To raise thy fury to a word and blow;
For hasty spirits never want a woe.
The Fox and Storke. Fab. 26.
THe Fox one night a Storke entreats
To guest with her, and taste her meats;
The Storke accepts the invitation;
The Fox makes dainty preparation
Of liquid stuff, but so it served,
The Bird in plenty might have starved;
For on the board the Fox it powers,
Which licking up, she strait devours:
The hungry Storke looks wistly on,
And seeing all the vians gone,
Though discontented, little said,
But hungry, angry, went to bed;
And there in musing spends the night,
How her kind host^ she might requite;
The plot was thus after short time,
She bids the Fox with her to dine,
And for the dinner does prepare
Great store of good and dainty fare;
But serves it up within a glass,
Whose neck both long and narrow was,
Into the which she puts her bill,
And takes, and eats at ease her fill:
The Fox might lick her lips at it,
But could not get thereof a bit:
And thus the Banquet was concluded.
The scossing Fox, went home deluded.
Moral.
What ere he be presumes upon his wit,
May find no doubt some one to equal it;
That can repay him with like geires and mocks,
As here the cousned Storke requites the Fox.
The Wolf and painted head. Fab. 27.
A Wolf upon a Holiday,
Belike the Painter gone to play,
Did cast his eyes upon a head,
So drawn to life, so shadowed,
A reasonable man would ween,
A counterfeit it had not been:
He took it up and gazing stood,
But when he found it painted wood,
Having perused it down it laid,
And thus unto the head he said:
Alas that such a noble part
Should have noe sense, and so much Art.
Moral.
The outward shape without internal grace,
Is as a Vizard, or a painted face,
Be getting scorn, for fools more hateful be.
How much more fair they are externally.
The Iay. Fab. 28.
A Paultrie Jay did once assume
The Peacocks gallant train and plume;
And being dressed in this array,
Flies to the Peacock, leaves the Jay;
But there she made no longer boad
Than till they found her pride and fraud,
Which found, to the naked skin they stripped her,
And having scorned her, soundly whipped her,
The little Birds that then stood by,
Dispersed this story as they fly.
Moral.
By Iaies proud men and vain are wene
Who scorning of their own descent,
With gallant shows, and vanting plume,
Amongst their betters place assume;
Till time disclose their pride and then
Their scorned of all deserving men.
The Fly and Ant. Fab. 29.
The Fly upbraids the Ant and her dissent,
Base worm she calls her and unworthy thing,
Whose life in obscure nookes, and holes is spent,
Whilst who but she lived with the greatest King,
Fed at his table tasted princely meat,
Out of his royal Cup drank his own wine,
Lodged in his chamber set in regal seat,
Carous'd Canara, Claret, and the Rhine;
And fed on sweet meats, delicates and rare,
Taking no thought, nor pains, them to provide;
But Court-like full flew forth to take the air,
Had plenty, ease, and gratis. The Ant replied,
She must confess the Fly had better fare,
(If dainties be best fare) for her descent,
Although she list not with the Fly compare,
TO was honest, good, without disparagement;
And where you say we live in holes, and den,
And that our dwellings are obscure and base,
We safely live, beloved of beasts and men,
Whilst like a rogue thou run'st from place to place,
And haste noe lodging, nor inhabitation,
But like a thief living on spoil and prey,
Thou only do possess present occasion,
Tainting those things thou can not bear away;
Noisome to all thou art alive or dead,
Hurtful to man and beast, hated of both,
Of putrefaction gotten, and so fed;
The soul, and lively counterfeit of sloth;
Thou art not sure to live nor breath a day,
Held hateful as thou art to humane kind,
By boys and girls thou art caught and killed in play,
And dead, leave naught but loath somnes behind,
Whilst we with safety and with joy possess
The blessed fruition of our peaceful cells,
Lives free from all, being free from idleness,
Eat what we get, and feed on nothing else,
The River yields us drink, the field gives bread,
We think of cold, even in the midst of heat,
Whilst thou with the first frost that comes art dead;
And wanting sustenance of drink and meat,
Do all the Winter season sleep or sterve,
Since victa'lls none thou stord'st, do none deserve.
Moral.
Learn from the Fly, who speaks those things he should not,
Must be resolved to hear those things he would not:
The Ant will teach a private country cell,
(When industry does with contentment dwell,)
The dainty careless court-like life out goes,
More full of fear, and danger, than fair shows.
The Frog and Ox. Fab. 30.
THe Frog beholding of the Neat,
Thinking to make her self as great,
Swells like a bladder blown with wind,
And of her child with inflate mind
Demands, does not my greatness yet
Excel the Neats, or equal it?
Oh Mother, does the young one cry,
Forbear this tumerous Ecstasy;
For till you burst, if that you swell,
The Ox you cannot parallel:
The Frog swells on, and croaks, does yet
My tumid body wax as great?
Or yet? and bursts.
Moral.
So proud men find,
The issue of a hauty mind.
Aliter.
To every Creature nature does depend
A general gist, to some, she Eloquence,
To others, strength, to him, does beauty give,
That each contented with his lot may live:
And where content abids, the gif it hallowes;
Where emulation rules, there ruin follows.
The Horse and Lion. Fab. 31.
WIth age the Lion stiff and lame,
Unto an Horse then turned to grass
Did make approach, and to him frame
A tale, what a proved Leech he was;
Supposing with his wit and brain,
To get the Horse within his paws;
The Horse knew well he did but feign,
Yet of his help seemed to have cause,
Tells him he comes in luckie hour,
For as he leapt a hedge of thorn
He pricked his foot which raged so sore,
The torment was not to be borne,
The Lion prays him let him see
The sore, and warrants remedy:
The Horse lies down upon his back,
And as the Lion came to view him,
So fierce between his eyes he struck,
That (weak with age) he overthrew him;
And so the Lion plies with blows,
Till almost both were out of breath,
The Horse triumphing away goes,
And to the cunning Surgeon says,
Good Sir, it will not be taken ill,
If on your self you show your skill;
Or if your worship hold it fit,
Go sell your salves, and buy more wit.
Moral.
Those are the mortal'st cruel foes,
Which murder under friendly shows;
And Judas like say nought's amiss,
When murther's harbored in a kiss:
A wise man therefore still will be,
Fore-arm'd with wit, and Policy,
And lanus like, have double sight,
To judge between the wrong and right.
The Horse and Ass. Fab. 32.
A Horse adorn, din all his rich array,
Ran a fierce course, and running loud did neigh,
And in full speed over took a laden Ass
Which staid him for a while he could not pass:
The fierce Horse trampleth on the ground in rage
Champing his bit his choler to assuage;
And to the slow foot Beast in scorn does neigh,
To clear the passage, and to give him way:
The ass for fear of this hot Horses heels,
Out of the path silent and fearful reeles,
The Horse pursues his race, and runs so fast,
He bursts his wind, and tired falls down at last:
But when the owner does his Courser find,
Bemyr'd, with foundred legs, and broken wind,
Unfit to ride, unapt to make a warrior;
For little coin he sells him to a Carrior,
Who claps a wooden pannell on on his back;
By this the Ass o're-takes him with his pack,
And to the Horse braies, friend what have they done
With thy guilt bit, and rich Capparison;
The Horse ashamed, answered no word at all,
Well quoth the Ass: Thus pride will have a fall.
The Birds and Beasts. Fab. 33.
THe winged Creatures made a brall,
With Birds and Beasts quadrupidall;
And certain who had seen the fight,
Would have beheld it with delight;
The Regiments were strong and great,
Each wing Commanders had complete,
Both Armies full of hope and fear,
Courage and danger equal were;
The Eagle, which Joves Bird some call,
Once of the Birds was General,
And wheresoever his Colors wave,
Assured victory they gave:
But yet the false faint hearted Bat
Dispairing, turned base Renegate;
And to the adverse party goes,
Whom The Eagle that day overthrowes;
The Bat perceived the bataile lost
Mounted on wing, does fly in post,
But is discri'd, and forthwith took,
(For what God treachery can brook)
Brought back, The Birds a Counsel call,
Commanded by their General,
Where in cold blood they guilty find
The Bat of Treason, against kind:
And although death she has deserved,
Her life was by one voice preserved:
But as an Exile she must swear
The winged Army to forbear,
And never more abroad to fly
While daylight does enrich the sky.
Moral.
He that forsakes his friends in their distress,
Deserves not to partake their happiness.
The Wolf and Fox. Fab. 34.
A Ravening Wolf, hunting one day to dot
A booty yielding food for many a day;
The subtle Fox soon had it in the wind,
And to her trots in hope to share the prey:
Gossip quoth she, I gladly would inquire
The cause you keep your house, and lie so quiet;
Oh quoth the Wolf I Am ready to expire,
I did mistru^^ ((...) Reynard) you were nie it,
Therefore I Am come to visit my dear friend,
And the best service I can do to profer:
I thank you quo^h the Wolf, pray then commend
My health unto the Gods, when next you offer;
Mean time pray leave me, for I feign would rest:
The Fox perceived the Wolf his craft discri'd,
Went thence away with heaviness oppressed,
As if the Wolf indeed had like to di'd
The Wolf laughes in in his sleeve the Fox mean while
Runs to a Shepherd as he kept his sheep,
And tells him how the Wolf he may beguile,
While in his den he lies fast asleep,
The Shepherd takes his dog, his staff, his sling,
And with the Fox he goes: (for she was guide)
Who to the hole him readily does bring,
Where the poor Wolf betrayed on sudden di'd,
The Fox for her good service had the den,
And whatsoevever goods therein were found
The Shepherd shortly after comes again,
And there the treacherous Fox he does confound,
And as the Fox his gossips death devised,
In the same trap he falls slain and surprised.
Moral.
The envious man that does repine
At's neighbors happiness and good;
Often for him digs a pit or mine
Wherein he sheddeth his own blood.
The Heart. Fab. 35.
Upon a Sun shine day a Heart
Repairing to a Fountain clear,
Stooping to drink perceived each part,
As in a glass he looking were,
When he surveyes his goodly horns,
And sees what breadth and branch they bear,
He shakes his head for joy, but scorns
His legs which small and spindle were,
Whilst thus himself the Heart survei'd,
And his own beauty did adore,
The Huntsman winds, whereat afraid,
He flies as leaves, the wind before,
The Dogs pursue, he takes a wood
Thick grown and high, where in the bushes
Fast fettered by the horns he stood,
Nor could get loose with friskes and brushes;
He sighed and wept before he did,
As Hearts (some say) are wont to do,
To see how he had magnified
Those parts had brought him all his woe;
When those that had him still befriended,
With scornful words had vilepended.
Moral.
We love the things which we should fly
What hurts us most often times most please,
We look on things shows fair and high,
And only fix our hearts on these.
Tillsnar'd by pride our woes begin
By that we most did glory in.
The Viper and file. Fab. 36.
ASmith one day (you know Smiths are good fellows)
To th'Alehouse went leaving his shop and bellows;
A Viper steals into his shop mean while,
And with her teeth began to grind his sile;
Fool quoth the sile, what is this thy rashness does?
Sooner than hurt me, thou will burst thy tooth;
The tuffest iron, and the strongest steel,
When I to bite dispose, my sharpness feel.
Moral.
Beware with whom thou do contend,
On stronger force they force who spend,
With shame are vanquished in the end.
The Wolf and Sheep. Fab. 37.
BEtween the Wolf and Lamb we see
Nature has put Antipathy;
Yet these two once would undertake.
To make peace; for performance sake
Each gave their pledge, the silly Sheep
Gave up their Dogs they used to keep:
The subtle Wolves their young ones gave;
For while the in^ocent sheep were feeding
And neither thought of wars or bleeding,
The young Wolves howl in strong desire
To suck the Damme, and see the Sire:
The Old Wolves hearing the young ones cry,
Raised an Alarm presently:
And on the guiltless Lambkins fall,
Slaying them in a moment all:
Suggesting they the truce did break,
The cause, they found the Lambkins weak.
Moral.
When thou do make a league, or seal a peace,
Beware of giving too good hostages,
For under friendships color and pretense
Some first get power, then wreake malevolene.
The Wood and Countrie-man. Fab. 38.
WHen trees could speak and had their native speech
A Swain comes to the wood and does beseech
To give him so much Timber as would make
His Axe an helve* It kindly bids him take;
But when this clown had helved on his Axe,
The stately trees he cuts, and hewes, and hacks,
And fells them to the ground; who now too late,
Sorrow their own, and moan their follows fate.
Moral.
Take heed on whom thy gifts thou do bestow,
Some turn good deeds to the Authors overthrow.
The Belly and Members. Fab. 39.
Man's nimble foot and active hand,
With belly in contention stand,
Accusing her that she does eat
Up all their industry and sweat;
Therefore they would no longer serve,
But let her earne her bread or sterve:
The belly prays them to remember,
She was but steward to each member,
And what they into her did power
She shortly did to all restore;
Th'umuly members had no ears,
Nor eyes to see, or hear her tears,
But cruel hearted were content
To pine her wanting nutriment.
But when the belly waxed weak,
The Arteries began to speak,
And call unto the hand to feed
The belly in this extreme need,
For now they felt the strength that lay
In those strong ligaments decay;
The stubborn hand did then relent,
And would have reached it aliment,
But the poor stomach was so cold,
TO would nothing take nor nothing hold,
They were too good the guts to cherish,
And therefore with the guts must perish.
Moral.
As in our humane bodies, so instates,
Each member on another does depend,
Eyes to the hand, hand to the feet relates,
Man needs man, friend stands in need of friend;
Ruin attends discord, when communion
Maintains the bond of peace in perfect union.
The Ape and Fox. Fab. 40.
AN Ape (whose tail you know is ever bare,)
Entreats the Fox, a piece of his to spare,
And if he would confer a part upon her,
It would ease him, and do the Ape much honor:
Friend, quoth the Fox, although my bush be fair,
It Is not too much, nor will I give one hair,
And say it were, I*de rather have it sweep
The durtie ground, than an Apes tail wa^me keep.
Moral.
Some want, some others have too much in store,
Yet cannot find in heart to help the poor.
The Heart and Oxen. Fab. 41.
AHart before the hounds ready to fall,
Does cast himself into an Oxes ftall,
And begs of him, (to shun the present danger)
Leave for a while to rest him in the manger:
The courteous Ox the Heart would not deny,
But it was not safe for him, he did reply,
Because the master, or the watchful hind,
Resorting hourly thither, would him find;
The hopeful Heart of safety makes no doubt,
If he conceal, and not reveal him out;
He climes the cratch, come, looks goes his way,
The Heart being over-joy*d with his success,
Begins to rouse as fearelesse of distress;
To whom a grave and aged Ox thus cries,
Friend, though you have escapt this fellows eyes,
Who is in truth a Mole, or one as blind,
Our Lynx-ey'd Master Argus, is behind,
And he will see the least straw lie's amiss,
Whilst the Hearts friend the Ox, was telling this,
In comes the quick eyed Lyncus to the stall,
To see his cattle, where he o'relookes all,
Strokes this fed Ox, claps that, goes to the rack,
To see if fodder, or if meat they lack;
And pulling out some hay to smell unto't,
By chance takes hold of the poor hid Hearts foot,
Upstarts the Dear, the Farmer shuts the gate,
Down falls the game, who dying thus too late
Sighs out, unwise are they who for to shun
The lesser danger, into greater run.
Moral.
Thus reason tells us that it is always best,
Of two great evils to select the least.
The Fox and grapes. Fab. 42.
THe Fox one day by chance espied a Vine,
Laden with grapes, which being ripe did shine,
And look so lovely, short to make the matter,
Don Reynards dainty tooth began to water,
And how to have them down he casts about,
For they hung high, and his short reach quite out;
The subtle wits he had, which are not small,
To get one bunch, together he does call,
But maugre all the brains he does employ,
Like Tantalus he saw, could not enjoy:
The more he looks, the more he feasts his eyes;
The less his appitite he satisfies;
At length perceiving none he could devour,
He cheers his looks, who until now did lowre,
And says I care not, yet these grapes are sour.
Moral.
The Moral of this Fable thus does teach,
Men ought not care for things they cannot reach.
Arion and the Dolphin. Fab. 43.
EAch child can tell ye that Arion was
A man of mustick excellent and rare,
Dwelt at Methymna; Lesbos I Will the place
Famed for the birth of this eare-ravisher,
Whom Periander Corinths King held dear,
As Well for gentle bi^th, as skillful Art:
But he had Crochets, as it should appear,
(So most Musicians have) and they must part.
Arion needs must other countries see,
Desire of foreign fame his Harp commands;
Sicilia first he foots, next Italy,
Where in great honor and much grace he stands,
Stealing men's hearts, as one may say, by the ear:
They, as some power divine do him adore;
Gold, and rich gifts, are given him every where,
That he is cloid with wealth, he had such store:
Back to his Country, he resolves to go,
And for his voyage does a ship prepare,
Manned with Corinthians whom he well does know,
All things made ready for his journey are:
Arion puts to Sea, the wind blows fair,
Whilst in security he lies at rest:
The Mariners who always watchful are,
Upon a night thus held their wardens quest,
How rich a purchase we with case may gain,
There Is none abaoad, but knows Arion here
Abounding in such wealth, as few remain
His equals for his Treasures, far, or near:
Who would not venture to become the Lord,
And sole Commander of this prize, to trust
A murder to the Seas, and over board,
Him and his charming instruments to thrust:
Let his bewitching lays sound new delight,
To Neptunes scaly subjects in the deep;
Let his rare harmony win Amphitrite
While we inricht cut through the Ocean,
And landed live like Kings; what think ye Mates,
(The Master says) to this my motion?
Who is it can tell the Story of his fates,
None but our selves, and if we blab his end,
May our tongs blast us; All agree; next morn,
Harmless Arion to the water's send:
As some sweet airie singer on a thorn,
Warbling harmonious notes, at unawares
Intrapt, forgoes her tunes, and falls to peep;
So poor Arion in the sailors snares,
Leaves Musicks melody, and gins to weep:
What means this outrage friends? if for my goods
Ye are combined, he said, why take them all:
Let not your hands be stained in guiltless blood;
The Gods forbid ye should to murder fall:
I value not my money, store, or treasure,
For ship, and goods, and jewel, all are yours:
Take all, convert my substance at your pleasure,
Spare but my life's unhappy wretched hours.
He begs remorse: they do not weigh entreats:
He weeps, such streams his body will not save:
His looks to heaven he casts, his breast he beats;
For tears no eyes, for prayers no ears they have:
Well then since thus you are resolved quoth he,
To force me suffer what your wills enjoyne,
Grant me one boon, before your tyranny
Bereave me of my being, with my coin:
Reach me my Harp, and give me leave to tie,
Such clothes about me fits my mournful song,
Swaine-like I Will sing my sunerall Elegy,
And make amends for borrowing time so long:
They are content, his Harp Arion takes
Sings such an Orphean song, that calmes the seas:
Then from the upper deck a leap he makes,
Which more than all his sounds the Sailors please,
For Corinth merrily they hoist their sails;
All their whole course, they laugh, play, sing and drink,
Careless of what given-lost Arion ails;
His Treasure shared, on little else they think;
But they must hear a strange and wondrous thing;
A miracle beyond all humane thinking;
A Dolphin twixt Arions legs does cling,
And bears the sweet-touch warbler from sinkings
Upon whose scaly back he sits astride;
And like skild Gallants running of a race,
As these, on land, he on the Sea does ride;
Save that no four foot beast can match his pace:
And though his late hired Ship was trim and tight,
A dainty vessel, and of nimble sail;
This courser runs his canvas out of sight,
Maugre tides force, or Eolus whistling gale:
At Toenarus a small, but famous place,
Where Poets feign the entrance is of Hell:
This fate loved Lyrick finished his Sea-race,
There plays his wind-swift Steed a sweet farewell:
Who, whilst his singers beat lifts up her head,
Above the Harpe-calme Billow of the Sea;
But ceasing suddenly as stricken dead,
Deseends, resounding murmurings at his stay:
The joyful man a shore upon his knees,
With utmost skill sounds out a hymn of praise
To Neptune and the other Deities,
That beyond hope, thus had prolonged his days:
Then to Corinthus ward Arion goes,
Which was not far from thence, so to the Court,
In the same habit, and sea-season'd clothes
He comes, and there his voyage does report:
The King (his friend) heard him a large relate
The strange events, and wonders that befell him:
But he as all good Kings, all liars hate,
Not only credits not, what he does tell him;
But in his antique garment does commit
Him to safe keeping, till the truth were known;
Which searce was done, Fate so determined it,
His Ship arives, report where of is blown
To Court, the King the ship master inquires,
If he can tell him of his traveled friend,
Who answers, he in Italte respires,
Beloved, rich, safe, whom all for skill commend:
Is It true, quoth Periander, ye relate?
Else let your Grace (says he) take of my head:
With that Arion shows himself, whereat
The shipper all aghast, looks pale as lead;
And the whole story does at large confess,
Imploring pardon for his guiltiness.
Moral.
From brutish creatures we more mercy find,
Than from those men to rapine are inclined.
Hercules and the Carter. Fab. 44.
A Carter having burst his waine
As he was driving on the way,
Sits down and does with tears complain,
And Hercules for help does pray,
A voice he hears from heaven descend,
And to him in this manner say,
Thy hand unto thy Cart first lend,
Whip up thy Horse, the Gods then pray,
First do thy part, use all thy power,
And then for aid, the Gods implore.
Moral.
For lazic vows, God help, and idle prayer,
By this we see the God do little care,
The lawful means we must peruse, and then
To our endeavors God will say Amen.
The Ape and her Twins. Fab. 45.
WHen as the Ape does whelp, as some have sed,
Of twins she evermore is brought to bed,
One of the which she ever loves most dearly,
The other nurses as a stranger merely:
And such an Apish Mother on a day,
With her beloved brat in arms did play,
when suddenly afrighted, against a tree
Where to she leaps, to shun the jeopardie,
The brains of her too dear beloved elfe
She dashes out, the other saves himself,
Which at her back, as carelessly she bore
As beggars do their brats not cared for,
Who grew in length of time a goodly Ape,
And got the Mothers love as well as shape.
Moral.
Fond parents often times occasions be,
Through too much love, too much indulgencie,
To spotle and lose the children which they love,
Whilst those least cockered ever better prove.
The Ox and Heyfer. Fab. 46.
THe aged Ox went daily to the plow
Whilst the young wanton Heyfer in the field
Was idle, fed, and played, nor knew to bow
Her neck to yoke, nor could to labor yield,
Nor could she be content this life to lead,
But from the pasture one day to the plow,
Softly as it was her custom'd pace to tread
She comes in state, and asks the old Ox how
He came so meagre, and did look so lean,
How his bald neck became so thin of hair,
Wherefore in age to labor he did mean,
When she did nothing, yet was fat and fair:
The aged Ox as then made no reply,
But drew the plow as he was wont to do,
But shortly after as he casts his eye,
This Iustie Heyfer came into his view,
For she was bound, and to the Altar led,
To whom the sober Ox, but sighing spoke,
Were it not better to endure the yoke,
Than feel the Axe, to labor, than to be
The untimely fruit of death and luxury.
Moral.
Safety and health, sweet industry attends,
When idle courses, still find tragic ends.
The Lion and Dog. Fab. 47.
A Paultrie Curre a gallant Lion meeting
His duty done, and complementall greeting,
Says to the Lion, Si^, what do you mean
To keep the woods, and by-waies, and grow lean
You see (quoth he) how I am fat and fa^re,
And which is best, nor labor nor take care,
True he replies, your fare indeed is better,
But with thy morsel (Curre) thou have thy fetter,
Thou that art borne a slave, can sawne and cog,
And fill thy paunch, a life fit for a dog,
We that are borne to rule, and to be free,
scorn to be fat, by base servilitie.
Moral.
Brave Spirits scorn to sloope to servile things,
A wallet fits a beggar, Crowns fits Kings.
The River Fish. Fab. 48.
ARiver Fish by waters force,
Perforce was hurrid to the maine,
The fresh thing quite out of his couse,
The goodly sea fish does disdain,
And of her birth, and of her breeding,
Estate, and worth, she much does tell;
And magnifies her drink and feeding,
The sea-calfe hearing this does swell,
And says thou bragging thing of naught
That dare wi^h N^ptunes sons compare,
Lets both be taken and be brought
Unto the Market, if thou dare,
Then thou shall see which of us two,
Man, the best Judge of flesh and fish,
Shall give the price, and palm unto;
We Are meat for Kings, thou fil'st each peasants dish.
Moral.
Vain glorious bragards, with the torrent borne
Of self conceit, all others g^ire and scorn,
But taken to task by some well seasoned wit,
They Are found fresh fools, for no employment fit.
The Leopard and Fox. Fab. 49.
THe Leopard a beast whose skin or hide,
Nature with spots has rarely beautified,
One day perceiving how she was adorned,
The Lion and all other brutes she scorne'd,
This gallant beast Reynard the fox does meet,
One known to be nor big, nor fair, nor sweet;
Who having fully learned her haughty pride,
And cause thereof, the Leopard does deride,
Vain foolish beast, of nothing proud but skin,
Foxes, though foul without, are fair within.
Moral.
This learning then we gather may from hence,
Of gifts to know a triple difference
Of fortune, beauty, and internal grace,
Of which the last deserves the chiefest place.
The Child and Fortune. Fab. 50.
Upon a day it thus befell,
A child sat sleeping on a well,
Where had he fallen into the pit,
He must have perished in it:
(But see the luck ont) fortune blind
Came by and chanced the barn to find,
Groping him out (for Poets lien
If she can see or have her eyne)
And feeling hun well made and prittie
Upon his parts she takes pity;
Awakes him first, then lets him see
The danger whence she sets him free:
Arise she says, go home, there keep
Thee safe from drowning, there safe sleep;
For had thou perished in this pit,
I only had bin blamed for it,
Thy years had thine excuses made
On me the fault thereof had laid.
Moral.
On us we dangers pull by oversight,
Then without cause blame fortune, and her spite.
A Youth and Swallow. Fab. 41.
A Wastefull youth who had consumed his state,
A fair demeanes, which careful parents gat
Was grown so poor and miserable bare,
That he owned nothing but the clothes he ware,
Which when he saw the Swallow first appear,
Who, as we say, is Summers harbinger,
He sold them too, and did disrobe his back
To feed his hungry belly, but alack
Hyems then mild, began his head to show,
And grizled Beard, ameld with frost and snow,
So cold the weather grew, so long it lasted
This unthrift and the Swallow both were blasted,
But when the ominous bird again he spies,
(For he had naught to do but gaze) he cries,
Oh fatal bird, thou had well deserved,
That kill'st thy self and with false hopes me starved.
Moral.
He that spends lewdly, shall with sorrow find
The want of help, in time of miseries:
He that in Halcton days with lavish mind
Wastes his estate, when blasts and storms arise,
May sterve for want, or in a prison dies.
Jupiter and the Crow. Fab. 52.
THe Birds would have a King, Jove was content,
And freely granted what they did desire,
Unto which end he called a Parliament,
Wherein it was ruled he should the Crown aspire,
That looked most lovely and most fair in show,
Each bird prepares himself against the day,
The Raven his deformity does know,
And out of hope to bear this regal bay
One of his own worth does of each bird borrow
A fether, and thereof does make a plume;
Never was Bird so fair seen till that morrow,
And Jove himself, on his side gave the doom;
But as he was about to give the Crown,
Each Bird assumes the fether he had lent,
And in a trice his plume they rustle down:
Don Corvo thus uncas'd, in discontent,
Sneaks slily thence, Jove laughs, the winged crew smile
To see how easily outsides may beguile.
Moral.
It Is not the outsides, glory, gorgeous shows,
Subject to moths;
It Is not the set by beauty of the face,
Changed by disgrace;
It Is not health, honor, riches, friends or power,
Gone in an hour;
That makes us worthy of heavens Crown,
Which moth, nor age, nor sickness, can pull down:
But it is the souls adornment, heavenly grace,
Exceeding honors, riches, cloths, or face.
The Lion and Bull. Fab. 53.
THe King of Beasts (says Esop) on a day,
To take a well-fed Bull did lie in wait;
The Beast was strong, and held the Lion play,
(For to say truth, he sinelt out the deceit)
The Lion seeing strength no issue takes,
With seeming love he does the Bull invite
To Court to supper, for a feast he makes
With fatted sheep, which he had killed that night;
The Bull durst not his Sovereign deny,
But thanks his Grace, and says he will attend,
Along they walk, for supper time grew nigh,
And being come unto their journeys end,
Enter the palace, and the dining ball.
The Bull, whose heart was filled with fearful care,
And circumspection, saw no sheep at all,
Nor preparation for a Princes fare,
Only he sees great kettles, spits, and axes,
Such as are used the ox to kill and roast,
Which seen the Bull retires, and no leave axes:
The Lion asks him why he makes such post:
Oh quoth the Bull, these instruments I see,
Presage the death of oxen, not of sheep,
Therefore your highness sups alone for me;
Light suppers (Leeches say) cause soundest sleep.
Moral.
A wise man sees a tyrants traps and snares,
And timely to prevent them he prepares.
The Lioness and she Fox. Fab. 54.
THe she Fox meeting of a Lioness,
Amongst some wise discourses thus does prate;
I wonder why our bodies being less,
We have more births, and often procreate,
For every year we do produce at least
One happy birth, and at one birth have many
To call us mothers, while you greater-beast
In many years have none, or have you any,
It Is but one whelpe. I must (quothshe) confess
Compared with foxes, Lions are but barren,
I whelpe but one, true, but a Lioness,
When all thy crew of cubs are arrant carren.
Moral.
Whence we collect those creatures are most blessed,
Not that have many children, but the best.
The Be and Jupiter. Fab. 55.
Upon a day the active Be,
(The map of pains and industry)
To Jupiter the first fruits gives
Of wax and honey of her hives,
So good to taste, so good to smell,
Jove could not choose, but take it well,
And was so pleased with her that gave it,
Ask what she would, and she should have it.
Great God, she says, this I request,
That when by man we are oppressed,
Stealing the honey that we make,
(For is it notfelonie to take
The sweet from us, for which we sweat,
Our only sustenance and meat?)
Such force there may be in our sting,
That pricked therewith, it death may bring.
When Inpiter had heard her suit,
A little while the God stood mute,
Studying belike what he should say,
(For man to him was dear always)
Not only he her suit denies
But adds this, thou worst of flies,
That would impoison with thy sting,
Of all our workmanship the King;
When he from thee thy combs shall take.
And thou on him assault do make,
And lose thy sting, then death shall be
Just guerdon for thy cruelty.
Moral.
Wish no man's harm, no not thine enemies,
For God in his due time will wrongs repay;
Endure thy crosses, suffer injuries,
Although thy goods and wealth be taken away;
For he that gave thee them can lend thee more,
And when he pleases, can increase thy store.
The Falconer and Partridge. Fab. 56.
A Falconer took a Partridge once alive,
And as he went to nip her on the head,
With tears she prays, and thus to him she sed,
Sir, if you will spare my life, and me reprive,
I Will play the stale, and bring into your snare
Whole covies of my kind. Will you be true,
And what for fear you promise will you do?
(Quoth he) she vows she will, the Falconer swear,
Were there no more, her life he would not spare,
That would for fear of death betray a friend:
Would every traitor had this Partridge end.
Moral.
The traitorous person who in hope to save
His own life by betraying of his friends.
So much the nearer draws unto his grave,
By how much he such treachery intends;
For every one will bury him alive,
Who to save one, would thousands else deprive.
The Tortoise and Hare. Fab. 57.
THe Tortoise and the Hare by chance did meet,
The nimble Hare derides the Tortoise feet,
Whereat the Tortoise moved, does brave and dare
To run a course with this light footed Hare.
Dull pated, as slow footed, did thou know
(Quoth wat) my speed, thou would st not dare me so,
But I accept the challenge, name the place,
And Judges who shall say, who wins the race;
Astutious Reynard of all brutes most cunning,
Was made the Judge of this new kind of running,
Who points the place, and does for Justice sake
To view who wins the goal, sit at the stake.
The Tortoise lays all obstacles apart,
And makes her course with all her speed and art:
The Hare, who scorned her slownesse, by the way,
As footmen use, did dance, and skip, and stay,
Mean time the slow paced Tortoise gathers ground,
And long before the Hare, at stake was found;
Which when the Hare perceived, she did confess,
The Tortoise wit outwent her nimblenesse,
Moral.
Hereby we see through industry and brain,
How slighted persons, great things may attain,
And how the mind does outward gifts outrun,
For what force never could, wisdom has done.
The Sallow and Axe. Fab. 58.
THe Sallow of all trees did first give way
To helve the Axe, so does the fable say,
Who in requital first of all did put
Her to the sword, and off her arms did cut
Wedges, wherewith she might the sooner cleave:
The grieved Sallow does the wrong perceive,
And thus in tears she does her moan express;
To be hewne down by man, I must confess,
Does not so much afflict me, as to be
Mangled and torn by mine own progeny,
And by those arms to whom I being gave,
This wounds my heart with grief, and makes me rave.
Moral.
In adverse time, the injuries we find
From friends untrue, or done by kin unkind,
Does more afflict us, than wrongs done by foes;
Doubly he falls whom his own overthrowes.
Jupiter and the Serpent. Fab. 59.
Jove keeps his Nuptials, on which day,
All creatures to his Court repair,
Bringing such presents as they may,
Amongst the rest, the snake comes there,
And in her teeth she brings a rose,
A dainty early fragrant flower,
The smell whereof ascends his nose;
She offers it, the God does lowre,
And does it utterly refuse:
For though (quoth he) I be the King
Of all things breathing, and do use
To accept the presents which they bring,
A Serpents gift I ever hate:
So sent her hissing forth his gate.
Moral.
A bad man's gift, though fair in sight,
Good men reject and bantsh quite:
For ili effects do closely lurk
In such, when most they friendly work.
An old man and his Wives. Fab. 60.
AN aged lecher in the spring,
(Best time some say for marrying)
Because he would be soundly sped,
A brace of wives at once did wed,
The one was young, the other old,
Himself twice thirty years had told:
These three together dwelt and fed,
The old wife often would scratch his head,
And that she might be held most dear,
Pulls out those hairs did black appear:
The younger wife that she might hold
All the affection from the old,
A thing not hard to do, they say,
As fast did pull out all the gray;
That in short time it came to pass,
As bald as any Coot he was;
And looked so uncothly and ill,
Men pitied him a while, until
They knew the cause, but then with laughter
They mocked and gier'd him ever after.
Moral.
From scofs and giers he cannot well befree,
That matches in old age for venerie.
Digress.
Yet many such old dotards now adays,
To match their goutie bones to wanton lays,
Count it a glory, though they know they weave
A cap to hide their horns, more than their hair.
The Lion, Bear, and Fox. Fab. 61.
A Lion, and a Bear, upon a day
With hunger bitten, went abroad to prey:
And as they ranging were upon a lawne,
They overtook and slew a tender fawn:
The Lion claimed the prey, as his by right;
The Bear denied it, so they fell to fight;
And fought so fiercely, till for want of wind
Both fell to ground: the Fox, who stayed behind,
And dogd them at the heels, to see the fray,
And the success, stepped in and took the prey
Which they contended for, and ran his way:
The Bear and Lion lying like dead stocks,
Roar out revenge against the saucie Fox;
Mean while Vulpone hies him to the hole,
Leaving the wearied warriers to condole,
Who grieve not half so much for want of meat,
As that a stinking carren should them cheat.
Moral.
Two fallen at ods, a third that takes less pain,
Often times steps in, and beaves away the gain:
So have I seen a crafty Lawyer thrive,
By getting that, for which two Clients strive.
The sick Lion, Wolf, and Fox. Fab. 63.
A Crazie Lion growing sick and old,
Betakes him to his den and to his hold;
Which known, unto his habitation
The beasts repair on visitation,
All but the Fox:
The Wolf that Reynard hates,
Observing it, thus to the Lion prates;
Sir, be of comfort, for you now behold
Your subjects love, though you be weak and old,
Here Is not a creature, as your grace may see,
But loves your person, and your Majesty,
And of their zeal to make a demonstration,
All, but the Fox, are come to visitation,
Reynard alone, if any ill affected,
It Is he, siuce he his duty has neglected;
The Fox comes in, as it had bin his Q,
And heard the Wolfs speech what it tended to,
And though the Lion to indignation
Was moved, by the Wolfes insinuation,
To show himself a wise and righteous prince,
He first would hear, before he would convince;
The Fox with low obeisance does beseech
His royal person liberty of speech.
And says, Thrice sacred Sir, which of these by,
Has done such service to your Grace as I?
As I poor worm, borne for no other thing,
Than thus to spend my means to help my King;
Whilst these about your person gaze and talk.
Unto the learned Physicians I walk,
And now at last after great pains have found
A sovereign salve, to make my Sovereign sound:
Nor was my absence as some by did press,
Out of neglect, but caused by carfulness:
For what am I, or what good should I gain,
By reaping hatred from my Sovereign?
The Lion, as all sick ones health affect,
Would know the cure that he might find the effect,
The more perhaps, for love unto the State,
Commands the Fox his medicine to relate,
Who says, although it homely be and plain,
Let me your servant, pray you't not disdain,
You then must pull the Wolfes skin ore his face,
And while it is blood-warme wrap you in his case;
Sir, this ant please you's all, and easily tried.
The Lion strips the Wolf straight out of's hide,
Whereat the Fox does smile, the Wolf does bleed,
Oh might all base backbiters still so speed.
Moral.
The Morall's double, first, a Magistrate
Although he suffer knaves insinuate,
And impeach others, should reserve an ear,
The just excuses of the wronged to hear.
Next the malicious and backbiting tongue
Which only wags to do another wrong,
Draws on it self the ruin, shame, and woe,
In which another it would overthrow.
The Dove. Fab. 63.
THe season being dry, the Dove with thirst
For want of drink did faint, and almost burst;
To quench which drought, she takes her self to flight,
And as she cuts the air, unto her sight
A garden house presents a painted spring
So lively done, the Pigion flags her wing,
Poor harmless bird, whose innocence deems
That each thing is in truth, the same it seems:
And in her fall she haps to break her wing,
In comes a servant and the Dove up takes,
Breaks her neck, and thirst for ever slakes.
Moral.
This shows that they which softly, safely go.
Who rashly work, work their own overthrow.
The Husbandman and his Cattle. Fab. 64.
A Husbandman that in the field did dwell,
Was forced to keep his house, the rain so fell;
Which still increasing grew to be so great,
He was compelled his sheep and lambs to eat;
The mutton gone, the tempest does remain,
Until the Oxen of the plough were slain:
The dogs perceiving them to go to pot,
Resolved to fly, I think 't was time to trot,
For if his laboring beasts (quoth one) he slay,
What will become of us never work I pray?
Moral.
So that we gather from the Fables telling,
With cruel masters there is no safe dwelling.
The Husbandman and his Sons. Fab. 65.
A Husbandman that on his deathbed lay,
Having two Sons, unto them thus did say:
My sons, ye know I love you with my heart,
But I from you, and all the world must part;
All that I have to give, or leave behind,
Is yours, dig in my vineyard, ye shall find.
The Father dies, the sons in hope of treasure,
Do delve and dig the vineyard out of measure:
Many a day they wrought, and turned the ground,
But not a dram of coin, or gold, they found,
Yet lost no labor, for the vineyard bore
More grapes that year, than it had three before.
Moral.
Man's travel his assured treasure is,
What wealth comes otherwise is fortunes bliss:
The worlds loved darling, riches, often we see
Lightly come by, is spent as lavishly;
When what we labor for and get with pain,
Does us more good, and proves the sweeter gain.
A Fisher and his pipes. Fab. 66.
A Foolish Fisher took his pipe and nets,
And to the sea upon a rock he gets,
Where merrily he pipes in hope assured,
The fish with his sweet tunes would be allured;
He pipes and plays two long hours by the clock,
The fish no more were moved than was the rock;
Whereat enraged his pipe he puts in's hose,
And to his tackling and his nets he goes,
Which happily into the sea he throws,
And a great draught of fishes does enclose;
Which being drawn a land and to the shore,
Danced now as fast as he had pip'd before;
What foolish creatures are these fish, he says,
That piping hear not, dance when no man plays.
Moral.
We never can expect happy success,
From senseless works, or actions seasonlesse:
Preposterous pursuing of our wishes,
Is to as much purpose, as to pipe to fishes.
The Heart and Fawn. Fab. 67.
A Little wanton Fawn upon a day,
Unto his Sire, the Heart, was thus heard say:
Sir, in mine eye, you are a lovely beast,
Well limbed and nimble; footed for your crest,
It Is double armed to keep off an invade,
Why should you be of every curre afraid?
You have more strength of body, length of wind,
Than any dog of whatsoever kind.
The good old Heart smiling makes this reply,
The words my child thou speak are verity,
Why we should shun the hounds as now we do
Or be at all afraid, I do not know,
But this I have observed which thou mai'st mark,
Though great, we fly, though the least dog but bark.
Moral.
Whom nature has made cowardly and faint,
No means nor art, can make him valiant.
The Hares. Fab. 68.
THere was a time the generation
Of Hares did meet for consultation,
All malcontents, and wot you why, they say,
Nature never made such wretched worms as they,
Obnoxious unto dangers day and night,
By men, dogs, vermin, famine, cold and kite,
With sad laments they moan their wretched state,
Praying Jove end their lives, or mend their fate;
Amend, oh never, quoth one aged Hare,
Our case is past relief, fear and despair
So fully has possessed us, that we see
Even in our fleepe our eyes never closed be;
Wherefore let us put an end unto our grief,
Death to affliction is a quick relief:
So hand in hand as they in order stood,
They were resolved to run to the next flood,
And there like loving friends at once to sink:
Amain they run till coming nigh the brinke,
A nimble frog that sat upon the bank,
Leapt off for fear, and in the river sanke:
Which seen, this wise old Hare cries out amain;
Fellows and friends, from violence abstain,
Let Us live and be content, for now I see,
That there are creatures fearfuller than we.
Moral.
More patiently men miseries sustain,
When they have fellow-feelers of like pain.
The Dog and Wolf. Fab. 69.
A Dog lying sleeping at a stable door,
A Wolf comes by, and seizing him before
He could escape or shun him by evasion,
Was forced to fall into this kind persuasion:
Oh master Wolf, quoth he, what do you mean?
If you should eat me now, I am dog lean,
Rank carrion, meat unfit your dainty tooth;
But if you will forbear one month (insooth)
My master feasts, for he his child will wed,
And in that time I shall be fat and fed.
The Wolf that loved his belly and good cheer,
Lets go the Dog, and when the month grew near,
Returns unto the stable, where he found
The Mastiffe in the hay-loft sleeping sound,
To whom he calls, and wakens, and thus sed,
Friend, you remember what you promised,
Your time's at hand, and you are in good plight;
I thank you, quoth the Dog, you are in the right,
I now am taught for sleeping without door,
And you to lose possession any more.
Moral.
From dangers mouth a wise man once set free,
Will still beware of the like jeopardie.
The Lion, Fox, and Ass. Fab. 70.
THe Lion, subtle Fox, and silly Ass,
Went out to hunt, and in an easy chase
Took a young kid, a sweet and dainty prey,
The Ass divider's made, who does obey,
And into three parts casts the divident,
As to his Asse-ship seems indifferent,
And into equal shares it being laid,
To take his part the Lion does persuade;
Whereat the choleric Lion in a rage,
Wories the Ass, his fury to assuage;
And therewithal unto the Fox converts,
Commanding Reynard to set out the parts:
The wily Fox lays all upon one heap,
Except some fragments which himself does keep,
Whose wisdom when the Lion had descride,
Best child, quoth he, who taught thee to divide?
To whom the discreet Fox made this reply,
The Asses harm, an't like your Majesty.
Moral.
Where tyrants reign it is better suffer loss,
And rest contented, than their wills to cross;
Other men's harms should good instructions be
For us to shun like we, like misery.
The Fox and Cat. Fab. 71.
REynard the fox, and Pus the cat,
Met by a wood to prate and chat:
The Fox was bragging of his wit,
The goodness, nimblenesse of it,
And how she had at least a peck
Of sleights, and tricks to save her neck,
At any pinch:
Well (quoth the Cat)
Jove help her has but one, and that
A plain one too. The huntsman sounds
His horn unto his deep mouthed hounds,
The Fox affrighted with the cry,
Taking no leave away did hie;
The nimble Cat leaps to a tree,
From whence the whole course she does see,
How Reynard is for all his wit,
Pursued, run out of breath and bit,
Which seen away she home wards goes,
Not caring for such tricks as those.
Moral.
Who builds upon the finesse his wit,
And tricks, like Reynard here, often bleeds for it.
The Ass and two Travelers. Fab. 72.
TWo friends there were (mine Author says)
Which traveled out of all high ways,
And as they went it came to pass,
Fortune presents them with an Ass,
Sadled, and brideled with a bit,
And all things for a journey fit:
But when no owner they epsy,
They strive whose is the property;
Like friends at first they plead their right,
When words nil serve, they fall to fight:
And whilst they unfriendly blows do deal,
The Ass away from both does steal.
Moral.
Thus greedy persons often thrive,
In losing that for which they strive.
The Wolf and Crow. Fab. 73.
OVer the Alps, a Wolf a journey goes,
Being all the way accompanied with Crows;
Who in his travel happened on a day,
Upon a liberal and a dainty prey;
The Crows therein would claim ashare, and why?
Because they kept the travellor company:
I thank you not, replies the Wolf, ye take
This pains for your own ends, nor for my sake
Should I fall sick and die, which Jove defend,
I fear for all the love you do pretend,
The seeming'st friend among'st you, would not stick
To be the first that would mine eyes out pick.
Moral.
Your Rookes in this our age are like these Crows,
In prosperous days, they will flatter, cog, and gloss,
In hope of prey: but fall into distress,
They Will sooner add affliction than redress:
Then wisely judge ere dear experience find,
The difference twixt fained love and loyal mind.
The Fishermen and Mercury. Fab. 74.
THe stars to Fishermen were so propitious,
They once of shel-fish took a mighty draught,
Whereof they eat so much they were suspicious
They had some ague, or some surfeit caught:
They ate, kept, sold, they gave away and spent,
Yet each had more than he knew well to use;
Their heads they lay together how to vent
Them while they are sweet, as they are in this muse,
Hermes comes by, and him they did invite
To taste their cates, as yet were fresh and good
The God who knew their thoughts does set it right,
For as he was a God, he understood
Their invitation was not for good will,
But what they could not keep, to help them spend:
Rude churles replies, reserve your fish until
It stink for me, I hold him for no friend,
Tenders another what he cannot eat,
So rich men bid the poor to their cold meat.
Moral.
Rich chuffes are taxt here, or their vanity,
Who bids not friends out of humanity,
Or for loves sake, but that their gifts may show,
What cheer they have, and in what wealth they grow:
The dancing Apes. Fab. 75.
OF all earths creatures next to humane shape,
Sense, reason, knowledge, Imitation,
None comes so near, as the ingenious Ape;
A beast (says Pliny) apt to education,
Of nimble foot, quick eye, attentive ear:
Of these apt Apes, a King once kept a crew,
All which such skillful active dancers were,
Great Lords and Ladies came from far to view
Their feats and sports, which made them all admire,
New active measures and new tunes they had,
Suited they were in strange, but rich attire,
A merry fellow once (or else a mad)
Who came to see these revells, or by chance,
Or purposely, into his pocket puts
(As Ladies sweet meats for their sustenance)
Good store of Philberds, and of hazell nuts:
The dancers enter, and their tricks they do
Beyond report and expectation:
All the spectators taken are with the show,
But now behold a pleasant alteration:
While they are busy, cast into a ring,
And lovingly hold hands, and dance the round,
His nuts amongst the dancers he does fling,
Which does all measure, time, and tune confound,
No sooner one perceives and smells the fruit,
But he lets go his hold and stoops to take it,
Here lies a vizard, there a tattard suit,
This masker shows his fellows shoulders naked,
That takes his next companion by the face,
Never was seen till then a true French brall,
They had forgot their taught curranto pace,
And now they dance the battle natural:
This was a change their master never taught,
A chance which no spectator looked after,
Which pleased the more, because beyond their thought,
The King and all the hall burst out in laughter
And for this sport the merry knave he thanked,
And in requital took him to the banquet.
Moral.
It is as hard a thing to change our nature,
As for to add a cubit to the stature:
Rich clothes may change the outside of an Ape,
But cannot alter nature with the shape:
For to each thing where nature is instinct,
The affections of the spirit are so linked,
That though with force thy nature hence thou chase,
She Will straight revert again unto her place.
The gald Ass and Fox. Fab. 76.
A Silly Ass whose o'reworne burdened back
With many a heavy load, and grievous pack
Was grown so gald, that each small sucking fly
Increased his torment and his malady,
Flings, winches, kicks, and whisks about his rail,
Yet naught to move these leeches would avail.
But still the more he stirs, more close they stick;
Upon the ground at length he lies heart-sick,
And prays the Fox which then by chance he spies,
With his bush tail to brush away the flies:
How long good friend (replies the Fox) have thus
These infects to your back been grievous?
Alas (kind Sir) this senight quoth the Ass,
I Have been so bitten that a blade of grass,
Which every neighboring beast about me crops,
Has not been seen within my jaw-falne chops:
And do they bite as bad as first they did
Quoth Reynard? Oh good sir, the Gods forbid
The Ass replies, for should they bite so fierce,
These and the Vultures mawes, had been my hearse
Long time e're now: why then Vulpone cries,
To have them off, me thinks you are not wise,
For should I sweep these which are glutted here,
And leave your gald back bare without defense,
New swarms of hunger-sterv'd malignant flies
Would open new pores, and suck new spurities;
Let these alone, you can but bitten be,
Full gorged suck gently, empty hungarly.
The Lark and her Young. Fab. 77.
THis mounting Chorister in field
Of wheat, her house, or nest, does build;
Which e're her pretty brood were fledge
Grew ready for the sickles edge;
She knowing well, upon a day,
Thus to her little birds did say:
When I abroad am flowne, give care
If ought about this corn you hear;
For doubtless 'twill not long remain
Here standing, lest it shed the grain:
Away she flies, th'obedient birds
Do promise to observe her words.
The owner and his son to see
How ripe the wheat grows, instantly
Approach, and thus the youngest fellow
Says, Sir, me thinks this wheat looks yellow,
It Is more than time the same were cut,
Fetched home, and in the garner put:
This afternoon the father says,
I Would have thee son, to go thy ways
Unto our neighbors, and our friends
And pray them that they would attend's,
With sickles sharp to morrow morn,
To help us reap this field of corn:
This said, away the owners part:
The peeping fools with panting heart,
As soon as e're their dam returns,
Recounts this news, which she not mournes,
But thus removes from them their sorrow;
If on their neighbors help to morrow
The father and the son rely,
We have no cause my chicks, to fly:
For friends and neighbors few there be
Help any in necessity,
But this excuse or that denial,
Answer such as do make trial;
The father and the son next day
Expected till the morning gray,
All azure changed by Sols high beam;
But neither sickle, friend, nor teame
Appeared, at which the senior said,
Our friends nil come I am afraid;
I Would have thee therefore go (my son)
This evening after milking done
And pray our kindred in the morn
To help us in this field of corn;
He answers, yes; away they went:
The larklings do afresh lament,
And to their dam in woeful wise,
Repeat their latter passages.
Content your selves my pretty ones,
The Lark replies, and cease your moanes;
Their kin on whom they now depend,
Will use them doubtless us their friend;
For kinsfolk in these days are slack,
Their nearest blood to help or back:
If friends and neighbors come not in,
We need not stir for fear of kin.
Next morn the pearls exhaled were
From the ripe wheates gilded ear,
And the chanting Lark on high,
Warbled natures harmony;
The hour before Meridian drew
Near, which by Phoebus height they knew;
But neither kith nor kin drew nigh;
To act the ripe corns tragedy:
Whereat enraged the father says,
Well, friends, and kindred, go your ways,
If e're you chance my aid to want,
Like courtesy ye show, I Will grant.
This afternoon see that you get
Our sickles, and them keenely whet;
And thou, and I, to morrow morn,
Will set our selves to cut this corn:
Which news being told unto the Lark,
More seriously she began to mark,
And having pondered well the words;
Yea marry (quoth she) my dear birds,
It Is time to trudge, for now I see
The old man, no more mock will be;
Since he himself resolves to do
What friend nor kin would yield unto.
Moral.
He that has power himself to make his ends.
Ought not rely for help, on kin, or friends:
For he that only will on such depend,
For means or help, may perish in the end.
Imprimatur.

June 9. 1634. Guil. Bray.

FINIS.

