The Fountain and VVelspring of all Variance, Sedition, and deadly Hate.
Wherein is declared at large, the opinion of the famous Divine Hiperius, and
the consent of the Doctors from S. Peter the Apostle his time, and the
Primitive Church in order to this age: expressly set down, that Rome in Italy
is signified and noted by the name of Babylon, mentioned in the 14. 17. and 18.
Chapters of the Revelation of S. John.

Chap. 17. verse 5 And in her forehe^d was a name written, a mystery, great
Babylon the mother of whoredom and abomination of the earth.

6 And I saw the woman dronken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

LONDON. Printed by Roger Ward, dwelling upon Lambard hill, near unto old
Fishstreet. 1589.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND noble Earls, the Earls of Huntington and Warwick,
Grace, Peace, and felicity in the Lord Jesus.
RIght Honorable, the wars, rumors of wars, breach of brotherly love,
manifold troubles and dissension growing every where through Europe, which is
the part of the world professing Christ, argue the dissolution of all things
premonished by our Lord not to be far hence distant. It behooves therefore
all good Christians considering the time, to be circumspect to watch and pray
accordingly as we are commanded by our Savior in these words. Vigilate and
Orate: again, Estote prudentes, sicut Serpents. Be ye wise as Serpents, And
we are deeply to consider, from whence this venom and poison flows, which
drunk and sucked in, by the space of many years passed, has transformed, and
as it were charmed the brains and senses of many men, that according to the
words of the Prophet, seeing they see not, hearing they hear not, and
understanding they understand not in matter concerning principally the
salvation of their souls. The remedy of which mortal malady consists in
this, to know and search out the cause, and that known, to remove the same,
and then to apply medicine for curing of it. In all which points, (Right
Honorable) I show briefly in this small treatise, following the doctrine of S.
Peter the Apostle, and the best learned and most approved Authors opinions
consenting and delivered from age to age, which open the sinful man, and
mystery of iniquity, the only cause of troubles, and not yet well perceived,
neither understood of the greater sort. Committing these my labors to your
Honors tuition and protection, whose zeal to true and sincere Religion,
attentive ear given always to the Preaching of Gods word, and laudable life
concurring as sure testimony, well known to the world, makes me bold to
dedicate unto your LL. this Pamphlet, hoping that the book being your own (as
it is) and therefore the more to be desired to be read, and to come into many
men's hands, whom all in general, for your singular virtues, do reverence,
honor and love, may profit, do good, and perchance, convert not a few from
their obstinate opinion in cleaving to the woorishe Babilonicall Church,
wherein rather of selfe-wil, than of any grounded reason they dwell and
persist. And on the contrary side, confirm and establish the others, whose
hearts already conducted by the holy spirit, see the light of Gods truth, and
ensue it* And herein, withal humblenes, I make manifest my conscience,
according to the small talent which unto me is lent, and hope that my duty,
obedience, and good will to her Majesty, Lords of her Counsel, and my
Country, may in the sequel sufficiently appear, Praying God to send both your
Lordships long life with increase of honor.

Your Lordships most humble, Christoph. O.

The Fountain and VVelspring of all Variance, Sedition, and deadly hate,
throughout Christiandome.
MEdicines be applied to the body, sick and diseased, but exhortations are
used to give courage and more stomach to the forward stout, and industrious,
that the spark of virtue already ingenerated in them, may grow to a bigger
flame and substance with increase, or else to stir up, raise, and pluck forward
the mind of man when it languisheth.

I therefore of the lowest sort of all among the learned, purposing to utter my
conscience, and knowledge by way of exhortation (my most bounden duty first
toward the Queens Majesty, and ne^t to the people of my native soil and
Country of England deeply considered, and moving me thereto) do earnestly
pray and instantly require al true English men of every degree as they tender
y^ safty of their souls and bodies, to give attentive ear, and well to mark
the whole discourse of this my purposed treatise the rather because it is of
weight and of most great importance, touching the weal public in this little
Isle of England, and preservation of our most royal and gracious Queen
Elizabeth, and next of us all English ingenerall, our country, wherein we are
bred and borne, our wifes, children, kinsfoolkes, and posterity, whereof we
should have a most chief and especial care, and regard, especially and above
all of religion, which concerns our souls to live here, and ever in the
world to come.

In all which by God his grace I intend to use perspicuity, to be as brief as
the urgent occasion of so necessary a cause shall suffer me: yet pretermitting
many things, which otherwise should have been touched, to avoid tediousnes and
prolixitie in matter now apparent already, and many years already past made
manifest unto y^ whole world. Consider O noble Eugland that thou have enimes
that hate thee deadly, that go about as much as in them is to work thy
destruction, Consider how the professors of the word of God else where in Europe,
far hence, and those that dwell next almost unto us be manaced, vexed, and
persecuted, and with all rigor and cruelty from time to time afflicted, even
to death: the malice whereof proceeds of causes of long time before grown,
hereafter specified, and fore warned in holy Scriptures. Ponder deeply and
call to mind with your selves, Nos incidimus in tempora periculosa. We are
fallen into the perilous time. The latter days of the world.
Nos sumus in quos fines Seculorum deueneru^t. We be those upon whom the ends
of the world be come. The tokens thereof be plain and manifest, told before by
our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, which be these, Nation shall rise against
nation, and Realm against Realm, then shall they put you to trouble, and
shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake. And
then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another. etc. So the time is
certain that the day of judgment is at hand. But of the day and hour (says
Christ) knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my father only. The
Apostle S. Paul in his 2 Chap. of his Epistle of the Thessalomans, ^^hessalo.
teaching when the day of Christ shall be at hand, thus says. Let no man
deceive you by any means. For the Lord shall not come, except their come a
departing first, and that the sinful man be opened, the son of perdition,
which is an adversary and is exalted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped so that he does sit in the Temple of God, ^^^ichrist.
boasting himself to be God. Remember ye not that when I was yet with you I
told you these things. And now you know what withholdeth, even that he might be
uttered and revealed at his time. For the mystery of iniquity does alreahy
work. etc. Again in the 10 Chap. of S. Matthew, these be Christ his words. The
brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the son, and the
children shall arise against theic fathers and mothers, and shall put them to
death, And ye shall be hated of all for my names sake. But he that endures to
the end shall be saved.

Now considering that these be the latter days, and that the end of the world
is hard at hand, by these tokens manifest and daily to be seen every where in
Christendom before our eyes, let us diligently search of whence this variance
and deadly discord sown and sprung up through all Europe is derived, Variance
and deadly discord throughout Christ^ndome.
out as it were of a welspring or fountain. For every malady proceeds of his
cause: take away the cause and imediatly ensues the curing of the sore or
disdase. What has been and is the original cause that the knot and band of
brotherly love is broken in the parts of the world professing Christ, that the
rage cruel, and beastly fearcenesse takes place, bearing sway, that the Peace
which was in one house, is put to flight: that envy, hatred and ma^^ce creeps
in, that War and the sword threatens destruction every where, The Pope the
cause of variance
even to the Innocents: That Satan is let loose abroad to increase the malice
of men, and to kindle the fire brand of all wickedness. Uerily the originaull
causes of all these troubles at this present broiling, and before this time many
years past, has been, and is the holy Father (as they call him) the Pope,
the Bishop of Rome, whom Saint Paul as ye have heard now before, covertly
describes to be Antechrist, the Son of perdition, which is exalted above all
that is called God. I beseech you gentle Readers be ye indifferent Judges,
even as the truth of God his word shall lead you, and as the interpretation
upon holy Scripture, made and set down by the ancient and approved Doctors
of the Church, even from the Apostles time, til 1000 years past shall direct
you: when the Pope rides from his castle to S Peter's Church in Rome, and is
carried (sitting in a Chair) aloft by men, The Pope exalts himself above all
that is called God.
upholding the same upon their shoulders. And the Sacramental bread is set in
a Pyx on a Nag or white horse back, led by a Priest in a white Surplice, going
before him, his guard enuironing the holy Father, and crying with aloud voice to
the people gazing on to see the sight, in this Italian word, Abasso, Abasso,
which is to say Bow and bend down your selves, or kneel down, not so much to
the Pix as to the Pope. Is not here the Bishop of Rome exalted above all that
is called God, and above the God in the box? For the Popes doctrine teaches
men to call the Sacrame^tal bread God, when they term it their Maker, and when
the make it a Sacrifice propiciatory for the quick and the dead, in their
Masses, when they reiterate day by day on the Altar that oblatation once
offered upon the cross once for all, for filthy lucre and gain, as in
trentals of Masses, etc. Does not the Pope boast himself above all that is
called God, The pride of y^ Pope.
when he sits in S. Peter's Church enthronished three or four yardes higher
then the Altar or Sacramental bread reserved in the Pix, blessing and crossing
them that lie prostrate before him: when he under his Bulls written or printed
in sheeps skins, and sent to those that dwell 1000 or 1500 miles from him,
being at Rome, forgiueth (upon money taken) horrible murders, Pardons for murder.
incest parracide, and such like crimes, the hearts of the parties not
considered, whether they be truly and unfeignedly penetent or no. When the
Pope most arrogantly peruerteth the words spoken in the Psalm 90. only of
Christ. Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis Leonem and
Draconem. Thou shall go upon the venomous beast and Adder, the young Lion and
Dragon shall tread under thy feet: and applies them with a Sathanicall pride
unto himself, and to those that from time to time ^it in his Chair, which is
horrible basphemie. But here I will use a little digression from the man to the
certain place of his habitation, The Pope known to be An^echrist by his
habitation and place.
that the Beast may the better be known by his den and accustomed haunt,
where he fatteth and franketh himself. For more and better prooffe of the
sequel of this matter, and so to settle their consciences in the truth, which
hitherto have but blinded: Hear (I desire you in the Lord Jesus) certain
authorities from the Primitive Church to this age, consenting and agreeing
together, that Babylon specified in the Revelation of S. John, does ^^te and
signify unto us the City of Rome in Italy.

First it is usual in holy Scripture to set down some word by some Trope to
signify a thing turned away from that which it properly betokens. And it is
used in writing, when an argument comes in handeling, out of which may grow
either vehement suspicion or fear of an imminent danger. In this sort S.
Paul. 2. Tim. 4. says himself to have been delivered out of the mouth of a
Lion: meaning by naming the Lion, the cruel Prince Nero. That in this place the
sense is, Nero to be taken for the Lion: The ancient Doctors of the Church, as
Hierome upon the life of Paul, Chrisostomus, Theophilactus, Aquinas^ Lyranus,
Interpreters upon holy Scriptures, do agree and consent. By like Trope our
Lord Christ in the 13 of Luke, calls the King Herod, by the name of a For.
Ignatius an holy writer in the Primititiue Church, using this manner of speech,
says that he he himself was compassed about with ten Leopards, which Ignatius
afterward interprets to be ten cruel soldiers to bring him capti^e to Rome.
Thus as S. Paul covertly by the name of a Lion would have to be understood
Nero. Our Lord Jesus by the name of For means Herod. And Ignatius by the
Leopardes terms Soldiers. So the author of the Revelation would have Rome
to be known by the vo^able of Babylon.

With this also agrees S. Peter, 1 Pet. 5.
who in the end of the fifth chap. of his former epistle writing from Rome,
says thus. The Congregation which is at Babylon saluteth you. Here note that
upon this place of Peter, as well the old and ancient Interpreters, as the
new do agree that the word Babylon is set down for Rome, as testifies
P^pias Hierapolites in Eusebius, upon the Ecclesiastical History. 2 book 15.
Chapter, Hierome upon the life of Mark the Evangelist, Papias. Eus. bi^.
Nicolaius Lyra, an approved writer, by the Romish Church, and many other,
which here to rehearse, it were to long. And so much the more this has a
resemblance of truth, that the Apostles had reueiled unto them many and sundry
things concerning the latter times: of the falling of the Roman Empire: of
the reueiling of the acurssed son Antichrist: of the abomination, standing
in the holy place. All which, the Apostles set out as it were shadowed somewhat
darkly, as it is left unto us in writing, and may be seen in the 24. of
Matthew, 2. Thessalonians. In which two places, there is spoken of these
matters, as it were by points, and pricks, rather than by any oopen speech.

Again, the same Papias taught afterward in Alexandria, and had been the
scholar of S. John the Apostle, whereupon we should be persuaded that he must
needs hear the same interpretation of his master, concerning Rome to be named
by Babylon, and that the same interpretation was as well in the Churches of
Asia, where S. John preached as in Europa, where S. Peter taught.

And least peradventure any might doubt, that no good and just testimony may be
brought out of the ancient and approved writers of the Primitive Church,
succeeding next to the Apostles age, you shall hear the opinion of those which
were next to the Apostles.

Tertullian Tertullian.
did write in the year 170. after Christ. He in his work against the Jews
has this written. Babylon in the writing of John, bears the figure of the
city of Rome, in that it is great, proud in force, and a beater down of the
saints. Who will now doubt, but that the said Tertullian heard this at the
Apostles mouths.

Also Origines Origines.
lived in the year 200. And he wrote in Alexandria many books, and the 12
Homily upon Ezechiell the Prophet, he thus expounds that there is Babylon:
where is confusion of manners, by vices and mischievous doing, continually
growing. And therefore it is no marvel if the holy writers, pondring what was
y^ state of the Romans Empire, which was the head of the world, especially the
city of Rome have defined Rome to be Babylon in their books.

Now hear an evident manifestation of this: where Hierome wrote about the year
of our Lord 380. Hi^ronimus.
teaching the Churches, both in Asia and Europa, in his commentary upon Esaias
47 chap. he witnesses, y^ many beside him in his time and age, did interpret
the daughter of Babylon, which should be made humble, not to be Babylon in
Caldea, but to be the city of Rome in Italy, which is called specially by the
name of Babylon in the Revelation of S. John, and in the Epistle of S. Peter,
and all threatenings which be spoken by the Prophet against Babylon to be
referred to the destruction of the city of Rome. Likewise the said Hierom, in a
certain Epistle to Assella, complaining of the corrupt manners of the city of
Rome, calls Rome by the name of Babylon. Again, the said Hierom, in the end
of his 2* book against Iouinian* turning his oration to the city of Rome, I
speak unto thee (says he) which has blotted out the blasphemy written in thy
forhead, by the confessing of Christ. O mighty city, lady of the world,
interpret thy name, Rome is by the Greeks a name of strength, by the Hebrews a
name of highness, keep that that thou art called. Let virtue make thee high, let
not voluptuousnes make thee low. Thou may eschew by repentance the curse
which our savior has threatened in the Revelation. Thou have the example of the
Ninevites. Beware the name of Iouinian, which is derived of an Idol.

S. Avgustine living in the time of S. Hierom, but yet a little younger, S.
Augustine.
accounted the chief among the latin Deuines, and having respect to all that was
spoken of Rome, by those that had written before in y^ Church, declares many
things to be like in Rome and Babylon: for in his book De ciuitate Dei, the
fifth Book, and second Chapter, he calls Babylon the first Rome. In his 18
book, and 22. chap. he compares Rome with the city of the wicked whi^^h Cain
builded. The one says he was builded of c^in which ^^ue his brother abel. The
other was builded by Romulus which killed his brother Rhemus.

Again Orosius a Spanish writer living in the time of S. Augustine, shows
that Rome and Babylon were alone, and especiciallie beside all other
wickedness in opressing the Saints of God. Lib. 2. cap. 3. and again. lib. 7.
cap. 2.

But perchance some to this before may make objection, alleging, that at that
time when these ancient writers did write, Rome was governed by most cruel
Emperors, which persecuted horibly all good Christians, inflicting upon them
all torments and most sharp death. But now Rome is no more governed by
Emperors that be wicked, and thirst the blood of the godly, but Rome is under
the jurisdiction of the holy Pope, and for that cause to be reverenced and
honored of all. Therefore if any man should now say in these our days that
Babylon mentioned in the Apocalips might betoken Rome, no sufficient cause or
ground of matter were to confirm or corroborate his assertion to be found. But
the answer to confute this is ready of great force and validity, and not to
be convinced.

Albeit wicked Emperors even from the Apostles time and long after, Nero and
others persecuted the Christians: The Popes do the same.
by some hundred years held Rome for the chief seat imperial, and put many
to sundry kinds of torment and death for confessing Christ: yet S. Hierom,
who lived about 380 after Christ, and after S. Augustine and Orosius whose ages
were during the reigns of Iouinian, Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius
Emperors, who not only favored, but greatly advanced Christian religion, did
in their books tax and sharply reprehend Rome, by the name of Babylon, then
gouerued rather by Popes and Bishops, as it is known, than by temperall
princes.

And here is further to be noted, that these Christan Emrours aforesaid ruled
and made their abode in Constantinople, and the Popes administered all at Rome,
by little and little mal engine, deceit, sinister practice with hypocrisy,
counterfeit humblenes now and then by force enterminled, encroched not to be
only equal, but challenged to have superiority, not upon the Clergy only,
but over Emperors and kings, to make laws at their lust and pleasure, to wage
war, make battle, yea, to tread down under their feet the whole world, if they
might bring it to pass.

All hitherto said and written does the testimony of the Church of Leodia in
the low countries confirm, set down. about the year of our Lord 1100 against
Pascalis the second of that name, then Pope. The testimony of the Church of
Leodia against Rome.
That is as follows hitherto (says he) I have but interpreted that S. Peter
would by the name of Babylon note Rome, because at that time Rome was spotted
with all kind of Idolatry, sin, and filthiness. And now my sorrow does
interpret unto me that S. Peter terming with a spirit of prophecy, the
congregation gathered together in Babylon, did foresee the confusion of
dissension, by y^ which the Church is at this day tornin sunder: for although
the Church be in Babylon of the world, yet it ought to be gathered by brotherly
unanimity. And a little after Esaias says, Babylon my well-beloved is turned to me
into a miracle: but I say Rome my beloved is turned to me into a miracle, yea
what is so marue^lous, yea what is so miserable. David saw the Angel of the
Lord standing with a drawn sword over Jerusalem: we, the daughters of the
Romish Church behold, we see the Bishop there, which is or should be the Angel
of God, ready with a drawn sword over the Church. David prayed that y^ people
might not be killed: our Angel reching to the Earl of Flanders the sword,
prays that we may be slain: where many mo things touching the cruelty of
Babylon be adiected in their place, whosoever listest to search and read the
history at large.

About the year of our Lord 1200, S. Barnard the Monk lived in great
estimation with Kings and Princes, S. Barnard.
even with the Kings of this Land: For he was a man of great fame, both for
his godly life and learning.

This S. Barnard in his books written to Pope Eugenius, does rehearse and
carpe so many and such crimes, both of the Bishops, and Citizens of Rome, how
many and such as none of the old prophets is read to have objected to the
Babilonians, which to (...) tediousnes here I omit to rehearse, who so is (...)
to seee his words, the books be extant at this time though written 400 year
past and more.

Likewise Petrus Johannes Pyranensis about 1330 did openly in schole teach,
that as the Pope was Antichrist: So no other Church but the Romish to be
understood by the name of the whore of Babylon.

Also Wickliefe of England, and John Hus, and Hierome of Bohemia, taught and
affirmed the same doctrine of the Pope, and of Rome: the first of these three,
his bones burned 18 years after he had been dead: the other two brent alive,
yet consenting in opinion to all the godly Fathers and Doctors in these points
that be above rehearsed. Now it has been sufficiently spoken with the
approved testimoof every age even from the Apostles time, and the opinion and
sentence of the best learned cited thereto touching the place, that Rome is
signified by Babylon. Now let us return again to the ruler of this Babylon and
his tragical actions who puts on him the vizard of piety and is altogether
under his Mask impiety it self.

This impudent and shameless man of Rome, yea rather beast he may be called,
which does the injuries before rehearsed to our Lord Christ: what presumes not
he to adventure upon, daily among his inferiors for equals he will have none,
and both Emperor and King professing Christ, within Europe, he has made
subject unto him, and ready at ^all to do his will and command^ment. He makes
War himself: he provoke one prince with fire and sword to assault another:
he sheddeth innocent blood, in persecuting those that dare or will open their
mouth against him. He maintains Subjects so rebel against their Sovereign
Lords and kings: he is the firebrand to set an outrage of burning in all parts
of Christendom: he is a deadly poison which has infected y^ church of God
with notorious dregs

Did not the Pope stir and provoke Sigismond the Emperor and the noble Princes
of Germany with force of arms to invade the realm of Bohemia? Upon what ground
or occation? Truly because John Hus and Jerome of Prage, had by preaching of
the word of God, began to reveal the son of perdition in the same country of
Bohemia. The Pope therefore feeling himself touched to the quick, endeavored
as much as in him did lie to destroy, and extirpate all the Bohemians, First
Hus and Ierom were cruelly burned, and yet the desire of the people to the
knowledge of true religion thereby not quenched, but inflamed and kindled the
more. What ensued of this, with huge power and most puissant (...) the
Bohemians were invaded two years together. And both the times with wonderful
courage and prowes of the Bohemians, the assault makers were repulsed, and put
back to shameful flight by the miraculous power and mighty hand of God, who
fought for them, and did set the^ at rest and peace, in despite of the Bishop
of Rome, his Cardinals and clergy.

I omit here for breuities cause, to infer many examples, how the Popes from
age to age moving war, have procured by their Legates and messengers, one
Prince to wage battle on his next brother and Prince adioining, and when the
Armies were ready to encounter and meet, then would he colourably as though
no fault were in him, Friars and other messengers were despatched between,
persuading peace and reconcilement. The Chronicles in every Realm can
sufficiently testify the same. And therefore I remit those that be desirous to
know further herein to the said Chronicles.

This I say and affirm boldly, that it was the Pope that did animate and set
on Robert Earl of Flanders against Henry the fourth Empero^r.

It was he the Pope that maintained the wars with ten thousand Italians and
gave money to pay them wages on the behalf of the Emperor Charles the fifth
against the Duke of Saxony and the noble Pee^es of Germany, because the said
Pope would have had the light of the Gospel darkened, which at that time had
sprung up from the first preaching of Luther, seeking to bring ignorance in
place again, though it were with the shedding of Christian blood, and utter
undoing and spoil of many both men, women, and children.

It is he the Pope, that to his great ignominy and shame for ever, cherished a
rank Traitor named Stukeley a man of evil life and conversation, Stukley
trator maintained by the Pope.
and mainteyned him against his Sovereign Lady and Queen, with money, men,
Ships, and munition to enter Ireland, God confounds the devises and
purposes of the wicked, and makes them frustrate, contrary to their
expectation. What followed? Stukeley when he had sailed from Italy to the Bay
of Portugale, and there hearing that the King Sebastian was going over into
Barbary with all royal preparation of war, offered his service to the said
King not for any zeal or good will but upon a subtle pretense, that Wars
there ended, he would borrowe a sum of money of the King, the better
afterward to go through with his enterprises in Ireland. In the battle in
Barbary, the King of Portugal, the black King with others, and this Stukley
also was slain. This you may see that God sent a cursed Cow short horns, and
Ireland was delivered and England also from a most cruel enemy and Traitor,
though he died a fairer death then he should have done, or had deserved, yet
such was the malice of the Pope, this enterprise began by Stukley, was
afterward prosecuted by the said Antechrist of Rome, who first sent Bulls full
all impiety, as it were with a bayt to allure the wild Irish to rebellion, and
armed ships and Soldiers to infringe the public peace there, The popes men
vanquished by the L. Gray in Ireand.
who not long after their arrival, had their welcome, so that of faure or five
hundred, not past twenty escaped alive. The English under the conduct of the
Lord Gray, Lord Deputy of Ireland, atchieuing the victory upon the Pope, his
Italians and Spaniardes, the fourth day after they came to the place where
these Strangers had entrenched themselves in good order of war.

He remarke well gentle Reader, the great goodness and mercy of God toward our
most gracious Queen Elizabeth, and her realm of England and Ireland. Note the
wisdom, forwardnes, and diligence, of the Noble man, chief^ Captain, and
General of her highness Army. How he spared not to catch hold of opportunity,
in the cold and deep of the winter: according to the saying: Principijs
obsta, and arripienda est occatio. For if they, with the badge of the cross
Keys of their breasts, might have been suffered to harbor the winter time
there, this small spark would have grown to a bigger flame, and not so
easily have been quenched. But the Lords of England, be so hot with their
soldiers under them, that let the enemies make trial when they will, let them
trust to it, they shall be fought withal, if they attempt to come on land, before
the swimming grown of the Sea-sicknes be quite out of their heads.

The Pope can and will, Church plate taken out of the Vestries by the Pope to
make war.
raise war to spill Christian blood, take out of the Uestries Church plate,
(for not any must controlle him) exact tasks upon his Clergy, to cause his
Cardinals and Bishops to give contribution to bestow the same where it pleases
him to murder innocents, to force wives and widows, to deflower virgins. For
these be the fruits of war, the benefits that be reaped upon insolent
victories.

Now take in few words, The wicked lives of the Popes.
of what godly conuersa^ion and life, Popes have been of late time, that either
the Catholics may be ashamed of such spiritual and holy Fathers, or else, in
time to forsake them, and to begin to abhor and detest them, and their most
wicked and abominable actions, and to learn to be of better understanding
than they have been, For the successor is commonly worsse and more had than his
predecessor.

Seek and see the writer Raphaell Volaterranus, Raphael Volaterranus. Xistus
the 4.
whether I make true report of them or no. Search in other faithful
Historiographers, what Xistus the 4. was in his See of Rome. A man not caring
(so he might have his will) whether it were right or wrong, raising war for
every trifling matter, selling benefices and offices for money, rouling
himself middle among harlots.

What was Innocentius the eight, Innocentius the eight.
a man both covetous, and factious given, to set out the Sword and pike,
boasting above measure of his aduoultries, and bastard Children, and occupied
continually in aduauncing and promooting them to high dignities.

What was Alexander? Alexander the sixth.
the sixth, a man of lust and carnal desire, that it is to be wondered at, and
for shame almost not to be named, which thing very cunningly did he paint out,
which wrote these two verses of his Daughter.

Hoc tumulo Dormit Lucretia nomi^^e, sed re
Thais, Alexandrifilia, Sponsa, nurus,
In this grave sleeps Lucretia, so men her called by name,
Yet Thais she by manners might, and eke be clipped for fame.
Daughter she was to Alexander the Pope, and sometime wife,
And married was to bastard his, mark here the fathers life.
This Alexander created of his bastard sons, not without great ignominy to
true Nobility, Earls, Dukes, and marquesses and did bear the charge of the
Army, of the which, is son was general.

Of this sort and faculty was Julius the second, and likewise also like to
these, I^lius the second.
was Leo the tenth.

And to these is annexed, Clement the seventh.
Clement the 7. a subuerter and destroyer both of Rome, and of his native
soil, the city of Florentia.

And after these, succeeds Paulus tertius, Paulus tertius
for his avarice, wicked living, incest, tyrany, and other horrible crimes so
odious, that men indewed with any spark of honesty and godliness abhor to
remember them, the Heavens, the Earth, and the Seas will fly away from the
hearing of them.

Here, (the place moving me thereto) let such as be addicted to the Church
of Rome, beware in season, that they be no longer seduced, and take heed and
learn to know the bad from the good, by that token which our Lord Christ
himself gave, saying: Ex fructibus eorurn cognoscetis eos. Ye shall know them
by their fruits. These Popes before rehearsed, These Popes, not men, but
monsters of men.
were not men, but monsters of men, and to read their lives truly penned and
set down, and deeply to consider of it, were sufficient to draw away any man
from that self-will, love, and confidence, they have put in that whoorish and
Babilonicall Church of Rome. Homines sunt, ergo errare and labi possu^t says
he. But these be men and monsters of men, as I have already said, and their
errors be so gross and palpable, that children and boys see them, and are
able to confute them, their manners and actions so wicked and vicious, that
every good Christian must condemn them.

I am bear further to use a few words to the Papists, Catholiqu^s.
who call and term themselves Catholics, by a word as it should seem, that
many of them do not well understand or if they do, they have no great reason
to use it. For Catholic a Greek word, signifies universal in English, and
Ecclesia Catholica in our Cr^^de or Articles of our belief, has Sanctam set
before that is the Catholic Church of God dispearsed wheresoever it be upon
the fa^e of the Earth, not tied to any one certain or terminate place, but
universal, where the Congregation, small or big is dispersed throughout the
world, professing truly Christ and his holy Gospel. We believe one holy
universal Church to be.

How holy the Romish Church is, let indifferent men judge, where such good
livers as the Pope^ above mentioned be the chief a^^ors in the play. So the
word Catholic makes quite against the papists, who would have the true church
at Rome, and depending upon the same Romish church, as tied to one certain
place, where many of the Bishops of the same church have bin, and at this day
be as wicked and cruel as were in times past. Phalaris Dionysius, Nero, or
Diocletian. Nam vitiato capite viti^ntur and me^bra corporis. The head being
corrupt, Exhortation to the Papists, to recurne to the true Church.
needs must the members of the body be infected with corruption. I therefore
pray you which be not yet come out of the mistie clouds of Papisme, in the
blood and bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, deceive not your selves. Look well
about you in time. Pin not your faith upon another man's sleeue. No man can
make atonement for his brothers soul. It is the blood of Jesus Christ the son
of God, that cleanses us from all sin, as witnesses S John, in the first
Chapter of his Epistle: Again, he the same Apostle says in the same Chapter.
If we acknowledge our sins, he (that is Christ) is faithful aend Just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And our Lord
himself gives us this lesson: Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and onerati
estis, and ego reficiam vos. Come unto me all ye that Labor and are heavy
laden and I will refresh you. It is he our Lord Christ that has borne our
sins, and paid the ransom for them upon the Cross. Now brethren, will you
trust in the Popes Pardons, who has no more authority, than any brother Bishop
or Minister has to forgive sins, and to pronounce absolution to them that be
heartily penitent, by authority given to the Apostles generally, Equal
auctority given to all the Apostles to forgive sins
and so to their successors, and all Ministers that come not in by the window,
but by the door. For as for the words spoken by Christ to Peter alone of
binding and loos^^ng, it is answered. If all the Apostles had the same
authority by Christ's his word, as it may appear in Matthew 18. and John 10.
Than Peter being but one, had it not alone. But if if it were spoken to him
alone, in Matthew, yet it does not restrain the general grant, made to others
in the places cited before.

Quorum remiseritis peccata etc. Whose sins ye shall forgive, they shall be
forgiven, and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt: For those words are spoken in
the plural number, whereby all Priests claim true interest in absoluing. For
will you hear what the Priests utter after auricular confession hard at any
man's hand, and judge your self. Dominus Jesus qui est summus Pontifex,
absoluat te ab omnibus peccatis tuis etc. and ego auctoritare mhi commissa,
absoluo te in nomine patris, and filij, and Spiritus sancti Amen: (which is to
say) Our Lord Jesus, which is the highest Bishop absolve thee from all thy
sins, and I by the auctority committed unto me absolve thee in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, Amen. Where is sins reserved in
the Canons to the Pope only to forgive? Why practices he to send abroad his
pardons in parchment, with leaden seals for money? where is his warrant in
holy Scripture? whereupon our Sauiuiour Christ says in the fifteenth of S.
Matthew. In vanum colunt me homines docentes doctrinas and mandata hominum. In
vain do they serve me, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men. Here I
must put you in remembrance of a fond fellow, who has set out a book:
entitled, Hierarchia, Hierarchia,
a Greek word, a glorious title, a show or promise by the word, of a great
matter, where in the end and effect, it proves nothing.

It is a rehearsal by name of the popes, from Peter, which was the first
Bishop of Rome, (if it so be true) and how one succeeded an other, from time to
time, and this was by Election in diverse sorts, one while by the voice or
suffragies of the people, as though Democratia were in ure, sometime by the
consent of the better sort in degree, as when the Deane and Chapter elected,
and that does adumbrate Aristocratia. And lastly and principally, when the
chief governor makes his choice of any person, where is the rule of
Monarchia.

But succession by election is one thing, and the right of inheritance another.
We daily see, that a good father has sometime an ungracious son, that godly
parents have a child descended from them afterward to be evil disposed. I have
found a man according to my hartliking says God of David the king. And yet his
son Solomon succeeding him, fell to women and Idolatry, insomuch that God being
angry, rent his kingdom after his days into two parts, viz. Rehoboam reigned
over 2 tribes, and Jeroboam over 10. If this be where state of inheritance
claims his right, that for sin God put teth down one, and sets up
another, and oftentimes changes the inheritance from one line of kindred in to
another, Succession by i^heritanc, and Succession by Election.
of what force is succession that comes by Election which is grounded upon
human policy. The Electors naming and appointing to office whom they will,
moved thereto sometime by meed and corruption of money, sometimes by favor and
friendship, procured, sometimes, by hatred and envy, the better ma^r^iected,
and the worse chosen. It is not denied, but that many learned, virtuous, and of
laudable life, have been Bishops and Pastors professing Christ in Rome. But
they with their whole flock, as they might be caught for the most part,
suffered Martyrdom, under the persecuting Emperors of the same city, as Nero,
Diocletian, and others. A body of the best complexion, which is sanguine by
continuance of time, and disorder of diet in meats, drinks, and other feeding
draws unto it gross humors, and so ^alleth into diseases, that the
alteration will be such, that ye shall not know it to be the same. So the Sea of
Rome, both during the time of the Primitive Church, and long after retained a
beauty of knowledge and holiness, but by little and little, it fell away and was
defaced, as rust creeps upon iron and other metals by contin^ance,
especially, when they be not rubbed, scraped, and dried, S. Paul spoke these
words in this time, Etiam mysterium iniquitatis operatur, and now the mystery
of ^iquitie does work. And again, as is aforesaid by the said Paul, what
withholdeth even that the son of perdition might be revealed at his time.
Most true it is where Christ says, Ego sum vobiscum vsque and consumationem
Seculi, I am with you even to the end of the world, that the holy ghost has
bin, is and will be with his Church to to the end, and will never leave it
destitute. As when the Heresy of the Arrians oue^^^owed the world, the holy
Spirit of God stirred up Athanasius, to defend his truth, which Athanasius
albeit, (...) the (...) is, there is the Church.
he was forced to fly and hide himself oftimes in dens and ca^es, for the
space of diverse years, yet the Church of God was with him in his dens and
caves. For where the truth is, there is the church Idolatry, worshipping of
Images, masses, dirriges, and Heaven to be sold for money, murdring of saints,
stews in whole streets of Curtesans, blessings for meed, cursings for envy,
are to be found in Rome, yea, and Antichrist himself who exalts himself
above all that is called God, therefore there is not the true Church. What
monsters have been admitted to the Papacy after one thousand and od years
after Christ, it has been somewhat before touched, and may seem to such as
have not read Histories almost incredible? What execrable practice was this to
enter and possess the Popes chair by Magic and Art forbidden both by Gods
law and man's, to give himself to the devil: to get worldly dignity and
promotion, to infame himself for ever, to purchase a momentary and transitory
pelf: to win wealth and glory on the earth, to leese eternal joy and heaven.
Upon this monster last rehearsed, and popes before mentioned, judge of this said
Hierarchia, of this holy principality or government of the Church, which the
author of the book would only apply to the sea of Rome, as to the chief of the
same, where good and bad popes are associated together in the rehersall, as
though Gods church, were not from the beginning guided and conducted in all
truth by the holy ghost, before the Papacy took place, or as if gods spirit
could not blow where it listed, not in one circuit of ground only, but in the
church whersoeuer dispersed even where gods word is truly preched, and the
sacraments rightly administered, whether it be in the east of the world, the
west, south, or north part of the same. This fellow does not only sanctify the
impurest monsters of the world, but also restrains and tieth the grace of God
and his spirit to the Popes girdle. Succession in the Sea of Rome, is of no
more force to prove principalie in the Church, then that the Bishopric^es of
Cullen in Germany, of Toledo in Spain, may prove the line by descent by
Regester Books many hundredth years. O mad and fantastical heads of such as
of self will believe him, to wit, the Pope and Rome his See to have of right
the superiority of the Church.

Jerusalem and mount Sion had these words spoken of her that follow.
Jerusalem fo^s^ken, much more Rome.
Psalm 132. For the Lord has chosen Sion too be an habitation to himself.
This shall be my rest for ever. Here will I dwell, for I have delight therein.
Yet Jerusalem 40. years after that Christ has suffered, was sacked (to
pretermit in silence, what was done before to it by the Assirians and their
king) The Temple with the city walls and houses was taken, rased, wasted, and
consumed, that one stone was not left upon another by Titus and Vespacian.

For what shall we now think of Rome? when was there any promise made to it,
which Rome by trope is painted out, and spoken in the 14. and 17. Chap. of the
Revelation of S. John, to be Babylon that great whore, Harlots or curtesans in
Rome.
where whole streets of Curtesans live without check, saving that at the
beeginning of Lent, they come to auricular confession, and take ashes, receive
the Sacrament, and pay their taxes to the Pope and his officers. After Easter,
they return to their old life again, and so continue all the year. See what
filthy lucre may cause. For these women pay sweetly: what heads of the Church
are these? who would trust or have any confidence in them. I pray and desire
all men, as they love their souls and salvation, to look into the holy
Scriptures, to study and read them diligently, and to confer the Bishop of
Rome his doings and doctrine with gods Book, and they shall quickly epsy and
confess, that the Pope is the self same son of perdition spoken of by S. To
read scripture, brings k^^wledge, understanding.
Paul to the Thessalonians as is afo^esaide, and so speedly forsake him. What
is the let, what is the stop and bar that these Catholics (as they call them
selves) draw back and come not forward.

Their Master the Pope would not have them once open or look into the holy
Bible, translated into the vulgar tongue, And they will not read it, nor any
other book that may bring knowledge of the truth, they love to dwell in
ignorance. God grant of his infinite mercy, that they may amend and wax wise
in time Amen.

It may seem to some that I have been somewhat too long in this discourse of
Rome, and of the Pope, and I pray the^ of patience, seeing the matter is so far
forth not impertinent, that it touched and concerns not a few but all: not
one region or country, but all the parts of Christiandome: not the saftie of
man's body only, but the health of the soul: not temporal, but eternal life.
And no inuectiue can be sufficient on him, til his name and tyrannical seat be
raised up from the bottom, and his memorial quite extinct, his pride thrust
down together with Lucifers in Hell. His doctrine abolished, as these few
Latin verses following do partly declare.

Papa sibi metuens frontem fore cornibus orbam
Lurida bacchatur trux aconita vomens.
Et cupit extinctos diro molimine Reges,
Mergit at hunc Stygijs CERBERVS ater aquis.
Non prius, in latis spatiosi finibus orbis
Di^sidij and coedis languida praxis erit,
Cum socijs, quam Papa suis plorare iubetur,
Eius and extinctum nomen ab orb perit,
Totius Europae magni consurgite Reges,
Arma (inquam) celerivos capitote manu,
Totius Europae communem pellite pestem,
Icta armis vestris Bestia tetra cadat:
Sic gens Christicolum tranquilla pace fruetur,
feruescet verae religionis amor.
Which verses may be thus englished, not following word for word, but the
sense truly taken out.

The Pope fearing least his strong force
might him alone forsake,
Does fret and cast his poison rank,
new shifts of help to make.
And first does seek with treachery,
The anointed of God to kill.
Without their let or any stop,
His purpose to fulfill:
Both braule, and strife shall never cease,
Nor edge of sword wax dull,
Till Pope and all his partakers
Be rapped on the scull.
Ye mighty Kings of Europe all
Use force, expel away
The common plague of Christendom:
Use force, use force I say.
If beast once fall that fenced was*
Time past that horns had ten:
Debate shall slake and peace ensue,
God grant it so, Amen.
For it is the Pope that is the ^eade and C^le^taine of the Confederates in
Europe at this day, The Pope the head of the holy league that practices to
trouble and molest England.
who the last year, viz. 1588, endeavored to bvxe and spoil this noble realm
of England, to molest and trouble our most gracious sovereign Lady and Queen*
but in vain (thanked be God, they were fr^strate of their purpose) and if they
might have had any good success, they determined afterward to ^lea and root
out all the professors of true religion in Christendom.

This was the resolute determination, purpose and inintent of this Antichrist,
Chieftain, and his confederates the Spaniardes with their society. The
Spaniard his preparation for war against England many years.
To prosecute the same with effect, diverse years past preparation has been
made, of money, armor, weapon, ships, ordinance, victuals and all other
necessary furnitur^ for mortal war to invade England: But God, even the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: God, the God of Elizabeth Queen of England, whom
she daily and hourly honors and serves, has confounded their devises,
broken their cros-bowes of steel, shortened their arms, weakened their bodies
which they bragged to be so strong, made faint their hearts and courages in
Iulie, last past, 1588: and in August following and September, that the Deb^ra
of England may say; God has bin on our side. God fought for her, God overthrew
her enemies.

Thus it is apparent, our deadly enemies is the Pope, that adversary (as S.
Paul terms him) that is exalted above all that is called God, maintaining
the war made upon England this la^^ year, The Popes pr^mise to save the souls
of them that perish.
with (...), and men* abetting and encouraging all the rest with promises, to
give them the bless of heaven, if they perished in the war, and died in the
fight.

O Satan, transfigured into an Angel of light. O false i^gler! O crafty
Apostle, yea rather Aposta^a. O bloody murderer, that under pre^ence of
holiness, would seem to sit at home in thy chair, and yet ar^ the grea^est
slaughter man in the front of the battle. O fierce brother of Cain that
killest the innocent Abels. S^rcease to animate and maintain the Spaniards thy
partakers in war: Learn by the event of their late enterprise, to sit still to
study on gods book and to leave the ^an^ling of war to temporal princes. But
religion is the chief occasion and ground of the debate and breath of peace,
beside other quarrels. The deciding of true religion and false, and judgment
thereof consists only as they say in the Pope, and therefore pronounces us
English, heretics. And where he cannot consume us with faggot and fire,
because he has not our Lady and Queen at commandment to be his executioner,
as he has Princes in other regions (...) thral to his tyranny.

This blessed man of Rome makes us a pray to the Spaniards or any other that
will assail us. Where, note that the Pope gave the crown and kingdom of
England to the king of Hispaine.

O impudent monster of men. O thou that hidest the commandementes of God in the
Latin, from the lay, The Pope a murderer.
simple and unlearned people, and wittingly and wilfully breakest them thy
self, which know them, and understand them.

It is written in the 10 and last commandment. Thou shall not count thy
neighbors house, nor any thing that is his. These be the words among others
in the commandment: If to covet be sin and breach of the precept: what
horrible offense to God is it, impudently to take and give away that which is
another, as though the whole earth were the Popes to bestow and destribute at
his pleasure. Not found in scripture that the Apostles di^ assign Princes,
c^ownes. But y^ Popes do it.
Where is it read, that Christ or his Apostles or any other Bishop of the
Primitue Church or prelate of any other place since, but this of Rome, did give
or assign Princes crowns, or kingdoms: the same Bishop of Rome, at the first
being a beggar, and lived but of alms and devotion of the well disposed, who
at the first went on foot as others do. And after that Constantines donations
had enriched the Sea of Rome, began to ride on horseback, Constantines
donations puffed up the Se^ of Rome with pride.
and now through pride is so puffed up that he is carried upon men's shoulders in
a chair. A kind of most arrogant insolency: for pomp, that no Prince in any
age for glory has used the like, but the Pope.

Religion (as I said before) is laid to the charge of us English. Touching
Religion, we answer, that we are in the true, and the Pope and his adherents
in the false. The judgment whereof appertains not to him being an adversary
of Christ, a persecutor of poor innocents and professors of true Religion, a
Tyrant, a blood-sucker. But the t^uchstone must be the holy Sceiptures, as our
Savior Christ has (...) and taught in these words. Scrutamini scripturas.
Search the Scriptures. And again thus, Erra^is, nescientes scripturas, Ye err
out of the way not knowing the Scriptures, which show and declare who go
right, and who go wrong. And we answer with the word^ of S. Paul in the 24
Chapt. of the Acts of the Apostles. But this we boldly confess with S. Paul
the Apostle unto the whole world, that after the way which the Pope and his
Clergy call heresy, so worship we the God of Abraham, believing all things
which are written in the Law and Prophets. etc. This is the Pope of whom the
Prophet Daniel speaks of in y^ 7 Chap. of his Prophecy that shall destroy
the Saints of the most highest: and in the 8 Chapter, He shall slay the
strong and holy people. In laying heresy to thy charge (O England) which is no
heresy, but the true worshipping of God, then it is God cause that thou art
blamed for, that thou art manaced, ^ated, envied, and suffer. Keioice
therefore and be glad, that thou may be counted worthy to suffer these
reproaches for Christ's sake. The Spaniards, the Popes own chief Darlinges,
The Spaniard took in hand the execution of the Popes malice, 1588.
before all other people in Europe, did take in hand this last year viz. 1588
the execution of the Popes malice and War, adding thereto quarrels of their
own: But as the Spaniard likes his last adventure made upon England, so let
him and his partakers come again, We English put in God alone our trust, they
shall go we ping away, if any go away or escape. The cruel^^^ of the Sp^^^ards.
For I trust it neither is, neither will be forgotten, the manacing of the
Spaniards this last Summer, their whippes, their scourges, their Yrons that
they brought in their ships to mark the youths of each Sex of the conquered
nation to make their bond-slaues: for so they vaunted, and according to the
Proverb, Ante victoriam canebant triumphum, that is, They assured themselves
of victory before thoy did strike astrcke for it. And if ever they come again,
they shall be recompensed seven fold in their bosom and shall be used as
Perillus was, according to the Proverb, Be whipped with their own whippes,
and marked with their own Yrons. For they be a people disdainful, cruel and
proud in heart above measure, even from the lowest degree of men in their
common weal. Will you hear for a proof thereof, what I have seen.

A poor Spaniard Fisherman, which only gains his living by going to Sea to
catch Sardines, a kind of Pilchard, silly wretch in his old rags, scant
worth taking up if they were found upon the donghill, after he has caught
some fish, and returns with his small Skiffe, or boat home, his poor wife
waits at the shore side for him. The man leapeth out upon the shore, leaving
his fish to b^ sold by his wife, and his boat also to be made clean by her,
and going home to his house, puts off his sea apparel, claddeth him self
with his best doublet and hose, and covered with his Spanish cape or cloak,
with his Rapier and Dagger by his side, walks and ^etteth in the place of the
town whereto marchantes, and the wealthiest of the Town resort to buy and
sell. As the Spaniard is proud, so is he crue^l exceedingly: and where he can
or may overcome, his tyranny is intolerable: what infinite slaughters have
the Spaniardes made in the West Indians in America, as well of women and
children, as of men, silly souls of that Country.

It is beside my purpose, here to rehearse: whosoever is desirous t^ know the
truth thereof, let them read whole books written of the same matter both in
French Latin, and other tongues. And to know the same by reading it, will make
any Christians heart to bleed. Over and beside, the cruelty of their Clergy
in matters of Religion repugnant to Papistrie, Superstition, and idolatry.
Woe, woe, yea three times woe to them that shall fall into their hands. It is
comparable with all the inventions of punishment and forture of all Tyrants
read of in all histories before this time, if it (...) not pass or surmount
them. Consider what the Strapado The Strapado.
is: a Diabolical invention, which is to let down into the threate a fine
piece of linen, wrapped round and ^ast together, ^i^d to a small string, and to
pull it up and down, that a man would choose rather seven times to die, if it
were so possible, then to suffer this pain once. Again the martyrdom of
Gardener, an Englishman borne in Bristoll, and suffering at Lisbona in
Portugal, was it not equal with Phalaris Bull? First his right hand was
chopped off, and after his left hand. After this he was hanged upon an high
gibbit, and fire so made under him, that it could burn but his feet and
shanks, then that done a space of time between his knees and thighs: after
that his belly, and intralles were consumed with fire, so that all this while
his breast, heart, and head, wherein the pincipal seat of life is, were
untouched: last, by Gods mercy the rope wherwithal he was tied under the arm
pits suddenly, brake, and so the whole man fell into the fire sooner then they
expected or wished. To hear this torture will it not make christian ears to
glow and any heart to quake. I will lead the Reader with no more examples, for
they be so many of this sort, that will and may make up whole books. Now let
us come to the Religion of the Spaniard. Pilgrimage is used and frequented even
at this day freshly to S. James in Galitia, and through all Spain accounted an
holy and meritorious thing to salvation. If any man die of any wealth there in
that country, the Friars of the four orders so flock about and the priests
that it is esteemed but a small funeral, the charges whereof does not amount to
200 Marks, which is divided among Friars and Priests for the most part, for
saying of Masses, Diriges, and funeral Obsequies, making the people believe,
that they with their oblations and prayers can save their souls. Of whence
comes this, the Clergy so persuade the people there, they will deliver any
man's soul from hell, and send it up to heaven, applying their merits thereto,
and with their Sacrifices of Mass auailable both for the quick and the dead.
I have seeene a young Priest in Spain (for there be many Priests there
belonging to one Chuch, which live only by these means following) coming to
the Church in the morring, and having mumbled to himself Mattyns (as they call
it) has (standing at the Altar) put on his Albe, looking round about him, and
expecting who would lay down and offer their devotion upon the Altar: I^
there were so many that the sum offered or given did amount to ten or eleven
Royals of plate, he would put on his Palle or Cope, say Mass that morning,
otherwise he would put off his linen Albe and will the people to come again
the next day.

Behold be not Masses well sold? be not Priests well maintained? What does the
Priest all the day afterward? He ^etteth up and down not after the manner
that sad and sage Priests use, but like a Courtier in a cloak without a cape
down to the ground. O noble England, O England thou may by this treatise
behold as it were in a glass, England beware.
thy adversaries, the Pope, his Cardinals, Clergy, and the Spaniardes, the
former sort to reign over the souls of Christians, with great tyranny to
maintain their pomp, wealth and glory, the other and latter ready to prosecute
the Popes commandents, and to raise up a new monarchy and Empire to ouertop al
other in estate his equals. To the which better to be accomplished, they have
practiced as ye old Proverb is, That where a Fox skin cannot reach they have
sowed to a Lions skin. And as they have done already the year past, so they
will perchance again use force and violence although they have had a fair
warning already, to leave and surcesse by their harms sustained: Howsoever it
may fall out, England* call unto the Lord and trust in him.
arm your selves (O valiant Britains and English men) first above all with
Spiritual defenses, as the kingly Prophet teaches Ad Dominum cum tribularer
clamaui and exaudiuit me, when I was in trouble I called upon the Lord, and he
heard me even to the granting of my petition. Again God himself scholeth us
in this sort, Inuoca me in di^ tribulationis and ego exaudiam vos. Call upon me
in the day of trouble and I will hear you. England be sorry and lament for thy
sins past.
Let us be sorry for our offenses past: let us be sorry and most sorry for the
sins we have committed, from the bottom of our hearts with full purpose of
amendment of life hereafter to be led by Gods grace and assistance of his
holy spirit. Let us sing in heart and say with tongue, The Lord is my light and
salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
then shall I be afraid: Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall
not my heart faint. If war rise up against me, yet will I put my trust in the
Lord. Again the Prophet thus says. England cease not to pray continual^y.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man may do unto me. The Lord
takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire upon
mine enemies.

Be ye therefore full of courage: Our en^mies hate us for ^eligion.
O ye English hearts. Our enemies hate us for religion. Their principal
quarrel is religion, our religion is constant, and agreeable with the word of
God: there religion is repugnant to it. Yea let the holy Bible be an upright
judge between us. They brag to assail us: we are to defend our selves boldly,
manfully, courageously: What dasterlie heart bears that man that will not
strike, rather then be stricken: who will not kill, rather then be killed: The
heathen man's l^^^on, ^o fight for our countri^
the Heathen man's lesson is Pugna pro patria, pro Principe, pro aris and pro
focis, Fight for thy Country, for thy Prince, for religion, for thy house,
wife, and children: Gods law commands us so to do. For as they which sail
in a ship by all means and force, they can possibly endeavor to save and
preserve the ship. If the ship perish and sincke, or be cast away, the
passengers and mariners all be lost and die. So every man indewed but only
with the gift of reason, besides that, he is by duty bound thereto, and so
commanded by God, Bound by gods law to defend our Prince and Country.
will and must with all his might of body, spending of his substance, study,
and i^dustrie of wit and soul, protect, defend, and save his native soil,
land, and place where he has his original of birth, ^ostering, feeding and
bringing up, abod, and dweling link, of kindred, society of friends and
countrymen, even to the loss of life and lives, if one man might have an
hundredth lives.

If the land wherein thou dwell fall into captivity, then thou that
escapest alive shall be in worse case than he that is dead. A continual
torment, pinching, tearing of a man living, is worse then any sharp death. The
senses by death are taken: the anguish on the other living in torment in the
day time is evil, and in the night worse. It fretteth and suffers still and
continually as is the fable of Prometheus his liver, which as it wastes by
feeding the greedis vultures mawes. So it is renewed, and increasing again,
ministers matter every day of n^w and fresh torment and punishment.

This one chief and principal comfort (but there be many mo besides) may
make glad all true Subjects to call to remembrance, how our Queens most
excellent Majesty, Comfo^t of the Q^eenes (...), and her most wi^e c^uns^ll.
Queen Elizabeth together with her Graces prudent Counselors, have provided
such plenty from the beginning of her Reign of principal Armor, Artillarie,
Munition, and all other necessary furniture of war, as never was in England
at any time before, and thanked be god therefore, England furnished with Armor
and Artillery, as it was never in any princes days (...) this time.
the English throughout the Realm so appointed and fenced with Corselets, and
weaponed in all sorts, with such readiness at one hours call, so forward in
their musters, that the children and yonglinges leap and spring for joy at the
sight of the same, and imitate men in their order of warlike array. A greater
comfort is, that our gracious Lady and Queen, having reigned over us now
thirty one years, The commen^ation of the Q^eene Elibeth.
with all clemency and administration of Justice, has conserved this noble
Island of England in long (...) with increase of great wealth in every sort,
and her highness government is such, that it far exceeds the rule of any
whatsoever Princess, either in Africa, Asia, or Europa, from the beginning of
the world to this day, except Debora that beloved of God among the Judges of
Israel.

Read the Cronicles and Histories in g^nerall written in Greek, Her virtues
and worthy qualities.
Latin, or any other tongues and it may be seen that her Majesty is without
comparison. Elizabeth of England, her gifts of the mind be so rare, so
excelling* so surpassing, (that is) her most fine and royal peircing wit in all
her Princely speeches and communications, Her knowledge in the Greek Latin,
and other t^ngues.
fre^^ent and mo^^ apparent, her learning and knowledge in the Greek, Latin,
Italian, French, and Spanish tongues well known to all Ambassadors and
others, who have conference in causes with her Grace far above the capacity
in the Feminine Sex, oner and beside the gifts of the body, and other that they
make this Queen of the West, noble through the whole world.

Note also, how often by the mercy and great providence of God, and careful
watch of her most noble Councellers, her Majesty's person has been deliungred
from peril and danger of Treason, and lately from the deuelish pra^^ses of
Pary, He^ (...) wonde^ful ^^liuera^ce from trea^on at ^^me.
first alias Vphary called after that of Babington and his fellows, a thing
miraculous in the sight of all good Subjects, in the which, the wonderful
mercy, and love of our God; has been showed to her grace and Realm of England.

Look and read over the Chronicles of all nations, for the long reign of
women Princes, The long reign of a man princes.
and ye shall find non to have reigned so long, but Debora and one more, (we
English trust in GOD she shall double her years of her reign with like
felicitte and victory, as her Majesty has already inioyed) which one thing
is a sure token of the favor of God toward the Realm and us the inhabiters
of the land. Solomon.
For as it is written in the Proverbs of Solomon.

Short reigns of Kings and Princes, Short reigns of prince what it b^tokeneth.
and often changing of the regal seat signifies that God is displeased with
that Country or land. And contrary the long reign of a prince, betokens Gods
great blessing. God grant Queen Elizabeth long to reign, Amen.

Over and besides this, The long ra^gne of a Prince.
the care, study, and diligence by her highness Lords ^f the privy Counsel,
has been and is such, for to continue good government, and to preserve in
unity, peace and love, both England and her Subjects, that it must needs breed
a comfort and joy in all true English people.

Further, The Quee^s care and ^^udy to stop and repress the rage and ^u^ie
practiced in France an in y^ Low Countries.
how deeply has her Grace lamented the rage and fury now many years
practiced and put in execution both in France, and in the Low Countries.

How has her highness ende^oured with all Godly zeal first to stop and
repress the great cruelties there exercised.

Secondly, to make mediation for uniting perfect amity and peace between the
one side (...) the other herein, and in this poi^^* the (...) Noble and
valiant Robert Earl of Leicester, who from hence lately deceased, meriteth
his commendation of eternal fame and glory, who of his own free will and zeal
to true religion, leaving at home his dear Lady and wife, his lands and
possessions in manner and sort neglected, his ease and pleasures altogether
abandoned, has in two several voyages, very fortunate, in the years 1586.
and 1587. adventured and hasazarded his person, spent and consumed his goods,
money, and plate, even to the great endebting of himself. The first time he
went over, in the deep and midst of the winter, in a dark and stormy night
taking shipping at Harwich, Sir Henry Palmer knight Captain, and M. Gray,
Master of the ship, and landed the next day at Flushing, and so passed by
Zealand into Holland. And this is to be remembered, that during his ab^ad in
Zealand and Holland, for the more force of his martial affairs, he was
accompanied with the Earl of Essex, the noble and valiant Lord Willoughbie.
The Lord burrowes. The Lord Wentforth. Lord Rich. The Lord North. Sir Thomas
Cicil son and heir to the Lord Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England Sir
Phillip Sidney. Sir Thomas Gorge. Sir Thomas Sturley, knight. Sir William
Pellam, knight, Sirr Thomas Perot, knight. Sir William Druery, knight. Sir
Phillip Butler, knight. Sir William Goodier, knight. Sir William Read, knight.
Sir John Connaway, knight. Sir John winckefield, knight. Sir Robert Sidney,
knight. Sir Cholmely, knight.


And many other worthy Knights and Gentlemen of England, furnished with great
Horse, Geldings, and Armor, that it was a most worthy sight to be seen. What
care, study and watch being there in the Low Countries: as a most wise and
politic Captain and General, did he use in the night? what industry,
labor and pains, did he take in the day, both in the house, in consultations
necessary, and abroad in the fields, present in person at skirmishes and
sieges of sorts and strong towns. What occasion rei been gerendae, as the
latin phrase is did this Earl omit, either to advance the honor of his
Country, either to prefer the weal public there? what good example of
religion and good life, did not this valiant Gentleman, and noble Lord give,
having two godly and famous learned men adorned with degrees of the School of
the University, M. D. Tomson, and M. D. Holland, every day preaching Gods
word, and saying divine service? what Hospitality and open house as we term
it? what princely Court did this Earl keep, for bread meat, wine and beer,
and all other delicate cheer, so amply, so plentifully, so abundantly, that
the best sort in the Country, had him in admiration, the second and meanest,
prayed, wished, and desired that he might continually dwell among them. How did
he tender the poor, redress wrongs, restrain and bridle the enemy from
iniurying those under his charge, win many strong towns, castles, and forts,
and as it were wall Holland, and that part of Zeland, that the enemy might not
approach but with great danger and difficulty. And at the two years end came
away from thence with great honor, loosing in fight very few, especially of
fame and name, but that noble hardy and most worthy knight, Sir Phillip
Sidney.
sir Phillip Sidney, who being hurt in a very hot and bloody skirmish, with a
musket shot a far of, afterward returning to Arnam, died of his wound: whose
fame and glory, no age at any time shall wear away. Carolus ^eobussextus king
of Scots lamented his unripe death.
The noble king Carolus Iacobus Sextus king of Scotland, and diverse others of
the Nobility of the same country, beside infinite numbers of every degree in
England, moved with his virtues, valor and prowes, made Latin verses most
learnedly lamenting his unripe death happening in the flower of his age. Truly,
yea most truly, there was nothing else sought, either by the puissant Queen
Elizabeth and the Lords of her Counsel, either by the said noble earl, but to
preserve true and pure religion, that it might not be trodden under the foot,
and to stop effusion of blood, which otherwise would have been much. And that
ought to be the care and study of every Christian king and Queen, to stop
and inhibit outrage of spilling of Christians blood.

Finally, the government of the said Noble Earl of Leycester, in his abode
beyond the seas, has been such, that the wise and well disposed every where,
gravely consindering upon the same, give to it condign praise to the great
benefits of the Country where he has been, and to no small strengthening of
us English at home, in such sort, that the Low-Countreis reaped thereby the
benefit of quietness and rest, from the molesting of the enemy, which
otherwise would have assailed them most sharply to their utter confusion and
undoing.

This also have we English to joy and to comfort our selves with all, The Lord
Charles Howard Lord Admiral of England.
and to deliver the same for an everlasting memorial to our posterity, that
the last year it pleased God of his infinite mercy and goodness, to give
victory by Sea, to the right noble and valian^ Lord, the Lord Charles Howard,
Lord high Admiral of England, upon and over the Spanish Armado or fleet, so
huge, so strong, so great, so furnished with double Canons, and Canons, and
Culuerins, and all other sort of geat ordinance and small, as musket shot,
calyuer and others so fraught with Captains, soldiers, and mariners to the
number of 28000 so garnished with armor and all manner of weapons, so laden and
stuffed fully with every kind of victual, to serve for long time, all which
did so far pass, surmount* and exceed, that it was Vique ad mundi miraculum,
Even to the wonder of this age, that the Spaniardes upon the confidence they
had in the same, their own strength, were so puffed up with pride that they
had denoured all England in their hearts, whilst they were yet in Spain, and
before they came any thing near our coast.

Neither is this here to be untouched, how the said Lord Charles Howard, Lord
Admiral, with the navy of England, went to the Seas in the month of December,
His going to Sea in the deep of winter. 1587.
being the deep of winter, to expect the enemies coming, and so continued
till August following.

What watch, what labor, what pains, especially in winter. What storms and
foul weather this noble man and his company did sustain and abide, and endure
out, during these nine months. It cannot be unknown to al those which have
experimented voyages by Seas.

And in the Coming and approaching of the Spanish Armado, to the west part of
Cornwall, which was about the 19 of Julie, 1588. How ready, desirous, and
glad, the said Lord Howard was to meet and encounter with the Spaniard, it
does by this appear: His victory over the Spaniards.
that the said Lord Admiral, accompanied but with fifty sail, not exspecting
the rest of the Queens Navy, or any further aid so come, did begin and enter
fight with the Spaniards, and so continued pressing and chacing the Duke of
Medina Sidonia high General of the enemies company, and his hundredth and
thirty two sail, from Sunday till Saturday following, by the space of seven
days, night and day, forbearing sleep and bodily rest which nature of man
does exact and require. Al which time, my Lord Thomas Howard, my Lord
Shiefield, Sir Edward Hobby knight, of years but young, yet for the gifts of
the mind, wit, learning, knowledge, boldness and courage equal to the best
Captains, and many other Gentlem^n in this our English Navy of good and
ancient houses, for the love, zeal, and duty they did bear to the Queens
Majesty, their Country, and my Lord Admiral, did voluntarily, not without
their great charges, as it were not only offer, but intrude them selves into
the service of the sea, in this war to win honor and same, and most
courageously, and with lions hearts, did assault, pursue, and terrify the
Armado, that where their purpose and pretense was to invade and land in
England, they durst not once draw near to any shore, but kept their course
still in the channel and deep stream, always flying and seeking by night if
it might be, in the dark to leese the sight of our ships.

On saturday night when ye enemies came to an anchor before Calis, The firing of
the Spanish Ships.
the english anchored hard by the^ y^ they could have no rest, expecting still
when our men should board them.

And it was devised by the Lord Charles Howard the next night following by
sira^ageme well known, and therefore not needful at large to be here rehearsed,
to fire all the Spanish ships, which in part was done and had taken further
effect, but the enemy for saking the rode, leaving Ankers and cables behind
them for have, set up sail and fled. And the next morning being Monday, my
Lord Admirals number being augmented above the Spanish with my Lord Henry
Seimers fleet of warlike ships, a feesh fight began: the Spaniard flying
before to the north toward Scotland, and the English, following the chase with
most sharp and bloody fight.

In all which Battle of nine days together continuing, both great wisdom
and manhood was used by the said Lord Charles Howard, by the Lords and Knights
in his company, Mariners and soldiers, and marvelous force was bent against
the enemy. For one of the ships of the Queens on Monday, the last day of the
fight, shot in eight hours five hundredth and 32. great pellets out of her
great ordinance hard under the sides of the Spanish Armado.

What number may we think all the rest of the great ships did discharge that
day. They of this great fleet of the enemies, beside the great slaughter of
their men, made and caused by our forces, were constrained to cast ouerboord,
their fine Iennets and horses, and waxed glad when night with darkness drew
on, setting indirect courses that the English might with more dificultie
epsy, find, or follow them in the morning ensuing.

There were from the beginning till this time taken Prisoners, and Spanishe
ships soo^cke and spoiled by the English forces, and brazen pieces and
Artillery taken, as the true number of them apeareth in books already printed,
by the means aforesaid, the pursuit was omitted, and the spaniardes sought
their way furthest about by the craggie rocks and Sea shore of Scotland, to the
west of Ireland. Where God with winds and soul weather so tossed the remain
of the Armado, that 17 of the greatest ships there, wracked, and were drowned
with y^ loss of some thowsands of their men, beside artillery, ordinance, and
other lading that perished in the water. Thus they that came to kill us, were
killed, taken, or drowned, except those that escaped by flieng and running
away: and God fought for England with his mighty hand and stretched out arm,
when the force of the English had ceased to pursue. Let any reasonable man or
others that have any experience be Judge.

This proud and haughty nation and people that came to conquer England, to kill
man, woman, and child, to make the country wast, to take the land into their
own possession, if they had not been sore afraid, and self also the Iron
pellets and blows of our English ordinance and the forces of the Lord Charles
Howard and his most famous band of Mariners and soldiers to the loss of lives
of their men and great spoil of their ships, would have returned home the same
way they came; but they durst not, but sought Spain the farthest way about.

The fame of this victory, howsoever the Spaniardes may or will color it, is
spread over all Europe, Asia, and part of Africa, insomuch that the heathen
have our renowned Queen in admiration for her virtues, princely qualities,
royal heart and courage, and principally for this victory achieved upon the
Spaniarde. O most high, O most mighty, O most merciful God, how good and
gracious did thou show thy self to our Queen Elizabeth, to her dominions
and territories, to her subjects and people: How godly, how prudently, how
thankfully did her Majesty at the last coming home and return of the L.
Admiral from the Seas, attribute and ascribe this victory gotten by fight
upon the Sea, only to God, giving him all the praise, honor, and glory for the
same, speaking in open audience of her Nobility, Ladies, and gentlemen in
Court, these words, which one of late has p^uned in a book written in latin
verse of her Highness. The verses follow.

Carole, laudo tuas virtutes, laudo viriles
Inuictosque tuos animos, comitumque tuorum
Quod loquor ex animo loquor, O attendite, quaeso
Non vis vlla hominu^, non tu (praeclare Dynasta)
Non comites, socijque tui, non Anglica classis.
Est Deus aeternus, Deus est, qui solus and vnus
Effecit, totam vt victrix celebrata per orbem
Ore ferar populi, domi and vt secura quiescam*
Illi tota rei been gestae gloria detur,
Illi totus honor, sit ei sui gloria soli.
And her Grace did not only in speech, but also in action apparent to the
whole world shewit, when her Highness accompanied with the Bishops of the
Realm, and Nobility came through the streets to the temple of S. Paul
within the city of London, The Queens going to Paul^ Church t^ (...) thanks
unto God.
and kneeling humbly within the west door of the same Church, gave with heart,
mind, and lowlines of body, thanks to God for his mercies and benefits
bestowed upon her and her people, and after heard a sermon at Paul's cross,
tending to the same end. As this was done and said before, like a most
Christian Lady and Queen, so it is worthy of remembrance, that contrary to
the custom of man and woman's nature, provoked, irritated and stirred up before
to wrath and displeasure, upon outrage and mali^e, practiced by any enemy, her
Grace with a most charitable and pitiful heart cherished and gave alms, The
Queens clemency and wonde^full (...), even to the enemy.
meat and drink to the Spaniards, captives and taken prisoners, forbidding
that any injury or violence should be proffered unto them, according to the
counsel of S. Paul. Vince bono malum. Overcome the evil with doing good.
Here I admonish and exhort all true English, of every degree, to print in
memory at the benefits before rehearsed, received by the mercy of God, and
daily and ha^rely to be thankful for the same, and to learn with the Prophet
to say and sing Misericordias Domini in aeternu^ cantabo. My song shall be
always of the loving kindness and mercies of the lord, with my mouth will I ever
be showing of thy truth from one generation to another* Again in the 146 Psalm.
Praise the Lord O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, yea, as long
as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God* Let us follow the example
of Mardocheus the 9 chap. England be continually mindful of y^ great benefits
received at Gods hand.
of Hest. who enjoined the Jews the 14 day of the month of Adar, and the 15
day of the same, every year, according to the days wherein the Jews rested
from their enemies and the month which was turned to them from sorrow to joy,
and from mourning into a day of mirth to keep them the days of feasting and
joy, and to send presents every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor:
wherefore was this done and enioined them? Because Haman the Jews Adversary
had imagined against the Jews to destroy them and had cast Pur, that is a lot
to consume and destroy them.

Let us follow Iehoshophat, who, when the children of Moab, and the children of
Ammon came against him to battle, did seek the Lord* and proclaimed a fast
throughout all Judah So did the Londiners (God be praised for it) and the
English, fearing God throughout all the Realm, and continued in prayer from
morning unto night. I wish and exhort them in the Lord to keep a memorial
thereof, and oftentimes to pray, and often to fast, many times to give thanks
for the manifold blessings of God poured upon us in preserving (as he has
done) the Queens Majesty's person from treason and imminent danger and peril,
in sending her Grace a long and gracious reign, that it may please him to send
her victory over her enemies (as he has done) if any here after shall arise.
(...)
So shall it come to pass, that as Iehoshaphat the king and the Jews, without
any stroke stricken on their parts, had their enemies overthrown at gods hand
and they gathered the spoil 3 days, and the 4 day they assembled themselves
in the valley Berracah and there blessed ye lord, then every man returned with
Iehoshophat to go again to Jerusalem with joy. And they came to Jerusalem with
viols and with harps, and with tr^mpets, even unto the lords house, and the
fear of god was upon all the kingdoms of the earth, when they had heard that
the lord had fought against the the enemies of Israel, and so the Kingdom of
Iehoshophat was quiet, and God gave him rest on every side, likewise in the 14.
Chap. of Exodus in the end of the same, it is thus written. But the children of
Israel walked upon the dry land through the midst of the sea. And it
follows in the 15. Chap. Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this
song unto the Lord in this manner, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has
triumped gloriously, the horse and him that rode on him with all the rest, has
be overthrown in the sea. The Lord is my strength and praise, he is become my
salvation, he is my God he is my fathers God, and I will exalt him. The Lord is
a man of war, his name is Jehovah, etc. Let us thus pray, and praise God with
y^ Israelites for the overthrow of our enemis in the Sea: and he will continue
our good and merciful God. Let us continue to go to the temple with Iehosophat,
and there with the harmony of our clean souls and bodies, give there the
Sacrifice of thanksgiving. Let us sing the 21 Psalm. Domine propter robur
immisum gaudet Regina, and quia tu author illi fuisti victoriae, exultat serio.
O Lord the Queen re^oiceth for the strength that thou have sent upon her, and
because thou have been the principal giver of victory to her, she reioiseth
earnestly. Let her Majesty spiritually reioise as she does: Let us her
Subjects take bold hearts, and be full of courage, if at any time foreign
enemy should make attempt. The Lord will not forsake them that put their trust
in him.

God grant her Highness a long life, a long and most prosperous reign. God of
his mercy, continue his blessings upon this Realm of England. Amen.

FINIS.

