A RELATION OF SUNDRY PARTICVLAR WICKED PLOTS AND CRVEL, inhumaine, perfidious;
yea, unnatural practices of the Spaniards.

CHIEFLY AGAINST THE SEVENTEEN Provinces of the Netherlands: yea, before they
took up Arms.

GATHERED AND TRANSLATED OVT OF Several Dutch Writers, as that Reverend Divine
Gulielmus Baudaitius, in his Morghen Wecker, and Emanuel de Miter, by S. O. a
lover of truth and equity, and an unfeigned hater of oppression and tyranny,
the bane of Commonwealths.

EXODUS 1.8.9.10. The new King over Egypt said unto his people, concerning the
Israelites, Gods people; Come on let us deal wisely with them, lest they
multiply.

PSALM. 2.4.5. He that sits in heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them
in derision.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

Printed, Anno 1624.

To the well-affected indifferent Reader.
GEntle Reader, there being so much spoken as thou may perceive, by the
foregoing Treatise, touching the cruel, inhumane, treacherous, perfidious;
yea, unnatural practices of the Spaniards, in these parts, and elsewhere,
which may sufficiently delineate him in his deserved colors, that whosoever
beholds him may mourn to see this Hazael so to tyrannize over the innocent,
and that the Lord should permit, and the earth bear such an unheard of
monster; yet notwithstanding much more might be added in sundry other
particulars, as the Dutch Chronicles mention, and other Writers have well set
out: amongst which, although I my self be a stranger by Nation to them; yet
since the time of my abode here, having attained some understanding in the
Language, I have thought fit to add some further particulars, which in my
reading I have observed, and could add many more; but my purpose being only
to annex a few things, I will not enlarge, lest I add another Treatise. But
before I come to what I intend, I have thought fit having some oversight in the
publishing of this Treatise aforegoing, to note by the way, the ill translating
of one word, in the 21 folio, it is touching the Princess of Parma, the
Translator terms her a crafty Queen, whereas the word bears no such sense in
the Dutch, but signifies one that has a sharp wit to deceive, as is said of
the serpent that beguiled Eve. Beside, The Dutch word Ghesante signifies
indifferently Ambassador or Messenger.
that that is translated Ambassador, speaking of such as were sent from the
States to the King, I conceive to be more fittingly rendered Messenger.

First, thou art to understand, gentle Reader, that the King of Spain was
lovingly received here in the 17 Provinces, and a solemn oath was taken on both
parts; the King for his part swore to maintain all their Laws and
Privileges, and they to him all due homage and allegance: He presently
demanded of them sum of money, whereupon the States did assemble, and
collected for him 40 millions of Florines, of Brabants money, to be paid in
nine years, and they paid it into his Exchequer; and although it was more then
they had paid before to his predecessors, yet upon this he did take great
displeasure against them; and, as they write, he for this did hate them to
death.

But he pretended this to be the cause of his wroth, because he saw that there
were some among them, that did defy the Pope and all his Religion: but that
could not be, for the City of Aelst was as superstitious in that Religion as
Rome is self; for they did persecute the Reformed Religion even unto death:
and yet for all that both they, and 170 fair villages that belonged unto them,
were by them plundered and spoiled of all their goods, and many of them wounded
and tormented for to confess where their money was, and many were killed. Thus
much by the way.

My scope and chief intent, is to show the first and just cause of the wars
in the Netherlands; whereby the diligent Reader (not partially affected) may
clearly understand, that the Netherlands did not rebelliously take up Arms
against a lawful Prince, (as some ignorantly think and speak) but justly and
religiously defend themselves against a perfidious Tyrant who sought their
ruin, by all possible means he could, and the subversion of the whole State.
A long while they patiently underwent his cruel oppressions, and intolerable
vexations, as the Histories clearly manifest; till there was no help, but
either they must become flaues in soul and body, worse then that of Israel in
Egypt, they and theirs for ever, or else be butchered by merciless
executioners of a cruel Tyrant. This Tyrant having a purpose to innouate all
things, to root out the ancient inhabitants, and to frustrate all the Laws,
Customs and Privileges which himself had sworn to maintain, knew not how
better to effect his evil ends, then by raising a bloody Inquisition to set
over them for their government; The inquisition was here 4 years before.
which said Inquisition (raised in Spain) concluded and pronounced certain
Articles, the tenth pr February 1568, which were confirmed by the King, the 16
following. Now because it may appear I do them no wrong in this charge, I
will lay down the Articles themselves verbatim.

The most sacred Office of Inquisition so often attempted in the Netherlands by
his Majesty, and hindered until this time, shall be instituted and advanced
in this manner, which is most expedient.

1 They must persuade the Emperor, being gone astray, and wickedly
confederated with heretics, that he resign his Kingdoms unto his Son,
with the whole administration of the Netherlands.

2 That the Emperor with his two sisters, having given over all affairs,
leaving the Netherlands, shall retire into Spain unto Us, being assured that
they shall never return more to do any harm.

3 These being dispatched, we must also draw the king to us, and keep him for
ever that he part not, and not suffer any Flemmings to have access or
conference with him.

4 That the King write unto, and command the Clergy of the Netherlands, that
with the Inquisition they should accept of 15 new Bishops, the which should be
free from all secular jurisdiction, yea in cases of treason.

5 The subjects of the Netherlands through their malice and waywardness, will
revolt and move seditions and tumults, pleasing to all but to our company

6 The Princes and Noblemen, heads and authors of those factions, with the
subjects, must be taken away, and the others reduced unto reason.

7 They shall hire at our charge thieves and spoilers of Churches and Images,
whose offenses shall be by all the world imputed to Rebels, by some subtle
means, and so we shall vanquish them.

8 That all Comerce, Negotiation, Liberties, and Privileges, shall be rooted
out, and that all be reduced to extreme poverty, whereby the realm shall be
permanent for Us.

9 No man of all those Countries (except he be of our faction) shall be held
worthy to live; and finally all to be rooted out: and all Goods, Possessions,
Arts, and Trades, and all Orders to be taken away, until there may be a new
Realm, and a new people.

10 In this action the wise and valiant Duke Alua shall be employed in person;
whereas any other, were he of the blood Royal, or a Prince, shall be of no
esteem: so as being suspect, yea in the smallest matters, they must be
dispatched.

11 No Contracts, Rights, Promises, Donations, Oaths, Privileges, and solemn
Assertions of the Netherlands, shall be of any force for the inhabitants, as
being guilty of high treason.

12 But above al we must have an especial care that in these matters of so
great weight and moment, we proceed not violently, but by means, by degrees,
and that discreetly, to the end the Princes, Nobility, and inferior subjects
may mutiny amongst themselves, so that one may persecute, yea execute the
other until at last the hangman be executed himself. For in all Christendom
there is not a Nation more foolish and indiscreet, and whose leuitie and
inconstancy may sooner be deceived then these Netherlanders, and God punishes
them accordingly.

There were other Articles found in President Vergaes chamber at Antwerpe, and
there Printed; and those are more cruel then these.

By these articles and unlimited power of these lawless Inquisitors, noman had
any assurance of life or goods for a day, but were In danger continually to be
called in question, either for the law of their God, or for some work of
mercy, which either religion, moral equity, or the bond of nature called
for: or else if they had color for none of these, they would impose such
unreasonable taxations, which if the Cormorants had not their gorges cramed
full they would make prey of all, whether by right or wrong it mattered not.
But my purpose being to avoid prolixitie, and to pass by impertinences and
needless repetitions, I will come to tnat I intended. In the year 1565 match
was concluded for the Prince of Parma, and the nuptials were solemnized at
Bruxels, whither all the Nobility and Gentry of the Country were invited, and
accordingly there met of them about four hundred, who like faithful Moses
being grieved to see the daily oppression of their brethren by the hard
taskmasters of the Inquisition, who not only robbed them of their goods, but
also by inhumaine cruelty, and unnatural but chery, deprived them of their
lives, who daily led them as sheep unto the slaughter: The consideration
hereof they jointly laid to heart, and hereupon (being met upon this occasion)
they resoved to present all petition to the Princess of Parma, which they did
the 5 of April next followings. The Earl of Breedrod delivering the petition,
humbly requested favorable answer. Three days after they received this
answer, viz. they should send two of their Noblement to the king, by whom she
would write in their behalf. The Lord of Barlaymont being present, after their
departure said (like a flattering Courtier) they were a company of Rascals and
Beggars.

It was concluded that the Marquess of Bargen, and the Lord of Mountigny
should go into Spain, who humbly presented their suite to the King, but could
get no answer in 16 months after.

The 26 of August anno 1566, the Princess of Parma sent for the Gentry,
telling them she had received letters from the King, containing promise that
all should be well, and that the Inquisition should cease. And for the
Proclamations they should not be of force, but his Majesty would take such
order as they and the State should like well of. The Princess also gave them
toleration for their Religion, on condition they should not deface, nor break
down the ornaments of the Churches: for, there had been before this time
vilde and lewd persons that freequented the meetings of the Reformed; these
went into the Papists Churches, stole their silver and what was worth carrying
away, and brake down their Images: but the Reformed suspected that this was
done by the appointment of the Princess, neither was their suspicion without
good ground, Emanuel de Miter says, that in Flanders they took 50 of them at
one time, and hanged 22 and (...) the rest.
for it is to be seen in the kings letters, Art. 7, that she had order to hire
this rascal company to do this villainy, which fact was imputed to the
Protestants, to the end that they might not only be odious there, but also
seem guilty, even in the judgment of other Nations; howbeit the offenders
were punished with imprisoment, yea, with death, even by the Reformed
themselves, who jointly confessed the action unlawful, and were so far from
giving occasion of offense in this nature, that Papist Burgers themselves
offered good security that no such thing should be attempted by them. Who then
can make any doubt that they were free from having any hand in those outranges
laid to them, the very opposites in Religion being Judges, who as appears were
willing to undertake for them; now as their saithfulnesse brought so good
effect for their persons, so did the Lord work that the truth of Religion
found many friends likewise, the Lord wondrously prospering the course of
Reformation, in so much that in short space they had in Flanders 60 Assemblies,
some Churches they themselves builded, but were by Duke d' Alua soon cast
down, who errected gallowses of them, and hanged them upon them.

The Princess of Parma also began to entertain soldiers with pretense to
apprehend the Church-robbers, but intended indeed to take away the ancient
Liberties and Privileges of the Netherlanders, wherefore sending certain
companies to Valencyn, the inhabitants denied them entertainment, who for that
were proclaimed Rebels the 14 of December, soon after they were besieged,
sacked, and many of them put to death.

But before they of Valencyn denied entertainment to the soldiers, the
Nobility had received letters out of Spain, He pretended it for Religion, but
his aim was to get their lands and goods.
from the Marquess of Bargen, showing, that the King was exceedingly incensed
against the Netherlands, that he had in the presence of many vowed to be fully
revenged of them, though it were with the hazard of all his Countries; that he
would make them an example to all the world, and would inuit the Pope and
Emperor to assist him in this quarrel. Upon the receipt of the letters the
Nobility assembled at Dortmond to consult what were best to be done, but
concluded not any thing, some judging it safest to join, and make head to
resist his tyrannical fury, other seeking rather to escape by flight.

Now was the Inquisition again brought in contrary to the Laws and Liberties
of the Country, which the King was sworn to maintain, for execution whereof
there were appointed 12 Inquisitors, commanding them to receive the Council of
Trent, these were called, The bloody Council, and so they were indeed, which
Rome well knew, refusing it, anno 1559, when as they fell upon the Inquisitors
house, set it one fire, wounded the chief of them, brake open the prison, and
set at liberty the captaiues, and would have burned a Cloister that belonged
unto them, had they not been by fair means dissuaded by two Lords in the
City, viz, Marc. Antonio Colunus, and Iulio Caesar.

Likewise Venice, Naples and Millaine, though they be Papists, would not suffer
it; the Merchants of Lisbon who are as superstitious in the Romish Religon as
any in the world, yet they did offer the King two millions and a half, that
they might not have it in their parts.

Yet the cruelty of this Inquisition did here increase, and many Soldiers
came into the Country, that some of the Country forsook their houses, and
resorted toward Freezland, and some did stay at home, and went to meet Duke
Alva, and well-commed him into the country, and showed him all the kindness
they could, As the Grave of Egmond, and the Grave of Horn, and many of the
Gentry at Brussels, 1^6^.
but he very shortly took off most of their heads, so that he did so terrify
the Inhabitants, that there fled out of the Countries more then an hundred
thousand houshoulders, besides many that were taken in flying, were taken and
hanged, and all these had their goods confiscated to the King.

The Prince of Orange, and the Earl of Bredrod, and five Earls, eight Lords,
and 50. Gentlemen, and they had some five thousand of Soldiers being in
Freesland, but were most over-throwne by the Duke of Alva his forces; so that
were driven to Embden land, and there prepared themselves to the Sea.

Now the Duke of Alva did command all the Inhabitants to pay the hundredth penny
of all their goods, and of all that was bought and sold; the which some of the
States did yield unto: and then he commanded them to pay the twentieth penny:
and then he commanded the tenth penny of all things that were bought and sold,
so often as they should be sold. Some of the States did make their humble
petition to the Duke, and to the Princes, showing them that it would drive all
Trading out of the Land. The Duke of Alva told them that he would have it,
though it did ruinate all the Land; but if he saw them willing to do their
best to pay it, he would deal favorably with them. All the prisons were
filled, insomuch, as they were sorced to prepare more, and filled them also.
But he said that it was against the Kings honor if they should not pay it,
seeing it was his pleasure to require it. And now did the Inquisition imprison
and execute many of the richer sort, as well Papists as of the Reformed Church:
and if they were rich there was no escaping for them. And whosoever was found
to have any hand in way of suit and petition to have the tenth penny to be
remitted, they were adjudged to have committed high treasom against God and the
King; and all these must forfeit life and goods to the King, and not any, of
their children to enjoy one penny worth of the same: but (poor Orphans) they
must beg their bread. And some that had been buried certain months, they
caused them to be dug up, and hanged on the gallows, and some to be burned,
because they had not the sacrament, and confessed before their death; but it
was because he would consiscate their goods to the King: yea when these
insatiable gold-thirsty and blood-thirsty wretches wanted color to cover their
injustice and cruelty, they had their officious imps (false witnesses) suborned
by Iesabel, to get Naboths vineyard; witness Martin Hutton, who was one of the
Inquisitors Clerks, and (being committed to prison) did acknowledge, that he
had made many false testimonies against sundry rich persons, some whereof were
of the Reformed Church. Here might fitly be brought in the hundred Merchants of
Granado, who were of the Roman Religion, and were never other; what pretense
had he to cause them to be murdered all in one night, and then presently to
command all their goods to be brought to his Treasury or Exchequer, whose
estate was worth more then 28 hundred thousand pound sterling? Now as this
tyrant was a devourer and destroyer of the lives of men, so did he presume to
usurp further not only upon civil ordinances, but upon the things of God; so
that those that were married in the Reformed Church, he forced to be married
again: and if they were rich, he took them from their husbands, and gave
them to his Soldiers to make prize of them. Those that were baptized in the
Reformed Church, he compelled to be baptized again, contrary to Gods word, and
to the decree of the ancient Councels, so that intolerable were the burdens
this cruel Pharaoh laid so excessive was his cruelty, that he filled all
places with blood, blood touching blood, as the Prophet speaks. For in small
towns he executed 50. and in great towns 200. and 300. or 400. And in places
as men traveled from one town to another, they might see many that his
Soldiers had hung up in trees to death, and some were worth 80. thoussand
guldens, and some less: yea this tyrant did confiscate so much lands and
goods, as by his account sent into Spain, did amount yearly to 8 tun of money
sterling, besides the many thousands that he and his Soldiers had. All the
money that he did exact out of this land (...) 6. years, did amount to more
then 50. millions of Gold. And if any were known to have any thing that did
belong to any that were put to death, and had not brought it to the knowledge
of the Inquisition, they did loose both life and goods: yea the 16 of February
1566. he gave sentence in his court at Madrill, that they were all traitors
against God and himself. At Vtrecht he beheaded a widow that was 84. years
old, because she had before lodged a preacher one night. whose living was worth
four thousand guidens yearly. And at Mastrich a father for lodging his son
that he had not seen in a long time, that was fled for religion, was put to
death. And at that place there was one put to death for giving a widow a peck
of come for an alms, whose husband this bloody court had put to death. And
many women were put to death, because they received their husbands in the night
that were fled for religion; yea they have killed women great with child, and
ripped up their bellies, and taken out the child and killed it: and some they
have fleyed alive, and covered drums heads with their skins, and some they
have tied to a post, and made a small fire round about them, and so roasted them
to death.

The like cruel they did at Oudwater.
At Naerden they received the Spaniards friendly into the town, who promised
them both their lives and goods; and as soon as they came in, they commanded
them to come to the State-house without their Arms, the which they did, and
the Spaniards gave fire upon them and murdered them all: and then they ran
about in the town, and ravished the women, and after killed them and fired the
town The young children that lay in the cradle, they quartered them, and took
them upon their pikes, and so went up and down the town, rejoicing in their
cruelty.

Such savage cruelty is scarcely to be found in any History, what Christian
heart can hear it, and not be affected with deep sorrow, yet behold some
monsters herein have bin found, that have been so far from humanity herein,
(for he that has humanity in him will commiserate others calamities) that
they have applauded it, as if he had in all these outrages done God good
service. Amongst the rest, I shall content my self at present, but to name the
holy Father the Pope, and one of his chief sons in this business. The Pope
sends his Legate to commend these so rare expioits, and calls this cruel Duke
Alva his beloved son, sends him a costly sword, the hilts whereof were of gold,
and a hat wrought with gold, and beset with rich and costly stones, thanking
him for his good service in maintaining the Romish Religion, and subverting of
heretics. Howbeit that his chief son I mentioned (exceeding this man of
sin, in the sin of cruelty, as if he would verify himself to be ten fold
more the child of Satan, then his father the Pope) thinks not so well of it,
his name Vergas, the President of this bloody Inquisition; for going shortly
after into Spain, he told the King, that he and Duke d' Alva, did mar all
in the Netherlands, by showing so much mercy to those people.

Concerning this Duke d' Alva, of whose outrage and cruelty so many have felt,
and perfiduous dealing which many have found by lamentable experience, whereby
may easily appear of what stamp his excessive mercies are, even such as the
Wiseman speaks of, Pro. 12.10. the tendermercies of the wicked are cruel. In
which he prides. himself, These words he spoke at a banquet, as he sat at the
Table, rejoicing he had, done the King so good service.
boasting he had slaughtered eighteen thousand and six hundred, in form of
justice, in six years times, and ten times so many he and his Soldiers
murdered otherways. And many more would he doubtless have murdered, had not
the Lord restrained and limited him, for his desire herein was as hell, that
cannot be satisfied: Witness the purpose of his proceeding against the
Magistrates of Bruxels, because they did not collect the tenth penny so as be
desired. He swear that he would have it, and before he would let it fall or
remit it, the Sun and Moon should leave their shining, so he went to
Brussels, and commanded the executioner to prepare ladders and ropes to hang up
that night in their doors 70. of the Citizens, and gave them his warrant in
writing what they should be: But God in his providence prevented this his cruel
purpose, Anno 1573. April. 1. I have instanced but 4 or 5 towns, but there
were scarce any town escaped their cruel pillaging, except they had bribed
their Commanders with exceeding large gifts.
in that there came news that the Grave of Mark has taken in the Brill; so
the tyrant did not go forward with his bloody enterprises.

Thus having given you a taste of some of those many things I have observed
concerning the intolerable oppression, and worse then salvage cruelty of the
Spaniards, exercised upon the people, which they endured and labored under the
space of sixteen years; I will now leave these cruel tyrants to the Lord for
judgment, and address my self to speak sormewhat further concerning this
Earl of Mark, who had those Gentlemen with him that fled. Before this he had
layne with his shipping in England, but the King of Spain sending his
Ambassador to our Queens (who was then in peace with him) to desire her that
she would not suffer his subjects to have their harbor in her land, and that
she would not give them or suffer them to have any relief whereby they should
make head against him: and here upon the Queen sent and commanded them out
of her harbor; and she commanded that they should not be suffered to have any
provision in her coasts, so that now they had no other means but only God,
who did in his mercy provide for them better then they expected. For they were
purposed to have gone for the Tassel, and to have taken some town about that
part; but when they came near that part, they had wind contrary that they
could not come there, so they went for the Mase, and came with their ships
before the Brill, artd there they went presently and took it; yet the Duke of
Alva had his forces in the town, near so many as they were, whom they
presently killed and chased out of the town, and out of the Island. The Prince
of Orange being in France, and hearing what had happened he sent them soldiers
with as much speed as could be out of France. And within one month after Duke
Alva sent certain companies to Vilshing to keep that place strong for
himself, and many of the commanders were come into the town: So the
Magistrates commanded the Citizens to come presently upon the Statehouse; so
they told them they must lodge the Spaniards in their houses, and they knowing
how they had used the Citizens in all places where they came, they told the
magistrates they would not have the Spaniards in their town. The Magistrates
asked them which of them it was that did refuse to receive them. They said, All
of them. So the Magistrates seeing them so earnest against the Spaniards, they
jointly took their Arms, and killed and took prisoners all them that were in
the town, and with their Ordenance they shot at his ships where the Spaniards
were and they made away. And of those that were taken, there were the names of
about 80. that they had in writing from Duke Alva that dwelt in the Hand, that
they should put to death. He had appointed those to be executed because they
were the chief that stood against the payment of the tenth penny.
So those of the Brill sent their soldiers with speed to help them. And
shortly the Prince of Orange came with forces and defended them; and some other
towns seeing the cruelty of the Spaniards, forsook the Spaniard, and joined
with them, and took the Prince of Orange to be their Protector, yet the States
notwithstanding did remain in obedience to the King some seven years after.

Again it is further worthy to be noted, that these Provinces did three times
send to the King their Noblemen, but could obtain no mercy, and many more
times they went to the Princess of Parma, and made their humble petition for
redress of their oppression, but could not obtain any favor, then they made
friends to the renowned Queen of England, and to the Princes of Germany, and
to the Emperor, who did earnestly entreat by their Ambassadors for them. The
King of Spain answered their Ambassadors with these words; he bad them tell
their Masters, That they should meddle with their own subjects, and not with
his, for he knew well enough how to rule his subjects without their counsel.
Now when our Queens Majesty found his unreasonableness and cruelty, Ann. 1575.
then and not before, she assisted them with Arms.

His own son Prince Charles did entreat for them, that it would please him
to let them have their Laws and Privileges, and that they might not be
oppressed; and withal he told his father that those Countries did belong to
him, Marplam in his Chronicle Ann. 1567.
and that they were given him at his Baptism, for the which his father sent
him to prison, and he never came out again. If the Lord would not have forgot
what Amalek did, long after, for smiting the weakest and hindmost of his
people, how may we in equity forget the infinite murders, and spoils, this
cruel Tyrant has executed wherever he has prevailed? And who can forget in
special that bloody attempt against our selves, in the year 1588.

If I should trace this Tyrant from place to place, I should run in
infinitum, having made the name of Christianity hateful, by his cruelty,
aganst the Heathens that know not God further then the light of nature: for it
is confessed by the Spaniards themselves, that some of the chief of the
Indians, They were exorted by a Popish Priest mind, that after this life,
there was one place for joy and another torment.
who were to be burnt to death, being told of heaven and hell, they asked
whether the Spaniards went when they dyed. It was answered to heaven, Oh then
said they, we will never come there, for we will never come where the Spaniards
are. But not to run so far, I will rest content to keep me within the bounds I
chiefly intended concerning these Countries. When the Citizens of Leyden were
in great extremity, by reason of a long sieg, the Spaniards proffering
conditions of peace, if so be they would yield up the City and themselue to
them, they returned answer; Not while they had a right hand to hold the sword,
or a left to eat; but if they should be driven to fall into their hands, they
would rather burn the City and drown themselves, then to submit to them, of
whose perfidiousnesse they had had so lamentable experience: and when some of
the Citizens pressed a yielding, in respect of the extremity of famine, a
Burger master, called Peter Adrianson said; Loving friends, I confess the
famine is great, and that some do die for want of food: yet rather let us
agree to eat up one another, as it shall fall by lot, begin with me first, and
divide me amongst you.

At Antwerpe, the Spaniards by the appointment of their Governor did come into
the City in battell-order, and marched up and down in their streets, and shot
into heir houses, and made a tumultuous noise, as if they had been so many
devils, for one day and two nights, and took the keys from the Magistrates,
They did this as well to the Spirituality, as to the Temporaltie, no (...)
excepted.
and set watch at the Ports; whereby they put the Citizens in so great fear,
that many women with child fell in travel, and some dyed with fear: and they
went by 12. or 20. into the best houses, and commanded them to prepare them the
best cheer, as boiled and roast, and other dainty dishes, as they list to call
for; and besides beer, they would have at least two sorts of Wine. And all the
chiefest Citizens houses had at least ten of these guests. And all cried out
for money, and said, They did offer them two (...) in money, and the third in
cloth, but they cried all for money.
that they would have 15. months pay, before they went out of the City of
them; And the Magistrates told them that they would procure them in cloth, and
apparel, and money the sum; but they all cried out for money, and that money
they would have before they went away; so at the last, the Magistrates got the
money, which did amount to 400. thousand Guldens. And the charge they were at,
which these companions did cost the Citizens, was 600. pound sterling the day;
and thus they were oppressed with them 28. days, I do make but a short
Relation of some of the cruelties they did against this City, yet there stands
in the Chronicle, out quire of Paper of their further cruelty.
in which time they had made them all rich suites, some of satin and velvet,
and some of cloth of gold: and one of them had a cushion of velvet, with these
words in Letters of Gold. I am the Dutchmans Bride well Master. And thus they
got rid of them for the present. And about two years after they came again,
and then they used the Citizens much more cruelly, for these devils did bring
straw, and set on fire, and put it into the houses, whereby they set nine rich
streets on fire, and burnt them with many rich and costly goods, and rifled the
Citizens of all their rich and costly jewels, and silver-workes, with their
money, and three days did they torment the Inhabitants for money: That they
are now and have been this 30. years more quiet, I easily yield it. But why?
Not that they have changed their former nature, for they still hold the former
principles of the Council of Trent, but being more subtle, and finding their
Kingdom is more weakened, they dare not to presume as formerly. In the year
1580. the States proclaimed King Philip to have lost his right, by reason he
violated his oath.
and in this time there was murdered of the Citizens above four thousand. The
money they took at that time is reckoned for more then forty tun of gold,
besides the Jewels and the loss they had by fire, was as much as the rest. And
thus was the best City of Merchants in Europe ruinated.

At Risell there was a Spaniard would force a rich woman to have the use of her
body, and the women cried out for help, and her husband came, and two of his
neighbors to help his wife, and they thrust the Spaniard away, and he ran
into the street and cried Spaynea, Spaynea, and there came many Spanish
Soldiers about him, and they rushed into the house, and took the man and his
neighbors, and carried them before the Magistrates on the towne-house, where
they were assembled, and there before them he complained of them to be rebels,
and stirrers up of vp-rores, and told the Magistrates that if they did not
presently put them to death, they would burn their town, and execute them
themselves, whereupon they durst do no otherwise, but hanged two, and whipped
the other.

Diverse things being manifested of the Spaniards cruelty, I will add one
instance of their treachery, and that of a famous person to his nearest
familiars: yea when he pretended sweetest familiarity and friendship. Pope
Alexander the 6. a Spaniard by birth, invited diverse Nobles and Cardinals to a
banquet, with a purpose to poison them all. The meetest instrument he made
choice of to effect this, was a Spaniard, one Caesar Burgia, his sworn
servant. The Pope showed himself wonderful pleasant, to avoyde suspicion, and
drank a carouse to them all; willing that his trusty servant to fill from such
a Bottle he knew well: which he did very effectually to the Pope himself as
well as to the rest. A Spaniards kindness to his friends.
After the company was departed, the Pope perceiving by an alteration in
himself, what was done, and that he must die now also, said to Burgia, This is
a right Spanish trick. It is written of them that they are so expert in these
exployts, that if Judas himself were alive, he might got to them to School.

I do beseech the Lord to show mercy to my native Country, that they may never
come under the government of the Spaniards, and give them hearts to repent of
their transgressions, and that they may sincerely embrace the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, to their endless comfort, Amen.

Yours to command in all services, for the advancement of the truth of Jesus
Christ.


