A Sarmon, of Ihon Oecolampadius, to young men, and maidens.

To his hearty friend Master segraue John Fox the translatour, whyshyth grace
and light of the holy spirit.
Sythen the time I first perceived in you, your desire to the word of God and
his holy institution, I have not ceased to be sollycytus in mind and prayers
for you, desiring the father and sender of our Captain Christ to increase that
thing in you which he has begone. And that inwardly you might be replenyshed
with plentuous spyryt and knowledge of the great glory and riches, which is
given us in Christ to thentent you might be altered in the sense of your mind
to a new man, And profesly forsak the vain fruition of this earthly world, and
to embrace ye glorious vocatyon which we called to in christ. The which I
thynk is hard for you and us all to do. The sense of our flesh is so strong.
The temptyng spyrytt is so ready. Nevertheless insomuche yet it is our parts
with mutual conferring one to exhort an other. And also for the brotherly
affection I bear to you ward, I cannot nor aught not I suppose, but some
thing I say as concerning your spyrytuall eadyfycation. And because you shall
not take my exhortacyones which be but of feeble weight, for you to styk unto,
here I have traunslated and sent to you a fruitful adhortacion of a famous
Chrystiane I, Oecola^padius, desyryng you to accept well in worth this labor
bestowed, and also to give dilygent reding to his preceptis whose institutions
if you will attently mark and peruse, I doubt nothing, but you shall receive no
small fruit thereatt, being suffycyently instructed in all things you shall
desire. The living grace of christ be with you. So be it.

This thing which I shall speak here to young mean which must be feed first
with milk and such tender meat, I would likewise you that be elders and more
auncyente in christ's doctrine, to practyse the same dylygently, every man in
his own house at home, for little yt shall avayle thus openly to preach unto
you, vnlsse ye use the same in your housholdes, the which pryuat and
domestycall instructyone I think so profitable and necessary in christ's
church, that without yt our open sermones though they be never so good and
learneyd shall little synke or remane in young men's hearts, by reasone their
minds and senses be so wandering and set upon tryffles ratheyr than to mark
any good thing, such things as be wholesome and for there souls health few
of theme reygarde unless they be brought up from their youth in the fear
of god. To you now there fore young men, I speak that be chrystened. Your
parents whethere they be alive or dead, brought you of a good and a chrystene
mind to be chrystenede, that ye might be dead from this world and sin.
Remember wherefore god did call you to that life not that you should live here
and hepe up riches in this world, but that you should inheryte the kingdom of
heaven. The which kingdom shall be given only to them that fear god, and work
rightuesnes, if we live wyckedly and co^tynue in sins, so as the fashion of
young men and maids is to do, perpetual damnatione and fire everlasting
shall folwe, for god is a just judge. Agaynne if we will walk in the
commandments of the Lord we shall find joy and lyffe everlasting, in
heaven with the Aungelles and all godly saynctes. But if you will not cease
from your sins and wickedness but still remain and wallowe in your
noughttynes, look for nothing else but everlasting fire with the devil. You
young persons you be bound to be obedyent to your Parents in all things save
only such as perteynes to god and your soul ward, in all other matters if you
live not obedyent to them, ye have no excuse before god the first and
pryncypal honor must be to god, the next after to our parents what profyt is
it, if thy parents do tender the never so much, make the there heir of all
they have, and pamper the up with all manner of delycates. And thou to lose the
fauore of God, with out the which, there is no health no quietness, even as
though a man for one little peace of land full of wides and briars, should for
sake all ye whole riches and treasure of the world. And at lenght the lord
shall also find these out when he shall judge the world. All yought for ye
most part follow the commen sort of people having no dyfferenc betwixt good and
badde, and other not knowing things sprytuall, or else not regarding them,
first look ye be obedyent to the word of God, and harken to yt daily and
dylygently. And if your pare^tes do grug theirwith or be offended, do you
rather fear and regard your heauenli father which has both power of bodi and
soul, tha^ your fleshli parents which have no pouer over you but only
inwardli things which is rather then to be esteymed, God which is almighty
and which has promised heaven, or your pare^tes here which give you but
earthly things and such as be transsitory and casual to every blaste of
fortu^e, Truly god I know undoubted some parents which do all they can that
there children, should not hear the word of God, O fowls and perverse people,
vnworthe to be named christen me^. Man must needs here in this world have some
god to serve, otheyr the god of heaven or else the devil the great adversary of
ma^kynd, it must needs follow, for so says christ yt no man ca^ serve two
lords at ons. They which will not serve god, do serve the devil, and be all
the minysters of ye devil which do not led a chrystiane life, And for this
cause chrystenmens children wha^ they be christened be told to abrenounce al ye
works of ye devil, and so they promise here after if ye live, to lead a
christie^ life to follow what so ever Christ co^maundeith to eschew what so ever
god forbideth. And this voue pleases god right well. Perjured and for sworune
you be if ye break your voue, say not now. I made no promise at my baptyme. Thy
parents and thy god fatheres promised in thy be half, whom also here I charge
and warn, that this voue be performede and dyscharged. It has been taken for
an heygh matter of godlynes if a young man had voued him self into some
monesteri there to remain in service of God and perpetual pouerti. but vnlese
they had been entyced in with promysys and fayere flattery words, they would
never have concented to that wicked madness, to bynd them selves in abbayes,
where as was nothing lose tha^ the service of god excercised. Now for ye most
part of yought they nether know what god, what the deuell, what good, or what
evil means. Nether is god nor the devil any such thing as the painters make
them. If you know how merciful god is how good, how meke. how gentle, how
sufferynge, how pacyent and just he is? than you know god, for by these
propertes we learn what god is. Contrarywyse, the devil is nothing else but
vnmercyfulnes, hattred, envy, murder, lying, mockyng of our neighbor, and al
thing that is naught, forthermore they be the children of god which follow god
in virtue in innocence, mercy, pety, and unfeigned charity. Again they be the
children of the devil, which be lying, cruel, unmercifully, dysobedyent to
their parents, perjured. They which be obedyent to god, do all such as
please god. They that serve the devil, do that please him. Wylt thou now
serve god, then set thine eyes of thy mind and mark christ, be just, gentyl,
meke true, faithful. Thou have abrenounced all ye works of the devil in thy
baptysme, now what be the works of the devil, I shall bryuely declare. To
bakbyte and speak ill of men, to moke, to despise, to scoff at widews and aged
me^, to give no reverence to thy parents, and chefly to neglect the word of
god, and to blasphem his name, wordly men love to go pompusly arayde, with there
hosse Iagged ye play and make merry as thowgh they should evermore live, and
never perysh, they riot and revel they use most impudent dansces, they go up
and down from one streat to an other all the night long with their crying and
routtyng they take away from aged me^ and infyrme persons their natural rest
and quietness. They little regard there parents commandments, what so ever
they speak unto them, they make ^yght an a moke at yt, yea and that is worsse
the greatter forte of them can not say the Lords prayer right, and if they can
say the words, ye strynght and sprit thereof they have not. They babble up there
prayers as the nounes were wount to do their psalter. But such young men as
serve and add yet themselves to christ be not polluted with such manner of
wickedness. Then such lewed and wicked persons which lead there time so
abhominably, let them nothing hinder you in your virtuous doyngs, wether they
be preestis or lay me^ or what so ever they be, for the pomp and pride of this
world, yet never pleased God. nor never shall. And yet it is plain such
things do greatly delight and stir up young me^ such as have not yet learned
to follow reason nor co^cyder the end and death of man. Yt is nothing else all
this but vanyte, to pastyme, to sport, to drink, to feight, to set idle, to
solace. O Lord how petifully is our youth brought up, even from there child
age. wherefore when they cum to be men afterward there fruits appear thereafter.
In like as our first parents in paradyce a place of all pleasure, were forbid
from thaple, that above all thing they should be ware and be circu^spectid
therein. But after that through the deueles instigatio^ they had committid in
taking of thaple, they fell into all manner of myserys, where with we be all now
oppressed to this day. Even so likewise, it is now amongst youth which
supposes the Glory of this world to be nothing else but all pleasure and
delight and all together honei, when in deed it is bitter poison, and verili
everlasting da^natio^. I do not here speak against honest mirth and such manner
of excersyce of the body as be cumly. But because I perceive the deuell thus to
go about with such delytes and baytes to snare young me^ and maids, and so to
seduce them from all goodness if they will consent unto him that at leynght he
makyth them clean desperate, both with out all fear of god and all
shamfastenes. which is the only ornament of all young age in so much that
nether they regard god, nether truth, nor justice, goodness nor honesty nor no
other virtue whereof also proceideth there greater dystruction that they will not
harken to the word of god, nor be not brought unto yt by there parents. O you
parents litell do you know what a charg lies apo^ your backs. And you
children, when will you remember and consider what yt is, you promised to god
in your baptysme? Yt is not to be neglected, I tell you, that you voue and
promysse unto god? he requires our faith, and such unfaithful false covenant
brekeres he will punysh and that most sharply. The lord setyth before us tow
ways, the one, to life, the other to dystrucsyon. Mark now well ye children
of the lord. The one is sharp thornie and full of briers, which few men do
walk, but after that yt be entered ones, yt is very plain and pleasant and
brings to euerlaisting life. The other seems first delectable, as though it
should co^ducte us to all manner of goodness, but at leyngeh and last end, yt
castith us head loung down to hell, where ye devil and all his au^gelles be
kept fast abydyng the day and judgment of god. Therefore says Christ.
Matthew vii. Enter in be ye straeyt wycket, for broad is the way that leads to
perdition, and large is the door and many enter in there at. And again strayet
is the door and the way narrow which leads into heaven, and few there be
that find it. The life of all true christians follows this strayet way, in
the which way they be daily excercised and tourmoyled in perturbatyones of
this world, And they never cease nor rest, to they have fineshed there course
and come where they would be. Say some. Then shall I not keep company with my
fellows and aquaintance, shall I not make merry with my gosseptes and solace with
the^ ones or twice a wicke?

I am no mounke nor friar. what man is able to keep so strait a rule, you must
consider we be men, what would you we should do? here my consel, good son, what
thou shall do, for I know what the world is wou^t to abject and say, here, I
say, and obaye the word of god. And undoubted thou shall sone perceive this
strayte way now to thy seauynge, shortly to be easy and pleasant. And I do
not doubt but at leynght thou shall give me great thanks for my counsel,
which have kept ye frmoe such dystruction and ieoperdy. I would wysh to all
you young men and children, the eyes of your mind open that ye might see the
end that such men come to, One is slane being droncke and mad, an other
has his arm or leg stroke of, an other goyth a robbynge and feyght
wrongfully for other men's money and so stroke^ do^ne and slain like a best,
An other is hangged for a small tryfle. And who can recyte up all ye kinds of
death and disttructio^, that such dysobedyent persons as these come unto? what
need we any example to be brought when daily experyence declares what end and
mischef these wretches com to. And the same I speak also to young weme^ and
maids. They be wanton and incontinent they have and draw to such fellows
after their owone sort more lecherous than any got, they scoff and moke every
young mane that comes by them, they delight. most in baudi songs. Some labor
and brings forth pryuely, and so they turn other to be common stews or eles
be driven to extreme poverty, and so live in contempt and miseri all their
life long. What honest young man would be copled or content to be joined in
marriage with such a beast? Then what cost of aparel have they ye most basse and
beggerli weme^ which have right naught yet how su^ptuously they must go
arrayed, Amongst ye very gentyls a man shall not find more excess and pride in
vesture, wherefore learn be time you Christen yonglynges to fear ye lord god.
And with hole heart and mind harken to ye word of him every morning ye first
thing ye do, and every sunday. And let it nothing perturbe you, though ye be
gruged or contemned therefore for the service of god, for this it is yt pleases
god most heighli, it is no matter whether we live or dye to the lord, that is
enough for us, what should pass for more? And think this rather and study how
you may follow him. And care not for this vain sort of men this rascal rabble
of ruffeynns which can nothing else but eat and play and (...) the streyts to
be seen of other. And the same I speak to young maids likewise, if god send us
long life here, and we spend it i^ wa^tones, in ye world to cu^ we shall be
cast into perpetual fire. Hyere my in his lamentationes.iii. says, it is good
for a man if he bear his yoke i^ his youth. And good it is for a man if he
teach his soul in his youth to bear the yocke of gods commandments, if
we will be content to serve god, then shall the sea and tempest of our
tentations soon swage, for ye lord will never forsake us. They which be elder
me^, and have receued light of god i^ his gospel, know what I sai, and greatly
complain there mysery and ingnorance in which they have been brought up and
led. Oh (say they) if we had hard such knowledge in the scripture which now
we here, thanks be to god, we would never have runned in the anger of god as we
have. Young age may be well compared to tender graftes or buddes apt to be
bended which way you will, if ye take them in time and while they be tender,
but if they be ons grouen and paste in bigness, it is but lost labor what so
ever ye do, break the^ you shall sonner than bend them, after they be come to
there nature. The same thing we see likewise i^ brute beasts. Take me a lion
and bring him up amongst men, he will be tame. And like yt is with children,
ill education and bryngyng up makes much in marring a man. filthe words and
baudy talk is agreate token of a corrupt heart. You must take better head
than ye have done yet, what company your children keep, what co^munycation they
use, and this shall make you christian people. children be as much consecrated to
god, as though they were a nointed priests, or shaven into any order of
relygyon. Consider groundly with thy self and tremble, if thou be in the anger
of god, canste thou sleep quyetly or take any rest? Yt will vex an honest man
if his neybour bear him dyspleasure. And a gentle child if he see his father
sore angered with him, he can not tell what to do to a void his displeasur with
flatteryng, with weeping he assayeth all ways he can to be reco^syled a gain
unto his father. Then how much more owght we to prove all means we may, to be
reconciled to our heavenly father, whom we have offended so often every howere,
which has both given us our body and soul. They be but tryfles that our
fatheres bestow upon us in comparyson to them yt we receue of god. The lord
our father ones plaged the world with the floode of waters, only reserving
eight persons, whom he preseruede from the waters through his mere grace
only. Sodom and Gomore with many cities moo he dystroyed with fire, besides
what an infinite number of men have been slain in battle? who will not fear
this lord? he is slow to anger, he grant tyth us time to repent years
suffycient. He sendith his prophets before to admonish us of his anger to come.
Then if we take no hyed by his admonishments, his vengance will strycke when we
least think of yt. We know no end of our lyffe, death crepeth every day
while we be most in our ruff, and daily in our pastymes. No man has a
commyssyon of his life how long to live. Then why obaye we not the precepts
of god, and cease from our sins which slaye the soul. Many deceive
themselves when they sin secretly, supposyng that god does not behold them,
if thou shuldyste walk in a deserte or in the most darkeste wode where no man
could cu^ to the nor see the, yet god would see thy works. Take hyde of his
vengaunce which is so sharp, for we be ready to offenses dyueres, where with we
greatly provoke the a^ger of god. Work ye the deeds that please god for these
two go always together, to cease from sin and to work charity. If we cease
not from sin, we can not work no goodness that pleases god. Let us demand
our children thus, what faith profesest thou, doste thou profese that faith
which the apostolyke church has left? Tell me ye artycles of thy faith. I
believe i^ god the father almighty maker of heaven and earth. etc. Let young men
be learned this creed perfectly, and let them say yt not with mouth. But have
yt in there hearts, yt they may set all there trust a pon God their maker,
that both he will and also is able to defend them. This it meanyth, almighty
God is the maker of all things of heaven of earth of things vysyble and
things in visible. All things that be, have there being of god, for with out
him nothing is made.

Corn, wine, oil, wolle, and all things else, yea the Aungelles of heaven.
All come of god, here we must consider that all these things were created for
us.

Oh what a merciful father is this, which has ordened such things for us so
vnworthe wretches?

what will not he grant us hereafter, what will he deny now to his chylderen?
unto elder men and such as be more grown in there faith the mystery of the
Trynyte must be declared, so much as man's weknes may comprehend. There is one
god which made all things, both that are in heaven and that are in earth. If
thou doste trust in god, thou may be sure the devil ca^ not hurt ye, much
lose no mortal creature. To believe in god, is to have a constaunte trust in
god, and to drive al thine hope in him, al other things and creatures set a
part, and that shall cause us to love god truly, other else it is but a feyned
and hypocrytycall love. It foloueth in ye Creed. And in Jesus christ his only
son. All mankind was damned utterly for their great and many fold
offenses, but christ has borne upon his Back all our sins satysfyenge his
father for us, and deliueri^g us from everlasting death, yt now we should live
to our master christ, who soever does inwardly believe this, will conform his
life honestly according to the commandments of god, eschuyng all manner of
vice, so much as in him lies.

There is nothing more abhorrede amongst true chryste^ men tha^ syne. Almighty
god first made Adam and Eve our first genytoures, and put them in paradyse,
geuyng them an eisy comma^dime^t, which they transgressed, deceived through the
sottyltie of ye devil, whereof we al take our ofsprynge. Ye know what they did,
and what happened to them ye same infection now is gendered in us. What man
does not see this and prove it daly in him self, but chefly in children as we
may se, this more apereth by lytil and lytil. For they begin to lie, to stele,
to be light, to stand chekmeat with their parents nothing regarding god, what
so ever is spoken, if we se any such vices spryng up in them, we must reform
them in time with rodes and strypes, lest ye evil in vale and get the head, so yt
ye hole man shall be poysened with the venime thereof. And so they procure to them
selfs everlasting damnation, vnlese they redrese them selves by time and
wtstand such infections while they be fresh and gryne. There is no young man
such a babe how young so ever he be, but he can understand what is good and what
is evil. For this is ye law of nature written in all men's hearts, do to other
as thou would be down to thy self, let us intermyt nothing in them which
become to a more perfect reasone and understanding, that they give not
themselves to the devil. Here I admonysh all children yt if you se your
parents slack in hearing the word of god, follow not their steps nor be not lyk
them. Al persons shall render a count to ye lord, and every man shall answer
for him self. Desire to go and hear sermons often, And the lord shall give you
plentiful grace to know him, and shall open you a way to all virtues. The lord
shall preserve you from all them that contemn his holy word. Wherefore did
christ dye? to deliver us from everlasting death. The excedyng great charity
of god, did not spare his only begotten sone, but for us all did bestow him
unto the most cruel death, that who so ever does believe in him shall not
perysh, but have everlasting life.

Therefore let us love him again, and accordynglye honor him for such
benefytes, as he most ryghtuosly does deserve.

What gretter love can their be my dear beloved childrn? If thou should fall
in a deep pete of water, and a stranger coming by draws the out, Or If thou
shuldyst ly sore syke at the point of death, that no mane should se any
recovery in the, there comes a physicion and restores ye to health, thou
culdeste not show no like kyndnes again corresponde^t to such pleasures done
to the. Much greatter pleasures have we received of christ, which has plucked
us out of the mouth of the devil, delyueryng us from hell, and promised
everlasting life and Joy with the Angels. O dear child, say thus in thy
mind, I will never syne more, seeing that syne is such a fowll and abominable
thing. Yea and if I were constrained to sin with a thousand deaths, yet will
not I consent thereto. Christ was the sone of god, before heaven and earth was
mad, which at the time appointed of the father was made man with out any
infectyon of sin, and lived with us i^ earth, And at last suffered for the
sins of all the world. Learn my children pacyence: Christ did bear his
cross a pon his own back, was knocked and scoffed, was scourged, and was
crouned with thorns. Mortify your members in time, lest ye evil grow inward
and at length break forth to your great peril and danger, yt folowyth in
the creed. The third day he rose a gain from death, ascended up. et. c. bear
this (you children and elders also) I do not mumble up these words with out
intellyge^ce. They be golden words and worthy to be written in all men's hearts
with the fyngar of god. Christ is risen again from death, and so shall we: do
thou doubt that thy body shall rise again? Christ says it which can not lie,
he syttyth on the right hand of the father, from thence he shall come to
revenge the wicked, and to reward ye godli with heaven. All things are given
him in his hand of the father. And though we yet here remain in earth weyke
and brickle vessels, yet do we tari and look fore joys to come, promised us by
christ. And to whom did he promise this? To such as once knowing the truth, be
content to lead a virtuous and an honest life, as do suffer in this present
world much aduersyte, for who so ever intend to live godly in christ Jesus must
needs suffer persecution. In so much the lord has so premonyshed us, let us be
content what so ever happen, what so ever aduersyte we suffer for the
gloryfyeng of his name. And if thou were in service with some myghtie lord or
prince, it could not be chosen, but thou shuldyst a bide many pereis, take much
pains, sustain great cold, for the optainyng and encreasyng of thy living.
Than rather sustain you the service of thy lord god, and doubt not of thy
reward, for he him self has promised to reward yt in his endless kingdom.
I believe in the holy ghost. etc. which did teach and now does teach all the
faithful the truyth that Christ preached unto us. The operatyon of him is to
make us despise the world with all his concupyscence. Yonglynges, here I
admonysh you, when so ever any ill thoughts tari long in your minds, be you
certain it is the devil that has styrred up the fire. Cast him out through
prayer and almose deed. The good spryte does engender in us the remembrans of
eternal things and that be good, And let not the thing that is good, dwell in
a corrupt place. If we be slack and neglygente now when we be called of our
merciful father to his heavenly feast, he does but well and worthily, if he
call back a gain his grace so ge^tilly of his mere te^dernes offered unto us.
Truly we be well worthy of many scorgynges and betynges, if we return again to
our old vices, after we have received and known the grace. Your going is much
vnseable, your iagged and cut apparel so dasshyng a bout you, do declare a mad
and a foolysh mind, you be proud and puffed up, you give no reverence to your
elders. The holy ghost did not teach you this, why do you neglecte his
inspyratyon? feyght against satan with all his pomp and that with contynuall
prayers. Resyst the vices which grow in you. Good children, learn to pray
gladly our lords prayer, so shall you prove to good men, and shall be both
worship to the co^menwealth and an orname^t to chrstyes relygion. Flee from
such company whose mind is all set to do myscheyfe, These be wicked persons,
which go about al they can toppres the veryte, by their maneres, their
counsels, and life: how be it, they be not able to euerte, although they
sumwhat obscure it, but only in there own hearts, which delight in lies. God is
merciful and very gentill, therefore call upon him in christ's name. And
dyspise not the grace of god, after the fasshyon of sum young men to foolyshe
and light, which ill prouyd for them selves both hear and in the world to
come. But these flowers and life of theirs will sone vade, and tha^ shall they
perceive and forthynke in their minds, what they have down. I believe yt
catholic church et. c. There is but one faith of all that ever have been, both
prophets and Apostelles, And this universal church is not contained in one
place here, but in all places of the world christ's church is dyspersed. be you
not deceived so to think christ's church only to be, which is governed under
the wicked pope. The lord has his people in every place. The true church is
yt which has the word of god, the old and new testament, which has here
sacraments, baptyme, and ye lords bread. If any thing be taught the a gaynste
the right doctrine of the gospel by any man how holy so ever he be, be it to
the accursed. If the papystes do teach the true honor, worship, and dygnyte of
christ. follow and embrace that doctrine. But else if they teach any other
thing, that is their own dremes and traditions, a void yt quickly, lest you
be defiled with the leven thereof. And be not quick i^ believing them that say.
Our forefatheres, ye bishops with all the general counselles, gathered to
gether in the holy ghost, have appointed this (though yt be dyrectly against
the word of god) therefore you must believe it under pain of eternal damnation
Let them auaunte with their baggage and phantasyes, wherewith they have
infectted and deluded all the world so long. Let the youth learn the word of
god exactly, so shall they easily judge of the faith and word of god, and
shall not lightly swerve from gods right doctrine. The sheep of Christ hear
and perceive his voice and follow him whyther so ever he goyth.

The forgiveness of sins. etc. Some herytyckes there have been which have
denied forgyuenes of sins, and have invented I can not tell what pestylent
doctrine out of there own heads. Also let these a voyed with there errors.
Christ callyth sinners to him daily, A men dement of life is preached to all
men for them to obtain forgiveness of their sins. Troble not your selves a
bout aurycular confession. To the lord confess your sins every day and
hour, the which he only forgeueth him self.

you fathers have respect and regard of your servants and maids, that they
run not all the year long in their fylthines with out fear of god. And so
doing you shall be lightly allowed of god. let the^ learn sermones early out
of the word of god, where by they shall learn to know god, which is the
beginning of an honest life: forgive you all envy and all harered. And your
father in heaven shall forgive your offenses. We have remission of syns, where?
In the cross, wha^ as christ suffered for all our sins, that is, the sins
of al ye world. Think ye not there sins to be pardoned, which live in all
wyckednes and fylthynes. God forbid that we should say such mean believe in
christ that have their hearts full of filthenes and replenyshed with all
mischeffe. And let no man think yt much, though he suffer here sum kind of
cross in this world for ye justice and glory of god, we have a promise, of
reysyng of our flesh, whereof the faithful man nothing doubts, but is suer,
(in nothing more) yt there is an other life after this much better and iyofull.
This is our faith which is taught us from our youth and which all christen men
do profess. Nether do we teach any other what so ever papists babble of us. if
this faith be lively in us, it will bring forth fruytes accordyngly, What does
baptism make, it cleanses us in this manner from sins. And like as the water
purges the body, so does the word of god purge the soul. Let us abhor and
renounce our fylthy and sinful life, if we be christen men in deed as we
profess. Howbeit yet the appetite, and pronesse to sin, remains in us
still, the which if we trust in the lord, is pardoned and taken a way through
grace. Our prayer with all desire, that the glory of our Lord may go forward,
and yt his kingdom daily may be enlarged unto all the ends of the earth, will
they nyll they these wicked papists. Let our supplication and prayer be to god
after his will and pleasure, which standyth ever, and profitable to us ward:
Say, O most holy father help our infirmytees, forgive our manifold offenses.
Give us right faith, yt we may be applyaunt to all good works which your will
requires. Deliver us from evil, that is, from ye devil that he have no power
nor impery upon us. Exercise your selves much in the lords prayer, Put a way
ye books of your wicked prayers whereof, all the world is full. And be not like
the hypocrytes which have a great pleasure to brag their prayers before
other men, which also stand i^ every corner of ye streets that they may be
seen of all me^, but these have their reward already, let them look for none of
god. Mat. vi, It is time I think now to draw to a conclusyon, seeing the hour
is full up. I beseech and desire you fathers by our Lord Jesus christ, yt you
give good chrstiane example in your houses to your children and servants.
Prove you exammynie well your hearts coming to receive the sacraments. If you
find this in your selves that ye can be co^tente to lead a christen life here
after, ye may bouldly com, if not, a way lest ye be gyllty of the bodi and
blood of the lord. Or if you do purpose as you be wont to do after the feast
of easter to run from town to town, like mad men, to fall again to your
old conditions, banketynge with your hores, and with your harlots, I do you to
wit, you receive yt to your damnatyon. Thou that art a father instantly call
upon thy son or thy servant yt he come not hither to dyshonest the board of
ye lord, or to receive to him his own judgment, as paul speaks. It is not
one days busynes, all our life time we ought to emploi this matter. We will
not, after ye papystes manner, our gestes come to this christian feast Let the
papistis go with their erores. It is no light thing to receive the body and
blood of our lord, here lies the weight of all ye matter, yt we should
hereafter led a new life, forsakyng our old si^full nature. Let all things
spring of a faith unfeigned, so al shall be well both here and in the world to
come, we shall both please men and all the Aungelles above, for they do
greattli embrace such as these adhore god sincereli, if we would follow this
rule of charity, that we would love our neighbor, as our selves and pray for
all our enemies, tha^ would god have great delight in us.

Nether let us think ye christen life consists in words only, but in works
and deeds, other else do we nothing but sclaunder the name of christ among
infydeles. The lord lyghten all our minds with his grace, that we may do all
things to his glory. And to the edyfyenge of his Catholic church. So be yt

FINIS
Imprinted at London by me Humfrey Powell, dwelling above Holburne conduit.

And are to be sold by Hugh Syngleton, dwelling at the sign of Saint
Augustine, in Poules church yard.


