A COMFORT AGAINST THE Spaniard.

DEVT. 20. And when ye are come nigh unto the battle, the Priest shall come
forth to speak unto the peole.

And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, you are come this day unto battle
against your enemies, let not your hearts faint, neither fear, nor be amazed,
nor in dread of them.

For the Lord your God goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies,
and to save you.

LONDON Printed by John Windet for I. O. 1596.

ornamental border

TO THE REVEREND FATHER IN God, William Lord Bishop of Norwich, and to the
rest of her Majesty's Officers for the execution of Justice in that Dioces. T.
N. wishes grace and peace.
IS it true that the Spanyardes will com this spring? And is it not as true
that we are ready to receive them? Has this land at any time had, either
better provision, or more Soldiers: brauer Captains to lead them, or sounder
Divines to encourage them?

Yea, but what for Armor on our backs if fear be in our hearts? can fear
there remain where our late victories are reme^bered? Is not our enemy the
same, our case, nay our God the same?

But Pharao, and Sisera, their overthrow is now forgotten. Miriam may sing
alone, and Barac and Debora can get no hearers. O, rather let this book call
to mind our duty, for why should we deprive, either our GOD of his glory, or
our selves of such a comfort? Is it not an hours Sermon of that invincible
Navy, and a brief Apology of the Portugale voyage? and does it not set
before our eyes how great things the Lord has done for us? To this end I
have published it, and to your Lordship, and worships, I do Dedicate it.
Beseeching God, so to bless you in governing us, that still the Gospel may
have free passage among us. So shall we still eat the fruit of our vines, in
despite of Senacherib: and good Ezechias shall not want Esaies to comfort her,
when Rabsache shall be sent to rail upon her.

Your Lordships, and worships in Christ Thomas Nun Minister of the word, at
Weston.

A Comfort, against the Spaniarde.
Iud. 5. ver. 19. 19 The Kings came, they fought: then fought the Kings of of
Canaan at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they got not the money they desired.

20 From heaven they fought, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

21 The river Kishon swept them away, the river of their meetings the river
Kishon. O my soul tread under foot what soever seems valiant.

22 Then the horsehoofes were battered by the swift fleeing of their valiants.

23 Curse ye Meroz: (says the Angel of Iehoua) curse ye the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to help Jehovah, to help Jehovah among the
mighties.

24 Let Iael the wife of Cheber the Kenite be blessed above women: above women
dwelling in tents let her be blessed

25 He asked water, she gave him milk: she brought forth cream in a lordly
dish.

26 She put her left hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans
hammer and she smote Sisera: she took away his head and battered and bruised
his temples.

27 Between her feet he bowed himself, he fell and lay still between her
feet: he bowed himself he fell, and where he bowed himself there he fell
deprived of his life.

28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and chatted through the
lattesse: why does his chariot defer to return? why tarry the wheels of his
chariots?

29 Her wise Ladies answered her, yea she her self answered her own words.

30 Have they not gotten? do they not divide the spoil? A maid, yea two
maidens to every one? Sisera has a pray of diverse colors, a pray of diverse
colors, of colors of nelde work, of diverse colors of nedle work on both
sides, for the necks of the spoylers.


FAther Jacob in his last Gen 49.21.
will foresheweth, that Neptalie should be a hind let go, giving goodly words.
The singer of the song (beloved) is the performer of this Prophecy, even
Barack of Iud, 46.
Cadesh the son of Abinoam: for as his feet were swift in Iud. 4, 10.
leaving his army against Sisera: so are his words sweet which for the
victory he here sings with Deborah. The whole song is longer then may now be
handled, this part as fittest for our purpose I have red unto you: for we are
here assembled, not only to sanctify this Sabbath as at other times: but
also to bless God for the late Spaniards overthrow. It contains 12. verses,
and consists of two members. In the one the battle is described: in the
other a curse to Meroz and a blessing to Iael is pronounced. Three
circumstances describe the battle: the place where it was fought: the parties
that fought it and the eue^t of it. Two places are named Taanah and Megiddo
neighbor towns in half Joshua. 17 11.
Manasses. At Megiddo good king Josias was 2. King. 23.22. 2. Chron. 35.22.23.
slain in the battle, and to Megiddo the three spirits like Frogs in the
Reave. 16.13.
Revelation do bring the kings of the earth to battle: the allusion is unto
this text, and the mening is, that pseudocatholikes should fight with no better
success against Christians, after the reviving of the gospel, then did Sisera
against Barack at the waters of Megiddo. And in this sense, well may our narrow
Seas be called the waters of Megiddo, for thither their pride brought them,
and there were they cutin pieces. And thus much for the place, the parties that
fought are now to be considered. Sisera and his adherents is the one, and
Barack and his partakers the other. Sisera his adherents are thus recorded. The
kings came, they fought: then fought the Kings of Canaan. Joshua in conquering
the land, killed Iosu. 12.24.
one and thirty of them, Israel had express Exodus, 23.33. and Deuteronomy. 7.2.
commandment to root out the rest: Iud. 1.21.
But Benjamin, Iud. 1.28.
Zabulon, Iud. 1.30.
Asher and Iud. 1.31.
Neptalie, thought it better policy to put the^ to tribute: they preferred
gain before godliness, but what gained they by that policy? They found them
pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, as God had Numb. 33.55.
threatened: they were brought to mere beggerie and extreme slavery, as well
they deserved: mere beggerie, for their high Iud. 5.6.
ways were unoccupied, and traficke ceased: extreme slavery, for the servant
of servants, even cursed Canaan became Iud. 4.2.
Lord over the^. But what is not Canaan his curse upon the Popes back? Is not
he as rightly called the servant of servants as Genesis 9.25.
Canaa^ was? If so? Why is not his brood rooted out from among us? Or seeing
England will still be pitying of them, why are they not Lords over her as was
Canaan over Israel? The difference between them is the reason of it: for
Israel chose new Gods; England has renounced I dolatrie, Israel did Iud. 4.1.
evil in the sight of the Lord: England gives free passage unto the Gospel.
And this I dare assure you, that so long as English laws do countenance true
religion, England shall be ours in despite of Gods enemies. Truth it is, that
in space of 339. years Israel was Iud. 3.8. Iud. 3.12. Iud. 4.2. Iud. 6, 1
Iud. 10 7. Iud. 13.1.
six times oppressed: but this also is as true that no one oppression began
before Israel went a whoring after other Gods. The ten tribes were 2. King.
17.2
carried captive into Ashur: but the ten tribes had first 257. years
continued in the sin of Jeroboam. 2. King. 24.14. and 25.11. 2. Chron. 36.20.
Daniel. 1.2,
Judah and Benjamin were carried to Babel: but not before Josias, his children
had 2. King. 23.32, and 37. and 24, 9. and 19
overthrown what Josias had established concerning religion. And as for their
posterity which returned from Babel, to build the temple, 2. King. 2^.2, 2.
Chro. 34.2.
they became Saduces and Pharisees: they Mat, 27.22. Mark, 15.13. Luke 23.21.
John, 19.15.
joined with the Romans, to Crucify Christ, before Titus, eitheir sacked
their City, or burned their temple. We read of David that he 1, King. 15.5.
held Religion all his days, the like we read of 1. King. 22.43.
Iehoshaphat, the like of 2. King, 18, 3.
Ezechias, and the like of 2. King, 22.2.
Josias, and who of all their enemies prevailed against their land in their
days? And yet to that purpose, how often and how dangerously were they
assaulted? Twice Philistims army was 1. Chro. 14.11. and 13.
pitched in Baalperasim: once Edom, Ismael, Moab, Ammon, Philistims,
Amalakites, Hagarens, Gebalites yea and Ashur too had 2. Chro. 20.1. and, 2.
and Psalm.
conspired together, and were approached to Engeddi: 2. King. 18.17.
Rabsache had brought his host to the walls of Jerusalem: and to such a plunge
Necho Pharao put Judah that she lost her 2. King. 23.29.
King in the battle even good King Josias. And to come to those sower Revel.
9.14. unto. 20.
Angels of Gods wrath, I mean the Turks and Sarasins, what though for their
multitude, they are c ten thousand thousands: for their force horses: for
their courage Lions heads: for their great desolation they make burning where
they come, they have Habergions fiery blew, and brimstone, and for their
doing this upon a word, fire, smoke and brimstone come out of their mouths:
yet Christian nations they ouerrun not, only they kill such men as will be
still Reave. 9.20.
worshipping of Devils, and Idols of gold, silver, stone and wood, there only
making desolation where Gods wrath is provoked by Idolatry.

Solomon was as a Lions whelpe couched in his den whilst he held Religion,
but after that his thousand wives had 1. King. 12 3.
turned his heart, who then had not a heart to rise up against him? Hadad,
Reason, Jeroboam how pitifully did they 1. King. 12.14.23. and 26. verse
afflict him? And at the last 1. King. 1^.20.
rent in two pieces his kingdom. Israel had Exodus 34.24.
promises of her God to be kept safe in her land, whilst she held his
ceremonies. His ceremonies we hold whilst his son we profess, for he is the
end of them, and the truth of them, and therefore as safe as were the
Israelitish women from the enemy at home, whilst their husbands appeared
before God at Jerusalem: so safe are we from the Papists, whilst we hold fast
our profession. Salomons temple was seven years in 1. King, 6.38.
building, Nabuchadnezar, 2. King. 25, 9.
burnt it, he was seven years to be a Dan. 4, 22,
beast for it: yet Daniel gives him this Dan. 4.24.
assurance, that if he would break of his sins by righteousness, and his
iniquities by pitying the poor people, there should be a prolonging of his
peace, Eliza. 1
Our Queen has broken the neck of Popery, has received into her kingdom
Christ's righteousness, and pitying the poor souls of her ignorant subjects
has caused it to be preached among them. And why should we distrust God for
the continuance of our peace, whilst she and her successors continue this
course? Yea but Moses tells Israel, that if they do not all Gods
commandments, the enemies shall eat the fruits of their land. Now England is
so full of sin that in stead of al it seems to perform scarcely and one of
them. Leui. 26.15, 16.
The text is, if ye keep not my commandments but break my covenant then etc.
Now England, howsoever it fails in civil duties, yet holding the covenant
she is not subject to this punishment. Neither is she therefore the rather to
be secure: for wherefore is pestilence and famine so often among us? Wherefore
so often is the sword of the enemy upon our soldiers abroad? The sword of the
magistrate upon our malefactors at home? But for her sins. Neither yet any
whit the more is she the to spare the Papists, for do they not deny the
nature and offices of Christ? Do they not give unto that Revel. 9.11.
Abaddon what is due unto our Sovereign? They are heretics and in truth very
Traitors, and yet you would think them the best subjects, if you consider but
their dealings with unreformed ministers: they are so zealous in speeches
against them, and so importunate with Judges til sentence be given against
them. But O ye fools, can ye imagine no other let for bringing in again your
superstitions, but only that the learned ministers their mouths are still
opened? Are the laws so soon altered? Will England be so soon at your
beck, as when with the Dog she returned to the vomit, and with the swine to
the mire? Has she these 37. years hated the whore, left her naked and burnt
her with fire, and should she now again begin to love her? I tell you God has
put these things into her heart to do them, strive not longer against his
government. Come out of Babell as we have done, kiss his Son and then live in
our land, yea live for ever. But if still you will have a Saul's eye against Gods
Ambassadors: then O ye judges do ye Justice, and let not Conser. Ezra. 2.13.
with Reuela. 13.18.
Adonicams children stand up against them. Are they not Revel. 11.3.
two for their fewness and in sackcloth for their poorenes? Yet out of their
mouths comes the Revel, 11.5.
fire that deuoureth your enemies, they are your 2. King. 6.17.
fathers, and the 2. King. 2.12.
chariots and horsemen of Israel, they bring unto you the glad tidings of the
Gospel, which if you believe, you shall Iosu, 3.16.
live for ever, and if you still profess you shall still be safe from your
enemies. And this of Sisera his adherents. Barack is the other party Iud. 4.10.
10000. marched under his banner, but who revenged his quarrel? From heaven
they fought, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. These were
dumb creatures, yet such as Jehovah uses to destroy his enemies. At his
commaundment the waters Genesis 7.23.
destroyed the old world: fire from heaven Genesis 19.24.25.
Sodom and Gomorrath; Exodus 9.24.25.
hail and Exodus, 10, 14, 15.
grasshoppers the fruits and beasts of Egypt: the red Exodus, 14.28.
Sea Pharao and all his host: Iosu. 10, 11.
hay lestones more of Iosuas enemies then did all Iosuas army, the Lord of
hosts is his name. The hosts of heaven and earth are always ready pressed for
his armies. Had the Spaniard learned this lesson he would have trembled to have
given the name of God to his Navy, for only Jehovah is invincible. The
Centurion shows by his answer how well he believed it, I am not worthy Mat,
8.8.
says he to our Savior that thou should come under my roof, only speak
the word and my servant shall be healed: for I have soldiers under me, I say
to one come and he comes, and to another go and he goes: As if he should
say: health, and consequently all other creatures are so ready to go and come
at thy word, as are my soldiers at my commandment. But to leave this point,
and to come to the event of the battle which thus follows. They got not the
money they desired. The river Kishon swept them away, the river of their
meetings, the river Kishon. There were the horsehoofes battered with the swift
fleeing of their valiants. And was it any marvel, though Sisera his army was
thus foiled? who ever resisted God and prevailed? Daniels profane kingdoms
could not, yet was Babel among people as a Dan. ^ 4,
Lion among beasts. The Medes and Persians ruled over 127. nations. Alexander
in six years well nigh ouerran the whole world, and the kingdom erected by
his Captains was a fearful and ougly Ester. 1.1.
beast with ten horns. These in Nebuchadnezars eyes were as a goodly image,
whose head was of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly of brass, and feet
of iron: yet for resisting God and abusing his people, in short time the Lord
so powned them to Dan. 2.34,
powder, that at his coming in the flesh, scarcely a remnant remained of them.
And as for Rome, howsoever by Gods close providence it may remain for a time,
for the holiness of Pilats vicar to abide in: yet seeing she has Mat, 27.26.
killed the Lord, banished John, and continually Revel. 17.6. and 18, 24,
shed the blood of Gods saints, her damnation is decreed, she is that Numb. 24
24
Chittim that must in the end perish. In John's days she was called the
Revel. 17.18.
great City, and rule over the Kings of the earth had she: But that great
City shall Revel, 16.19.
drink of the wine of the cup of Gods fury, Revel. 16.21.
hail like talents shall fall upon it, the whore shall Revel. 18.8.
come to destruction, her Revel, 18.15.
Merchants may bewail her, but none shall be able to help her. But to return
to Sisera: he had Iud. 4.3.
900. iron Chariots: his Ladies were assured that he could not loose the
victory, how therefore do they comfort his mother concerning his long
tarrying? Have they not gotten? do they not divide the spoil? a maid yea two
maids to every one. Sisera has a pray of diverse colors, a pray of diverse
colors of nedle work, of diverse colors of nedle work, on both sides for the
necks of the spoylers. But the Pro. 10.28.
fools their hope quickly perished, for Sisera is now dead, the army fled and
drowned: Iere. 6.1^.
they said peace peace, but sudaine destruction came upon them. And this for
the former part of my text. The other is Meroz, curse and Iaels blessing. The
cause of her curse thus follows. Curse ye Meroz says the Angel of Jehovah,
curse ye the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help Iehoua: to
help Jehovah against the mighty. Meroz durst not venture a limme to get
liberty, she was situated so nigh the battle and so faint hearted, that well
she might be some town in Isaschar, the only tribe which Deborah Iud. 5.16.
vpraideth of asselike sluggishnes, and which father Jacob Genesis 49.14.
foretold should be an Ass couched under two burdens. She only regarded her
commodities, so she kept them Sisera, or Jehovah whom she served she cared
not: Luke warm Revel. 3 14.
Laodicea was much like her in behavior, and almost the like punishment had
she, for she Reave. 3.16.
was spewed out of the Lords mouth, and Meroz is here accursed from his mouth*
And this of Meroz curse: Mels blessing thus follows. Let Iael the wife of
Cheber the Leuite, be blessed above women, above women, dwelling in the tents
let her be blessed. He asked water, she gave him Milk, she brought forth
Cream in a lordly dish: she put her lift hand to the nail, and her right hand
to the workemans hammer, and she smote Sisera, she took away the head, and
battered and bruised his temples. Between her feet he bowed himself, he fell,
and where he bowed himself, there he fell deprived of his life. Before we
come to Iaels blessing, a word must be spoken of her Country and exploit: she
was neither Israelite nor Canaanite, but a Kenite, Iud. 4.4.11.
descended from Exodus, 3.1.
Iethro king of Median Moses father in law the Kenite. Lot and Iethro showed
the like obedience, the one Genesis 14.4
left his fathers house to go with Abraham, the other Mat, 11, 5
left a kingdom to go with Moses, and almost the like reward found they for
Ruth the daughter of Lot was the Lords mother, c and Iael the daughter of
Iethro Iud. 4.17.
killed the Lords enemy. But why should Iael therefore be blessed, was he not
in league with her? Did not he * fly to her house for succor? The league was
but civil and private: But now a Iud. 4.
public cause is in hand and the Lords battle in fighting, she was to prefer
the cause of religion before her covenant with Sisera: Her blessing was the
very same that Gabriel Luk, 1, 28.
bestowed upon Mary, for bearing the Lord, this only excepted that Mary is
blessed among women, but Iael above women. I will not now dispute whose was the
greast blessing, but this I am sure of, that they were both saved by believing,
and not by these works, howsoever they had a prerogative above women for them.
For this is a sealed truth, that we are saved by Ephe. 2.8 9.
faith, and not by the wokes of the law: Yea, Mary Luke 1.47.
rejoices in God her Savior. The time is past: yet a word of the Spaniard;
and that by way of comparison, with the enemy we have now in hand. Sisera
Judge. 4 3.
had 900. iron Chariots, the Spaniard a Navy invincible: Sisera with an high
hand, came down to the river Kishon. The Spaniard brought their Navy on our
natrow Seas with the like affection. In Israel none doubted to follow Barack
but such as misbelieued Deborah her prophecy: In England none fainted to take
armor against the Spaniard, but such as knew not the course of Gods
government. Judge 4.9*
Deborah went up with Barack to comfort his Soldiers. And at Tilberie O
Elizabeth, how were thy Soldiers encouraged at thy presence? Maide^like in
attire, thou came unto them, but warrierlike in behavior wast thou among
them, void of fear was thy countenance, and gracious were thy speeches:
Mighty was thine army as was Baracks, but Jehovah would have the glory as
then he had, his winds revenged thy quarrel. O Jehovah, to thee must we sing,
thou wast our man of war in that day, the horse and his rider thou
ouerthrewest in the Sea, thou have triumphed valiantly: The Spaniard said we
will pursue, we will overtake, we will divide the spoil, our lust shall be
satisfied upon them: thou blewest with thy winds, the depth covered them,
they sunk to the bottom as a stone. O Jehovah, so let thine enemies perish,
but they that love thee, let them be as the Sun arising to his strength.

The Apology of the Portingall voyage.
THe Portingall voyage had a double purpose: the one to spoil the K. of Spain
his towns of victual, the other to weaken his strength of men and shipping:
and both these to this end, that he being impouerished and weakened at home,
the Church in England might without fear still serve the Lord Jesus in holiness
and righteousness. This was no evil meaning, seeing God commands Revel. 18, 6.
to do unto the^ as they thought to have done unto us: seeing also Rome is
babel which if we destroy we have ablessing. One means to accomplish this,
was the carrying of the K. of Porting all into his country: neither was this a
cursed course though his Religion be accursed: for shall we condemn Abraham
for Genesis 14.24.
carrying with him Anar Eschol, and Mamre for recoverie of his Nephue Lot? Or
Genesis 30.7
loseph for using the help of Pharaos servants when be went to bury his
Father? Or Nehemi, 27. 8.
Nehemiah for having aid from Darius when he returned to Jerusalem, or Acts 23,
7.
Paul for stirring the Pharasies against the Saduces, that he might escape with
his life? God forbid, seeing the ancient Hebrews had always this Christian
liberty, to use unclean beasts in matters of Physic. It is truth that many
of our soldiers died in the voyage: but to the godly death is no curse; and as
for the rest it is a great blessing to the land that they never returned. It is
truth that at Plymmouth God kept his winds from favoring us a great while, even
until the greatest part of our victual was spent, and many of our soldiers
weak: but who knows whether this was that we should humble our selves under
his mighty hand, at the beginning of the enterprise: and that we should give
him the whole glory, the victory being gotten. This I am sure of, that he that
thinks he laid these cross upon us as a curse, because he disliked the whole
action, never knew what blessing he vouchsafed us in any one part of the
action: In 3. days he brought us from the lands end to the coast of Spain:
this was no small blessing. He gave first into our hands that town, where the
year before that invincible Navy was gathered together, where a hourse was
builded for the laying up of the English treasure, where a mint was erected to
pay the Soldiers appointed for that voyage, where also we found victual
horded up for the present victualing of a new Navy. This we confessed to be a
great blessing. The exceeding great plenty of wine and victuals we found there,
were notably abused to drunkenness and suffetting: and therefore did not God
there once make us miss our purpose? and ever after send leanes even to the
death among us? Yet so in wrath he ever remembered mercy, as still he showed
himself a favorer of the action. He gave us courage, so that we burned the
shipping in the harbor, destroyed the Country round about the town, the army
gathered at the Bridge, having great advantage of us, both of place and number,
could not withstand our forces, they fled before us to the toppee of sleep
mountains, where, if they stayed, our sword pierced them, if they fled, they
brake their necks down ward. If this were not a blessing, why was the General
and his valiant Captains so joyfully received, when in the Evening they
returned from the slaughter? yea, why was the next day so solemly proclaimed A
day of thanksgiving. How rued it the enemy from the high town to behold this
triumph? to see our Soldiers marching in their armor, our Mariners carrying
abroad their munition and wealth, their own town flaming at the last with
fire, and they not daring come forth to quench it? And though we thus plagued
the^ fiftene days together, yet no other wreak they wrought upon us (such a
fear had our good God put into their hearts) but only peeping out of some
hole of the Wall, with a piece now and then they took a leg or an arm from
us.

Penichea was the first town we descried in Portingal, and could there, either
the shot from the Castle, or the sleepnes of the mountains, or the Rocks
hidden in the water, or the troops of the enemy keep us from landing? How
shamefully did they after one or two brauadoes given, take themselves to their
heels? How speedely was the town given over and the Castle surrendered unto
us? Were there any more of us then 6000. that marched from thence to Lysborne?
Yet as the Hare before the Hounds, so fled the pesants before us. They gave us
leave three days and three nights to enjoy the Suburbs of the City, even
so long as any provision for us was found in them. Once indeed they sallyed
out with Viue Don Antony, as if they had been Portingals, but their dissembling
was well recompensed, for we are persuaded that of 600. not 26. returned
without their deadly wound: so long the chase was in which we had them, and so
nigh they were when we began to pursue them.

From Lysborne we marched in one day to Castcales, the march was long, and our
match spent, and health sore decayed, this they knew as well as our selves: yet
all that day long, durst they once skirmish with us? Nay, their horsemen
thought it as a great matter, a far off from some high hill to behold us;
so a wonderful glory to kill, a few straglers, which the army being passed,
they found in Orchards.

At Castcales word was brought that 8000. of them were come within two miles of
us. We feared presently: not that they were come so nigh, for the reporter was
well rewarded: but least they would not abide the trial of the battle, such
cowards we had always found them, therefore with all speed a Trumpeter was
sent with, round message to provoke them: we as fast as we could marching
after, they heard no sooner of our coming, but straight way they took
themselves to their flying march, a trick of war which they always used.

Homewards within the Isles of Bayon, we Ancred in despite of them, Vigo and
the villages there about we set on fire, the inhabitants we chased all, some
we killed, and had not Bayon been better walled then they hearted, we had fully
satisfied our selves upon them: but some will say: what is the King of Spain
the worse for this, or we the better? What? we have laid open the weakness of
his Country, the dastardlynes of his people, set on fire his holds, and
brought away his Munition, his gold, his spice: yea, what was there worth the
carrying which we left behind us? Where we carried forth one we brought
home two ships, the like we did of Armor, the like of bread, or at least of
Wheat to make bread, and the like of other pillage whatsoever is become of it.
Yea but our Mariners there all dyed, which are the strength of our land? So
indeed do Papists give out, to dissuade unstable minds from the like
enterprise, but ask her Majesty's Officers men of great worship and credit,
who saw them as they paid them, and they will tell you clean an other matter.
And therefore howsoever this voyage is evil spoken off of some, whom nothing
contenteth, and bitter to others that lost their friends: Yet for the Generals
and Captains it was most Honorable, for the whole land blessed, and cursed
for none but for the Papists.

FINIS.

