The Book of measuryng of Land as well of Woodland as Plowland, and pasture in
the feelde: and to count the true nombre of Acres of the same. Newly corrected,
and compiled by Sir Richard de Benese.

Impynted at London, by Thomas Colwell.

The Contents of this book.
IT shows the ma^er of dividing of one acre or mo, of woodland from many
other acres, liyng i^ one piece together Also it shows the diuersytie prices
of all the parts of an acre of wodlande, after ye rate and diversity of the
price of the same, from the price of.iii s.iiii. d. for an acre to the price
of.vi li. xiii. s. iiii. d. Also it shows the manner of mesurynge of timbre or
stone, by the foot square, in timbre measure of what quantity soever the
timber or stone be, from one ynch in square to xxxvi. inches square. Also it
shows ye ma^er of measurynge sawene bordes, tables, or panes of glass by the
foot square, what breadth soever the bordes, tables, orpanes of Glass be, from
one ynche breadthe, to xxxvi. inches in breadth.

It shows also the manner of measuring of a Chamber flore or of a Pauement, to
know how many Foot of Boorde or stone will board or paue it, of what length
and breadthe so ever the floor or Pauement be, to. iv. foot in length, and.
xl. foot in breadth.

Finis.
The Preface of Thomas Paynell. Chanon of Marton to the gentell Reader.
IT is most co^monlie seen, that every man does most commend ye thing that he
is best expert and seen in. And therefore some there are ye exfoll divine
letters, some the law, and some Philosophy, with such other lyberall sciences,
in the which they are learned and exercysed.

Other there are ye do not only extol the^, but after they have so done, they
dispute whither of them are most laudable, and most worthy to be preferred
above other There are likewise ye after long disputacion do not only assygne
every sience his peculier laud and praise, but all so ye discuss whether that
of such noble sciences are most for thy common weal supposyng (and will) that
thing to be most excellent, that is for every man's profit, and that
common vtylytye and prosyte does none other wise ercede private gayn and profyt
than gold all other metals.

These men (after my sentence) gre in a very good opinion, for the divine Plato
says: that man is not borne only to profit him self, or any synguler
person, but to profit the common wealth also The which does then prosper and
floryshe, when gouerners and rulers do tenderlye and intierlye abiectynge all
synguler affection, look and take heed unto it.

My diligence and study is (says Scipio Africanus) not only to beware how
rome be now in my time ruled: but how I may invent fashions and means, that it
may increase, and be well governed hereafter. O what an excellent word and
saying was that.

What other thing but only ye wealth publyke moved M. Curious to say thus to
the Samnites, offering him great sumes of money, I desire none of your gold
(quoth he) but I desire that ye and your riches may be under the dominien of
the Romans. O. was not that an excellent answer.

And that O. M^^i^s conspired to murder Porcenna enemy to the Romans without
any hope or sauegard of his life was it for the common wealth of Rome.

And did not the only wealth public in force M. Regulus to persuade the
Senators of Rome that they should not restore the young galauntes of Cartago
to prolonge his life withal. They are lusty (quoth he,) and in their flowers,
and apt to do us much sorrow, and so her re turned again to Cartago well
assured that he should never escape their hands alive. O what synguler
affection and love had this man to the common well, yt preferred it above his
own life of all thing the most esteemed, and best beloved. Are not such men
worthy to be gouerners and rulres of cities and of the common weal.

As long as Rome and Cartago, with other like cytyes, had such regentes and
gouerners, they prospe red and had abundaunce of all thing. But after that
synguler affection, synguler co^modytie and profit, ambycion, Idleness and
voluptuous pleasure took their enter, then all that (wisdom, diligence, study
and great labor had augmented) decayed. Then these most excellent and rich
Cities fell in ruin, and were easily subdued. The which thing does declare and
open their great laud, by whose gubernacion, rule and policy, they came to
such high renown and fame. By this it does now appear and follow yt such
politic Rulers are worthy of much laud and great co^me^dacion. But what
co^mendadion laud, and praise shall we esteem and judge them worthy of, ye
ingeniouflie have invented and cloquently discribed, how and by what subtle
and politic fasshions, such places should be governed and ascended to high
honor. And again how Gouerners of a common wealth should use them selves in
their offices. And not withstandinge there be that do eleuate and extol the
doer and the inuenter of thinngs above the writer, yet after my mind, the
inuenter, writer, or expositer of other me^nes writings are worthy of no
little praise, what reason should defend him, yt would say, that the executer
of the Law (by whose aid all commonweals are ordained and ruled) to be of
more excellency then Moses, the first of all lawyers. Should any Philosopher
prefer him self above Pytagoras the first Philosopher, or any Astronomer above
ye children of Seth, the very inue^ters and foundacio^ there of, or any Musician
above Tuball, Lameths son, ye first yt ever gave any study to Musycke, or any
Physycia^ above Apollo or any Arithmeticia^, above ^aminus, Pytagoras, Pallas,
or Algus (of who^ Arythmetike is called Agrym, (the inuenter of nombres. Or any
Geometrician above Cain, the which taught the Hebrici ans the manner and craft
of weightes and measures? Is it not (tr^w ye) more to invent and find, than to
add unto that, that is found al ready. And as Agrym was found for ye course of
marchandyse and the accomptes thereof, so was Geometry upon the excursions and
ouerflowing of the flood Nilus whose insidacio^s and surges were such that
they confounded and so troubled the lymytes and bonds of the land of Egypt,
that they knew not their own Land from other me^nes. Of this took Geometrye
his Oryginall beginning the which includes the measuryng both of land and
water, the use of weyghtes and knowledge of the universal order of the bodies
above, the distaunce and greatness of stars, mocyons, and reflections.

Carpenters and Masons, with such other Artyficers do use Geometrye, by the
which all manner of ingynes and craftye ordynaunces of war, and other
apperteynynge unto their art do depend as hanging roofes, and Galaryes,
walls, ships, Gallayes, Brydges, Milles Carts, and wheels, with the
which, things of great weight, are very eas^lye drawn and hoysed up.

Also what soever goes by weyghte, water or wind, or by cords, as Clockes,
the which goes by weygtes, and Organes, the which sounds by the vehemence
and force of the wind, does long unto this noble Science. The artificial
craft also of war, of casting of Belles, and Bomberdes, or Gonnes with
such other Artylery, whither they be of tymbre or metal do for the most
part depend of Geometrye.

And did not the noble Archytas make ^ Dove of wood, to lift her self up,
and to fly by Geometry.

Did not Archimenides, make an Instrument of Brass, wherein men might easily
perceive the mocyons of the Planettes, with other things comprysed in the
materyall Spear, and how to measure the altitude and height of all such
things as man may see and not come unto? And those things also that lie
plain, deep, round, cornerwise, in length, or in breadthe be longethe unto
Geometrye, the which conteyneth. iii. diverse kinds of measuringe.

The first is named Altemetria to me asure a quantytie after his lenghte only.

The second is named Planimetrya, that is, to measure a quantitye after his
length and breadth.

The third is called Tercometria, that is to measure a quantytie after his
length, breadth, and deepenesse.

In this Scence, are certain quantyties, called famous quantities, as a
Finger, a Palm, a Foot a Cubite, a Pace, a Perch, a stake and a ^yse, with
such other, much necessary to be known

It were very ^edyous to expound all the Terms, Parts, Properties, and
Vtylities of Geometrye. For notwythstandynge that God may, and can do althyng
without no^bre, measure, weight or any point of Geometrye, yet when he gave
the fyrmament the Planettes, and stars, their mocions, the earth, form and
fasshion, the Sea, with other rivers, their banks, he did it by nombre,
weight, and measure.

Wherefore I may well extol this most noble Science conteinynge these three,
with the knowledge of many other lyberall and manual arts, right necesary
for the common weal of man, Considerig the^ this lyberall Science called
Geometry to be in every thig much convenient for the use and common profit of
all men. A Friend and a lover of mine, a Chanon of Marton, named Sir Richard
Benese, not willing to hyde the treasure, that god has enryched him withal.
But evermore myndinge and labouringe (as the fore said Romans did) to
increase the common wealth, having also this saienge of the Philosopher in
memory. The more profitable a thing is, the more it should be common, he
has, (I say) compyled this ingenyous and profitable Book, for the common
profit, and use of every man

Wherein is sufficiently and breiflie centeyned the perfect form and rule of
measuryng of woodlande, hills and mountains? whersoeuer, how soever or in
what form or quantity soever they lie.

Also of deuidinge of one acre of woodlande or mo from many other acres.

And of measuring of Timbre, square or round? Boordes, Tables, and Panes of
Glass, by the foot square.

He has furthermore so expressed these intricate and hard points of Geometrye
by fygures, rules, and such open examples, that every man, applyenge his mind
thereunto, may without any great labor attain unto the perfect knowledge
thereof. Vale.

Thus ends the Preface.


Here follows the Book to measure all Lands.



The manner of measurynge of Land, and co^^ptynge the nombre of acres of the
same.
BY cause in measuringe of Land, meny men sometime the sellers, sell more
measure than right, sometime the byets by less measure tha^ right be greatly
deceived, by ye m^aters thereof, the which be not expert and conning, both in
true measurynge of Land, and also in true compting and summyage the number of
acts of the same. Therefore in this little book, ye shall reed certain rules
much necessary for ye perfect knowledge both of true measurynge of Land, and
also of true comptynge and sumynge the number of acts of the same.

Of diverse quantytyes of measures, and of diverse names of the same.
But first for the playner and redyer knowledge of these rules following, ye
shall dylygently note, that there be diverse quantityes dyuersly named in
measuryng of land that is to say: an ynche, a foot, a perch, a dayworke,
and quarter of an acre (most commonly called a roode,) an half acre, and an
acre.

To make a true ynche.
THe length of an ynche after some men's opynion, is made by the length of
three barley corns, ye which rule is not at all times true. for ye length of a
barley corn of some tillage is longer, and some shorter, after the fatnes and
leanesse of the land, where it was sown upon. Therefore i^ making of an ynche
after this rule It should be somtymes longer, and somtymes shorter after the
length and shortness of the barley corns: the which should make great
difference in measuring. Therefore ye shall take the length of any ynche more
truly upon an artificers rule made of two foot in length, after the standerde
of London, the which rule does conteyne. xxiiii. inches in length.

To make a true foot in length and in sq^re.
A foot contains xii. inches in length, a foot square in measurynge of
land, or any other thing by the length and breadth only, co^ teineth in it.
c. xliiii. inches di. A foot square contains in it. lxxii. inches. A quarter
of a foot square conteyneth in it. xxxvi. inches. But in measurynge of tymbre
or stone, or any other thing by the length, breadth, and depth, a foot square
to^teineth in it. xvii.. and. xxviii inches.

Of two manner of perches, the woodlande perch, and the fylde land perch.
Because Woodlande, and fyldeland be not measured with perches of like and
equal length. therefore ye shall understand, that land in the field is
measured most commonly with a perch or a pole of xvi. foot and di^, in length.
But in some places the land perch is l^nger and in some places shorter, after
ye custom there used. The woodland perch is commonly. xviii. foot in length.
But in some places it is longer, after the custom there used. The woodland
perch of. xviii. foot in length square co^ teineth in it. iii.. xxiiii.
foot, half of this perch square contains in it.. xlii. foot, a quarter of
this perch square contains in it. lxxxi. foot.

Of an acre both of woodlande and field land.
AN acre both of woodlande, and also of fylde land, is always. xl. perches in
length, and iiii. perches in breadth, although an acre of wood land be more in
quantity, than is an acre of feldelande. Because the perch of woodlande is
longer, than is the perch of fyldelande, as it is before expressed, An acre can
not lightly be reduced and brought into a true square, except ye should add
to some part above the true quantytie of an acre, or else take away some part
from the true quantytie of an acre. Nevertheless, after mine accomptyng (as
nyghe as I can search the true the, in this behalf (an acre of woodland
square is on every side. xii. perches and di. ii. foot. viii. inches, and a
quarter of an ynche. An acre conteyneth in it. lx perches. An half acre
co^tei^eth in it. ^xxx. perches. The quarter of an acre (otherwise called a
rood) contey neth in it. xl. dayworkes. A daiworke co^teyneth in it. iiii.
perches. For likewise as a Mark of money conteyneth in it.. lx. pence, so does
an acre co^teyne in it.. lx. perches. And likewise as a Mark of money does
conteyne in it. lx. grotes, so does an acre conteyne in it. xl. dayeworkes. And
as a grote does conteyne in it four pence, so does a dayworke conteyne in it.
iiii. perches.

Of two manner of Instruments to measure land withal.
MEters of Land, for the most part do use to mete land with a pole made of
wood, conteynyng in it the length only of one perch. The which is a very
true and a perfyte way of metynge. But it is much laborious and not spedefull
to mete therewith a great quantytie of Land in short time. And also it is very
tedyous to mark truly a great nombre of perches in metyng of them one after
another. Therefore some men do use (and best) for ye more expedytion and speed,
to mete with a cord or a line containing in it. v. perches in length, which
line four times laid in length, does make. xx. perches.

This manner of metynge with a line has been used long time before. For the
Prophet Zachary says in the. ii chapte^r. that when he lyfted up his eyes, he
saw a man bering a metynge line in his hand. And when the prophet asked the
question of him, why there he went, this man answered the prophet, that he went
to mete Jerusalem, to know how much the length and breadth of it was. But by
cause a cord or a line by drawing it upon the ground will sometime shrynke,
and wax shorter, if it take wet, and sometime stretche longer by long dryeng
therefore it shall be necessary, to sere it in hot wax ane rosyn, that it may
keep at all times his true length.

How ye shall ^ewe a piece of land, and mark the fasshyon there of to measure
it.
When ye shall measure a piece of any manner of land, ye shall go about the
bounds of it ones or twice and consydre well by vewynge of it, whether ye may
mesure it in one parcel hole together, or else in two or many parcelles. For
some manner land, lies in such diverse fasshions, that it must needs be
mesured in diverse parcelles, each one by them self.

Therefore when it may be mesured in one parcel together, then shall ye look
wisely, which way ye may cast it in to. iiii. sides, and then ye must measure
every side by it self. And mark dylygently in writing or else score upon a
square slycke the no^bre of perches of every one of the same sides by them
self, and then sum them together, as ye shall se hereafter. But when a piece
of land must be divided into diverse parcelles, and must be meat ted each one
by them self, then ye shall consydre well in how many parcelles, and in what
manner fasshions they must be best divided into, that ye may measure every one
of them after their diverse fasshion. For diverse fasshions of land be dyuerslye
measured, as ye shall plainly perceive by diverse fygures following.

Of dyuersytie of lines and angles.
BY cause all manner of fygures be made of lines and angles, therefore it shall be
expedient first to know the diversity of them. For they make great dyfferences
in the making of measures. Therefore ye shall dylygently note that there be
three manner of lines, and three manner of angles. Of lines, one is a straight
line hanging, the second is a straight line overthwart, the third and last
is a crooked line ha^gig, or else overthwart Of angles, one is a plain angle,
like to one of the angles of a. iiii. square, the second is a flat angle, like
to one of the angles of. v. or. vi. square or mo The third and last is a
sharp angle, like to one of the angels of a tryangle or. iii. square. The
which lines and angles be these that hereafter follow.





Hereafter follow diverse fygures, of diverse fasshions of land, and first of a
piece of land equally square in all the. iiii. sides, with. iiii. plain a^gles.

If a piece of land be euuallye square in all his. iiii. sides having. iiii.
plain angles, like this present figure, and perches upon every side of equal
nombre as in this example. The upper side is. xx. perches in length, the nether
side is. xx. perches, the right side is. xx. perches, the lift side is also.
xx. perches, the^ ye must take. xx. perches for the length, and. xx. perches
for the breadth, because all ye sides be equal in length. The which. xx. in
length and. xx. in breadth multiplied the one by the other, does make two acres
and di^. in the whole su^me, as ye shall se by diverse rules of su^minge of
measures following hereafter.

Of a piece of land equal in breadth at both the ends and equal in length on
both sides.
If a piece of land be equalle in breadth at both ends and equal i^ length on
both sides with. iiii. plain angles, like to this present figure, As in this
example, the upper side is xx. perches in length, the nether side is. xx.
perches in length, the right end is. x. perches in breath, and the lift end
is. x. perches in breadth, then ye must take. xx. perches for the length, and.
x. perches for the breadth of this land, the which. xx. multyplyed by. x. make
one acre, and one roode. Like wise in all other manner of forms and fasshions
of Land, whither they be in three sides equallye trianguled, or else partly
tryanguled, or else diversely in manner of an Harp trianguled or else in. iiii.
sides partly square, or else in all. iiii. sides dyuerslye square, or else in.
v. or. vi. or mo sides equally square, or else round, or else pertelye round,
like to a fashion of a ^owe, or else in two sides partelye round, like to the
fasshion of an egg, or else it be mountyng up in the mydle, like to a mountain
or an hill, or else descendynge downewarde, like to a valey, as hereafter shall
appear by diverse examples of diverse figures, yet that manner of land, must
needs by some manner of reason be brought to one rertayne length, and one
certain breadth, or else it can not be su^med to the true nombre of acres, and
other odd qua^tities as hereafter shall appear. But some men that be
ygnoraunt, and not expert in this manner of mesurynge and co^^tynge, they will
mete a piece of land round about of what form or fasshion so ever it be, and
will cast the whole nombre of perches of all the sides together.

And then they will divide that whole nombre of perches, into. iiii. equal
parts, of the which they will take one part, for the length, and one other
of the^ for the breadth. But in this manner of comptynge, they be greatly
deceived, as it shall be proved by this last example before, where the right
and the left ends, every one be. x. perches in breadth, ye higher and the
lower sides be every one. xx. perches in the length. These. iiii. sides laid
all together, do make. ix. perches in the whole su^me. Then if ye deuyde this
whole nombre in to. iiii. equal parts, every part is. xv. perches in
length. Therefore if ye take. xv. perches for the length, and. xv. al so for the
breadth of that piece of land after this manner of comptinge, they do make in the
whole su^me one act, one roode. vi. dayeworkes, and one perch. But this su^me
is false, for it is more the^ the true content of it, as does appear by the
length, and breadth, (as they do stand) in this foresaid figure. For. xx.
perches in length, and x. perches in breadth, do make but an acre, and on
eroode. Another example the higher side is. xl. perches i^ length the lower
side is. xxx. perches, the right side is. xx. and the lift side is. x.
perches. All these nombres of perches laid together, do make an. C. perchers.
Divide them into four equal parts, and every part makes. xxv. perches.
The^ take. xxv. perches for the length, and. xxv. for the breadth, and this
length and breadth of perches does make in ye whole su^me (after this comptynge
(.iii. acres. iii. roodes. vi. day works, and one perch. The which su^me is
false, as ye shall prove by casting of every two contrary sides together.
The which divided into two halfes does make xxxv. perches for the length, and.
xv. for the breadth. For these nombres of perches in length and breadth do make
but. iii. acres, one roode, one dayworke and one perch. Therefore ye shall not
use that manner of comptynge by casting the whole nombre of all the sides into.
iiii. equal parts, and by taking one part of them for the length, and one
other for the breadth because it is false. But ye shall cast every two
contrary sides together, and then take the half part of two of them for the
length, and the half of other two of them for the breadth of the land: as ye
shall se plai^ely here after in the figure dyuersly square.

Or else in such manner fygures dyuerslye square, ye shall use another way
better, as in the same place does plainly follow.

Of a piece of land tryanguled in all three sides equally.
But when ye can not cast a piece of land into. iiii. sides, because it is
trianguled having all three sides of equal length, like to this present figure,
the^ ye shall mesure from on of the angeles to the mydle of the contrary side
as does appear by the line through ye mydle of ye same figure. And take the
no^bre of perches of yt measure for the length And the^ take half the nombre of
perches of a whole side, for the breadth as in this example. The three sides
every one is. xx. perches, the mydle line from the mydle of the lower side to
the higher angle, is. xvii. perches and di. Then take the nombre of perches of
ye middle line for the length, the which is. xvii. perches and di. Afterward
take half the nombre of perches of the longer side, the which is. x. for the
breadth. Then multyply. xvii. and di^. by. x. and it makes. C. lxxv. perches,
the which makes one acre. iii. dayworkes, and. iii. perches.

Of a piece of land partly tryanguled.
ANd when a piece of land is partly tryanguled, having the. ii. sides of like
length, and the head shorter in breadth like to this present figure. The^ ye
shall measure from the foot to the middle of ye head, as does appear by ye
middle line ithys same figure. And take the nu^bre of perches of that mesure for
the length. And the^ take half ye number of perches of ye head for the breadth,
as in this example. The higher side is. xvi. perches ye right and the lift
sides every on is. xxx. perches, and the line in the myddest from the foot to
the middle of ye head is. xxix. perches. The^ take the half nombre of perches
of the head, the which is. viii. for the breadth and the nombre of perches from
the foot to the myddest of the head The which is. xxix. for ye length, and then
multiply. xxix. by. viii. and it makes one acre, one rood, and. viii. day
works.

Of an other piece of land partly tryanguled.
AND if a piece of la^ de be partly trya^guled having ye one side longer, and
the. ii. other sides shorter of like lengthes, like to this present figure,
then ye shall measure from the mydle of the longer side to the flat angle on the
contrary side, as does appear by ye middle line in ye same figure. And take the
nombre of perches of yt measure for the length, and than take half ye nombre
of perches of the longer side for the breadth as in this example. The longer
side is. xl. perches in length, and the two other shorter sides every one is.
xxx perches in length, and the distaunce between the mydde of the longer side
and the flat angle, is. xx perches in length. The^ take the nombre of perches
between the mids of the longer side, and the flat angle, the which is, xx.
for the le^ght, and the half nombre of perches of the longer side the which
is also. xx. for the breadth. Then multiplye. xx. by. xx. and it makes two
acres and a half.

Of a piece of land diversely tryanguled, in manner of the half part of a
quadraunte.
Also wha^ a piece of land is dyuerslye tryanguled, in manner of the half part
of a quadraunte having one plain angle, and the other two sharp angles, like
to this present figure. The^ ye shall measure from the plain angle on the
lift side, to the sharp angle on the right side, and take the no^bre of
perches of yt measure for the length, afterward ye shall mesure from the plain
angle to ye sharp angle on ye left side, and take ye half part of ye measure
for the breadth, as in this example. The higher side between the ii. sharp
angles, is, rxv. perches, the lower side from the plain angle to ye sharp
angle on the right side, is, xx. perches, and the head on the left side is xv.
perches. The^ take the nombre of perches for the head on ye left side, the which
is. vii. and di^. for ye breadth. Then multiply. xx. by. vii. and di^. and it
makes. iii. rodes. vii. daiworkes and. ii. perches

Of another piece of land dynersly tryanguled like to the fasshion of an harp.
And when a piece of land is dyuetslye tryangled in manner of an harp, having
one flat angle, and the other two sharp angles like to this present figure,
the^ ye shall measure from ye sharp angle on the lift side to the sharp angle
on the right side, and take the nombre of perthes of that measure for ye length
afterward, ye shall measure from the flat angle on the higher side with a
straight hanging line to the nether side making there a plain angle, as does
appear by ye mindle line in ye same fygute, and take the half part of the
measure of the hangyng line for the breadth, as in this example,

The right side, from the flat angle above, to ye sharp angle on ye right side
is, xx. perches, the left side from the flat angle above to the sharp angle
beneth is xviii. perches, ye lower side between the two sharp angles is.
xxviii. perches, and the hanginge line between the flat angle above, and the
nether side is. viii. perches. The^ take ye no^bre of perches of the lower
side, the which is, xviii. for the length and the half no^bre of perches of
the hanging line, the which is. iiii. for the breadth. The^ multyply. xxviii.
by. iiii. and it makes di^. an acre, and. vii dayeworkes.

Of a piece of land in all. iiii. sides equally square with two flat angles,
and. ii. sharp angles.
YFa piece of land be in all. iiii. sides equallye square, with two half angles
above and beneth, and two sharp on the right and left sides, like to this
present figure. The^ ye shall measure from the sharp angle on the right side,
to the sharp angle of the lift side, and take the nombre of perches of that
measure, for the length. After ward ye shall measure from the flat angle above
to the flat angle beneth and take the half part of that measure for ye
breadth, as in this example The dystaunce between the. ii. sharp angles is.
xvi. perches, and the dystannce between ye. ii. flat angles is. xii. perches.
Then take. xvi. for the length, and the half part of the other measure, the
which is. vi. for the breadth. Afterward multyply. xvi. by. vi. and it comes
to half an acre, and. iiii. day works.

Of a piece of land in. iiii. sides partly square.
AND when a piece of land is partlye square with two plain a^gles on the lift
side, and one flat and one other sharp angle, on ye right side, like to this
present figure, the which is of like breadth between the flat angle above and
the contrary side of ye same figure beneth, as is the breadth between the two
plain angles on the lift side of the same figure. Then in the example of this
figure, ye shall take the nombre of perches, yt be between the two plain
angles on the lift side for the breadth, the which is. x. and afterward ye
shall lay the upper and the nether sides together, the which make. xxx. perches
in ye whole nombre. Of the which take the half nombre of perches the which is.
xv. for the length, and then multiply. xv. perches, by the nombre of. x. and
that nombre so multiplied makes. iii. ro^des. vi. dayeworkes and two perches.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partelye square.
Also when a piece of land is partelye square, like to this present figure
with. ii flat angles on the higher side, and. ii. sharp angles on the longer
side, having like dystaunce from both the flat angles about, to the contrary
side beneth* the^ ye shall take the nombre of perches between the higher and
the lower sides for ye breadth, as does appear by the lines i^ the same. After
ward ye shall lay the higher and the lower sides together, and take of. the
nombre of perches, of these. ii. sides for the length as in this example. The
dystaunce between the flat angles at both ends, and the contrary side of the
figure is. xv. perches, therefore take. xv* for the breadth. The^ lay the higher
side, the which is. xx. perches, and the nether side, the which is. xxx.
perches in one sum both together* and these both sides make in the whole
sum. l. perches. Of the which take the one half, the which is* xxv. for the
length, and. xv. for the breadth, the which length multyplyed by the breadth,
makes in the whole sum two acres, one roode. iii. dayworkes, and. iii.
perches.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partly square.
And when a piece of land is i^. iiii. sides partly square Like to this present
figure, having. ii. flat angles on ye right side, and. ii. sharp angles on
the lift side, having like dystaunce from both the flat ongles to the right
side, to the line an the lift side, then ye shall take the nombre of perches
between ye lines on the right and lift sides of the figure for ye length, as
does apeer by the mydle line in the same figure. Afterward ye shall lay both
ye right and the lift sides together, in one nombre of perches, and then deuyd
out half the nombre of perches, of those. ii. sides for ye breadth, as in this
example. The distaunce between the right and the lift side is. xx. perches in
length, therefore take. xx. perches for the length. The^ lay ye right side, the
which is. x. perches, and the lift side, the which is. xvi. perches in one
sum, both together and these both sides make in the whole sum. xxvi. perches,
of the which take the one half, the which is. xiii. for the breadth, and. xx.
for the length. Then multyplye. xx by. xiii. and it makes in the whole sum
one acre and di, and v. day works.

Of another piece of land in the. iiii. sides partly square.
ALso wha^ a piece of land is in. iiii sides partelye square, with one flat angle
and on sharp angle on the right side, and one sharp angle, and on flat angle
one the lift side, like to this present figure having like distau^ce at both
ends from the flat angles, the lines on ye contrary sides, than ye shall take
the no^bre of perches between either of the flat angles, and ye line on the
contrary side for the breadthe, as it appears by the two lines in it.

Afterward ye shall lay both ye hier and the lower sides together in one
nombre of perches. And then divide out half the no^bre of perches of that two
sides, as for the length in this examples. The dystaunce from either of the
flat angles, to the line on the contrary side is. x. perches the which is the
shorter side. Therefore take. x. perches for the breadth.

Then lay the upper side, the which is. xx. perches, and the nether side ye
which is also. xx. perches in one sum both together. And these both sides make
in the whole sum. xl. perches. Of the which sum, take the one half, the
which is. xx. perches for the length and. x. for the breadth. Then multyply.
xx. by. x. and it makes in ye whole sum one acre, and one roode.

Of a piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.
But when a piece of land is in all iiii. sides dyuersly square, with one flat
angle, and one plain angle on the right side, and one sharp angle, and one
plain angle on the lift side, like to this present figure, having like
distaunce between the flat angle on the right side to the line on the left
side, as is between the two plain angles on the netherside Then ye shall take
the nombre of perches between ye flat angle on ye right side, and ye line on
the left side this figure for the length, as does appear by the line in it.
Afterward ye shall lay both the right and the lift sides to gyther in one
nombre of perches, and than deuyde out half the nombre of perches of that two
sides for the breadth as in this example.

The distau^ce from the flat angle on the right side, to the line on the left
side is. xx. perches, the which is the longer side, therefore take the nombre
of perches of that measure, the which is. xx. for the length. Afterward lay
the right side, the which is. x. perches, and the lift side, the which is.
xvi. perches i^ one sum both together and these both sides make in ye whole
sum. xxvi. perches, of the which take the one half, the which is xiii. for
the breadth and. xx. for the length

Then multyply. xx. by. xiii. and it makes in the whole sum one acre. ii.
roodes, and v. dayeworkes.

Of an other piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.
Also when the. iiii. sides of a piece of land every one of the^ be of diverse
no^bre of perches, with one flat and one sharp angle on the right side, and
also one flat and another sharp angle on the life side, like to this present
figure, kepinge no like distaunce between any of the contrary sides, as in
this example, and higher side is. xx. perches in length, ye, lower side is.
xxiiii. perches, the right side is. xiiii. perches, and the lift side is.
viii. perches in length. Then some men would lay both the contrary sides each
two together, and take the one half of every two, the more for the length,
and the less for ye breadth, as in this example. Lay ye higher and the lower
sides together, and they make in the whole sum. xliiii. perches. Than divide
out the half of this nombre, the which is. xxii. for the length. Afterward
lay the right and the left sides together, and they make. xxii. perches in the
whole sum. And divide out also the half part of the nombre, the which is.
xi. for the breadth. Then take the more nombre of these two the which is. xxii.
for the length and the less nombre the which is. xi for the breadth Then
multiplye. xxii. by. xi. and it makes one acre and di. and. ii. perches. But
this manner of measurynge of such a piece of land pleases me not, for it
makes more land than is contained in this manner of figure. Therefore ye shall
divide such a piece of Land from the two contrary angles, into two parts,
like to the division, as does appear by the line in the same figure.

And take the no^bre of perches of ye line for ye length. And then ye shall
measure from the two other angles to the mydle line with plain angles, and
lay the two halues of these two lines together for the breadth, as i^ this
example. The dystaunce between ye two sharp angles of this said figure is.
xxx. perches in length, and the line from the flat angle on the right side, to
the mydle line plain anguled is. viii. perches, and ye line from the flat
angle on the left side to the said longer line plain anguled is. vi.
perches. The^ take the nombre of perches of the mydle line, the which is. xxx.
perches for the length and the half part of the other two lines, the which is
vii. perches for the breadth. Then multyplye. xxx. by. vii. and it makes one
acre, one rood ii. day works, two perches. Whereby ye may perceive well that
in such a piece of land that is diversely square in all. iiii. sides without any
plain angle, or in any other like, ye shall never lay both the two contrary
sides together, and take the halfes of the^, one for the length, and the other
for the breadth, for that manner of summing of any piece of land is not true but
in some manner of square land, and specially where there is any plain angle, ye
shall lay one, but not both of the two contrary sides together, and take the
half nombre of them sometime for the breadth, and somty me for the length, as
the fasshyon and quantytie of the land shall require, the whythe ye have seen
in diverse square figures before, in this manner of figures diversely. iiii.
square is to be noted great dyuersytie of quantities of measures. For the
flatter that the flat angles, and the sharper that the sharp angles be, the
less quantytie must needs be in such manner figures. And on the contrary wise,
the sharper that the flat angles be, and the flatter that the sharp angles be
the more quantytie must needs be in the same figures. For although the. iiii.
sides do always con^^ing and keep every one their le^gthes, yet the more or
less distaunce that is between ye contrary angles, the more or less measure
does it cause to be within the same figure. Therefore ye may not cast the
contrary sides by the halfes, as most common meters do use But ye shall deuyde
such manner fygures into two feldes in manner of trya^gles, as is before
expressed. And measure the^ as does appear by the lines in their foresaid
figure. This is a special rule, and well to be noted

Of diverse other square perches of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square.


ALso when there is any other piece of land in all. iiii. sides dyuersly square
with sharp flat angles like to any of these present fygures, or any other like,
then ye shall never take the halues of any of both the contrary sides of them
for their length or breadth, because ye can not measure truly any of them in
one piece wholly together. But ye must divide every one of the^ into two parties
in such manner of division as does appear by the lines within the same. And
then measure every parcel thereof after his fasshyon, as ye have seen plainly
before in the fygures of tryangles.

Of a piece of land in many sides diversely square.


AND when a piece of land is in many sides, dyuerslye square like to any of
these present figures or any other like, then ye shall deuyd it into many
parts by such like deuisions as does apeare by the lines in the same figure,
because none of the^ may be metted in one piece all together. And then ye shall
measure every parcel thereof by it self, after the manner of tryangles of that
fasshion, equallye, partly, or else diversely trianguled, as ye have seen in
diverse figures before.

Of a piece of land in diverse sides square, and in some sides indented.
IF a piece of land be in diverse sides square, and some of them be indented,
like to this present figure then ye shall deuyde out one square part of it,
the which ye may do most conveniently like to such manner of deuysyon, so as it
does appear in the mydle line with in the same figure. And then measure that one
piece by it self, and cast the length and the breadth of it, as ye did of other
such square pieces before Afterward ye shall measure the three straight sides of
the other piece every one by them self, and the^ye shall dylygently vewe the
fourth side mounted, and ye shall leave as much by estymacion without the
measure of that side, as does lack within, and then also measure that second
piece, as ye did such other like pieces before Or else make four sides of this
second piece (as large as ye may) as does appear by the line in this present
figure.

And then measure yt piece by it self, in such ma^er, as it is before expressed
afterward ye shall measure the other part indented by perches, half perches,
and quarter perches. And the^ sum it by pence, half pence and farthynges.

Of other fygures to be divided partly into tryangles and partly into other
fasshyons.
Also wha^ there is any other piece of land like to any of these present
figures, then ye shall deuyde every one of the^ in so many parts as ye shall
consydre necessary, by such manner of deuysyon, as does appear by the lines in
the same figure, and afterward cast every parcel of these deuysyons by them
selfs, into the length and in breadth, as ye have done other like pieces square
or trya^guled in the examples before written, and then sum every one of the^,
by their lengthes and breadthes, as ye have done before other square pieces, or
triangled.

Of a piece of land lyenge in diverse fasshions.


Sometime if a piece of land does lie diverse fasshions as does these present
fygures, and as do many other, the which ye can not mete in one piece whole
together by it self.

Therefore then ye must vewe it dylygently and deuyde it in so many parts as ye
shall perceive necessary, like to these deuysions made with lines in these
said figures. And afterward ye must mete them every one by them self in
squares or triangles after such manner of fasshions, as they be of, and then
cast them every one by them self in lengthes and bredthes, and likewise sum
the length and breadth of every one of them, as ye do of other pieces, that ye
do measure, wholly together. For it were to sedyous, ye impossyble, to put
partyculer examples for all fasshyons of land, the which be infinyte, and ever
newly found.

Of a piece of woodlande growing having many sides dyuersly anguled.


When there is a piece ofwoodland growing, like in fasshion to this first
figure, having many sides diversely anguled, the which ye can not vewe every
way from side to side, for the standing of the wood, then ye shall enlarge
that manner piece of wodland into. iiii. square sides, in like manner, as does
appear by the lines of these ronde figure. And then measure all that whole
square together in one field, and compteit all together in one sum, and
afterward ye shall mesure every parcel so enlarged with lines by them self.
And then cast all the same parcelles into one sum together, and take away
all them from the first whole sum, and that quantytie yt remains of the
first whole measure (the said parcelles enlarged with lines, taken away) shall
be the true quantytie of this manner piece of woodlande, as in this example.

The whole figure enlarged into. iiii. square conteyneth in it. lxxx. acres of
the whole sum, the parcelles enlarged with lines, laid in one sum to gither
co^teyne. xxvi. acres. The^ take away. xxvi. from. lxxx. and there does remain
but. liiii. acres, the which sum of. liiii. so remaining is the co^te^t of
this figure. Note well this rule for it is very profitable and often times
necessary for the measuryng of woodlande growing.

Of a piece of land in. v. sides equally square, with. v. flat angles.


And when a piece of land is in. v. sides equallye square with. v. flat angles
like to this present fygures then ye shall measure all the. v. sides together,
and take the half part of that mesure for the length. Afterward ye shall
measure from the mydle point wfthin the same figure to one mydle place between
two angles of one side of the circuit, take the nombre of perches of that
measure for ye breadth, as it his example. Every one to the. v. sides is. x.
perches i length, the which. v. sides laid all together make. l. perches in
the whole no^bre. Then take half this nombre of perches ye which is. xxv. for
ye length and the distaunce between ye middle point and the middle place between
two angles of on side is. vii. perches Then take the half nombre of all ye v.
sides, the which is. xxv. perches for ye length, and the number of perches
between ye middle point and the middle place between two angles, ye which is.
vii. for ye breadth. Then multiply. xxv. by. vii. and it makes one act iii.
day works, and. iii. perches.

Of a piece of land in. vi. sides equally square, with. vi. flat angles.


ALso when a piece of land is in. vi. sides equallye square with. vi. flat
angles, like to this present figure. Then ye shall measure likewise all the.
vi. sides together, and take the half part of that measure for ye length.
Afterward ye shall measure from the mydle point within the same figure to ye
mydle place between ^woangles of one side of the cyrcuyt and take the nombre of
perches of that measure for the breadth as in this example. Every one of the.
vi. sides is. xii. perches in length, ye which. vi. sides laid altogether
make lxxii. perches in the whole sum, the^ take half this nombre of perches
ye which is. xxxvi. for the length. And the distau^te between ye middle point
and the middle place between two angles, of one side is. x. perches and di^ The^
take the half nombre of all the. vi. side, the which is. xxxvi. perches for
the length, and the nombre of perches between the middle point, and the middle
place between two angles the which is. x. perches and di^. for the breadth.
Then multiply. xxxvi. by x. and a half, and it makes two acres one roods.
iiii. day work. and two perches.

Of a piece of land in. vii. viii. ix. or. x. sides equally square.


AND also when a piece of land is in vii. viii. ix. or x. sides equallye square
like to any of these present fygures. The^ in like manner as ye did. in these
two fygures last before, ye shall take ye half no^bre of perches of all the
whole sides for the length, and the nombre of perches of the dystaunce between
the middle point with in the same figures, and the middle place be. twene two
angles of one side for the breadth, as ye have seen expressed in the two first
figures of five, and. vi. square, and as it does appear plainly by examples
of the same. iiii. present fygures.

Of a piece of land, all round without any square side.


But when a piece of land is round without any square side like to this plesent
figure. Then (leuyng all other untrue reasons and opynions of meters of land
in this behalf ye shall measure round about al ye whole cyrcuyte of this
figure, and take the one half of the nombre of perches of that measure for the
length. Afterward ye shall measure from the middle point within the figure, to
the utter side of the cyrcuyte, and take the no^bre of perches of that measure
for ye breadth, as in this example. The whole cyrcuyte round about is. xiiiii.
perches, of the which take the one half the which is. xxii. perches for the
length, and the distau^ce between the mydle point and the vtterside of the
cyrcuyt is. vii. perches. Then take ye half nombre of perches of the whole
cyccuyte, the which is. xxii. for thee length, and the no^bre of perches
between the mydle point, and the utter side of the cyrcuyte, the which is.
vii. for the breadth. Then multyply. xxii. by. vii. and it makes. iii. roodes.
viii. dayworkes and two perches.

Of a piece of land half round, like to the fasshion of a bowl.


ANd when a piece of land is half round, like to the fasshion of a bowl as is
this present figure.

The^ ye shall measure the whole half cyrcute, and take the half part of that
measure for the length. Afterward ye shall measure from the middle of the
half cyrcuyte above, and take the nombre of perches of that measure for ye
breadth, as in this example. The half cyrcuite is. xxii. perches in length, of
the which take the half nombre of perches, the which is. xi. for the length,
and the dystaunce between the mydle of the nether live, and the mydle of the
half cyrcuyte is vii. Then take the half nombre of perches of the half
cyrcuyte, the which is. xi. for the length, and the nombre of perches between
the mydle of the nether line and the mydle of the half cyrcuyte, the which
is. vii. for the breadth. Then multiply. xi. by. vi. and it makes one roode.
ix. dayworkes, and one perch.

Of a piece of land more than half round
ANd when a piece of land is more than half round like to this present figure
the which is in the circumference, or cyrcuyte about. xxv, perches, the nether
side is. vt. perches, the dyameter or overthwart line is. x. perches, and the
hanginge line is. ix. perches. The^ ye shall deuyde it into two feldes, as it
appears by the deuisions of ye lines within ye same figure. After that for
mesuryng of the higher part in the line deuysion, ye shall multiplye the half
no^bre of perches of the diameter or overthwart line, the which be. v. by ye
half nombre of perches of the cyrcute of the figure, the which be. xii. and
di. and they will come to. lxii. perches and di. Afterward for the measurynge
of the triangle in the deuysyon, ye shall take again the half of the
ouertwarte line. the which be v. from the. ix. the which the hanging line
does conteyne, and then there does remayn but. ii. the which iiii. ye shall
multyplye by. iii. the which is the half nombre of the nether line, and it
comes to. xii. the which xii. ye shall join with the foresaid. lxii. and
di. and these. ii. sumes laid both together make. lxxvii. perches and di. the
which nombre of perches makes one roode. ix. dayworkes, and one perch and di.
Note well this rule, for it is very subtyl, and much profitable.

Of a piece of land less than the half part of a whole round.
But when a piece of land is less than is the half part of a wholerou^d like
to this present figure, tha^ ye shall add to it ye residue of the whole
cyrcuyte, as does appear by this second figure, and note well the nombre of
perches of the cyrcu^ference, ye which is. xliiii. perches and also of the
diameter, ye which is. xiiii. and the^ ye shall mete all the same whole figure
in on measure together, taki^g the half of the cyrcu^ference, the which is.
xxii. for the length and the halfof the diameter, the which is. vii. for the
breadth, then multiplye. xxii. by. vii. and it makes. C. liiii. perches. After
that ye shall deuyde the same whole figure in to two parts, like to these two
deuisions made within these lines in this third figure, of the which the
latter deuysyon is the figure less tha^ half round. And then ye shall
measure the first deuysion of this figure as ye did the figure last before,
that is more than half round. And that quantity yt lacks of ye whole
round beside the measure of ye first deuysion shall be the quantyty of the
latter deuysyon, the which is the figure less than half round, as in this
example. The cyrcumference of the first deuysion is. xxx. perches, and the
diameter is. xiiii. perches, then the half of that circumference, ye which is.
xv. multyplyed by the half of the dyameter, the which is. vii. makes. C. v.
perches. After that ye shall take again the half of the dyameter (the which
is. vii.) from the. x. di^. and a quarter, the which the ha^gi^g line of the
first deuysion doethe conteyne, and then there does remayn but three di^. and a
quarter, the which iii. di^. and a quarter, ye shall multyply by. vi. the which
is the half nombre of perches of ye nether line of the first division, and it
makes. xxii. perches and di^ ye shall join this with the foresaid. C. v.
perches. And these two sumes laid both together make C. xxvii. perches and di^.
And this is the sum of the first deuysyon the which lacks of the content
of the whole round. xxvi. perches and di^. And sum this so lackyng shall be thy
measure of the letter deuysion, the which is the figure less tha^ half round
Note well this Rule, for it is very subtyle.

Of a piece of land less than half round on both sides
And when a piece of Land is less the^ half round on both sides like to the
fashion of an egg, as is this present figure. The^ ye shall divide it into two
parts by such like deuysions as does appear by the line ouertwarte in the
mydle of the same figure. And than ye shall measure one of the same two parts
likewise, as ye did measure before the figure less than half round.
Afterward join the sum of yt side to the other side, and then these. ii. sum
mes laid both together, make the whole content of this figure, as in this
example. The ouerthwarte line in the mydle is. xii. perches, and the hanginge
line of one side is three perches and a quarter, then the cyrcu^fe rence of the
whole round added there to (as it is before proved) shall be. xliiii perches, and
the dyameter. xiiii. the which whole round meted all together contains. C.
liiii. perches of the which the higher part added to ye figure less then
half round is. C. xxvii, perches and di^. And the sum lacking of the whole
nombre before said, the which. xxvi and di^. is the co^tente of the nether
part, the which. xxvi. and di^. doubled for both the sides of this figure
makethe. liii. perches. And this is the true content of this present figure.

Of a piece of land, that is plain on both sides, and half round at both
ends.
ANd when a piece of land is plain on both sides and half round at both ends
like to this present figure, then ye shall divide it into three parts by such
like deuysio^, as does appear by the lines within ye same figure. And then ye
shall measure ye middle square part by it self, and afterward ye shall measure
one of the half roundes of one end, and join it in one sum with the other
half round of the other end, and then join all these three parts in one
sum together. And that whole sum shows the content of this ma^er figure, as
in this example The dyameter of one half round in this figure is. xliii. and
the cyrcumference of the same is. xxii. then multyply the half of the
cyrcumference, the which is. xi. by the half of the diameter, the which is.
vii. and it makes. lxxvii. Then join that. lxxvii. to the other half round
of the other side, and it makes. C. liiii. After yt ye shall multyplye. xiiii.
the which is the length of the square part in the mydle of the figure by. vii,
the which is the breadth of the same part, and it makes in the whole sum. CC.
lii. the which is the whole content of this figure.

To measure a mountain or an hill, having the two ascences, on both sides
from the foot to the top of equal dystaunce and measure.
WHen a piece of Land is not plain but is mou^ting in the mydle, like to these
present figure of a mountain, having the. ii. sides from the foot to the
top of equal distaunce, and measure. Then ye shall mete diligently the nombre
of perches of the cyrcuyt, and compass of the tope of the hill, and also of
the foot and of the ascence or going up from the foot to the top. Afterward
ye shall lay together the nombre of perches of the cyrcuyte of the foot and
of the top of the hill, and take the half part of both these measures for
the breadth. Also take ye whole nombre of perches of the ascence from the foot
to the top of the hill for the length as in this example. The crycuyte of the
top of the hill is. lxxx. perches, and the cyrcute of the root of the hylis.
CC. xl. perches, the which two sums make. CCC. xx. perches, and the ascence
from the foot of the hill to the top is. CC. perches. Then take the half
nombre of perches of the cyrcuites of the foot and top of the hill, the
which is. C. lx. for the breadth, and the whole nombre of perches of the ascence
the which is. CC. for the length. Then multyply. CC. by. C. lx. and it
makes. xxxii M. perches, and this sum makes. CC. acres.

Of an hill or a mountain having the head, the mydle, and the foot of
diverse cyrcuytes of measures.
And when the circuy tes of the top of the mountain of ye middle and of the
foot do diffre much, one from another in their measure, like to this present
figure. The^ye shall lay the three no^bres of the top, the middle, and the foot
in one sum together. And take the third part of yt sum for the breadth.
Afterward ye shall meet the ascence or going up from the foot to the top
of the hill, and take the whole nombre of petches of that measure for the
length. As in this example. The cyrcute of the foot is. cc. perches, the
cyrcuite of ye middle is. c. percges, and the cyrcuyte of ye topp is. xxx.
perches, the which three sums laid all together makes. ccc. and xxx.
perches. And ye ascence from the foot to the top of the hylis C. lx. perches.
The^ take ye third part of the said sum of. CCC. xxx. the which is C. x. for
the breadth. And the whole sum of the asce^ce, the which i. C. lx. for the
length, then multyplye. C. li. by. C. x. and it makes. xvii. M vi. C. perches,
and this sum of perches makes. C. l. acres.

Of an hill or a mountain that is not of equal measure in the ascences,
netber in the cyrcuytes.
But when an hill, or a mowntayne is not of equal measure asce^ces, neither in
ye nether i the cyrcuites, like to this present figure. The^ ye shall lay the
measures of the cyrcuytes of the top and foot of the hill together, and take
the half part of these two crycuytes for the breadth Afterward ye shall lay
the measures of the longer, and the shorter ascences both together, and take
the half part of that measure, for the length as in this example. The cyrcuyte
of the top of the mountain is. xx. perches and the cyrcuyte of the foot is
CCC. perches, ye which two su^mes laid both together makes. CCC. and xx.
perches, and the half part of it is. C. lx. Also ye longer as^^nce is. CC
perches, and the shorter is. C. xx. the which ii. su^mes laid both together
make. CCC. and. xx. perches, and the half part of it makes. C. lx. Then take.
C. lx. for ye length, and. C. lx. also for the breadth, and afterward multyply
on of the same two su^mes by the other, and it makes. xxv. M. vi. C. perches
the which sum of perches makes C. and. lx. acres.

Of the mesuryng of a piece of land lyeng i a valley, enclosed round about with
a mountain or an hill.


ANd when there is a piece of land lieng in a valley, enclosed round about with a
mountain or an hill like to this present figure, then ye shall use contrary
wise of measurig of such manner of land, as ye did of measurynge of hills and
mountains For in meetynge of an hill, ye measured the ascence and going up
from the foot to the top. But in meetyng of a valley ye shall measure the
descene and going down from the top of the hill to the depth of the valley.
And where ye measure the cyrcute and compass of the top of an hill, so
contrary wise ye shall measure the cyrcuite and compass of the depth of the
valley. And where ye measured the cyrcuite and compass of the foot of ye hill,
so contrary wise ye shall measure round about the cyrcuyte and compass of
the heyght of the valley. And then ye shall lay ye cyrcuite of the height, and
the depth of the valley in one same together, and take ye half part of that
whole sum for the breadth. Afterward ye shall take the no^bre of perches of
descence and going down from the heyght of the hill to the depth of the valley
for the length of the measure. And then sum it by multiplye^g the length by
the breadthe, as in this example. The circuit of the depth of the valley is.
lxxx. perches, ye cyrcuyt of the heyghte of the valley is. CC. perches. And the
descence from the heyght of the hill to the depth of the valley is. CC.
perches. The^ take the no^bre of perches of the descence, the which is. CC. for
the length, and half the no^bre of perches of the circuites of the which is.
C. lx. for the bretdth. Then multiplye. CC. by. C. lx. and it makes. CC. acres.

Of a valley, yt is nether of equal measure in the descences nether in the
Cyrcuytes.


But when a valley is not of equal measure nether in the desce^ces, nether in
the cyrcuytes, like to this pesent figure, then ye shall lay the cyrcuytes of
the height and depth of the valey together and take the half part of these two
cyrcuytes for the breadth. Afterward ye shall lay the measures of the longer,
and shorter desences both together, and take ye half part of those measures
for the length, as in this example. The circuit of the depth of the valley is.
xx. perches, and the cyrcuyte of the heygth of the valley is. ccc. perches the
which two sumes laid both together make. ccc. xx. perches* and ye half part
of it is. c. lx. perches. Also the longer descence is. cc. perches, and the
shorter is. c. xx. the which two sumes laid both together, make in ye whole
sum ccc. xx. perches, and the have part of it is. c. lx. The^ take. c. lx. for
the length and. c. lx. also for ye breadth, and afterward multyply. c. lx. by.
c. lx. and it makes. xxv. M. and. vi. C. perches, ye which sum of perches
makes. c. lx. acres.

Of one manner way to compte and some the nomre of acres conteyued within any
measure.
WHen ye shall compte and sum the nombre of acres contained wtin any measue
of land, the^ ye shall lay so many times the nombre of perches in the length,
as be in the no^bre of petches in the breadth, or else contrary, as many times
the nombre of perches in the breadth, as be in the length. But ye must turn the
perches into pence. For like nombre of perches will make an acre, as of pens
will make a mark, the which does sygnyfy an acre in this manner comptynge, as
in this example. The length of the measure is. xl. perches, and the breadth of
it is. xx. perches. The^ co^pt xl. times. xx. pence, or else. xx. times. xl.
pence, the which makes. v. Mark and so likewise. xx. times. xl. perches
makes. v. acres. Another example. lx. perches in the length, and. l, in the
breadth. The^ ye shall count. l. times, lx. pence, the which is in the whole
sum. xii, li. x, s, the which sum makes, xviii, acres, and, iii* roode,
Another example. xlv, perches in the length and. xxv, perches in the breadth,
The^ ye shall compte, xxv, times, xiv, pence the which is in the whole sum,
iiii, li, xiii, s, ix, penc, the which sum makes. vii. acres, one dayworke,
and one perch. But when ye have half a perch or a quarter of a perch in any
side of ye measure, ye shall not count them with ye perches, but after that ye
have cast the sum of perches in the length and breadth in manner beforesaide.
Then, ye shall compte the half perches by them self, and the quarter perches
by them self, and sum them in the contrary side, as in the example. The piece
of land is. xl. perches and di. in length, and. xxx. perches in breadth. Then
because the half perches do stand in the length, therefore ye must compte them
in the breadth and sum them (as in this last example.) xxx. half perches,
after the no^bre of the breadth* and not. xl. half perches after the no^bre of
the length, the which. xxx. half perches do make iii. dayeworkes, and. iii.
perches.

Likewise if ye have half perches, or quarter perches, or else half perches and
quarter perches both in ye length, and also in ye bredthe of the measure Then
ye must always sum every one of them by them self in the length, that
stand in that breadth.

And sum them in the breadth, that stand in the length. Therefore in all other
like manner of comptynge the sum of acres by money, ye shall understand
always, that a mark of money does sygnyfy an acre, a royal does sygnyfye
three quarters of an acre, or three roode, a noble does sygnyfye an half acre, a
crown does sygnyfye one roode and. v. dayeworkes. xl. d. does sygnyfye a
quarter of an acre, or a roode. xii. d. does sygnify. iii. dayeworkes, a grote
does sygnyfy a dayewoke, a penye does sygnyfye a perch, an half penye does
sygnyfye an half perch, and a farthyng does sygnyfye a quarter of a perch.

Of the turnynge of pounds into marks or acres.
BY cause in coumptyng of money it is not much used to compte any sums in
marks, but most co^monlye in pounds. Thefore because Marks do sygnyfye acres
in comptynge the measures of land, and pounds be not lightly turned into
Marks by them that be not expert in reakenynge, and castyng of a count.
Therefore in these sumes following ye shall se pence turned into perches grotes
turned into day works. xl. d into a roode, a noble in to di^. acre, a Royal
into. iii. roodes: a mark into an acre, and pounds turned into Marks, the
which there be named acres And this rule does extend from. i. d. to. xl. d.
and from. xl. d. to. xx. s. and from xx. s. to an. C. li. and from an hundred
pound, to a. M. pound.

This Rule following, is very plain, and easy to be understood: if it be
well marked.
Pence. Dayeworkes And perches. i. d. i. perch. ii. d. ii. perches iii. d.
iii. perches iiii. d. i. dayworke v. d. i. dayworke and. i. perch vi. d. i.
dayworke and. ii. perches vii. d. i. dayworke and. iii. perches viii. d. ii.
dayworkes ix. d. ii dayworkes and. i. perch x. d. ii. dayworkes and, ii,
perches xi. d. ii. dayworkes and. iii. perches xii. d. iii. dayworkes xiii. d.
iii. dayworkes and. i. perch xiiii. d. iii. dayworkes and, ii. perches xv. d.
iii, dayworkes, and, iii. perches xvi. d. iiii. dayworkes xvii. d. iiii.
dayworkes and. i. perch xviii. d. iiii. dayworkes and. ii, perches xix. d.
iiii. dayworkes and. iiii. perches xx. d. v. dayworkes xxi. d. v. dayworkes
and. i. perch xxii. d. v. dayworkes and. ii. perches xxiii. d. v. dayworkes
and, iii. perches ii. s. vi. dayworkes ii. s i. d vi. dayworkes and. i, perch
ii s. ii. d. vi. dayworkes and. ii. perches ii. s. iii. d. vi. dayworkes, and,
iii. perches ii. s. iiii d. vii. dayworkes ii. s. v. d. vii. dayworkes and, i.
perch ii. s. vi. d. vii. dayworkes and. ii. perches ii. s. vii. d. vii,
dayworkes and, iii. perches ii. s. viii, d. viii, dayworkes. ii. s. ix. d.
viii, dayworkes and, i, perch ii. s, x. d. viii. dayworkes and. ii, derches
ii. s, xi. d. viii, dayworkes and, iii, perches iii, s ix, dayworkes iii, s. i.
d, ix. dayworkes and, i, perch iii. s. ii, d, ix, dayworkes and, ii. perches
iii. s. ii. d. ix dayworkey and. iii. perches xl, d, A quart. of an acre, or a
rood v, s. i, roode and. v, dayworkes vi. s, viii, half an acre x, s, iii.
roodes or. iii, quarters of an acre xiii. s. iiii. d i. acre xvi, s, viii, d i,
acre and one roode xx, s, i, acre and di^. xxx, s, ii, acres, and one roode xl,
s, iii, acres l, s, iii. acres and, iii. roode iii. li, iiii. acres and di^,
iiii. li. vi. acres v, li. vii, acres and di^ vi, li, ix, acres vii, li, x,
acres and di^ viii, li xii, acres ix, li xiii, acres, and di^ x. li. xv. acres
xi. li. xvi. acres and di^. xii. li. xviii. acres xiii, li. xix. acres and di^.
xiiii. li. xxi. acres. xv. li. xxii acres and di^ xvi. li. xxiiii. acres. xvii.
li. xxv. acres and di^ xviii. li, xxvii. acres xix, li, xxviii. acres and di^
xx. li. xxx. acres xxi. li. xxxi acres and d. xxii, li. xxxiii, acres xxiii.
li. xxxiiii. acres and d. xxxiiii, li. xxxvi. acres xxv, li. xxxvii. acres and
di^. xxvill, xxxix. acres xxvii. li. xl. acres and di^ xxviii, li xlv. acres
xxix. li xlvi, acres and di^ xxx. li. xlviii, acres xxxi. li. xlix, acres and
di^ xxxii, li li, acres xxxiii, li, lii, acrers and d. xxxiiii. li. liiii.
acres xxxv. li. lv. acres and di^ xxxvi. li. lvii. acres xxxvii. li. lviii.
acres and di^, xxxviii. li. lx. acres xxxix. li. lxi. acres and di^. xl. li.
lxiii. acres xli. li. lxiiii. acres and di^. xlii. li. lxvi. acres xliii. li.
lxvii. acres and di^ xliiii. li. lxix. acres xlv. li. lxx. acres and di^. xlvi.
li. lxxii. acres. xlvii. li. lxxiii acres and di^. xlviii. li. lxxv. acres.
xlix. li. lxxvi. acres and di^. l. li. lxxviii. acres li. li. lxxix. acres and
di^. lii. li. lxxx. acres liii. li. lxxxi. acres, and di^ liiii. li. lxxxii.
acres lv. li. lxxxiii. acres and di^ lvi. li. lxxxiiii. acres lvii. li. lxxxv,
acres and di^. lviii. li. lxxxvii, acres lix, li, lxxxviii, acres and di^ lx,
li, lxxxx, acres lxi, li, lxxxxi. acres and di^ lxii. li, lxxxxiii. acres
lxiii. li. lxxxxiiii, acres and d. lxiiii, li. lxxxxvi. acres. lxv. li.
lxxxxvii, acres and di^ lxvi. li, lxxxxix, acres lxvii. li. C. acres and di^
lxviii. li. C. ii. acres lxix. li, C, iii. acres and di^. lxx. li. C, v acres
lxxi, li. C. vi. acres and d. lxxii* li. C. viii. acres lxxiii. li. C. ix.
acres and d. lxxiii. li, C, xi, acres lxxv, li, C, xii, acres and d. lxxvi, li,
C, xiiii, acres lxxvii, li, C, xv, acres and d. lxxviii, li, C, xvii, acres
lxxix. li, C, xviii, acres and d. lxxx, li, C, xx, acres lxxxi. li, C, xxi,
acres and d. lxxxii. li, C, xxiii, acres lxxxiii. li, C. xxiiii, acres and d.
lxxxiii, li C, xxvi, acres lxxxv. li, C, xxvii, acres and d. lxxxvi, li. C,
xxix, acers lxxxvii. li. C. xxx, acres and d. lxxxviii, li, C, xxxii, acres
lxxxix, C, xxxiii, and d. lxxxx, li, C, xxxv, acres lxxxxi. li. C. xxxvi. acres
and di^ lxxxxii, li, C. xxxviii acres lxxxxiii. li. C. xxxix. acers and di^
lxxxxiiii. li. C, xli. acres lxxxxv, li. C. xlii. acres and di^ lxxxxvi. li. C.
llxiiii. acres lxxxxvii. li. C. xlv, acres and d, lxxxxviii. li. C, xlvii.
acres lxxxxix, li C, xlviii, acres and d, C, li, C, l, acres, CC, li, CCC,
acres CCC, li, iiii, C, l, acres CCCC, li, v. C, acres v. C, li, vii, C, l,
acres vi, C, li, ix* C, l, acres vii, C, li, M, l, acres viii. C, li, M, CC,
acrers ix. C. li, M. CCC, l* acres M. li, M. CCCCC. acres.

Thus ends this way of turnynge of pounds into Marks or Acres.
Of another way of su^mynge of measures in to acars.
BEcause this Rule of summynge of acars beforesayde is very hard and tedyous
to them, that be not expert and ready in casting of a compte, and many times
they be deceived in true summynge of measures after this way. Therefore ye
shall have hereafter a Rule following more playner, and ready to all men, for
the true knowledge of this thing. Therefore when ye have cast out the length
and bredthe of your land, by such ways and reason as ye have seen before in
diverse fasshyon of fygures, by diverse examples. Then ye shall seek out the
nombre of perpches of the length of your land in the higher margent, and the
nombre of perches of the bredthe of your land, in the side of the margent. And
then ye shall seek out benethe upon the same side, that place, the which
does auswere dyrectlye to both of these nombres, of the length and of the
breadthe together.

And theare ye shall find the nombre of acres, roodes, dayeworkes, and perches
contained within the length and breadth of the same measure.

Explicit.
To know the reason of this rule following.
But first for the perfect knowledge of this Rule following, ye shall
understand, that the nombres set above in the higher margent, do sygnifie the
nombre of perches in the length of the measure. And the nombres set in the
side margent, do signyfye the nombre of perches in the breadth of the measure.
The first nombre set to every square place beneth upon the sides, do betoken
the nombre of acres. The figure of. 1. set above, in the lift of the said
places, does betoken a roode, or a quarter of di^. acre. The figure of. 2. set
there signyfieth an acre. The figure of. 3. set there signyfieth three quarters
of an acre. The first figure set in the le^ger part of every place,
betokens the nombre of day works, and the figure that follows next after
that, be tokenethe the nombre of perches. Also ye shall note, yt this rule does
extend from the nombre of one perch, to the nombre of. vi. score perches in
length. And from the no^bre of one perch to the number of an. C. perches in
breadthe, and no further. This rule should be written altogether upon one
side of a table that ye might see all together, the whole length and breadth of
al these nombres before said. But because this manner of table, should be very
large and tedeous to bear about. Therefore it is divided in this litell Book,
in to the. x. parts as it does playnelie appear hereafter.

1. The first part is from i perch to. vi score perches, in length, and from
one to. x. in breadth. 2. The second part is from. xi. to. vi. score in
length, and from. xi to. xx. in breadth. 3. The third part is from. xxi. to.
vi. score in length, and from xxi. to. xxx. in breadth. 4. The fourth part is
from. xxxi. to. v. score in length, and from. xxxi. to. xl. in breadth. 5. The.
v. part is from. xli. to. vi. score in length, and from. xli. to. l. in
breadth. 6. The. vi. part is from, li. to. vi. score in length, and from. li.
to. lx. in breadth. 7. The. vii. part is from. lxi. in to six score in length,
and from three score and one, to three score and ten in breadth. 8. The. viii.
part is from. lxx. to. vi. score in length, and from. lxxi. to. lxxx. in
breadth. 9. The. ix. part is from. lxxxi. to. vi. score in length and from.
lxxxi. to. lxxxx. in breadth. 10. The. x. part is from. lxxxxi. to vi. score in
length. and from. lxxxxi. to an. C. in breadth.
Here ends the measurynge of Lands. And hereafter follows the measurynge of
Timber.
To measure Timber or Stone, in length, breadth and depthe by the foot square.


IN measurynge Timber. Stone, or any other like thing in length, breadth, and
depth, by the foot square ye must diligently mark, whither it be equaly. iiii.
square, or partly. iiii. square, or else in. iii. sides equally, or partly
square, or else in. v. vi. vii. or more sides square. Or else all round, with
out any square side. And if a piece of timber be equally in. iiii. sides square
like to this present figure, then ye may take in dyfferently one of them to
the breadthe of the true square of that manner piece of timber. And the^ set
forth the length thereto for a foot square, as does apere by the mesure that
follows after that square in the figure of Timber measure, as in this example.
The. iiii. square sides be every one. xii. inches broad, then ye must lay out
to that breadth. xii. inches in length, the which does make one foot square
in timber me asure, as does appear in the figure of timber, measure folowig.
Another example. The square sides, be every one. x. inches broad, the^ lay
out. vii. inches. qr. ynch thereto in length for one foot square, as does
appear in the same rule following, and so like wise of all other pieces of
Timber equallye. iiii. square.

Of a piece of timber in. iiii. sides partly square.


But because al pieces of Timber, be not in all. iiii. sides equallye square,
like to this foresaid figure, but some be in. iiii. sides partly square, like
to this present figure. Therefore in such pieces of timber ye shall lay one
brother and one narrower side in one whole sum together, and deuyde them
equally into two parts, and then take one of them for the breadth of the
square of such manner timber, as many artificers do commonly use, the which be
greatly deceived thereby, because by such deuy sio^, they make ye square thereof
much more then the truth, and by reason of the more square, they set forth
the less length thereto, for a foot square in Timber measure, But ye shall
take the square of such a piece of Timber, as is set forth in the table of
squares folowinge, according to one of his brother and narrower sides of what
diverse quantityes so ever they be. And the^ ye shall measure the length thereto,
for a foot square in Timber measure, as it is plai^ely set forth in the figure
of Timber mesure next after that rule following, as in this example. The piece
of timber is on one side. xii. inches broad, and on the other side. xvi. inches
broad, the^ take. xiii. inches di. ynch quarter ynche, quarter quarter ynch of.
quarter quarter ynche, for the square of these two bredthes, as does appear in
the figure of squares following. After ward ye shall lay to this square. x.
inches, quarter inches in length for one foot square in tymbre measure as does
appear in the figure of timber measure folowige. But because ye squares do not
always tyse to any inches, but so^tymes to odd parts of any ynche, ^s in
this example before said. Therefore the odd quantytes after your dyserescyon
considered, ye shall add to, or take away, sum part more or less in setting
forth the foot square in Timber measure, beside the qua^tyties expressed in the
figure of timber measure here. For it were very hard, yet imposiyble to set
forth true quantities of timber mea^sure, to all odd quantyties of squares.

Of a piece of timber in. iii. sides equally square.


AND when a piece of Timber is in. iii. sides equally square, like to this
present figure, then ye shall take ye distaunce between one of the angles to
the mydie of the contrary side for the square, and the half of one whole side
for another square. Then search out in the figure of timber, as it is set
forth there according to the brother and narrower sides thereof, as i this
example. The dystaunce between the one angle to the contrary side is. x.
inches, and the half one whole side is. vi. inches, the^ take. vii. inches di.
ynche, quarter in che, for the square of this length, and breadth, as does
appear in the figure afterward ye shall lay to this. ii. fore xi. inches,
quarter ynche, in length, for one foot square in Timber measure, as does
appear in the figure of timber measure. Always considered the od quantytes of
the square above the. vii. inches.

Of a piece of Timber in. iii. sides partly, or dyuersly square with one plain
Angle.


ALso when a piece of timber is in iii. sides partelye or dyuerslye square with
one plain angle, like to this present figure. Then ye shall measure from the
plain angle to the sharp angle on the one side for one square, and measure
from the plain angle, to the sharp angle on ye other side, and take half of
that measure for the other square. Then take the square of that piece of timber,
as it is set forth in the Figure according to the one border, and one
narrower sides thereof, as in this example, the one side from the plain angle to
the sharp angle is. xii. inches in breadth And the other side from the plain
angle to ye other sharp angle is. viii. inches in breadth. Then take. xii. for
the breadth of one side of the timber and half of the other side of. viii. the
which is. iiii. for the breadth of another side. Then take. vi. inches half
ynche, quarter ynche. di. qr. ynche. qr quarter ynch, di. quarter ynche, for
the square of this length and breadth, as does appear in the figure, afterward
ye shall lay to this square sum part less than the. iiii. foot in length,
for one foot square in timber measure as does appear in the figure of timber
mesure in consideration of ye odd quantyties above the. vi. inches in the
square aforesaid.

Of a piece of timber in. v. sides equally square.


IF a piece of timber be in. v. sides equally square like to this present
figure, then ye shall measure all the square sides of it round about and take
half the nombre of inches of that measure for one square side. And the^ ye
shall measure the distau^ce from the mydie of the end of the timber, to the
mydle of one square side between the two angles, as it appears by the line in
the same figure. And take the measure of ye dystau^ce for another square side,
as in this example, in this figure of. v. square every side is. x. inches, the
which. v. times multiplied makes. l. then take half. l. the which is. xxv.
for one square and ye distau^ce between ye middle paynt to the middle of one
square side the which is. vii. for another square side. Tha^ take. xiii.
inches di^. quar. ynch, quarter qr. ynch. di. quarter qr ynche, for the square
of this length, and breadth. Afterward ye shall lay to this square, some part
less than x. inches, quarter ynche, in length for one foot square in timber
measure, as does appear in the figure of timber measure, by reason of ye odd
qua^ tyties above the. xiii. inches to the square aforesaid. This last rule
ye shall follow generally in measuryng of all other pieces of timber in. vi.
vii. viii. or more sides equally square.

Of a piece of round timber without any square sides.


ANd when a piece of timber is all round without any square side like to this
present figure, then artyficers most co^monely do gyrde it round about with
a line, and deuyde ye measure of that gyrdynge into. iiii. equal parts, and
the^ they take one of them for the square of such a round piece of timber. But
they be greatly deceived by such manner of measuring, for they make the square
thereof much less than the truth, and by setting forth the more length thereto
for a foot square in timber measure much more (...) her for a foot square in
such round pieces, than is right. Therefore when ye have gyrded it round about
with a line, ye shall divide the length thereof into. ii. equal parties, and
take one part of them for one square side of such a round piece of timber.
Afterward ye shall divide again the same whole length in to. iii. parties, and
take half one of them for another square side of this piece of timber. The^
take. viii. inches di^. ynch di^. quarter ynche di. qr. quarter ynche, for the
true square of this length and breadth as does appear in the figure. Afterward
ye shall lay to this square some part less than two foot. iii. inches in
length for one foot square in timber measure, as does appear in the figure of
timber measure next after that following, with allowance of some part less
for the odd qua^tities above the. viii inches of the square before said.

Explicit.

