A tragoedie or Dialoge of the unjust usurped primacie of the Bishop of Rome,
and of all the just abolishyng of the same, made by master Barnardine Ochine an
Italian, and translated out of Latin into English by Master John Ponet Doctor
of Divinity, never printed before in any language.

Anno Do. 1549

To the most mighty, and most excellent Prince Edward the syxte, by the
grace of God King of England, France, and Irelande, defendor of the faith,
and in earth Supreme head of the church of England and Irelande Bernardinus
Ochinus Senensis wishes all felicity.
ALthough god of his mere goodness has given to your Majesty most rich
treasures, most large kingdoms, special grace and love of al people, most
high nobility of bludde, most singular ornaments both of the body and of
the mind, partly coming only of God, and partly through his favor
obtained also by your industry, beside other innumerable graces, which it
has pleased god to endue your hyghenes withal: Yet nevertheless all these
things ought not, nor cannot be compared to that benefit, which he has
showed unto you, in giving unto you in such a dark world, and in so tender
age, such clear light of Christ, that albeit in this world he was poor,
low, dispiced, and crucified, and your Majesty is so rich, so high, in so
great honor, and all kinds of felicity, Yet not only you knowleadge and take
him for your Lord and master, but also you love him, and that in such
sort, that for the love, which you bear unto him, you have such a godly
hatred to his enemies, that following the blessed memory of your father, first
with the favor of god, and than with the advice of your most derest uncle the
lord Protector, and of other your trusty and faithful Counseylours, you have
driven him out of your Realms and Dominions him, who among all the wicked
has the highest place, and is most adversary to Christ, and therefore is he,
and may wourthely be called Antichriste. Now remains nothing behind, but
that with him you drive away also (as you have begone) his lies, errors,
Hypocrisy, Symonye, Robbery, supersticion, Idolatrye and all wickedness. And
than if Pirrus, Alexander magnus, Anibal, Scipio Affricanus, and Julius Caesar
had noble victories and tryumphes in this world, how much more shall your
noble acts far pass al them, and their acts in the sight of God,
aungelles, and men, for as much as you (being yet but almost a babe) shall
overthrow the most mighty, most crafty, most wicked, and cruel tyraunte, that
ever was, or ever shall be in the world, delivering your subjects from a long
and miserable bondage, and captivity.

And yet forasmuch as many (such as be blind, and do take him for their god
in earth, where as they ought most hyghly to commend your Majesty for your
godly proceadinges,) peradventure will speak evil of so excellent an act, I
thought it my part, for the duetye that I owe to god, and to your Majesty to
show unto such men the beginnynge of this their Papacy, and how it
increased, and came into so high estimacion among the blind people: So that
they perceauinge their weak, false, ruinouse, and deuilishe foundation, may
leave their fayt^, which they have in him, and give glory to God and to your
Majesty, to whom I pray god to ^^unte a long and most blessed life.

The parties, that do speak in this Dialoge, are these.
i. Lucifer, and Beelzebub. ii. Boniface the third, and Doctor Sapience
secretary to the Emperor. iii. The people of Rome. The church of Rome. iiii.
The Pope, and man's judgment and the people of Rome. v. Thomas Massuccius the
master of the horse. Lepidus the popes cha^berlain vi. Lucifer and Beelzebub
vii. Christ and Michaell and Gabriell archangels. viii. King Henry the viii,
and Papista, and Thomas Archbisshop of Cantorbury. ix. King Edward the vi. and
the lord Protector.
A Tragoedie or Dialoge of the unjust usurped primacie of the Bishop of Rome
and of the just abolishinge of the same, made by master Barnardine Ochine an
Italian, and translated out of Latin into English by Master John Ponet Doctor
of Divinity
Lucifer and Beelzebub. MY dear faithful brethren, and most enttierly beloved
friends, for as much as I know how much profit arises of the labor and
pains that ye take in the world, be ye well assuered that I would not have
wylled you to assemble here together in Hell at this present, were there not
some great profit to our common wealth arising of the same, that moved me so
to do. Ye know right well my brethren and friends how wrongfully and unjustly
our enemy God (without any our fault or deserving) hurled us down out of
heaven hedlonge, Esa^y. xiii^ Luck. x. Apo. xi^.
and also ye know what greuouse torment, miserye and calamity we have
sustained ever sin^e that time. And although he will needs reign alone in
heaven, and cannot abide fellow to be joined with him in that kingdom but
does usurp it whole to him self alone: yet if he would have left to us some
dominion in earth, this torment and misery of ours might better have been
borne. But whereas we had by much travail and busynes obtained and inioyed, as
it were by our prescription, of many years the dominion of the world: se you
not how he has sent ye same son of his whom they call Christ, to mar
all that ever we have made, John. xvij.
and utterly to destroy that we have builded? do ye not perceive how that
fellow Christ being nailed upon the cross droweth all men to him: and do ye
not perceive what a number of me^, which before were of our side, be now fled
to him, there to be souldiars underneath his banner. If his Apostles being but
twelve made such a commotion through out the whole world, what a ruffell
think ye will so many thousands make, whom they by their teaching have
turned: Certainly by conjecture it should seem that the matter will daily
wax worse and worse, oules this great mischief ^e wyselye provided for
inseason, else will it at length come to pass that our scepter royal shall be
plucked out of our hands, and our dominion utterly taken away from us. But
after long consultinge and dyuising there is now come into my head a very
handsome imaginacion, whereby we may destroy the kingdom of Christ, and
stablysh our kingdom for ever. If we attempt to oppress the members of
Christ with persecucion and tirrannye, we shall that way but increase more
and more our own sorrow. For as we be sufficiently taught by long experience,
they be so persed and led with a zeal to ye glory of god, and so carried
with a vehement heavenly spirit, that they contempne all thing sauinge Christ
only. And this one thing seems much to be maruailed at, that wha^ they be
spoiled for ye glory of Christ, or ba^nished in to exile, or lose their honor,
their country, their substance, yea or their life also, yet they earnestlye
triumph and be merye, and they esteem it as a game won, and a joyful
victory, romans viii. Gala. vi. phil. ^.
to suffer all kinds of misfortune for Christ's sake, so that ye more sorrow we
do unto them, the more glorious and famous they be, and we remain in more
misery and confusion. And again there is one other thing both more hurtefull
to us, and more to be lamented, that is, the res^ of the people perceauinge
them to bear such ignominy and rebukes with so meruelouse patience, so
joyful hearts, and so constant a courage, be compelled to think thus with
them selves and say: Truly God lives, and works in the^ meruelously, if they
had not an experience and a taste (by a secret moving of the holy spirit) of
another life in Christ, John. iii. phyl. i. Gala. ii. Heb. xiii. i. John. v.
much better and happier then this present is, they would never be so
desierous to be rid of this present life. And if it so be that we kyl one
Christian man (as the fable is of the cutting of one of the heads of Hydra the
serpent) there springs as it were of the ashes of him a hundredth immediately
in his place. When we intend to bring the kingdom of Christ to nothing,
then we make it more nob^e, rich, and gloriouse. Now if we should attempt
to overcome this our ancient enemies kyngedome by reasons and arguments, we
shall do nothing else but increase our own rebuke and shame. No man can
withstand their wisdom, wherewith if our reasons be compared: truly they be
very folishenes. Therefore it is expedient and necessary, seeing that we can not
overcome them in plain field with open war, to attempt their overthrow by
art, policy, diligence, craft, subteltie, gyle, and prodition. I have
conceived in my head a deceyt of such weight and importance, that if I may
bring it about after such sort, as I have devised it, there was never man
saw, nether yet in the world was there ever any, that devised the like both
for the straungenes and for the force thereof. I have devised with my self, to
make a certain new kingdom replenished with idolatry, supersticion,
ignorance, error, falsehode, deceit, compul^ion, extorsion, treason,
contencion, discord, tyranny, and cruelty, with spoylinge, murder, ambicion,
filthiness, injuries, factions, sects, wickedness, and mischief, in the which
kingdom all kinds of abhominacion shall be committed. And not withstandinge
that it shall be heaped up with all kinds of wickedness, yet shall the Christian
men think that to be a spiritual kingdom most holy, and most godly. The
supreme head of this kingdom shall be a man, which is not only sinful and an
abominable robber and thief, but he shall be sin and abhominacion it self,
and yet for all that shall he be thought of Christian men a God in earth, Mat.
xv. c. and.ix. b. Luc. xix. a. John. xii. f. xiiii. ^. ^. Timo. i. a. phi. ii. a
and his members being most wicked shall be thought of men most holy. God sent
his son into the world, who for the salvation of all mankind has humbled
him self even to the death of the cross: and I will send my son into the
world, who for the destruction and condempnacion of mankind, shall so auaunce
himself that he shall take upon him to be made equal with God. This is our
counsel and witty inuencion, and it is not to be doubted, but that if the
matter come to pass as I would have it (as my trust is that it will) we shall
in short space see a revenging of that our old iniurye.

Beelze. When I behold you most redoubted prince, and ponder your words
severally with myself: ye would not believe how much I am comforted, me
thinks that I am now so satisfied, and that I feel my self so presently
eased, as though I my self had powered out all the boylynge poison of my
stomach against God. There was never creature that had a more witty, a more
noble, or a more worthy devise, if the matter might take like effect, as me
seems it cannot. For who would believe that the christian men (which excel
in wisdom and judgment) could be brought to this point to believe that the
kingdom of the devil is the kingdom of God? And that the supreme head of
that kingdom, being the very great devil of hell, ought to be adored, and
wurshypped for a God in earth, and his members honored for saynctes?


Luci. O how goodly occasions many times men lose, and how goodly
interprises come not to such effect as they were purposed for, by the means
of the weak fearefulnes of men's stomakes, in that they dare not take the
thing in hand, which they be affrayed they shall not atcheue? Such as be of
hault courage, auaunce their mind studeing and attempting things of great
adventure, and so with wit, industry, diligence, care and earnestnes, at the
last they bring things to pass, that be very hard to compass. My hope is
therefore that even as God has saved the world by Christ, so in despite of
him I shall destroy the same, and that under the pretense and color of
the same Christ, by the means whereof men may be the easelier deceived. I will
stir up the chief captains of my kingdom, that they may so by craft and
diligence shadow, and cover supersticion and ydolatry with a fair face and
beautye of feigned holy ceremonies and of good intent (as they call it) that
men shall be made so dronken, and so amassed with this outward pomp and
show, that they themselves shall not be hable to descerne truth from falshod,
when they be drowned in the mids of the floude of ydolatrye and supersticion.
More over I have determined so to extol, and set up the carnal man in this
my kingdom, and the light of nature, and the strength of man's fre will, and
his works, that I shall be hab^^ to cast down Christ out of his place, and
to bury his great benefit, and so to minish the profit of his grace, his
righteousness and merit everlasting. And furthermore I will bring men into
that madness that they shall think themselves not only hable by their own
power and might to inioye the praise of ryghteousnes before God, but also that
the eleccion and choice of their salvation shall depend wholye upon
themselves. All these things will I persuade to men under a pretense of a more
perfect ryghteousnes and honesty, and under a shadow of a better setting
forth the glory of the name of God. And although the principal heads of
this kingdom be full of darkness, of ignorance, of heresy, error, fraud,
and lies, yet shall they shamelesly take upon them the usurpation of authority
to make new and wicked articles of the faith, wrasting the holy scriptures to
their crooked purpose, and yet shall they think themselves to be in a great
clearenes of light and truth. For I can easily persuade unto them that their
church is the church of Christ, although it be nothing else in deed, but a
very assembly of Satan. I will persuade unto them that they be the disciples of
Christ, and the successors of Sayncte Peter, when in deed we be their chyefe
masters, and they our vicars and supply our roumes, and serve our cures in
yearthe. Finally when in deed we reign in them, they shall think they have
the holy ghost within them, so that although they be in a continual error, yet
shall they persuade men that they are inspired with a heavenly spirit, and
cannot err. Oh lord what a number of mischiefs and abhominacions shall be
committed in this kingdom, by reason of the wicked and sinful decrees,
which shall be made of governors of the same, when they shall glory that they
have power to bind the conscience of man even of like sort as though they
were hayle fellow with God or rather better, and all this under the shadow of
religion and holiness. I will cause them to be most cruel tyrants, and
bochers of Christ and his chosen members, and that under a pretense of a zeal
to the house of God. They shall attempt to hyde their uncleanness, and filthy
behavior under a gaye name of sole life, and shall cover their wickedness and
abhominacion with an exceeding wide cloak of hypocrysie, and with a glorious
shynyng title of religion and holiness. But what needs so many words? The
chief head of this kingdom shall be directly quite contrary to Christ, and
the members of it, shall be open adversaries to the chosen of God. But one
thing my friends ye must diligently consider, that this thing of necessity be
always kept secret, else if men should perceive by any means this our
counsel, all our labors should be lost, and all our enterprise frustrate.
Dout ye not dear brethren but that if the thing come to pass, that I
intend, there shall be such horrible and wicked viciousnes in this kingdom,
that the chief captains themselves could not abide them if they knew them
to be so abominable as they shall be. Wherefore it is necessary that the
greatter the wyckednes shall be the more craftilier and coninglye they be
anourned and set furthe with some pleasant beautyfull face of religion and a
gaye painted veil of holiness.


Belze All these things we allow right well, and be also ready to obey your
counsel, and to bestow all the powers of our wit and might to set forward
this noble enterprise, howebeit first and formest we think it very expedient
that ye disclose plainly unto us all your intent and purpose, that we may
direct al our labors and study to that end, and so to bring this noble
enterprise about even as we will with the common consent of us all.


Luci. Even as upon Christ depends the whole salvation of all mankind, so
is it necessary for us to devise a supreme head upon whom may depend the whole
condempnacion of all mankind. And as the son of God for the salvation of the
world did abase himself from the high state of his divinity, and endued
himself with man's nature: of a like sort is it needful for the destruction
of the world that there be some man which shall auaunce himself above Christ
and above God himself, that men being blinded by stynkynge and filthye
supersticion may fear, honor, and obey a mortal manne more then the very
living lord. And more over it is necessary that this man be so furnished with
all wickedness and iniquity that I may worthelye say of him: this is my well
beloved son, in whom is my only delight, hear him: Even as the heavenly
father long agone did testify of his son Christ.


Beelze. Me thinks that I hear the lively image of Antichriste himself
handsomely and properly described of you.


Luci. It is even so in deed as thou say.


Beelze. But who is (I pray you) so shameless to receive so wicked a dignity?


Luci. Receive it quod he? This dignity shall be honored and set forth
with so much riches, so much pleasure, and so much habundaunce of things, so
greatly befrended with noble men, so decked with honor and great welthe of
this present life, that all the princes of the earth shall be desirous to
atteyne thereunto. And as for thabominacions of this high seat, they shall so
be covered with a gay glorious outward show of holiness, that they themselves,
which shall sit in the same, shall not be hable to know their own
wickedness. No, (a man would scasely believe it) they shall think themselves
very gods in earth. As far as my wit will serve me, I think the Bishop of
Rome the most mete instrument to bring about the thing that we intend.
Because that Rome is the head city of the world, it shall be no hard thing to
persuade men that the bishop thereof is the head of all christian men, and
the church of Rome to be mother of all other churches. And again thinsaciable
ambicion of the Romans, their craft, their malice and gyle, wherewith they be
naturally infected, shall not be the only thing that shall help forward our
purpose: but also the favor and grace that they obtain at the Emperoures
hands of Rome. Furthermore it is not unknown unto you that by reason of the
manyfolde heresies which we have sown, in Affrike, and in the east par^es of
the world, what a number of bishops have fled to Rome for succoure of the
Emperor. The bishop of Rome (as a man that gapeth for this honor of the
highest place) intertaineth al men very friendly, declaryng tokens of kyndnes
and love toward every body, in so much that some of a me^e simplicity, and
other some by craft and fraud will be so desirous of the election and
apointment of this high dignity, that they will be very glade to give their
voice to the bishop of Rome. Who on the other part is so replenished with
deceyt and suttelty, and with such a botomles desire to be a Prince, that it
shall be easy for him with the help and favor of our spirit to attain to this
most high dignity, namely because as ye know they be sufficiently furnished
al ready with learning, and also helped by the power and worki^g of our spirit.
The churches of the Eastpart of the world wereeasly infected with the heresies,
that weresowen abroad, and because their heresis be now known to all men,
they can not infect the other churches of Christ, which be more syncerelye
instructed. But as for this church of Rome it must be infected by little and
little not in the outward show, but in the inward bowelles, and that so
extremelye until it cannot be made more wicked (thoutwarde pomp and show and
a certain form of the church of Christ being preserved) that by the means
thereof, it may bring all other churches more easly into error, and may be
the only chief bredyng mother of error and wickedness, like as it shall be
taken for the mother of all other churches. Thus have I declared unto you
(dear brethren and friends) all my whole inuencion and imaginacion: and I have
opened also and set before your eyes the end whereunto we must direct all our
labors and study. It rests now i^ you that every one apply his whole mind to
ye uttermost of his power for the performaunce of so noble an enterprise, and
leave nothing undone, that shall seem expedient for the brynginge about thereof.
Doubt ye not but the time is at hand, when we may revenge our old injury
against God. And for as much as he would not suffer us being most worthy
creatures, to be fellows with him in heaven: Esaias. xiiii Luc. x. Apoca. xii
we will bring to pass by our industrye, that the vilest manne and most
cast away in the world shall be above him in earth. And now that every one of
you in his degree may the more cherefully apply himself about this business, I
promise you, ye need not doubt, but you may be well assured that we shall in
short space bring the thing to pass that we desire. For in this point we
have God himself favorable unto us, Mat. xxiiii
who in sondrye places of scripture prophesied that there should an Antichrist
come, and now is the time expired, wherein that wicked head of Christendom
ought to come into the world. Then if God will not be made a liar it is
necessary, that at the last he come and be disclosed to the whole world. For
with this whyppe God will scourge and punish the false christians. Who because
they would not believe the truth, God of his rightful judgment will that
they shall believe lies, and be worthily deceived as Paul has written. ii.
Thesa. ii.
There were never, nor never shall be more shynynge ceremonies neither more
beawtifull, whereby to allure men under a color of holiness, then those shall be,
which Antichriste and his members shall devise to be used amongst men. And
know ye more over, for a confirmacion of their doctrine and living, that they
may be more easly deceived, God will suffer many wonders, many signs and
miracles to be showed by us, by reason of whom even the very chosen shall be
seduced if it were possible, as Christ him self has prophesied, Mat. xxiiii.
I am sure ye have in remembrance how that in the beginning of the church of
Christ when it was most pure, and a long ceason after, there were chosen
as well in Rome for to be Bishops such men as were most godly, best learned in
Gods holy scriptures, and as most diligently and faithfully labored to
auaunce gods true word and his glory, but afterward when good discipline
began to decay, and we had powered ambicion, darnel, and discencion into the
world, then were chosen to be Bishops by their own procuremente, not such
as were most godly, but such as were most worldely, most ambitious and
crafty, seking more their own glory and lucre then the auauncement of god^es
glory, and the exercise of their office, rather pluckyng from the sheep their
milk, than fedyng them with good pastures. So that the name of a Bishop now,
is no more the name of a very paynfull office as it was in times pa^^, but of
a great pomp and dignity. Furthermore they have ordained according to the
example of the old Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob three new Patriarchs
one of Antioche in Asia, another of Alexandria in Affrik, and the third of
Europe in Rome. Of a like sort ye know that a long ceason all Christian men in
the church of Christ have been taken, for spiritual, sanctfied, and religious
me^, as they be called in the scriputure, and as they are in deed, for as much
as they be hallowed in baptism, and dedicated to god to be his children, and to
be led by his spirit. But the infidels, which be not of the church of
Christ as me^ utterly without Christ be accounted (as they be i^ deed)
profane, hethe^, and ungod i. But now of late days only a sort of cloysterers
disguysed men in apparel, and lyuinge from other men begin to be taken for
spiritual, religyous and holy men, though they be never so vicyous. All
other Christian men be they never so godly, and replenished with the heavenly
spirit, yet be they judged profane, and unworthy to touch their holy
garments with their little finger. This wonderful dignity and magnificence
shall set out the royalty and glory of our Monarchy and sole kingdom not a
little. Believe me dear brethren we have a mete time, and opportunity for our
triumph, for our glory and victory. God for thauauncement, and for thincrease,
and establishment of his church gave to it the holy scripture for a rule to
live by for ever: likewise for the increase, the inlargynge, and confirmation
of our church we will give unto it our decrees and Cannons, which although
they be for the most part profane and wicked, yet shall they nevertheless
not only seem good and holy, but also they shall be taken for the very squire
and rule, wherbi the holy scripture shall be tried. Furthermore because God
knew right well that his holy word is a thing most necessary above all other:
he commanded his Apost^es that they should preach through out the world
the voice of the gospel, which in deed is the true chief office of them,
which will be taken for the true ministers of Christ. For although baptism
(as all men know) be a ceremonye ordained of God both holy and necessary, yet
was the Apostle Paul so diligent, and busied with preaching the word of god,
that he christened very few with his own hands but left that office to other
ministers. But now shall the time come, yea and it is at hand, wherein the
chief headdes of this our kingdom shall not only challenge to be the
successors of thapostles, but also of Christ him self: they shall be stricken
with such a madness that they shall think it a vile shameful thing for them
to preach the gospel, and therefore shall they substitute under them simple
Sir John's, who for the fashions sake shall pretend and do the outward
ceremonye of preachinge, but the doctrine wherewith they shall instruct the
people shall be handeled and infected after their own fashion. And as for the
bishops they shall be given al together to esteem things of the world and of
the flesh. And yet to the end that they may appear before men as though they
were bishops, in deed, at certain times of the year they shall set forth
sundry ceremonies with a great show to the people, which shall be no less cold,
dumme and folishe than wicked and supersticious, which shall be framed, and
wrought in our workehowse of hell. But brefely to comprehend an endless sea of
matters in few words, know ye my brotherne, that this kingdom of ours shall be
so pestilent and abominable, that it shall not only infecte and hurt the
church of god, the holy ceremonies and constitucions, true worshippinge of god
and the sacred scripture it self: but it shall also destroy and overthrow
other lybera^l arts and sciences.


Belzee. When I consider how short the life of man is it seems to me a
thing impossible, that one bishop of Rome, in so short a space should bring
to pass so many mischefes.


Luci. Brother me thinks that ye be very dull. For this name of Antichrist is
not the proper name of any one man, but is a common name to many, for
notwithstanding that it is a fyt name for all them, that be contrary and
enemies to Christ, yet chiefly and above all other it agrees to those bishops
of Rome which usurp tyranny lordship and dominion above all other bishops.
Now all the difficulty and hardness of this business stands in the beginning
thereof, that is to say, in gyuinge a beginning to a matter of so great
importance, and that same byshope of Rome may be found, who dares give the
first adventure to be called the head of al other bishops. If we may once
obtein this at one of their hands, the rest will easly follow willingly, and
daily will they find out new ways for the stablishment of their dominion.
Therefore let us al go now out of hand and every man prepare him self to do
his endeavor according to his calling, and I as your chief captain will first
prove. and formoste attempt to perswad this godly imaginacion of mine to
Boneface the byshope of Rome, and I dout not but that I shall obtain present
favor of his carnal wisdom.


Boneface the third. Doctor Sapience Secretary to Themperor. O immortal God
how sweet and pleasant a thing is the glory of the world, trewly it is more
to be esteemed, then all worldly treasures or pleasure. I am the Patriarch of
Rome, and have under my tuicion and governance an infinite number of people:
Who being pressed with any kind of affliccio^, straight they come runnyng to me
as thike as hoppes, they al honor me, they have their eyes set upon me, I have
money at will, and I may have all kinds of pleasures at my commandment. If I
could bring it to pass to obtain at the hands of Phocas the Emperor the
dominion, and principality over al other byshopes of the world: I would think
my self to have attained even the very highest state of felicity, and happy
life, that might be. If then I could not by wisdom, and industry bring to
pass, that men should worship me as a god in earth: I might worthily be
accounted a fool, and much unworthy of so great a felicity, but what shall I
do? I can by no means disclose this my fantasye to any manne, but I shall
forthewith disclose this mine arrogancy, and he shall judge me a man full of
ambycion. But I see master Sapiens the Emperors secretarye mine old friend.
Truly I could not have found a more fit instrument for my purpose: if he will
be so good to me as to open this thing to the Emperors Majesty, not as a
thing divised and found out of me, but rather of his own head, as though I
durst not so hardy of my head will or mind so great a matter.

Sapi. God save your highenes most Reverend father.


Boni. Ye be very heartily welcome. What news?


Sapi. Nothing but y^ al is naught. The comm^cac^on betwe^ Boniface Bishop o^
Rome and Doctor Sapience the Emperors Secretarye.
Sundry letters there be brought to the Emperors Majesty, the contents of the
which does declare that there is such a number of faccions, sects,
contencions, and of diverse kinds of heresies in the church of Christ, that
without gods present help, the church will shortly be utterly undone.


Boni. Your words give me both occasion, and incoragement to disclose unto
you, as to my most faithful and dear friend, my whole mind and intent. I
will therefore open unto you the secret and hyd purposes of my mind. But
because the matter is of great weight, first I will desire you to keep counsel.


Sapi. Sir that is a thing, that belongs to mine office, to keep secrets,
for as much as I am secretary to the Emperors Majesty a dignity whereunto I
should never have attained, if I had not sumwhat learned what thing it is
amongst men, pryuyly or openly to whist or to talk. Wherefore be not afraied,
say what ye will, and think with your self that ye may safely say your mind
to me, for assurau^ce whereof I promise you faithfully that I will open it to no
man, neither speak any thing thereof to any man living, but as you shall be
contented.


Boni. For one epistle, and one message that themperor has received of
faccions, and heresies, which abound in Asia and Affrike I have received a
thousand letters, and messages: for all good men resort to me as to their only
refuge and succor, and I comfort them in their affliccions and calamities.
Therbe many also not all of the best sort, which resort to my guard and
tuicion, some lest they should worthily be punished of their superiors for
their offenses: and other, that under the shadow of my favor they may be
promoted to some dignity. And I of very humanity and gentleness can not but
intertaine them very frendely and show al tokens of kindness unto them, be they
good or be they evil that come to me for refuge. It is not ambition that
moves me to this thing, neither gooe I about by this means to increase my
pryuate commodity, or to auaunce the worthynes of my dignity, (as God he
knowethe): but christian charity, and a true zeal to Gods honor moves me
to do this my dewtie: unfortunate had the Christian men been, which dwell
in those countries had not I helped them with my labor and di^igence. There is
none amongst the^, who desirethe not thincrease and setting forth of mine
honor, that my authority and help may be a stay unto them in such things
as belong to their profit. But I of a certain natural inclinacion (I can
not tell how) both naturallye and wyllynglye abhor all pomp and dignity.
Yet to say as I think, and as my conscience gives me to speak the truth, I
fear me much lest all churches, not only they of whom I spoke even now,
but our churches also in short space will be undone onles they be governed of
some universal supreme head. Ye know right well, that where is no order,
there of necessity must be confu^ion, neither can there be any certain order
except there be a head, whereunto all things must be applied as to the chief
state of governance. And to put you out of doubt, christen men be not now
of that simplicity, and virtuous behavior as they were in the beginning of
the primative church, wherefore now it is necessari for them to have a head
which may punish the evil, and reward the good. Ye se with your eyes how
many sects and heresies be now in the church of Christ, and there is small
lyklyhode of amendment, but that it shall be daily worse and worse if some
remedy be not found betymes, shortly shall ensue amongst men such a
licentious and unbridled liberty that every manne will attempt to invent a
new kind of religion of his own brain, so that every man shall believe what
him lists, and shall also refuse whatsoever shall seem contrary to his private
commodity. Wherefore it is very necessary that there be some supreme head to
reduce all men to an unity in religion, whereby all waves of opinions may of
a Christian sort be calmed and ceased. Experience which deceyueth no man
but is the chief maystres in consultacion, teaches this thing so evidently
that it cannot be denied. Now that we have by sage conjecture espied it to be
necessary to have one head in the church and christian commonwealth: I judge
that christen men will more wyllynglye and readly admit and receive me for their
head and governor than any other manne, which thing may be compassed both
more safely and better without business, if the Emperor would help it forward
(being so profitable a thing as it is) with his royal authority, against
whose will and pleasure as I dare attempt nothing: so would I not doubt but
that if he would do this thing himself, it were no small means to increase
his glory, and establishe the continuance of his memory for ever, and also
for thinlarging of his imperial dominion and dignity. For if I should
acknowelage perpetual obedience, reverence, and fidelity to him (as I am
bound and as my mind is to do) he might well think all the dominion and
authorytie, which I should have, to pertayne also to him. Now if you think
it good to common with ye Emperors majesty in this matter when ye shall see
time and place convenient, (because I know that he louethe you singularlye
well, and that he settethe much by your counsel, and I know how good ye be
to persuade a matter, and also I am well assured that ye be my very friend) I
doubt not but ye shall easly bring to pass this my desire. And for my part,
bysides that I should be always bound unto you, I would declare unto you in
deed after no slender and mean sort how earnestly I love you for that I had
received so great a benefit at your hands. And I will be plain with you, my
desire is, that ye will open all these things to themperours majesty as
though they were first devised by you, and as though I had never talked nor
spoken of them. For me thinks it a wisdom: when I have obtained my suit to
show my self as though it were against my will, that I might say amongst all
men that I took not this dignity wyllynglye, but by force and compulcion.


Sapi. I perceive all that your highness has in this plentiful oracion
declared, and I promise you my faith, and true diligence for the compassing of
this matter, and that my good heart, and mind shall appear to your highness to
be void of al dissimulacion. And as soon as I shall perceive what answer
Cesars majesty will make, I shall declare his will and pleasure to your most
noble lordeship, and because I am now even cloyed with to many businesses and
am also sure that there be a great number lokynge for me at the court, I will
take my leave of your highness oneles ye will command me any other service.


Boni. Nothing but that ye will humbly comme^d me to Cesars majesty.


Sapi. I will with all my heart. I thought the time of my tariaunce with this
manne to be a whole year long: he displeased me so with such a rolling
rhetorical vanity of words. Oh Lord god that there can be so much
ambition and desire of honor hid in the breast of a man, and that of a christian
man, yea and of a bishop which will be accounted most holy. Yt is no
marvel that he intertayned so frendely all strangers that came to Rome, and
often times praised them earnestly to the Emperor, for it appears by the
matter it self that it was for none other purpose, but to obtain the favor
of his neghbours, and strangers for the better attayninge to this dignity,
which he hunteth for. And to cloak his hypocrisy with a gaye outward show,
he says it is very necessary for the church to have one supreme universal
head of the church in earth, as though Christ were not the true head of his
church, or else did not regard things in earth, but satte in heaven idle and
slepinge. He affirmithe also that if this head be not stablyshed in the church
of Christ, it will shortly decay and be undone: but I am of a contrary
judgment: if Cesars majesty fulfill his ambicious desire the church of
Christ will not only decay, but it will utterly fall down, as though it were
plucked up by the roots. As though the Bishops which be already were not
sufficient for the churches that they have. And if there chance any
contencion to arise amongst them they have counsels, by whom to make an end
of their strife and controversies. What knowelage can this false wretch have
of the churches in Affryke? Or of the churches in Asia, where he was never in all the days of his life? but what talk I of Affrike and Asia? How can he
govern those churches that be in Europe whose language for the most part he
understands not? By the reason of the great distaunce of places, and variety
of the nations and men? Who ever saw one Crane gyde all other Cranes in the
world? Who ever saw a shepard, which could alone feed all the sheep in the
earth? He were worthy praise if he could govern his own well though he
were not a whit troubled with caringe for the rest. Who knows whether Wolfes
may be found in his own flock, and whether he may worthylye be judged the
chief Wolf of all? It is not many years agone sense John Bishop of
Constantinople attempted the same interpryse that he might be made the
universal Bishop, whom the whole church did wythstande, and namelye Gregory
the first this man's predecessor, who in his letters amongst other things
wrote unto him. That the name of a universal Bishop was a folishe, wicked,
proud, and a church robbing name, and if he should go about to usurp that
name, he should do nothing else but make himself like to Lucifer, and be a
fore messenger of Antichriste, in taking away the glory and dignity from
other bishops his brethrene, andso to trouble the concord, and unity of the
faithful, and undo the church of Christ. Now if this ambicious fellow may by
craft and sutteltie obtain that thing, which his predecessors with the common
praise and consent of all men did most justly condemn in other, suerly it
shall not be done without great offense of all good men. This I dare be bold
to say, that neither Affcyke, neither Grecia, neither the rest of the churches
of the East will ever consent hereunto, but will rather resist and rebel
amongst themselves: and so shall the seameles come of Christ be torn in many
parts. This shall be ye first fruit which shall spryng of this devilish state
and authority. Furthermore the churches either will not consent thereunto, or
else if they do consent it shall be by compulcion, because they may easly
perceive how much mischief this marvelous tyranny shall bring with it. If
all the tyrants which ever have been were joined together, they al never did
so much mischief to the world as this one is like to do. I see plainly that
this matter is a thing most pernicious and hurtful, whereof I ought neither to
think, nor speak but only to put away so great a myschiefe from christian
men's necks. Yet because I have made promise, I will see what the Emperor will
say to it, and will talk earnestly with him of the matter, forasmuch as this
ambiciouse bragger did declare plainly that he would see me well rewarded if I
would do that lay in me to help the matter forward. Besides this, because
he is named to be our countrema^ one of the Romans I am bownde to promote his
suit and purpose. And who knows what he will do shortly after for my sake
if he obtain this dignity by my procurement. Truly it is not like that he will
forget so great a benefit received at my hand. And be it that there arise
contencion amongst the bishops, what is that to me? Nay the more they
strive amongst themselves, the more shall they need themperors help with whom
I am chief, and so my vantage shall be the fatter. Therefore will I bring this
thing about, and that with as much celeritie and speed as is possible.


Bon^. Sense I disclosed my mind to Doctor Sapiens, I have been wonderfully
troubled. And who knows whether he will (in so weighty a matter as this is)
keep counsel or not according to his promise. He has a number of friends
whom he will put in trust with some of my matters. And what if he open somewhat
of my will in declaring the matter to the Emperor, but beit that he do none of
all these things: yet can it not be but that Cesars majesty of him self (as he
is replenished with wisdom, and excedingly practiced in such kind of
feactes) shall by and by suspecte that this arrowe came out of my quiver, and
that the matter was altogether of my diuisinge, and so my craft shall be espied,
and I put to shame. Furthermore if it so chance that he obtain not my suit at
the Emperors hand, what have I then else done but disclosed unto him my botomles
ambicion to no purpose? But if he obtain (as I pray god he may) all men will
say with one accord that I have brought it to pass with much labor and
industry, and so shall the thing be left in writing to the posterity. And so
shall I be both to men of this present age, and to the^ which shall be in time
to come a lawghing stock, and a iestyng stole. All men good and evil will
have their eyes set upon me, and (as it were) point me out with their finger. I
shall be ha^pered in a thousand snares. And o^^e thing is greatest mischief of
all, I alone shall be the first beginner, and the chief original of all
thabominations, which my successors shall committee in all the whole world by the
reason of this tyranny. But why trouble I my self any longer with a rablement
of reasons? The die is cast hap what hap will: and I can not sauinge
mine honor draw back again from my purpose: therefore me thinks it more
mete to stand to the matter stoutly tarying to see the end. If the matter come
to pass as I would have it (as I trust it will) I will find a means quickly
how I may find friends plenty. The matter of it self tells, and daily
experience shows, that all men hunte for the frendshippe of them who excel
in riches, and authority, all though they be very tyrannes. And to thintente
that men shall the more embrace and magnifye me, thinkinge me to be a Christ in
earth, I will cause it by letters to be blown abroad over all the world, that
this high dignity chanced to me both not lokinge for it, and all together
unwilling to receive it, and that I would have received it in no wise, had not
the zeal that I have to the house of god compelled me, that is to say to
provide a remedy for heresies, factio^s, and an infinite number of other
mischiefs, by the which the church of Christ is oppressed. But Master
Sapience is come and his journey is toward me with speed, he seems very
merry, no dout he brings me some good news.


Sapi. Your most reverent hyghenes should not maruayle that I have differred
and prolonged the time for answer to the matter, which I know to be to us
both very pleasant, longer then either of us both did suppose. Truly the
cause why I did so was no negligence, but rather that I might bring the thing
to pass more diligently and more effectuouslye. I choase my time and place
when I might best for our profyt declare this matter to the Emperor. Yester
night after supper me thought his Majesty was merier then he was wont to be,
he walked forth into a gardene, and being there alone he called me to him a
part. There he began to declare unto me his power, his riches, and to
extolle and magnify the greatness of his Empier and dignity, and further he
opened unto me certain secret counselles, whereby he thought to increase his
riches, and to cause his whole dignity royal to be the more esteemed. And I
perceauinge this thing to make sumwhat for our purpose did not only confirm
and approve his intent, but also added this thing more over: that he now had
such occasion and opportunity given him to increase his honor as never other
Emperor had before him, so that he would speak but one word. Now because
these words pleased him wonderfully: he desiered me earnestly to declare unto
him how, and by what means this thing might be brought to pass. Then said I:
if your imperial Majesty would attempt to subdewe the dominions of other
princes ye may not think that it would be brought to pass without much
bludshed, without great danger and difficulty. But ye have now an occasion
offered unto you of god, which if it will please you to take when it is
offered, ye shall not only without difficulty, but also with much ease and
favor of al parts subdew all Christian regions. So that those people, which
be furthest of shall come and submit themselves to your Majesty gladly and
willingly. When I perceived yt he gave very good head to my talk, whiles I
should open this hyd mystery, first I declared unto him how the church of
Christ was shaken and tossed with sundry miseries and calamities, and for none
other cause but that it lacked one supreme spiritual, and vnyue^sall head in
earth, whereunto all men that were afflicted with any kind of mysery might
resort as to a common refuge, and that all men both knew and desiered this
thing. I declared also how this head for the opinions sake of religion,
(whereunto al men be naturally inclined,) should easily be received of all
the whole world. And more over by reason of the thunder boltes of
excomunicacion it should be terrible to all nations, so that in short space it
should inioye a fyrme and a perfect Dominion. Besides this I showed him that
if one of the Emperors subjects should be chosen to be this supreme head,
which should hang all together upon the Emperors will and pleasure, he
should be a very mete instrument easly to compass the dominion of the whole
world. And thus I came nerer by little and little to the communicacion of your
most reverend hyghnes. I did put him in remembrance how much you favored his
Majesty, and how mete a man above all other ye seemed for this purpose, and
again for the great eistmacion in that ye were bishop of Rome, in the
which room ye did now service with high praise and commendacion, and also
how much this thing was desiered of very many men, which should increase
the renown of the Emperors Majesty with a great reioysinge of all nations.
This thing also I added: Onles his Majesty would declare and establishe this
head by his authority, it would shortly come to pass, that some other
would attempt the same thing, and bring it to pass he not knowinge thereof,
yea though he did gain say it, who (to his Majesty's great shame and
rebuke) would chose some other which was no subject to his highness, but (so
it might chance) his adversary and foe, that either would spoil utterly, or
at the least much vex the borders of the Romayne Empier. In conclusion these
and such like reasons prevailed so much with him, that being persuaded he
interrupted me of my tale, and spoke to me before I had made an end of showing
my mind, prayinge and besechynge me that I would go busely about this matter,
and that I should come straight way to your hyghnes in his name and so in his
name pray you very earnestly yt ye would not refuse this condition thus
offered, neither disdain to receive this burden what so ever it be. And this
is true also I may tell your highness in counsel: The Emperor charged me
privily that I should not tell you that he desired this thing so much for
the private commodity, which might thereby to him insewe, but for the glory
of god, and the profit of the church. Thus your hyghnes has the beginning,
the myddest, and thend of my message.


Boui. My dear friend Sir Sapience, not withstandinge that the last day I
commoned with you somewhat houerly of this matter, yet after that I had wayed
it more substancially with my self, I perceived it to be a dangerous
enterprise and full of perell, and so hard to compass and so paynful, that I
have repented me more then a thousand times sense that ever I begane it. So yt
if I could have conveniently brought it to pass in time, I would have changed
my former purpose, and have desiered you never to open your mouth, neither to
Themperor, neither to any man else for this or such like matter. This I am suer
is very true, yt there was some heavenly spirit, yt moved me as soon as I
first spoke of this matter. But now am I in such a perplexity and doubt
that I wot not what is best to do. For this is once, I love quietness, and my
desire is to pass over the rest of my life in rest and peace without
ruffyllynge and busynes. And on the other side again there is a certain zeal
to the honor and glory of God, which stirs and prycketh me, neither would I
wyllingly resist the calling of the holy ghost. Then comes in the authority
of the Emperors Majesty, whose beck, word and request, I take to be as a
commandment unto me. Therefore tell themperoure how that when I thought
nothing less then this thing, ye laid glory of the name of god to my charge,
and at the last when ye had proved the thing to me by excedyng strong reasons,
that I could not refuse this heavenly vocation being freely offered unto me,
without a manifest and open injury to gods holy name, and therefore that I
was compelled to receive this offer. But of this one thing I desire you to
move Cesars majesty very earnestlye, and ye shall move it to him in my name,
that is, that he will consider again and again, when I am auaunced up into
this high estimacyon, I shall have many earnest adversaries, whose darts he
himself must defend, and also guard and preserve me in that place wherein I am
by him placed. And I think it in very deed more wisdom, and more standing
with both our honors, that even at the very first beginning neither he should
grant, neither I usurp this supreme authorytie, for the avoiding of all
tumult as much as may be. Yt is enough at the first that I be proclaimed
chief Bishop of all. And afterward as time and occasion shall serve we will
go on further a little and little, vsyng dominion and authority mete for such
a dignity. Therefore let him spedely cause the wrytinges to be penned, and
proclamacion to be made throughout the world of this his determinat mind and
pleasure. Shortly after will I come humblye to see him, and furthermore I will
have in remembrance how much I am bound to you, and what I have promised
you when time shall require.


Sapi. All this shall be done, and fare ye well. Eue^ as of late our Bishop
disclosed unto me his wonderful ambicion, so now I perceive that he has hid
within him such an hypocrisy as never was herd of. I know that he runs mad
for this dignity, and yet went he about with his crafty glosynge and
deceytfull words to persuade that he would never receive it when it was
offered. Now seeing that he goes about to hyd it from me, unto whom he first
opened it, how will he handle other that know not his deceytfulnes. Surely
his shamles ambicion deserves no less but that I should let all the matter
quayle, which thing would be very acceptable to God no doubt. But we have
wadid further herin the^ is easy for us to stope it, being almost brought
to pass already. The Emperor himself is so amassed and dronken with my words,
that by no means possible can I withdraw him from his purpose. And I my
self who was the beginner and procurer of this matter am forced not to forsake
my suit, but rather with my judgment to allow it, and with my diligence to
perform it. What shall a man do? Such chance does chance to them that
attempt noughtie matters. I will get me hence, the sooner I bring this thing to
pass the sooner shall I be delivered of this noughtie and paynefull fantasies.


The people of Rome. The church of Rome. I understand by common report that
the bishop of Rome is made head of all other churches by Phocas our Emperor.
If it be true, he has done a thing more folishe, more abominable, more
perrelous and more wicked the^ ever was either done or herd of. The Emperor
knows not how much ambicion, gyle, malice, craft, and wickedness reygneth in
him, he has begone to brood in his bosom such a young adder as will
shortly shot up to a mighty dragon, and will at length dig out his own
eyes. This priestlynge in continuance of time, will so grow in ambicion pride
and bostyng in vain glory that he will stablishe his seat above the dignity
of Themperours. There will a time come, and it is now very nigh at hand when it
shall be needful for the Emperor if he will have his crown he shall ask it
and receive it (if it please him to give it) at our bishops hands, and that he
shall come as an humble suter to him and kiss his fete, and he (in the name of
God) a very holy bishop shall trede with his foot upon the Emperors throat.
Neither will he be contented with all that ignominy but in conclusion he will
stryke of his head. Yt may chance peradventure that themperours name only
shall remain unto him, but he shall not possess one foot of land which shall
properly be called themperours. O lamentable state of thee O people of Rome.
What misery art thou falling into? Thou shall be taken from ye great dominion
and noble renown wherein thou did floryshe in times paste, and shortly
shall be made a driven drudge, and a vile slave of a most foul castaway
priest. If our old au^ceant noble hearted Romans should live in those days,
how would they abide it when they should see, the sacred senate house
replenished with so many wicked thieves? But I see the church of Rome coming
out of the church of S. John Lateran, she seems to journey toward me, and I
desiere very much to common with her. I have met her i^ good time. God save
you holy church of Rome.

The church. Wish ye me to be saved when as I within this few days have
gotten so much salvation and health by the reason of the wonderful dygnitie
that I have received at themperours hands, whereby I am the mother of all
other churches that the health of all the whole world depends upon me? Therefore
must not I receive this thing of other, but communicate it to all other.


The people. Sense I understood that our bishop is changed by the Emperor
from most reverend to most holy and most blessed, I have be^ more troubled then
ever was man, and many and sundry doubts does vex my brain.


The church. Show me your doutes and I will resolve you fully in them al, for
ye know right well that there is nothing to be douted of mine answer, I am now
made blameles so that I can no more err.


The People. Tell me in good faith, had ye never a beginning.


The church. Yes without question.


The people. And who was your mother that conceived you.


The church. The church of Jerusalem, as it was forspoke^ by Esaias the
prophet. The law came out of Sion, and even so the word of god from
Jerusalem. Therefore when Christ ascended into heaven there remained none other
church in earth besides the church of Jerusalem, and she by the ministry
of thapostles begat all other churches.


The people. If the church of Jerusalem be your mother (as ye confess her
to be) how then comes it to pass now that the self same mother is made your
daughter?


The church. O immortal god what a gross philosopher ye seem to be? For even
as ye know right well that the selfsame virgin Mary, is both the mother and
daughter of Christ, even so am I my self the daughter of the church of
Jerusalem, and also the mother of her and all other churches.


The people. O how blind was I, now I perceive how the matter stands. As
the vyrgyne Mary is the carnal mother of Christ, and also Christ's daughter
spiritually, so be you where as in times paste ye were the spiritual daughter
of the church of Jerusalem, within this few days ye are made the carnal
mother of the same church and al other. Now then saying ye be the carnal
mother of al churches, ye shall as a carnal body be shortly infected, and so
infected that in short time ye shall deprave and destroy with your poison,
rottennes, slander, and corrupcio^ al other churches as well as your self. And
when they all be once poysened as ye be, ye shall beget them to hell, as in
times paste the church of Jerusalem your spiritual mother begat you to
Christ. Suerly I maruayled how ye could otherwise regenerat the church of
Christ (which is governed with the spirit of god else is it not the church
of Christ) except ye gave unto it the spirit of the devil, for there is but
only one holy spirit which continues for ever.


The church. I will be their spiritual mother, and as a spiritual mother I will
comfort them, give suck to them and noryshe them to Christ.


The people. Nay ye will suck all the blude from the^, and if ye fortune to give
the^ suck, it shall be with the milk of adulacion and flattery.


The church. I will make all churches rich.


The people. Yea wys with iubileis, pardons, and blissinges.


The church. I will defend such as fly to me for succor when they be
opressed with other.


The people. Ye will defend them in deed be it right or wrong if they bring
money.


The church. If there arise any dout in matters of religion I will open it by
and by.


The people. With your own judgment against the word of god.


The church. I will also punnish them that will not obey.


The people. Ye mary with your wicked decrees and decretalles, and that with
fire, whereunto ye will commit them which confess the wholesome doctrine of
the gospel which is quite contrary to your doctrine. I deny not but ye may
be so high above other churches in spirit, in faith and good works, and
somuche profyt them with your good example and learning, that ye may worthily
be called their mother and superior: but I am afraid lest all together
chance clean contrary, and that there was never tyrant so cruel toward
his subjects, as you will be toward your daughters, and therefore not worthy
to be accounted or called their mother.


The church. Be it that I were as wicked as might be possible, yet shall I
always be their mother, for that one prerogative the Emperor himself has
given unto me.


The People. And what power I pray you has themperor to make you mother of
other churches if they agree not amongst themselves thereunto, but be al utterly
against it? namely the churches of the East, in cou^treyes where the emperor
has no power nor dominion? it must needs be therefore that ye confess
themperoure has the chief authorytie in spiritual matters, and even as he
gave you this dignity wrongfully, so may he lawfully take the same away again
from you.


The church. Nay that will I never grant were it never so true. Feign I
would have you persuaded in this point, even as the mother after she has
conceived and brought forth a child, she is always the childs mother, be she
never so evil, neither can the Emperor cause her leave of to be a mother, or
make her not to have had a child whom she has brought forth, because that
thing is once done and past: of a like sort, after that I am once made the
mother of al other churches, and that by Themperors authorite, The Emperor can
not bring it to pass with all the power he has that I shall not be evermore the
mother of them whom I have begotten.


The people* And how may it be that you have begotten al churches, when it is
evident that there was a great number before you, yea and that you were begotten
of other?


The church. John.xix. Nota.
O braynles head. Know thou not that when Christ honge upon the cross and
showed John to his mother, and said: woman behold thy son, forthwith he was
made her true and natural son? so that after those words once pronounced
it shall be always true that John was borne of her? Now of the same fashion,
when the Emperor shows unto me all churches and says: behold thy daughters,
by and by am I made their true lawful and natural mother. And then began this
sentence first to be true that they were all borne of me, and therefore can
it not be but that I begat them, and am their mother for ever.


The people. Christ by this word minded to declare nothing else to his mother
but that she should from thence forward take John instead of her son, and
that he should take Mary instead of his mother, as he always did, but his
mind was not that she should be John's natural mother as she was that
conceived and bare him.


The church. Lo now ye come in with your tropes and figures: the words of
Christ are simply to be understood. Christ said to his mother: behold thy
son, and he said to John, behold thy mother: so that it folowethe well, Mary
was John's very true mother, and John was Mary's very true son, but how this
thing may be it behooves us not curiosly to search. Of a like fashion the
words, which Christ spoke at his last supper when he there ministered to his
disciples taking bread into his hands, and deliuerynge it broken to them,
that sat with him saying: this is my body, be semply and planly to be
understood: that is to say, that the bread is the very body of Christ, and
not the bread is a figure of the body of Christ, of the very same fashion the
Emperors words must be taken when he showed me all churches saying: behold
thy daughters, these words must be understood plainly as they stand:
wherefore I conclude that they be my true lawful doughtets, and I am their
mother.


The people. What? when you never begat them? I neither knew, nether cold
believe that the Emperor had ever any such authority, that he could make that
thing to be done, which was never done in this world, that is to say, that he
could make you bring forth those churches which ye never brought forth. If
the emperor have so great power that he can make those things to have been
which were never, no doubt he can bring to pass also that those things were
never which have been, and so may he cause also, that ye never were, neither ever
shall be their mother. I would very feign that ye could perswad the same thing,
which ye told me, to your monks and prestes: that is, that the words of
Christ are simply to be understood without any trope or figure, as this other
saiing of Christ is: some there be, which have geldyd themselves for the
kingedo^ of god, for taking it plainly they would gelde themselves, and let my
women alone undefiled, neither would they be stained with so much wicked
filthiness, which thing they should more willynglye do, for that they so
frowardlye defend that they will take no wives. To possess things not
needful appears to me not only superfluose, but also folyshe. This would I
learn of you, when the emperor said unto you: behold thy daughters, what thing
was it yt he showed unto you.


The church. All churches.


The people. The churches of Christ, or the churches of the Deuell?


The curche. I am indifferent.


The people. If it be as you say, I think he showed unto you the churches of
Satan. As touching my part I dare boldly say there is no cause why I should
rejoice in this dignity but rather lament: for whereas before I was your only
son and heir, now when ye have a meany of daughters, and ye must give to
every one of the^ their dowery, so that I shall remain a beggar.


The church. Nay thou shall be rychest of all other, know ye not the fashion
of the turks, which sells their daughters for a certain su^me of money to
the^, that shall be their husbands? so will I sell my churches and byshoprikes
to them, that will give most money, and so shall the spoil of all other
provinces come immediately to Rome.


The people. Then will ye commit simonie, and norishe a den of thieves?


The church. I told thee before that I can not err, and so must thou believe
if thou will be accounted my son, yea although thou saw me commit daily
all kinds of abhominacion.


The peo. This cannot be except I lose my five wits.


The church Nay I would ye should not only be persuadyd that I cannot
err, but also that I am most holy, and ought to be called most holy after such
a sort, that he, which names me holy and not most holy, is to be thought not
to speak of me.


The people. Then when the Apostles in the Creed say: we must believe one holy
church, we must not think that sayng to belong to you. But I heard say not
long agone a thing more to be wondered at, that our Bishop is made most holy
of all, and most blissed of all other a gods name.


The church Thou hittest the nail on the head.


The people Then as concerning holiness he shall be superior to Christ, who by the
authority of scripture is named holy of holies: but this good blood of ours is
called by the mouths of me^ most holy. Therefore should he not desire to come
into heaven. For be it that he were there even now, more then blissed should
he not be: and being in earth he is accountyd most blissed. Wherefore he should
not ascend to a higher state of felicity but rather descend to a lower. And
it is maruayle if thangelles and Saynctes, which be in heaven, come not with
speed to Rome, and there begin to sue for this dignity of the Byshopryke of
Rome, that they may be made more blissed and more holy then they now be. I
heard more over that he is declared the head of all other churches.


Thechurch. So it is in deed.


The people. Had not then the mystical body of the church a head before
now? If it were so it might well be accounted monster like. And I marvel
very much how it could live?


The church. Oh, Christ was the head.


The people. Then the Emperor has taken away Christ, and put our Bishop in
his place?


The church. Nay not so: but he has joined this head to the church, and yet
does Christ remain.


The people. That talk is more shameful. Was not Christ hable to govern his
church as an universal head? In the beginning of the primative church and a
little while after, the church of Christ did flourish very much, and was
wonderfully replenished, and yet had it none other head but Christ. He only
as a true head did govern it, and that excedinglye well by the instruments of
his ministers. May it come to pass at any time that Christ being weried
with his painful governance would now rest him? so that he now has
committed it to themperours discrecion to apoynt some suffragan, and helper in
his stead? or else truly is he much displeased with his church, and loves it
no more, neither regards the governance thereof, but withdraws his spirit
from it, and so shall he be a liar in that he says: I am with you to ye
worlds end. Furthermore, themperor as it apereth is more careful for the
church of Christ then god him self. For when god withdrewe Christ from his
church, the emperor has provided it another head. But according to the
doctrine of Paul we be not ignorant yt the militant congregation of Christ
is as one body whose head is, was, and ever shall be Christ himself. He as the
only and true head has governed it hitherto syngularly well, and will also
govern it until the latter day of judgment, and even until such time as
he has subdued his enemies and put them under his feet. Think ye that
christian men be such bussards that they will believe Christ and his spirit
to be taken away up into heaven as into a place appointed for his majesty: and
is there contained as a triumphinge head of the triumphaunte church? And for
that cause the Emperor has appointed another head of the church militant in
the stead of him, that is abse^t? If it be so, ye must of force grant, that
theselfe same head, for as much as it is destitute of the spirit of Christ,
has the spirit of the devil, and so shall it be a deuelishe head. And if
the church militant shall from hence forth have two heads, surely it shall
be a thing like a monster. Neither can I perceive by conjecture how two
headdes being equal in power, and most contrary in condition, may quietly and
safely live to gether, and govern at one time one special charge. Math. 28^
Uerely it is to be feared, (so wonderful is the pride of our Bishop bred by
the bone) that he will drive Christ out of doors from his own kingdom. But
peradventure this thing is true: if our Bishop be once made supreme head of
the church militant, by the means whereof he may be esteemed above Christ: it
may so be that he will suffer after a sort, that at the lest ways he may
use his service as he were a slave. But I can never be persuadyd that he
will suffer himself by any mean to be taken for an vnderlyng to Christ.


The curche. Think not that his power has any end. For even as all power in
heaven and in yearthe is given unto Christ, so is it likewise given to him.


The people. Yea, and further also both in purgatory and in hell. But speak no
more of his power for surely he will take more upon him then I would wish.
Another doubt I have whereunto I would have you answer me, if ye can. Shall he
be a common head to all other churches?


The hurche. Yea verelie.


The people. Of late I learned of them that be seen in logike, that particular
men be those, which labor and do any thing, but manne that is commen
and general to all men does nothing. Then if he be a commen man he shall
neither see, hear, perceive, nor understand, and so shall he be nothing
else but a very block or image.


The church. But thou thyselfe shalt well perceive, that he can see, hear,
perceive, and work.


The people. I believe it forsooth that he will swalow up largely, yea the riches
of other churches. But tell me how that may be? That he may work being a
man that is commen to all men.


The church. He shall be a particular man also.


The people, Why then shall he not be one only, but he shall be two. O what a
fool am I, and how dull witted. Now lo I leave wondering. For as I hear
say, as soon as he is made Pope he speaks no more in the singular number but
in the plural: so yt he does no more say: this I will do, or say, as they
were wont in times past when they were but one man: but now he says: we will
do, and we will say, because that now he is made a double man. I am also
resolved now in another doubt, whereof I should never have been answered if ye
had not made me perceive it.


The church. What doubt is that?


The people. I have heard many times say that after he is created Pope, he
can not err as the Pope, but yet he may many times as a man err.


The church That is very true.


The people. Now I am sure of this truth, that as he is Pope and a common
man, he can not work any thing, neither err.


The church. Nay as he is Pope he works wonders, and can not err because of
the holy ghost which is assistant unto him.


The People. Then by your sayng he can not be at one time a Pope and a man, for
the^ might he at one time err and not err. He might err as a man, and not
err as the Pope. Therefore at some time must he be a Pope and no man, and then
can he not err. But yet can I not well perceive what monstrous beast this may
be which is a Pope and no man, and again an other time a man and no Pope. And
I marvel wonderfully, that they will rob the Popeshipe so much of so great
a dignity, and so to leave him a bare man. How beit I believe in deed,
(although of an other sort,) that no Pope can err, because that Christ ever
has been, and ever shall be the very only and true head of his church, never
shall there be any other Pope, or head of Christ's church.


The church. I dare not affirm that our Bishops can never be heretics.


The people. Peradventure some have been.


The church. If any such thing chance, in that he is an heretic, he cesses
to be Pope. Yet is this thing true that ye must obey him, and allow him so
long for Pope until he be judged and condemned for an heretic, and be
deposed from his Popshipe by the authorytie of a general counsel.


The people. So that if he co^pel me to his wickedness, and command me to
believe his heresies before he be deposed of his popshipe, I must obey by your
judgment. Surely it is handsomely counseled of you.


The church. Thou must obey him in things rightful and honest, and not in
things that be wicked, even as ye would do, if a man would force you to
believe an heresy.


The people, Even now ye said he could not err as he was Pope: but he as
Pope commands me to assent to his wicked opinions, and by your mind I must
allow him for Pope, until he be deposed by thauthoritie of a lawefull
counsel. Wherefore it folowteh that I am bound to obey him, and to be an
heretic as he is.


The church. Thou shalt not trust him in heresy and wicked doctrine, though
he would command them to you a thousand times.


The people. And how shall I know when he favors and teaches a wicked
doctrine? for by your saying I must believe that he can not err, because
that whatsoever he appoynteth me to believe, I must determine it to be wholesome
doctrine and infected with no dregs of wickedness. So yt in this point I
shall not follow the judgment of mine own reason. And if I should apoynt the
word of God to be judge, by your doctrine I shall not understand it, but
after the Popes pleasure and exposicion. And if the Pope write the scriptures
wickedly, and expound them frowardly, as he is wont, and by that means frame
some heresies, which he will give me, that am ignorant, to believe: shall I be
bound to receive and honor them as Articles of my faith? for he must be as it
were my refuge and succor, and a continual guyd and rule to declare holy
scriptures. Yea, if the general counsel would declare him to be a wicked
man, and worthy to be deposed from his office, yet ought I to allow him as Pope
at the lest ways until such time as he has declared the general counsel
to be lawfully gathered, and that he was justly condemned in that counsel.
But I ask of you: is the Pope above the counsel, or beneth, or equal?


The church. Above.


The peo. Then has he alone more knowledge and inspiracion then the whole
counsel. And therefore beit that the counsel lawfully assembled had condemned
his doctrine for heresy, yet ought I rather believe him then the whole
counsel, forasmuch as he is above them and more indewed with supernatural
light then they be. But tell me this one thing: ye said eue^ now, if ye Pope
were an heretic, yet ought I to receive him as Pope until such time as he were
deposed by thautoritie of a counsel. Now this question I demand of you: if it
should chance the Pope to be an heretic, and yet not so declared by the
counsel, whether were he in deed Pope or no?


The church. If such a thing should chance, I durst not affirm him to be
Pope. For the^ should he err in deed, and that in matters of the faith, and
that as pope, but I said even now that he could not err as pope, although he
erred as a man.


The people. Why then should he no more be pope.


The church, Noe truly.


The people. And how or when did he lose his popeship?


The church. In that he is an heretic.


The People. If the matter be as you say there shall be very few true Popes, no
none at all. For a man can not be a Pope, except he be an heretic, if he were
in no point else, yet should he be in this, that he must believe the Pope to be
the supreme head of the church of Christ. But let us grant (although it be
not so) that a man may be a Pope in deed, and yet no heretic. When I am not
assertayned, whether he err in his mind or not, in matter that belongs to
our faith, I shall be always in a dout whether he be the true Pope or not, and
therefore shall I also be in dout whether I shall credit his words or not, and
so shall I be always doutfull in my faith.


The church. He is always Pope although he be an heretic in his heart, if it
so be that he disclose not him self to be such a one.


The people. What if he disclose himself to be an heretic to some other man
and not to me.


The church. Trewly then should he no more be Pope.


The people. Then forasmoche as I know not whether he have at any time
declared himself to be an heretic or not, I shall have his doctrine always
in a ielosye and suspicion neither shall I know certainly that he is Pope and
can not err, because I shall never know certainly whether he have disclosed
him self to some man to be an heretic or not.


The church This shall be enoughe for the, to think him to be always a Pope to
the, so long as he has not declared himself to the to be an heretic. But to
such as he declares him self to be an heretic, to them he is Pope no more
in very deed.


The people. The^ if he declare him self an heretic to other men, and not to
me, he should be a Pope to me, and not to other.


The church. It is even so as ye say.


The People But my desire is very much to know whether he be then a Pope in him
self or not? ye can not by any means prove him to be Pope and not Pope, and
all at once. For if such a word should escape your mouth ye should perceive
plainly that ye spoke contradiction. Neither can ye affirm that he is pope.
For where as he did err before other, yea and that in the doctrine of
salvation, than you must needs grant that he erreth, as Pope, which thing
before you said could not be. Therefore ye be forced to grant that he is not
Pope. But I which shall never have knowledge whether he has declared to other
himself to be an heretic or not? shall be in a continual doutinge whether he
be truly pope or not, and so whether he can err or not, of the which thing
there aryseth a certain trembling in my conscience, so that I shall never be
certain and suer of the verity and truethe of his doctrine. And so much the
more shall I dout, be it that he declared himself an heretic to me, because I
can worse descerne the true doctrine from the false and worse judge whether
his opinions be heretical or not, namely because his word must be the first
and chief rule of my faith. But let us now make an end of our disputacions
because the time is spent, and I must go to the emperor, before whom I will
power out my complayntes against many ydel varlettes who after they perceived
the greatness of our bishope they ru^ne to Rome in sholes, to get some offices
and benefices at his hands, and few there be that bring not their trulles
with them, and such as do not, fall on woyng at Rome. But it were a heavy thing
for me if Rome should be turned into Troy.


The curche. Besides this noble dignity of our bishop, I am to much occupied
with an infinite number of matters, of ceremonies, of suits, and controversies,
and of other profane things, that I have no time left to scratch my head.
wherefore now will I forsake you. But I will tell you one thing yet before I go.
Sense this man was created pope I have been wonderfully vexed and sick both in
body and soul, even as though I had drunk a pocion of poison. And I can not
well tell whether I gat this sycknes of to much joy wherewith I was
replenyshed by the reason of the greatness of my promocion, or else of
thintollerable burden of businesses which grow toward me daily. Now have I
nothing else to say, but that I offer my new kinds of merchandise to be
sold to you before other, and that better chepe than any stranger shall have
them.


The people. I thank you for your merchant like civility, and again I offer
unto you my favor, and all my strength, and power to defend and increase the
greatness of your honor.


The Pope. Man's Judgment. The people of Rome. The Pope. AT the last we be come
to this high honor, which we have so much desired (and that is more to be
wondered at) by the whole consent of all the people of Rome. I would never have
thought such a number of the nobility would have come to gratify me and to
increase my joy. They think verily that this our promocion shall increase
and amplify their riches, and power not a little. But I am informed for a
certayntie that many foren churches were much vexed therewith, namelye such as
be of the East parts. Wherefore we understand that they send ambassadors
(what they be I can not tell) to replye against the thing, and it may so be,
that they will drive the matter to a disputacion. Now is it therefore necessary
for us to arm our selves for our defense, and as in a matter of great
weyghte, and importance, to use a witty counsel. Wherefore man's judgment
(who art one of my pryuye counsel) with thee I think it best to consult.


Man's judge. Truly sir I have tossed and turned all this matter in my mind
again and again, and after long and earnest fantasyinge, I conclude that
there is no more present remedy, to preserve, increase, and establish this
your promocion, kingdom, and authority, then to contend, and earnestly to
stand in it, that it is not the ordinance of man but of God. So that it is
Christ himself, who has ordained you to be supreme head of the church, and
that with a whole fulness of power: otherwise shall ye hang always upon the
Emperor, who has placed you in this high estate of honor, and by that
means as he once gave it you, so may he again take it away from you.

Moreover your Empier and authority cannot be stretched out further then the
coasts of the Empier of Rome extendith, besides this all Christendo^ will
laugh to scorn this feigned, and conterfect dominion. Crying out that Christ
is the supreme head of his church, and that he alone is able enough to
govern it well with out the help of an other head or of any other deceyptfull
manne, as he has by his ministers governed it hitherto. But if ye contend
earnestly that it is Christ who has put you in this place, ye shall both be
delivered from hanging upon the Emperor, and shall also be as far above him
as holy and spiritual matters are to be preferred to matters profane and
worldely. So that your authority being by this means established, ye shall
enter into all the coasts of the earth. There shall be no Christian men in the
world, but when they shall be persuaded that Christ was the author of this
ordinance (who has made you his vicar, and of whom ye have received this
high authority) but they will come to you of their own swing as though
they would wurship this Godhead of yours in earth, and will glory that they
may obey you.


The Pope I would allow this counsel of yours very well if it might be
brought to pass by any means that I could persuade so manifest a vanity to
the world.


Man's judge. The folishenes of man is grown so far now, accompanied with
a wonderful deceyt and wickedness, and I of my self am so subtle and crafty,
that me thinks it a thing easy to persuade, yea and that I now see the
means how.


The Pope. I desire of all loves, that ye will tell me by some inkeling what
thing it is that ye even now mused upon, for ye may well know, that it is my
joy to talk of such things.


Man's judge. If there could be one jot found in the holy scripture,
whereupon we might lean for a proof that Paul the Apostle was ordained of God
to be supreme and universal head of the church militant, yea though it
seemed writhed and wrasted with the braakes of your authority, and drawn by
violence to our purpose against the natural sense, and yet so that there were
some like^yhod therein: the victory were ours. For it is evident by the word
of god that Paul was some time at Rome, and though he were then in prison,
yet shall we persuade by all means possible that he was made Bishop of this
City, whose office and dignity you have by inheritance and succe^syon
obtained. I have occupied my fantasy to and fro, and have chewed this question
diligently, and so at the last I perceive that there be many words in the holy
scripture, which with a little wrasting would make the blind ignorant common
people give credit to this vain opinion: that Paul was the chief of all the
Apostles, and universal head of all the churches of Christ. And yet shall we
not therefore obtain all our purpose. For the self same holy scripture is in
other places directlye and in plain words against us. Forasmuch as it is
evident that Paul thapostle was none of the twelve Apostles of Christ: yea and
when Christ was here in earth, he was his enemy and persecutor, and
afterward also a certain space. Neither is it lykelye that Christ would
ascend into heaven, but would first well forsee to his church, and leave
unto it one certain head to be his vicar and occupy his rowme. This thing was
very necessary for him to do. This last reason must we allege earnestly, and
defend it stoutly, if we intend to obtain our purpose. But now have I
devised a far better way. There be many places in the gospel which may
easly be writhed to our purpose. That is to say, whereby some likelyhod may
be alleged, that Peter thapostle was pronounced chief of the apostles by
Christ his own mouth, and was created supreme head of his church militant.
Now if we could bring him to Rome, and make him Bishop of this city, it
shall be an easy thing to persuad that you be his successor, and so shall we
obtain all our purpose.


The Pope. Will ye attempt to bring Peter now to Rome: and he died so many
years agone? This thing me thinks cannot be.


Man's judge. In case I should reyse him up from death and bring him to Rome,
and so in conclusion make him Bishop of this city, what would ye say?


The Pope. Mary I would withstand it with tothe and nail. Neither can thou
make him Bishop of this city, but thou shall bereue me of this my dignity.


Man's judge If I should make him Bishop, and yet rob not you of your
honor, but rather establishe you, and make you his successor, should it not
please you?


The Pope. Yes wonderfully. But I see not how that may be brought about.


Man's judge. I have written certain epistles in the name of those christian
men which were at Rome in the time of the beginning of the church, wherein
there is often mention made of Peter as though he had been at Rome, and not
only Bishop of this city, but also Pope, and universal head of all the
church militant, as though sundry constitucions had been then by him made. And
because ye shall praise my wit the more I wrote all this gere in so wonderful
old books, that for age they could scarsly hang together. There is no man
that sees them but they will judge, they were written a thousand years agone or
more. Let us make the people believe that these books be newly found by
chance in some old rotten library, and so when this rumor shall once be blown
abroad, the common people will straight believe that Peter was at Rome. If there
were none other cause, yet that he came for religions sake, on pilgremage to
saynctes relics, and to receive the jubilee and full pardon.


The Pope. Yet is not all this enough. For be it that he were at Rome, that not
with standinge he departed after he had received the iubilye, and took his
Popeship away with him, and so shall we no longer be his successors. Therefore
is it needful that as ye have brought him to Rome, and have made him Pope, so
ye cause him also to dye at Rome.


Man's judge Abide a while, this is the thing I went about: I have done this
thing already. And for a confirmacion of the whole matter, I gat me an old
scul bone of a dead carcas, into ye which I did put a paper which had these
words contained in it. This is the head of Saynct Peter the first Pope of
Rome. Moreover I have compassed this head about with an other head of silver,
and have so framed it with a great bearde, that it appears verily to be
Saynct Peter's head. And I doubt not but that this feigned matter may be easly
persuaded to the people, if it be published abroad by your authority.


The Pop^ We must of necessity grant that Peter was crucified upon a cross,
John. xxi*
for so did Christ prophecy of him, now, it is well known that it was the
use of the Jews and not of the Romans to hang men upon the cross. Wherefore
I see not how the people will believe that Peter was killed at Rome, and put
upon the cross by the Romans.


Man's judge Tushe, men will not be so curious in other men's matters, to search
every point of them so narowely. And again, we shall have a sure staff to
lean to, whereunto we may always resort. We will say that god would have it so,
that Christ's words might be fulfillyd. Who can prove the contrary? Besides
this I have many remedies, and means how to preserve, increase, and establishe
you in this high honor, as ye shall see by experience, neither will I let any
good occasion ouerslyp, that may be to your furtherau^ce. Be it that there come
Ambassadors to the city of Rome: I alone will answer them all as they ought
to be answered. In the mean space shall you begin a little and little to
publishe, abroad that it is Christ, who has made you Pope, and that ye be the
successor of Peter the high Bishop of Rome.


The Pope. But what will then the Emperor say, when he shall perceive that we
noise it abroad that it was Christ, and not he, which made me Pope?


Man's judge. Our answer shall be that ye were declared and confirmed the
chief Bishop by themperours majesty, but yet that it was Christ, who has
placed you in so high a seat, even as he did your predecessors before you.
But lo one whom ye saw not, a gentle man called the people of Rome, I think
he comes to see you, and to do his dewtie. I pray you offer him your foot
to kiss, that ye may so begin to bring that thing into a laudable custom.


The people. And even for the same very purpose, have I caused a red cross
to be made on the over part of my foot.


Man's judge. Although many think that to be done of you in despite of the
cross, yet is it justly and well done to set the cross in the lowest place,
yea and Christ himself also, that your glory may be auaunced to a most high
state. Namely for that we know the cross of Christ always to be hated of the
wise men of this world. And to say the truethe, it had been more mete for you
to have caused the cross to be set under the sole of your foot, if it had not
been paynfull for you to lift up your foot so often to all such as would kiss
it. But I will withdraw my self for a time, that you may common alone at your
pleasure with this son of yours.


The people of. Oh happy and blissed am I, sense I have thus much favor
showed me, that I may be suffered to come, and kiss these holy and blyssed
feet.


The pope. In consideracion that this benefit may be the more esteemed, we
grant to you out of the treasure of Peter and Paul and other holy Apostles
and Saynctes forty times forty days of pardon.


The people. A goodly reward, and we thank you highly, we thank you I say as
speaking to many which be most holy and most blissed Popes.


The Pope What meanest thou by that? That thou did call us most blissed and
most holy Popes in the plural number? think thou that we be many Popes?
See thou not us only placed in this dignity?


The people. Pardon thou me I beseech the most holy and blissed father. When I
herd the speak in the plurell number, I thought that there had been two
Popes at the least.


The Pope. Do not thou perceive thy self to speak irreverently, thou
say pardon thou me? understand thou not that thou should of nurtor,
and dew reverence speak to us in the plurell number? And that because he
works continually in us, who first auau^ced us to this high dignity, for we
be not alone in working. Otherwise when thou should speak by name to us,
thou ought to speak in the singular number, and that because our parson
and dignity is but one.


The People. I beseech your holiness to pardon me, because I am not yet
acquainted with these ki^des of ceremonies. Ye have heard I think of the
number of Ambassadors which be sent from soundry parts of the world, of
whom a great company be come to Rome already.


The Pope. For what purpose say they that they be come?


The people. To reply against you, being offended with this high honor that
the Emperor has given you.


The Pope We have received this popshyppe of Christ, and not of the Emperor.


The people. Truly I herd say it was given you of the Emperor.


The Pope. And who told the so?


The people. Your church of Rome, of whom I perceived of late in
communicacion, that it was given you of Cesars majesty.


The Pope. As concerning this matter, she is not advised what she says.


The people. And she says planly that she cannot err.


The Pope. Truth in deed, no more can she, when she is informed and instructed
of me. Ye know right well according to the doctrine of Paul that a woman must
be subject to her husband, i. Cor. vii. and.xi. Ephe. v.
and so far forth she speaks well, as she receive the knowledge of him: of
the same fashion the church of Rome speaks well, and erreth not, so far
forth as she receives instruccions and knowledge of me: for she is my spouse,
and therefore is she my wife.


The people. Why how the^, does she not acknowledge Christ to be her spouse?


The Po. Yes truly she is both Christ's spouse and mine.


The people. This is the first time that ever I heard that one woman may have
two husbands. I have herd of sundry men that has had many wives, but I
never herd of one woman that has had many husbands. But let this pass, and
let us return again to our former talk. And most humblye this one thing I
beseech your holiness it will vouchesafe to tell me: How has your holiness
obtained this high Byshoprike at Christ's hand?


The Pope. we will tell the. Christ being ye head of the church ordained Peter
before he ascendyd into heaven to be his vicar and successor. And because he
came to Rome and brought his high Popeship with him, and dieng there has left
the same to his successors, that is to say to ye other Bishops of Rome in
order: we now being Byshope of Rome have received of Christ by succession and
inheritance this high Pontifical dignity power and authority.


The people. I hear news now that I never herd before: Namely this that Peter
was ever at Rome. I am of an exceeding great age (as ye see) and have dwelled
in Rome in Peter's days. And so desireful I was to hear news, that if ever he
had come to Rome no doubt I would have seen him, and it had been for none
other cause, yet truly would I so have done for his worthy names sake,
wherewith he f^lled our City, neither would I have suffered the remembrance
of him to have decayed, even as I have diligently preserved until this day
fresh, the remembrance of Paul. No man can either think, or show what time
he was here, and I absent. For I never went out of this city.


The Pope. All the time whiles he was here, for the most part he was in
prison, and therefore is it no marvel though thou saw him not.


The people, I have been always and am till this day exceeding quisitiue, and
curious in searchynge of news. My study is to know what is done euerywhere,
I range and wander even to the very priso^s. It is not possible that such a man should at any time have come to Rome, and have been cast in prison for
the gospelles sake, but I should have heard of it. Howebit I not only never
saw him, but more over I never heard of any man living that ever he was at
Rome, saving even now of your holiness.


The Pope. Yt may so be, that whiles he was at Rome he lay hyd in some
corner.


The people. How then preached he the gospel here, by thoccasion whereof he was
cast in prison, and at the last hanged upon the cross? Besides this, if he
were Byshope of Rome, how was he chosen to that dignity if he were not known
whiles he remained in Rome?


The pope. Mark well this thing that I shall say unto thee. Thou must be
circumspect and wise, when it shall chance the to reason of this matter. For
the day may come, when we shall call the forth to be a wytnes in it. Which
thing if it happen, we will the to say that thou did both see and know
him.


The people What would ye have me lie lustely? and so sensibly that every manne
might perceive it?


The Pope. We absolve the of this fault, and further we let the to wit, that
we do al these things of a good and holy intent, and for the glory of god.
And this dare we be bold to say, that great honor and profit shall arise to the
by thincreasynge of our dignity.


The people. If I be absolved of this lie, I can not but do for you in all
other things, because that herby shall insewe to me a very great commodity.
But lest I should be taken with my lie, I would feign know what I shall
answer, when I am asked, namely of the time when Peter was at Rome.


The Pope. Thou shall say that he dwelled at Rome still, after he came once
thither until his dyenge day.


The people. Being demanded when he came first, shall I say before Paul or
after?


The Pope. It is best for the to say before Paul, lest men should have
occasion to think, that Paul was bishop of Rome before Peter.


The People. Now call I to remembrance when Paul's cause was first heard
here at Rome before Cesars throne, al christian me^ forsook him, as he himself
writes in a certain epistle yt he made to Timothy. 2. Timoi. 4.
Wherefore it must then be granted that he was the^ forsaken of Peter for
fear. Which thing seems not likely that there should so great a fault be found
in Peter, who had so earnest and fervent a zeal toward religion, and full of
christian charity, namelye after Christ ascended into heaven, and replenishid
him with the holy ghost.


The Pope I could not remember so hard a don't as this is. It is best the^ to
say that Peter came when Paul was already examined.


The people Again being demanded whether he were chosen Bishop of Rome in
this city or not, what answer shall I make?


The Pope Mary thou shall constantly say yea.


The people Well, then received he his byshoprik of men, and not simply and
only of Christ. How the^ shalit be true that he was pronounced by Christ
head of all other churches?


The pope Thou understand not this matter. Peter had.ii. bishoprikes, one
particular, and another general. The chief yt is to say, ye general: he
received of Christ, whereby he is bishop and head of al other churches and
bishoprikes. The latter, that is to say the particular he received of men
whereby he was the Bishop of Rome.


The people, I have seen amongst them which profess mounk^y, when they go on
their general visitacion of ye provinces committed to their charge, they will
not be so general prouincials, that they will take upon them to remove them
away whom they find, but suffer the^ to remain, and do their office, as they
did before, and they also be contented with their office of visitacion. Of a
like sort me thinks if Christ had ordained Peter a universal byshope of all
other bishops, his deutie should be to visit all other churches, and yet to
leave every bishop remayninge in his own diocese, and he himself to be
contented with his own office, and regard nothing to be created bishop of
every sundry church. But I pray you this one thing, was Peter a bishope before
he was made byshope of Rome and Antioche or not?


The pope. He was but yet a general byshope of the whole church of Christ,
and no several bishop of Rome or Antioche.


The people. Then was he called an universal Bishop of Christ, and of his
church, by the means whereof he was called a christian byshope, and not the
bishop of Rome.


The Pope. It is very true as ye say.


The people, Now maruayle I very much, why after he was made bishop of
Rome, he refused the first title, and received the latter, saying that his last
byshoprike was no cause why he should lose the first: that not withstandinge he
would no more be called the chief Christian bishop, but the bishop of Rome.
And yet without controversy the first title is more worthy title then is the
latter. And as for the first name and title he had it of Christ, the latter
of man. If Peter at any time would have received and allowed to be called the
chief christian Bishop, suerlye your predecessors would have usurped and
challenged the same title: Which thing because it is not done, but they be
called ye bishops of Rome, many men will think that neither they, neither
any of their predecessors were ever universal bishop of all churches. For if
that had so been, trewely they would have changed the particular title with
the more general and more worthy title, or at the least ways your holiness
should now at the last begin to be called, neither the chief, nether the
Romish bishop, but a Christian bishop of Christ, and of his congregation, and
create some private bishop of Rome in your stead.


The Pope. Ye can not persuade us to be so much a fool, that we will refuse
the byshoprike of Rome to run invisitacion of churches hither and thither
like Egiptyans. We will hold fast this byshoprike of Rome, and further more
we will be, and require so to be accounted, the supreme head of all other
bishops.


The people. As for my part I am right well contented, and satisfied how so
ever the matter go, neither did I move this matter for any other purpose, but
because that name and title of a Christian bishop seems to me much more
excellent, then to be called byshope of Rome. But and it may like your holiness,
was Peter the first bishop of Rome?


The Pope. That is without question.


The People. Suerly I maruayle much that Paul was so notable an Apostle, and
so much esteemed before Peter, and yet was not made bishop of Rome. And another
thing I marvel at much more, that although the church of Christ was at
Rome, yea and that many years before Paul came thither, and many wise and
godly men were in it (as it appears in the Epistle, which Paul wrote
specially to them, where he saluteth them by name) yet that their church was so
evil ordered, that it lacked a byshope.


The Pop. There were bishops there, but Peter was not the first bishop of
Rome: but the first chief bishop of all other, and he made an ordinance that
all bishops of Rome, which should afterward follow him, should also be ye
highest bishops above all other.


The people. Uerely I can not see from whence Peter had this authority to make
such an ordinance, that all bishops of Rome should be Popes, and vicars of
Christ, although they were wicked helhoundes, me thinks it had been done
according to justice, and equity, if any should be ordained bishop above
all other bishops, and churches, the same, should be chosen by the consent of
all bishops, and all churches. And this thing is most of all to be maruayled
at, how it may come to pass, that all your predecessors from Peter even
until this day were highest bishops, and head of all churches, and yet used
not they this authorytie? no there was never communicacion of it before this
present.


The Pope. Never think that that is so, as though they were not chief
bishops in very deed: but because it was not nedeful for them to use their
authority, and of a certain modesty, they declared not the^ selves chief
bishopes, as they were. But now there be so many heresies arisen in the
church of god, such sundry sects, and dissencions that we have thought it
necessary, for a remedy against so many mischefes, to declare our selves,
what power we have by Christ, and so to use our most high authority.


The people. I understand you well. Namelye because the chief bishops of
Rome (as I hear say) can not err. This one thing also can I not hyde, which
seems to me sumwhat: if they have received this high authority of Christ, they
ought by no means to keep it secret and hid, but to disclose it to the whole
world, whether they used it or not, according as the circumstances of things,
parsons, times, and places should requier, and that should the more
diligently have been done, for that it is now opened with a great offense of
all good and godly men, and the worst point of all is, that men be not so
folishe now a days, that they will give any credyt unto you. But I as a good
child of your holiness, will always show my self obedient, and ready to believe
you. And because I would trouble your holiness no longer with your blessed
license I will depart.


The pope. And we now give the our blyssing freely.


Thomas Massuccius the master of the horse. Lepidus the Popes chamberlayne.
Mas. YOnder I see master Lepidus coming hastily and cherfully out of
themperours court. I will wait upon him, to know whether he bring us any
good tydinges. God save you master Lepidus. Suerly you bring us some good
news, as a man would judge by your countenance, ye seem so pleasant and merry.


Lepidus. I have so much joy trussed up in this breast of mine, that I can
scarsly stay my self within my skin.


Mas. As nobell hearts of the world may be esteemed so much the more happy,
the larger they spread abroad their happy state and felicity. Wherefore I
beseech you vouchesafe to tell me whereof this joy of yours arises, that your
joy may be increased even with the tellinge thereof.


Lepidus. Why? is it your chance alone not to hear of the disputacio^, that
has been in the court of Rome? and of that triumph, and victory that we have
obtained.


Mas. I know nothing else, but that the last day I heard tell of certain
Ambassadors, which came from sundry coasts of the world to Rome, which
would reply with open mouth against this high authority of the pope.


Lepidus. This day was there an open and a solemn disputacion in the presence
of Cesars majesty of this matter, and in conclusion our men have obtained the
high power of the Pope.


Mas. I would feign know what reasons they had to bring this unworthy matter
to pass.


Lepidus. Suerly I know a great number of them, and some of them were such,
that I dare not disclose them unto you, onles ye promise me before to keep them
to your self.


Mas. If they be such reasons, as may not be lawfully kept secret, ye requier
in vain to keep counsel of them, and though I swear a thousand times, yet
ought I not to keep it: but if I may lawfullye and ought to keep it secret, ye
may have so much credyt in me, that ye may believe I will keep counsel
without an oath, if ye think me a man not worthy to be trusted, then are ye
the more to blame to require an oath of me, from the which the Pope may easly
absolve me, by reason of the high power that he now has, howbeit I promise you
by the faith of a Christian manne to keep counsel, if I may do it lawfully.


Lepidus. Forasmuch as I trust you not a little by the reason of our old
frendshipe, I can not but disclose the whole matter unto you. When the holiness
of our Lord and master herd say yt the most part of the whole world was much
troubled for this wonderful dignity whereunto he has attained, and that also
their Ambassadors were come to cry out against it openly, he took this ways
first, which appeared to make very much for his purpose. As soon as they came
to Rome, he sent unto the^ secretly goodly flaggons of ye best wine, that could
be gotten, of Maluesey, of wine of Tribiana, of S. John, of Grecia, and of
Corsica.


Mas. Suerly this was a goodly beginning, that he made to the strangers,
whereby to compass, and overcome them, and (as it were) to claspe them by the
very throat.


Lepidus. He sent moreover a goodly present, and a bewtifull of blyssinges,
Pardons, Iubilies, privileges, immunities, and very rich promesses of
benefices, and of all other such gifts, which either he now had, or else
should have here after. After this he sent unto every one of them clean
remission a pena et culpa. Then he absolved them of their oaths, that they had
made to such as had sent them.


Mas Uery well, that by the means thereof he might more easily corrupt them.


Lepi Nay, that they being absolved, and set fre from their oaths, might more
easily, and freely styke to the truth. And so he caused his servants to say
unto them, lest peradventure men should conceive some evil opinion of them. He
signified also unto them that he was very joyful, when he heard of their
coming to Rome, that they might see with their own eyes, and judge with their
own knowledge, and know the whole truth of the matter, even as it was, so that
at their return home again into their contreyes they might shine to other
with the light of their knowledge, who peradventure should other wise remain
in the darkness of ignorance or of some false surmise.


Mas. And if he were not Pope, I durst be bold to say, he lied shamefullye in
so saying. For I am sure that the coming of thimbassadors was as pleasant to
him, as though one had hurled salt into his eyes.


Lepi. And because the disputacion of his Pontifical prerogative must be in the
presence of Caesar, and the Popes holiness for sundry consideracions would
defend it to be of God, and given to him by Christ, and not by the emperor: he
fearinge lest by this means the Emperors majesty would be vexed, signified
unto him that he would proponde, and establishe the matter after this sort:
not because he did not acknowledge that he had this dignity only of him, at
whose commandment he would always be, and recognize him to be his
singular patron, and defender: but because he would deliver him from al
suspicion, and slander, which many without cloking did object, as though it
were very evil done of him, which bestowed this honor upon one mortal man,
And lest also other Princes, taking example of him, would likewise establishe
in their dominions sundry supreme heads, and that should bread schisms, and
discentions in the church of Christ.


Mas. Oh what an assehead was he, if ever he would assent hereunto?


Lepi Assent? Yea, and praise him also, even as though it had been a thing
devised by god himself, and sent to him from God. When they came to the very
disputacion, the emperor had a plentiful oracion, where in he exhortyd all
them, that came thither to entreat upon that matter, to peace, concord, and
unity. And when it came to the Popes course to speak, because he would keep
his state, he commanded master Hypocryt to speak in his name, and he so
handled himself with conterfetyd words, and gesture, and went about with
such a force of eloquense to persuade them, that the Popes holiness was not
moved of him self to accept so high a state, but rather earnestly withstode
it, and yet having an eye to the glory of God, and following the mouynge of
the holy ghost, at lenghth he took this heavy and sharp cross of the popship
upon him, this I say he persuaded in such sort, that he had almost made me
believe it was true, yt he said. And so I my sell fe did many times assent to
him in yt he said, that if he could with a saufe conscience leave this high
authorytye, he both redely, and gladlye would so do. But that might not be,
because by that means he should do God great iniurye. But seeing the matter
was so, he was right glad that there was at this present a disputacion
appointed of so great and weyghtie a matter, whereby the truethe there of
might be known to all men. Thembassador of Constantinople his reasons.
And thus at last began the disputacion: Where first arose the ambassador of
Constantinople, a very wise manne, and with a loud voice said before the
great audience there assembled, that all the churches of the universal world
were highlye offended with this wonderful and wicked primacie of the Bishop of
Rome, which never was herd of before. And that Christ himself was the true
and only head of his church in this militant exile: even as he is also the
head of the triumphant church of the heavenly Jerusalem, and that he never
ordained any other head. Wherefore it was to be thought yt this wicked
innouacion was not of God, and in case it were ordained of god, yet could not
this supreme honor belong to ye bishop of Rome. Therefore was it not only a
divise of man but wicked also, and wrongful, and therefore all together
deuelishe and not to be suffered. Not a thing ordained of god, as all might
perceive, that have any judgment, and so false it was that there could be
any one word found in all scripture for the defense of this primacie, that
there be a number of sayings directly against it. Then arose master
Falsidicus, and interrupting the Ambassador in his matter spoke after this
sort for the popes defense. Nay in holy scripture there is not one word
contrary, but many things be there, which make for it. First and foremost ye
know right well that Christ said to Peter. Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I buyld my church. Now if Peter were made the true and only
foundation, not of this or that particular church, but of the whole universal
church of Christ, by thassente and apoyntment of Christ, it must of force be
granted, that the church was sustained and governed by Peter, whiles he lived
here in earth, and so was he the universal head of the church, as after him
Peter's successors were, and be the true heads of the church. Hereunto
Thimbassador made answer. If ye fall a gestinge in an ernest matter, it is not
to be commended in: matters of importance. But if ye speak as ye think, I
maruayle much that ye be ignorant. Is it possible ye should be in such an
heresy, to think Peter was the head and foundation of the church of
Christ, that is to say, of all the faythefull? Truly if it were so, the
church of Christ in times paste should have had a very feeble and week
foundation, and many times should it have fallen by reason of the feebleness of
so slender a ground. And again it is an extreme wickedness and plain ydolatry
to attribute that to Peter, which apperteyneth only to Christ. Christ is
only that proved corner, excellent, suer and stable stone, which according to
the prophecy of Daniell shall break all the kingedomes of the world, D^ni. ^.
Esai. xxviii. Psalm. cxviii.
and it self shall endure for ever a stable and strong foundation of the
kingdom, and congregation of Christ. Which thing is confyrmed not only by
the testimony of Daniell, but of Esaias also, and of David, Mat. xxi.
and by thautoritie of Christ himself. And Paul Thapostle teaches also ye
same very doctrine, when he saiethe, that we must be raised up in this holy
buylding of the church, Ephe. ii.
not upon Peter, but upon Chris^e, the most strong foundation of the
prophets, and of thapostles. The self same doctrine is stablished, and
confirmed by the witness of Peter. And because that a number of light fellows
might chance to stumble at this stone, i. Peter. ii.
in so much that they should think Christ, during the time of his being in
earth, was the foundation of his church, but when he was once lifted up into
heaven, he left Peter in his stead: Paul thapostle, and most faithful
interpreter of gods heavenly will, teaches the contrary in especial words.
When he says: There can none other foundation be laid for the church of
Christ besides, i. Cor. iii. b. Math. xvi. c.
that is already laid, that is to say Christ. And if Christ must always be the
true and only foundation of his church, it must needs be confessed, that
never was, or ^ls ever shall be any other foundation of the church of Christ,
and therefore none other true and universal head. Math. xvi. c
Now when Peter had professed the very true confession of Christ, that he
was the son of god, Ma^^. viii. d Luc. ix. c. John. vi* g i. Co. x. a
and Christ had said to him, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my church: he showed, and declared him self, to be the lively Rock,
and strong foundation of his church, by the means whereof he began to be
called Peter, whereas before he was called Simon, and all was by the reason of
his confession, and of the reuelacion of the heavenly father, that he cle^ed by
faith to Christ the strongest rock, and foundation of his church. The self
same thing happens to al those, that believe truly in Christ which happened
to Peter. For they are blessed, and have everlasting life, as Christ him self
does witness, and they may be called Peter's, because by the help of lively
faith they cleue to the lively and unchangeable rock, which is Christ, even
as Christian men have their name of Christ, and against them, that believe
of such a sort, the very gates of hell shall not prevail. i. par. xviii.^^
Ma. xvi. c.
Where it is to be noted that gates were wont to be exceeding strong, and
suerly defensed, in the which gates judgment in times paste was wont to be
exercised, and therefore when our savior Christ names the gates of hell, he
understands the power, and wisdom of his adversaries, or else trewelye he
understands sin, whereby, as it were by gates, men enter in to hell, as
though he had said, all the power, sutteltie, false doctrine, thretninges,
and flatteringes of the world, furnished with their hell, and paradise shall
not prevail against his church. And that Christ, by this rock, whereupon
he said he would buyld his church, did understand, and mean himself. S.
Austen does write in an homely which he has written upon this place, where
he says. If Christ would have laid the foundaicon of his church upon
Peter, trewely he would have said: Thou art Peter, and upon the will I
build my church. Although Chrysostom, and Theophilact do expound this
place as though Christ would have the sound profession, and sound faith in
Christ to be understood by this word rock. Which faith may be called
vn^yll this day the foundation of the church of Christ, forasmuch as the
congregation of the chosen cleueth to Christ, the chief and true foundation of
this church by faith. Now then because Christ is always the true and only
foundation of his church, and also that faith is the thing whereby we be
joined to Christ, we must of necessity grant that it is as false as God is
true that some men^e say: That Peter or some other Bishop of Rome is the
foundation of the church of christendom. Gala. ii. b.
Paul writynge to the Galathians, says not that Peter was the foundacio^ of
the church of Christ, but calls him a pillar, as he calls also James and
John making him equal, but not superior. If there were ever any manne that
said, that Christ laid the foundation of his church upon Peter, if they were
of right judgments, they mindyd to declare nothing else but that it was
builded upon the faith of Christ, which faith the chosen and electes have,
even as Peter had.


Mas. But my believe was always that Christ was the only one who ruled,
governed, and sustained his church, neither can I persuade to my self the
contrary. But that same master Falsidicus as far as I perceive does
fantasy that Christ governed and sustained his church for a season, and
afterward intending to ascend into heaven, because he could not be at the
self same time in heaven, and also sustain and govern his congregation, as
though it had been one tired with rulynge and laboringe, left Peter in his
place, and so after the^ all the Bishops of Rome in ordinary succession. How
beit if men, and not Christ were the foundation of the church of christendom,
which did sustain, and bear the same, trewlye it should have weak and very
feeble pillars to leave upon, and so feeble, that it would not once, but more
then a thousand times have been overthrown, namely because this thing is
without controversy. When the Byshope of Rome is dead, there is not by and by
another chosen in his room, but some days at the least come between, wherein
the church of Christ should lack a head, though it never lacked one at any
time else. Now may you perceive whether the church were then destroyed or
not. And this dare I boldlye say, if the church of Christ should lean upon
men after this sort, as upon the foundation, hell gates had prevailed against
it long before this time. Furthermore, if we were grounded upon men, and
should trust to them as to our ground work, and foundation, we should be
all accursed, according to the sayng: Cursed be that manne which puts his
trust in manne. Iere. ii.
And then should not our church be the church of Christ, but the Sinagoge of
Satan, and Peter should have erred excedyngly, Christ being lyfted up in to
the high place of heaven, and he left for the foundation of the church in
earth, in yt he exhorts Christian men not to build upon him, but upon
Christ the true and suer foundation, and ground work of his church. And
this also is very true. Even as Christ did not only ask Peter: mat. xvi. c.
marc. viii. d Luc. ix. c. John. vi. g.
but all the rest of the Apostles with him, when he said: but whom say you
that I am? So also Peter made answer in the name of all the Apostles, or else
they al being demanded, should every one have answerid for themselves. But
there was much communicacion amongst the^ at sundry times before, and they al
confessed with one accord, that he was the son of God, although Judas with
a lyuelye faith believed not so. And Christ at another time asked al his
Apostles, will you also depart? John. vi.
Peter only in the name of the rest made answer: Thou have the words of
eternal life. Which thing is evident of the words, that follow, to whom shall
we go? we knew and believed, long agon, that thou art Christ the very son
of the living God. Of a like sort he answered in the name of them all, when he
spoke these words: Thou art Christ the son of God. And because Peter in the
name of them all confessed Christ to be the son of god: ye must grant that
when Christ said: Thou art Peter, i. Cor. x.
and upon this rock will I buyld my church* that he spoke not only to Peter,
but to them all, although it were in the name of Peter. As though he had said
Peter only is not the lively rock, but all such, as folowinge his example
verelye believe, and confess Christ to be the son God, be lively rocks,
which be builded upon the unchangeable and precious corner stone Christ the
only foundation of his church. Math. xxi.
But I pray you tell me in good earnest, what said master Falsidicus to such
things as were objected?


Lepi. Would ye know said he how Christ minded by these words to make Peter
the foundation, and head of his church? Read the words, that follow, and ye
shall perceive, that he spoke to Peter, when he said: To thee will I give the
keys of the kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever thou shall bind in earth it
shall also be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou loosest in yearthe, it shall
be loosed in heaven. Yt is not to be thought but that Christ being most true of
his promise performed most habou^dantly yt, whatsoever he promised Peter.

And so must it be granted, that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were
delivered to Peter, and therefore has he power to open, and to shit up heaven,
to whom so ever it shall please him, and to bring in, and drive out, whom he
shall think mete, as he will him self, so may he lose also, and bind. And
forasmoche as by the words of Christ Peter only had thauthority to loose,
and bind, to open, and shut heaven, it follows that Christ gave authority
full, and whole to Peter, and ordained him only to be head of his church.


Mas. If only Peter, and the bishops of Rome have the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, and they only have power to open the same, forsothe I would not dye,
when the sea of Rome is vacant, and void of a bishop. For then should there
be no body, which should open heaven gates to me. And I maruayle more over
of whom they gatte the keys of purgatory, for it apereth by their own
confession, that Christ gave him none other ke^es, but of the kingdom of heaven
only. But I could have choked him, even with one word.


Lepi. How?


Mas. Thus would I have said. Themperours porter has the keye of the emperor
his court, and has authority to open and shit: and the Mayor of a city
has authority to bind and loose, and yet neither of them both is
the emperor. Of a like sort, be it that Peter had the keys, and authorytie to
bind and lose: it follows not therefore that he is the head, and lord of the
church of god, that he is equal with Christ, or else at least his vicar of
equal authority by whom our faith may be stable and suer, that he is the
vmpie^ and judge of all controversies, which arise in holy scripture. But
tell me this one thing, what answer made thembassadour of Constantinople to
this thing.


Lepidus. First he answered, that Christ gave not the keys even then to
Peter, but promised them only, not doutinge but that Christ kept promise with
him. But he was desirous to know of master Falsidicus, the time when he
delivered the keys to Peter, and gave him thauthoritie to louse and to bind,
and what words he said when he gave them? For by that means the truth might
appear, what was meant by these keys, and what is this authority? To this
master Falsidicus made answer: That he assuered Peter of them, when after his
resurrection he asked Peter, whether he loved him more earnes^ly then the rest
did or not? unto whom Peter made answer, saying. Thou know O Lord that I
love the, then Christ gave him iniunccion to feed his sheep. In the very self
same hour he made him the chief shepard and bishop of al souls. The^
Thembassador of Constantinople smylinge said: if preachinge the word of God
be the fedinge of souls, (as the holy doctors with one assent does expound
it, it is with out dout that that office was not only given to Peter, but
also to all the rest of thapostles, and namely to Paul, who writes in special
words, that he labored more then all the rest did in the ministry of
preaching. Yea and Christ himself before he spoke these words to Peter,
commanded the self same thing to all the Apostles saying: go ye through
out the universal world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures. So that it
can not be said that the office of preaching was given by Christ only, to
Peter, and to the Bishops of Rome in ordinary succession after him, by whose
appointment it should also descend to other. For then must it be granted that
there has been very few lawefull and true Bishops, which had lawefull
authority to preach, and so few that Peter only may be accountyd the
true Bishop, which preached lawefully, and a few besides, who were by him
appointed in such countries where as he preached. By this means Paul and the
elleuen Apostles, and such as were by them converted to the faith, neither
were truly bishops, neither yet preached lawefullye, because they neither
had their Bishoprike, neither authority to preach of Peter. And more over
none after the death of Peter should have been made Bishop, neither have
license to preach besides the Bishop of Rome. And truly the Bishops of
Rome, have committed a greuouse offense in that they have hyd this large and
great authorytye of theyrs, that they had so necessary in the church of God.
Then replied master Falsidicus, even as Peter (quod he) loved Christ more
earnestly then the rest of the Apostles, as it is plain by the words of his
answer, when Christ demanded him whether he loved him more feruentlye then
the rest did: so had he more authority given unto him over the sheep of
Christ, then the rest of the Apostles. To this answered thimbassador of
Co^sta^tinoble. And where I pray you have you found that Peter's answer was
to Christ, that he was more earnestly beloved of him then of the rest of ye
Apostles. Not withstandyng that he was so demanded, yet his answer was only
in this wise. Thou know O lord that thou art beloved of me. He said not:
Thou know O Lord that thou ar^e more feruentlye beloved of me then of the
rest. For so could he never have said without great suspicion of arrogancy,
because it was unknown to him how much ye rest loved Christ. But let it be
granted that Christ was more earnestly beloved of Peter then of the rest:
does it therefore follow, that Christ gave him more power? Or in case he gave
him more was it therefore most of all? For it is not all one thing to say feed
my sheep, and to say, be thou head of my church, or else: Take thou more
authority then the other Apostles. And as for that Christ demaundyd of him
thryse, whether he loved him or not: it was done for this end and purpose,
that his love being declared by thryse confessing, might counteruayle and
somewhat make amends for his fault. When he thrice denied him, he minded to
have Peter's love sealed, (as it were) and warranted before he would commit unto
him the cure of souls, that all men might know no man can be a good
shephard onles he love Christ earnestly. Furthermore if your reason were a good
reason, it should rather follow thereof that Christ declared Ihon the chief
Bishop then Peter. For it is written of John, this is the disciple whom Christ
loved. Wherefore if he were beloved of Christ above other, he gave unto him more
worthy gifts, and replenished him more abou^dantlye with grace, and therefore
placed him above the other, and namelye for that he was more mete for the
purpose by the reason of the excellent gifts, which he received at Gods
hands. And so much the more because it should rather appear, that Ihon loved
Christ more then the other did, and was loved again of Christ, and knew hi^
more thoroughly, and therefore more like to be judged worthy to feed the sheep of
Christ.

Yt maybe proved that Christ would have ordained him the universal shepard,
not only by reason of the noble light of the heavenly spirit, wherewith he was
endued, and was always nighe and familiare to Christ, and amongst all the
rest of thapostles he alone followed him to the cross: but chiefly for this
cause, that when he was upon the cross he committed his mother unto him, in
whom only (as you your selves do confess) the lively church of Christ
remained after Christ's death. For all thapostles were not a little afraid, and
dismayed with that terryble and doleful sight of Christ's death upon the
cross, accordingly as Christ had told him before. And if John were not
ordained the supreme head of the church of Christ, then much less was
Peter. Then said master Falsidicus will ye see how Christ ordained only
Peter to be the chief Pastor of all? Lu^. ^.
Read the Gospel of Luke and there shall ye find spoken only to Peter: Thou
shall be a fisher of men. Thereunto answered thimbassadour. And will you see
how Christ ordained not Peter to be the chief Pastor of all? Read the
Gospel of Mathewe, and Marcke, and there shall ye find the same spoken also of
Christ to Andrewe, and the two sons of zebedei. Wherefore it follows that
Peter only was not assigned of Christ to be the fisher of men. Yea and
consequently not alone of his own sheep. Christ never said to Peter only
feed thou my sheep, be thou only a fisher of men. To the only will I give
the keys of the kingedome of heaven. No, he never said so much as this: be
thou only a shepard and a fysher above the rest of thapostles. Take thou more
authority then they have. But he said in simple and plain words, I will
give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and so he kept promise. Mary
he gave the same keys also to the rest of thapostles. And that this is true it
is evident. For Christ gave the keys to Peter and to the rest of thapostles
after his resurrection from death, The keys were not given only to Peter.
standing in the midst of them, when he had saluted them and showed his
hands and his side that they should both see and know him that talked with
them and delivered them the keys to be in deed very Christ the son of god,
he said unto them as John writes. Even as my father sent me, so I send you.
As though he had said: my father sent me in to this world that I should
preach the gospel, as Esaias the prophet said long ago. Therefore do I send
you even of the same fashion through out the world to preach this glad
tidinges, that I am nailed upon the cross, and dead for the sins of the
whole world: that I am the only and everlasting redempcyon, and reconciler,
who have purchased the favor of the eternal father to all mannekynde by the
price and ran^ome of my blood, and that all the sins of all the men in the
world be pardoned and blotted out for my sake. The self same sentence Mark
expressed, Mar. xvi.
albeit it were in other words when he shows how Christ after his
resurrec^ion from death said to his Apostles going through out the universal
world, preach the gospel to all creatures. And Mathewe. Go forth, teach
al people. Luck writes that Christ said: Mat. xxvi^i^ Luc. xxiiii.
it is written, and therefore it must be that Christ shall suffer, and rise
again from death the third day: in whose name repentance and remission of
sins must be preached to al people beginning at Jerusalem. It is plain that
the Evangelists agree hitherto. John furthermore does add that Christ said
unto them, take ye the holy ghost. Which thing Luke declares after another
sort, saying: that Christ opened their minds that they might understand the
scriptures, which is the very true office of the holy ghost, wherefore he gave
them the holy ghost, brething upon them, that is (as Luke does declare) he
opened their minds and knowledge that they might understand the holy
scriptures, and that was so done that they might know, and perceive, that the
Gospel, which they should preach, was no vain or new thing, but true
and of antiquity, spoken of before by the unfeigned sayings of the prophets.
Rom* i.
Which thing they beleuinge undoubtedly, through an earnest styrringe and
motion of the holy ghost, should preach the gospel through out the whole
world. Now afterward when he gave them the keys, John writes that he said:
whose sins so ever ye forgive, they be forgeuen them, and whose sins so
ever ye retain they be retained. That is to say: I deliver you the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and give you authority and power to open and shit
the same, by the kingdom of heaven he understands the kingdom of grace, and
the kingdom of glory. The synnefull manne was driven out of the kingdom of
the heavenly favor, neither can he find any means or ways to enter into
the same again but by faith. Romans iiii.
According to the doctrine of paul. Romans x.
He can not believe of the common sort onles he hear the word of the gospel,
which can not be without preaching. So that there was authority given unto
thapostles, and keys delivered unto the^, that they should open the kingdom
of heaven to the wicked, when Christ gave them authority to preach the
gospe^l, that is to say to teach that men be saved by Christ. Because that
when they were sinners, and without the kingdom of the grace of Christ,
neither had any way opened whereby they might enter: thapostles in preachinge
the gospel opened the gate of the favor and grace of god unto them, which
guided them in ye ready and plain way, whereby they might obtain to them
selves the favor of god by believing that Christ died for them, by whose mean
and help they are saved, thapostles did move, and styre men to give credit to
this truth. And such of them as believed, entered in the kingdom of Christ by
faith, and the Apostles opened the gate unto the^ by preaching the word of the
gospel, and did set open the way for their entrye. But if ye hearers of this
preachi^g believed not: thapostles did shut the gate of gods favor, when they
taught in their preachinge, that onles they believed the gospel there was no
hope of salvation, neither any other way or means, whereby they might enter
the kingdom of the favor of god: Not withstandinge they had done as many good
works, as be in the whole world. And so is this opening and shutting, (as a
man may call it) a lousing and a bindinge, as Christ declared when he said to
Peter, to the will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. What soever thou
shall bind in earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoeur thou lousest i^
earth it shall be also ^oused i^ heaven. Mat. xxi.
Now these keys, and power to open and shut, to loo^e and bynd were given to
the Apostles, when Christ said unto the^, whose sins ye forgive, they shall
be forgeuen, and whose sins, ye retain they shall be retained.

Not that the Apostles themselves should have power, and authority to pardon,
and forgive sin, for that belongs to God alone. And that should be a
wonderful ydolatry and blasphemy to attribute and assign that thing to man,
which belongs to god only. Who is only he, that forgyueth sins for
Christ's sake, even as it is only he, which powers faith into us, and men be
his servants and ministers, in that they preach the gospel and move men to
believe. But the beleuinge it self, and the faith it self, and the remission
of sin, which is by it procured, is the gift of God. Then the Apostles had
no power to remitte and re^ayne sins at their own will and pleasure. Neither
to loose and bind, Ephe. ii.
neither yet to bring manne in or out of the kingdom of God, when they lusted
so to do: but they had power to preach the gospel, and to show that this
preaching must be believed, and that this gospel must be embraced with a sound
faith, if they intend to have forgyuenes of sins at gods hands, and so to
be loosed, and to enter into the kingdom of grace. For they only have their
sins forgyuen the^, which believe the gospel: they only be loosed and enter
into the kingdom of god. They had also authority to declare, that their
sins were retained, which believed not the gospel, and that they only be
bound and shut out of the kingdom of God. Luc. xxiiii.
Yt is evident and plain by Saynct Luke, that this is the will and mind of
Christ, who declarethe the selfsame sentence with more plain words saying:
Christ said to his Apostles yt Christ must dey, as it was written, and rise
again the third day from death, and that repentance and remission of sin
must be preached to all nations in his name. So that by this it is easy to be
perceived, that Christ gave his Apostles keys and power, not properly to
forgive sin, but to preach remission of sins to all them that believe
through Christ. The self same thing may also be confirmed by the authority
of Saynct Mark: who expondyng the same sentence (although it be in other
words) says: that Christ said to his Apostles. Go through out the whole
world and preach the gospel to all creatures: who so believes and is
baptized shall be saved: and he that believes not shall be dampened. Whereby it
may be well perceived, that the authority and power which Christ gave unto
his Apostles, was nor to save and condemn: but only to preach the gospel,
and to show the way of salvation, in that they moved me^ to enter into that
way, and they declared him to be within the compass of condempnacion which
gave no credit to the gospel, and went about to disuade men from this
unbelief. These be the keys: this is the power which Christ gave to his
Apostles, and not only to his Apostles, but also unto all their successors.
Which thing does evidently appear by the words of Christ, when he says to
his Apostles. That which I say to you, I say to all. Mar. 13.
Neither seems it any thing lykely, that he spoke that thing which he taught,
to them only: but to all. Truly this is certain as Saynct Hierome wrote upon
this sayng. (To the I will give the keys of the heavenly kingdom). That ye
bishops and priests have thought hitherto, by the reason of their pride, and
pharisaical arrogancy, that they had power to condemn the gyltles, and to
deliver the gyltie. But truly they be deceived all over the field. Because
that the question is not before God of the judgment of the priest: but of the
life of the sinner. Whereby he plainly declarethe, that the choice of binding
and loosinge is not left in the liberty of the priest, but in the sinner, who
is commanded to believe. The minister of Gods word does not absolve, but he
publishes and declares man to be absolved: and likewise he declares man to
be bound and condemned onles he believe. Even as ye scepter royal signifies a
kings power, and the sword the empire: So likewise does the keys betoken the
spiritual governance of the kingdom of god. For whosoever he be that preach
the gospel, be it whosoever ye will: in that he preaches, he does all that
lies in him to open the kingdom of heaven to the hearers, whether it be
openly or privately that he preach to one or to many. More over he delyuereth
all the beleuers, he forgiueth all their sins, he saves them, and brings
them into the kingdom of God, when he teaches that they be fre by faith, and
because they believe, that their sins be forgeuen them they be saved, and in
the kingdom of Christ. Again on the other side, he byndeth al them, which
believe not, he retayneth their sins, he condempneth them, and shuts them
out of the kingdom of heaven, when he teaches them that they are bound, that
they remain in their sin, that they be dampened, and shut out of the
kingedome of grace by the reason of their unbelief. But this thing is worthy
to be noted yt there is two kingedomes of Christ in earth, whereof the one is
spiritual, and can not be seen, wherein dwell only the godly and righteouse
men: and another, that is much greater, wherein abide not only the good, but
also all other, that be Baptized, which will seem to be christians. Neither
were the keys of both these kingdoms delivered only to Peter, but also to
all the rest of thapostles, and by them to the successors of thapostles, that
the ministers of the word of god might not only shut, and open the first
kingdom (as it is before declared) but also the second. For they may
suspende, and excommunicate sinners openly, when they amend not, after such
order as Christ has appointed, and so shut them out of the second kingdom,
and bannishe them the company of other christians. They may also loose, when
they show forth tokens of penance, that is to say, they may declare in the
christian congregation, that they be fre, even as before they declared them to
be bound: and by that means open unto them the second kingdom, and grant
unto them the liberty to dwell and abyd in the company of other christians, and
with them to receive the holy Sacraments. Mat. xvi. au^. xviii. John. xx. ^
Then were these the keys and this the authority, that Christ spoke of, when
he said to his apostles, what so ever ye shall bind in earth it shall be bound
in heaven, and what soever ye shall loose in earth it shall be loosed also in
heaven. The ministers also of the church of Christ may, and ought to enjoin
penance to such, as be excommunicated at such time, as they convert and
repent, that they may openly show tokens of a penitente heart, not that they
may think thereby to satisfy and make a sufficient recompense for their
offenses in the sight of God, for ye which Christ has suffered long a go yt
neither they themselves, neither other following their example should any more
commit the like offenses, neither should withstand the correction of the
church and of the ministers. But as touching the signs that be unknown and
secret: the ministers ought not scrupulously to inquire for ye knowleage of
them. Nevertheless the manne, that is troubled with this kind of sins, and
coming to a sobre and learned minister in christian knowledge, telling him of
the trouble of his conscience, and requiryng of him, what were best for him to
do, whereby to be restored again to gods mercy. Then shall this Phisician
preach to the soul so repentaunt the gospel, and move him to believe that
Christ is he who has satisfied for his sins, Esa. liii. c Roma. iii. c i
John. ii. ^.
and also for the sins of the whole world. Which thing when the sinner
believes, immediately the minister of gods word opens unto him the kingdom
of heaven, and bears witness that his sins be now forgyuen him, and also
the sinner so repentaunt may make a rehersall and a confession of his faith
before the said learned minister, and may demand of him whether that be a
true and lively faith, which shall suffice to salvation. Then shall this
minister open unto him the whole doctrine of Christ's faith, and so induce him
to the true faith, and show him the way whereby he may attain to the right
faith, and remain therein increasing continually. Then shall the minister open
unto him remedies mete for him whereby he may preserve himself safe and
unspotted from such greuouse offenses as he perceyueth him most inclined unto.
And who so has a true faith, goes straight ways to Christ with the
Samaritane, to render present thanks in his presence. But who so has not that
faith, he shall always be a wicked manne and an infidel though he confess
himself every day a thousand times. This is the power, which Christ gave not
only to Peter, Math. xx. c
but to all the Apostles of his church, that is to say, to preach the
gospel, to declare the remission of sins to all them, Mat. xx^i^v. c Marc.
^vi. b.
that believe, and to hold in sin such as believe not, to minister the
sacraments according to the word of god, and Christ's institucion, and to
punish them, Mat. xviii. b
that offend openly, and will not repent, when they be entreated after such a
sort, as Christ has appointed. That is, first that they be excomunicat, and
then, if they amend, to be received again into the christian congregation.
This power being given by Christ unto his church is not extendyd but to them
only, math. xvi. c* and.xviii. b John. xx. c.
which be in this life, whiles they live here. And therefore said Christ,
whatsoever ye shall bind, or whatsoever ye shall loose (not indifferently in
all places, but in earth) shall be bound and loosid. Wherefore it is true that
the church militant has no power upon the^, that be passed out of this lif,
and rest in the lord. Neither gave he any authority to the church militant,
to give pardons a pena et culpa, neither to ordain new kinds of
wurshippinges, neither to devise new doctrines, or to make new articles of
the faith, or to devise new commandments, and that upon such a condition,
that men's consciences must be forced and tied to believe the same wicked
decrees of men with a tirannicall pain, even to the death, to the sword, to
the flame and fire appoinctyd for the transgressors of the same ordinances.
Christ said to his Apostles, ye shall be my witnesses not only in Jerusalem,
but also in all Jury and Samaria, even to the vttermoste parts of the world.
Act. i.ii. Luck. xxiiii. John. xv.
And it is plain that witnesses must testifye the treuthe, and neither add,
nor take away from the same any word, namely when as the church of Christ is his
spouse, Ephe. v.
and she must be obedient unto him, as to her husband, and speak those words
only, which she hears of him. For Christ opened to his Apostles, and to the
first beginning of his church all things, that seemed profitable and
necessary to thobteyninge of salvation, John. xv. Luke. xxiiii. John. xiiii.
wherefore he said to his disciples. I have disclosed all things unto you
that I have received of my father. The holy gooste opened their minds, that
they might understand the scriptures, and informed and taught them all such
things, as Christ had said unto them. So that it can not be without a very
heynouse offense, that any thing should be added to the doctrine of Christ,
and thapostles, and of the first most pure and sincere church. Wherefore
either Christ is a liar when he says that he taught all: or else were the
apostles wicked, in that they did not put the rest of the articles of our
faith into the Creed, which the bishops of Rome boaste they could find out
afterward, and that such articles (as they say) as be very necessary,
besides a great number of precepts, which they have invented. The
Evangelists also should have been wicked creatures, to keep hid things so
necessary to our salvation. But neither were thapostles wicked, neither
Christ a liar. For both Christ taught all things necessary, and they
delivered the same to men accordinglye. And Christ commanded them precisely
that they should teach the people to observe, and keep all those things, Mat.
xxviii. Mar. xvi.
not which they dreamed themselves, but which he commanded them. Yea and
Paul thapostle determined all creatures, not humayne only, but celestial
also, Gala. i. Iaco. i.
and angelical to be accursed, which preached any other gospel then the
gospel of Christ. We be all borne a new by ye word of god, by y^ which thing
only, as by a perfect and strong norishement, we live and continewe. Now then
when master Falsidicus thought the keys to be taken out of the popes hands
by unanswerable reasons, by and by he clapped his hands upon his weapon
saying. Read Saynct Luke, Luke. xxii. c.
and ye shall see how Christ wills the disciples to provide for themselves
two swords. Who making answer that they had twain in a readiness, Christ
said they were enoughe. Therefore has the Pope two swords, and the highest
power upon both sides, the one spiritual, the other temporal.


Mas Oh what a fine dialecticall wit was that?

Truly this consequence and reason could not be answered to. Uerely I
marvel much why they have not caused this long time Saynct Peter to be
painted with keys hanging upon his girdle, and holdyng two swords in his
hands, the one in the right, and the other in the left, to declare his chief
prerogative, and so to make men afraid with that fearful sight. But tell me
I pray you what answered the ambassador to this?


Lepi He answered that Christ promised and gave to Peter, and the Apostles
keys, and not swords, and that when Peter used a sword for the defense of
his master, Christ himself stayed his unadvised rashenes. Io. xviii. ^
Because the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, neither is it worldly,
and yearthlye: but heavenly, and spiritual. Neither was he sent of his father
to reign in this world of a carnal fashion, Math. xx. d Mat. xxviii. Mar. x. e
Luc. xxii. b
as in a kingdom, but he was sent to minister and serve, and to give his life
for our salvation. And forasmuch as he sent his Apostles even of a like
fashion, as he him self was sent of his father, he sent them not as though they
should reygne in the world, but to be like innocent lambs amongst wolves.
And to mind to stablishe one supreme head in the church of Christ is
nothing else, Math. x^ b Luke. x. a
but a crownynge again of Christ with a crown of thorn, and when he is
apparelled with a purple and a kyngly vesture, to deliver him to men to be
made a laughing stock, as he was scorned in times past of the Jews, when he
honge upon the cross. Therefore Christ foreseing that his Apostles would be
offended with his death, Mat. xxvi. c Mar. xiiii. d. John. xvi. d
and would slip from that trust they had in him (as he prophesied to them
before) he demanded of them, whether they wa^ted any manner of thing, when he
sent the^ forth naked and destitute of all man's help? Luc. xxii. c
And when they answered that they wanted nothing, he said: now then provide
you for swords, Math. x. a Mark^. ^i. a Luc. ix. a
as though he had said. Hitherto have I been your merciful master and
governor, I have defended you, I have provided all necessaries for you, as for
my beloved children, ye lacked nothing, I took the tuition of you. But because
within this short space, when ye shall see me caught by the hands of the
wicked, and bound, Mat. xxvi. c Mar. xiiii ^. John. xvi. d.
and in conclusion dye, ye will be offended with that miserable sight, and will
faint from that sure trust, that ye have had in me hitherto, it is needful
that from hence forth ye provide for your selves: and therefore I give you
warninge to prepare ye swords for your defense, for the persecution that
comes upon you shall be great. And when they showed two swords, and said
master, lo here be two swords, Luc. xxii. ^
Christ answered them rebukingly with a privy check, saing they be enough.
This was a wonderful declaracion and figure of the dulnes of the Apostles, and
of the clemency of Christ. Even as though tender infantes should have
showed their father two speres made of reeds, and then ask of him, whether
that speres of reed were sufficient to overcome an excedyng strong army: unto
whom the father should answer with a smilling countenance, saying: yea,
they be sufficient, as though he had said: O ye tenderlynges think you yt
speres of reed can prevail without my help. Now is it here evident, first and
foremost that Christ gave not swords to his Apostles: Gene. 9. a Ezech. xi. a
Math. xxvi. Luke. xxii. John. xviii. Apoc. xiii.
whereof it follows that he gave them not the supreme power, and authority
both spiritual and temporal, which is shadowed (as you hold opinion) by
these two swords. And more over Peter only made not thanswere: Lo here be two
swords, but the disciples, as Luke plainly does witness. Neither is it red any
where that Peter alone had two swords. And although it were so, that the
highest supremacy where shadowed by these two swords, yet may ye not by any
means infer or go about to prove thereby, that the same authority belonged
only to Peter, but to all thapostles jointly: and the whole church together.
And yet can I not perceive how these reasons hang together. Christ said
checkingly that two swords were enough, ergo Peter had the supreme authority
both spiritual, and temporal given unto him. Then would master Falsidicus
without dout have made some preaty answer, as his fashyon is, if the Pope had
not commanded him to hold his peace, fearinge lest this hateful dysputacyon
of both swords should offend the emperor. Whereof he said to Falsidicus, that
it was sufficient for this present to reteyne the one sword, that is to say
the chief dominion in spiritual matters, and to permit the other of
temporal matters to Ceasars majesty.


Mas. A wonderful liberality.


Lepi. But ye must know, that he granted this but for a time, yea and
against his will. For his left arm is weak and small, because he is not
accustomed to use it, but let him alone, and suffer his strength with a little
exercise to come to him, and ye shall see him halt and lame as he is, shed
more blood alone then all themperours of the world, though ye put the^
together. Then master Falsidicus fynding other matters to talk upon, said.
You know right well master ambassador that Christ keeps promise: and if he
give a name to any man at any time, that name is not a void name, it is not
the bare sound of a voice, but the truth of the thing it self is also
agreeable to the name. And because Christ said to Simon, from henceforthe thou
shall be called Cephas, Mat. xxvi. c.
which by interpretacion signifies a head: ye must of necessity grant that
Christ gave in deed that, which he promised with special and plain words.
Simon was called Cephas, John. i. d
that is to say a head, then it follows that he was a head by the name,
that Christ gave him, ergo he was a head in deed, that the truth might be
agreeable to the name. To this thembassador answered. Truly ye be worthy to be
burned, for if ye burn them, which deprave the wrytinges of thapostles, what
ought ye to do to them, which peruerte falsely the words of Christ himself?
Christ said to Peter thou shall be called Cephas, and Cephas is a word of
the language of the Sirians. Which is as much to say as Petra that is a
stone. But you deprauinge the holy scriptures, say that Christ said, thou
shal^e be called a head, and this do you to the end that you would draw all
sentences (as though it were halynge them by the neck) writhing them to your
perverse purpose, and in the mean time corrupting the truth, and the majesty
of holy scriptures.


Mas. I maruayle that he was ever afterward called Peter, and not rather
head, if it be so that this name Cephas signify a head, and not Petra, which
is a stoone, as master Falsidicus did contend. But tell me I pray you was he
not ashamed to speak any more?


Lepi. Nay then he seemed but as it were to begin to prove the primacie of
Peter.


Mas. And what thing brought he therefore?


Lepi. First and foremost thus he said. Even as it is evident by the scriptures
of the old testament that the first begotten, was the Lord over all his
brothren, even so because it is evident that Peter was the first begotten of
Christ, he must be lord over all the rest, and supreme head of ye whole church
of Christ. Which thing may be proved by that, that Peter as the chief and
most worthy parson speaks always first for them all: and amongst the rest
he was always accounted, and named the first. Yea be it, that it could not be
proved by any word of God, that Peter was declared supreme head by Christ:
yet ought we to believe it, forasmuch as we must assuredlye persuade our
selves, that Christ ordained his church well, and therefore that it was done
by a certain ^easo^ and order, for where as a certain order is not observed,
there must al things of force be full of co^fusio^ And certain order can there
none be, where as there be not degrees of me^ higher, and lougher. But where as
there is a higher degree of men, there must ye ascend and come to one, as to a
supreme head, that the nature of order may be preserved, which because it
can not proceed so far, but that it must have an end, onles there should
be some supreme head established, it should come all together to nothing. Now
likely it is not, that Christ appointed any other head then Peter: ergo Peter
was the supreme head. The self same thing may be proved of the order of
natural things, where all things be referred to one, as to a chief
beginning and original cause. For not only in any civil governance of man
(if the common welthes be well ordered) there is one supreme head: but amongst
brute beasts also we see this dignity of order observed. Bees have their
king, who govern the baser sort of the common people, and ouersee them to
do their duties. The Cranes have one chief guide* whom all the rest does
follow. The sheep also have their shepehard, John. x.
whose voice they know, and whom they follow, and at whose commandment they
be. So that, look how much the church of Christ is more excellent, and more
perfect, then other things, that belong to manne, and is also better
governed, so much is it the more lykely, that there must be one supreme head in
it, at whose commandment all men must hang, as though he were a God. To
these reasons the imbassador made answer. If the first begotten amongst
thapostles ought to be lord of all the rest (as Falsidicus said eue^ now) for
as much as Andrewe was called before Peter to the office of the Apostleshipe,
Peter should not take the lordshippe away from him, which of right should
have a better title to it. But truth it is, that Christ is the first begotten
amongst his brethren, and he is only the lord of all. And all the worthiness
of the first be gettyng, which was shadowed in the first begotten of the old
testament, is fulfilled in Christ himself. Now because that the kingdom of
Christ is altogether spiritual, he may be accounted greater, higher, and more
excellent, not that is first borne to Christ in this world, nor he that is
richer, or more noble after the flesh, not he that is better learned: but he
that excels more in godlynes, and has received more light and strength of
the holy ghost. And although Peter used often times to choppe in, and speak
first by the reason of his boldness, his zeal, his earnestnes, and age: yet
follows it not of that, that he had authority and dominion over the rest of
the Apostles, neither that he was their Pope. Neither is he which speaks
first in any congregation to be thought the head of all the rest. For then in
deed should Peter have been Pope not only before Christ gave him the keys,
but also before he promised him them, because that often times long before
that time, he spoke before his fellows. And Philip also, and Andrewe, and
Thomas, and the rest should by this reason have been Popes, all the which spoke
first a^ sundry times. And although Christ when he numbered the Apostles, John.
vi.xi and.xiiii.
named Peter first, yet is it not necessary, that therefore he should be Pope
over the rest. Even as our Bishop of Constantinople has spoken first in
sundry counselles that has been, and has also been taken for the first
Bishop, because he spoke first, and sat first in the congregation. And yet for
all that was he never judged Bishop over all other Bishops, neither yet their
head, (which ye challenged to you by tyranny) I grant trewly that Christ did
set in order, and governed his church wonderfully well, and that it has gone
forward in a wonderful order, so that I ^an not deny but there must be some
supreme head in that church. But that head is Christ him self (as Paul
testifies) who by his spirit is present with his church evermore, and
governs it after a more wonderful fashion then man's understanding can
comprehend. Neither is it needful to dream of any other universal head in
earth, for Christ him self without any other Popes, governs his church by
his ministers most wonderfully, but let us grant that Christ declared Peter to
be the head of thapostles and of the first church, at the which time
because they were very few he might right well govern the^ all. But now when
the church of Christ is spread abrod through out the whole world, it is not
possible for him to know them all, or to visit them all, to understand their
tongues, to hear their matters, to provide for them all, and govern the^ al
well. One crane may well be the guide to other.xxv. cranes, or else
peradventure fifty, but me thinks, that it is a thing impossible that all
the cranes in the world should follow this one crane as their only guide, yea
and be it that they all followed this one, yet does not that prove that this
one being guide is the head of all the rest. Of a like sort say I of the
bees, amongst whom it may well be and is, that one be, be king and governor
of all ye other, that be in the same hyue, as a bishop may be the gouerner of
all the souls that be within his diocese. But yet as it can not be that one
be should govern all the bees of the world, so neither can it be that
one bishop of Rome can have the cure of all the souls in the world.


Mas. Will you have (...) say to you, what I think? This bishop of ours
^^meth to me a very ass, and without all judgment and perceueraunce, and this
is my reason, that moves me so to say. I have seen many times, and have
proved by experience the thing, that I shall tell: when one sheparde has the
charge of a thousand sheep, it is as much, as he is able to do, to feed so many
and order the^ well, but the same sheparde can not (...) six or eight
thousand, and yet much less, an hudreth beasts, and a thousand sheep
together, and yet much less a thousand sheep and a thousand beasts, an
hundrethe oxen, an hundredth kyne, an hundrethe asses, and an hundredth swyne.
But this bishop of ours will be the universal bishop, and shepard of all
Christian men, amongst whom be found not only beasts innumerable, but
asses also, and kyne, bores, and swyne, and an infinite number of foxes, and
wolves. Ye know that I am the master of his horse, and am feign sometime to
spend a whole month to tame one fearse beast, or before I can bring a mule
to her true pase. And he will take upon him to tame all the whole world, and
he thinks to bring it to pass, that all men shall walk right the same
way that ledeth to god. But I pray you tell on the dispu^acio^, for in hearing
you recite godly their reasons (in ye name of god) I am more and more
strengthened in the truth,


Lepi. He brought more over an argument of the chief priest of the Jews,
saying: it is plain, that ye old testament is a figure of the new, now
then, as they by the will of god had one chief priest above all other, so the
christian men now a days must have one Pope. And he must be honored, and set
forth with such beutie and glory, that the kings of the world (as the
prophets have spoken before) shall come to wurship this merueylous godhead in
earth. And furthermore al christian me^ shall come to Rome, as to a spiritual
Jerusalem, which was shadowed by that earthly Jerusalem, to obtain
salvation, and receive heaven at the Popes hands. And the^ he said thus. Now
me thinks that I have confirmed, and establishe sufficiently the Popeshippe
with these reasons and authorities, that I have al^eged. Wherefore now will I
make an end and give place to other: And to conclude of this, I am sure that
the imbassador can not find one word in the holy scripture that may make by
any means against this primacie once planted, and established. Then
thimbassador made answer in this wise. The Jews were but few in comparison
of the christian men, who if they were this day compared with them, they should
appear innumerable. And again, they were all knyt, and joined together in one
narrow place, but the christian men this day be despersed through out the
whole world. Wherefore that thing, which according to the will of God was mete
for them then, (that is to say, that they should have one chief priest in
earth) can not agree now with us of these days. Moreover the high
priesthode of the Jews shadowed not the high priesthode of the Bishops of
Rome: but the high priesthod of Christ. Wherefore that high priesthod of the
Jews after a certain time had an end. And furthermore, the yearthlye
Jerusalem, figured not Rome: but ye spiritual church of Christ whereunto all
the chosen resort, to obtain favor and health of Christ our chief and
everlasting priest, to whom all the princes of the earth ought to come flat
down and wourshyppe, that they may acknowledge and confess him to be the
son of God. But your Rome is so far unlike to the spiritual Jerusalem,
that it may worthelye be called fylthie, and carnal Babylon as Peter termed
it. i. Peter. v



Mas. Rome seems to me the very liuelye and express Image of that great
whore, of whom it is written in thapocalypse, who has made drunk, corrupted,
and infected, all the whole world with her golden cup of hypocrisy,
replenished to the very brime with abhominacio^ and uncleanness, Apo. xvii.
she deceyueth and blyndeth the eyes of all men, with a pleasant outward
deceytfull show of feigned holiness, of ceremonies, of beawtie, of riches, and
of abundance of things that fade and decay. But tell on the end of the
disputacion.


Lepi. When master Falsidicus had spente all his matter, and said what he
could: Thimbassador began to declare how the holy scripture was directlye
against this primacie. And first he made it plain very well, that Christ was
the chief priest, not after the order of Aaron, Hebr. vii.
but after the order of Melchisedeche. And that he was not of the tribe of
Leui, or of the stock of Aaron, but of the tribe of Judah, and of the stock of
David. And more over that he was not chosen, as other men be: as other chief
priests be chosen of other priests, who does not always chose the best:
Psalm. ii. Heb. v.
but that he was chosen of his eternal and heavenly father, when he said.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten the. And the other chief priests
were anointed with a material oil: Hebr. v.
but Christ was anointed with the holy gooste. And they had on such garments
as Moses appointed them by gods commandment: E^od. xxviii. esa. lxi.
but thapparell of Christ was the whole company of al virtues. They offered
incense, and brute beasts, but Christ offered himself upon the cross with a
spiritual and heavenly excellent sweet savor. They entered the holy of holyes,
but Christ entered into heaven, Heb. ix.vii.
and sits now at the right hand of the eternal father, making intercession
for us, obteyning what soever he desiereth. esa. liii. Romans iii. Gala. iii. i.
Timo. ii John. xvii. i. John. ii. Heb. v. John. iii.
Whereas before time he did put upon him our infirmities, that by the means
thereof he might be earnestly sorrowful for our miseries. So that Christ was
chief preeste after the order of Melchisedeche, which was much more
excellent, thenwas the order of Aaron. Neither was he only the son of god,
unto whom the spirit is given without measure, and all power, and dominion in
heaven and in earth, Mat. xxviii. ^ohn* xiii. Collo. ii. John. i. Collo. i.
in whom all treasures of wisdom and knowledge of god be hid, who is full of
grace and truethe: but in him allo dwells a full plen^ifullnes of all heavenly
things. And that Christ has now taken away Aarons presthod as a thing
imperfect, and was but a shadow of this, which is more perfect. So that they
now may be accounted true priests, which be regenerated by Christ, and
have the spirit of god* And them to be the greatter and better prestes, who
has received a greater measure and habundance of that heavenly spirit.

And al ye other to be profane and wicked, notwithsta^dinge that they be a
thousand times anointed, ordered, and chosen in to the number of priests by
the Pope, and his members. Wherefore he says either ye have the spyrite or
not: if ye have not the spirit of God, then be ye no priests, neither after
the order of Melchisedech, neither after the order of Aaron, because ye be not
of his family. Therefore can ye not be prestes but after the order of Beliall,
after whose order ye may well be the chief priests of all. But if ye have ye
spirit of god, the^ be ye right precious in deed, and hi^ shall ye think to be
ye highest priest of all, who is replenyshed with more habundaunce of the
spirit of god. And because that Christ only received the spirit without
measure: he only must be taken for the true, only, and chief high pressed.
And for as much as Christ only is full of light, grace, truethe, power, and all
heavenly virtue: it were an extreme wickedness, ydolatrye and abhominacion to
study to rob Christ of these heavenly gifts, and apoynt them to a mortal
manne, and so much the more and greater should thabhominacion be, the more
we be assuered that Christ is the chief everlasting preeste, Psalm. ^ix.
Heb. vii.
as David prophesied, and as it is written to the Hebrews. Wherefore as the
chief prestes of the Jews died, and another was appointed in his place, by the
means whereof they were many: So this Christ our eternal preeste, being
once raised from death dies no more, but is ascended into heaven, where now
he lives and reigns chief preeste for ever, and is able perfectly to save
all those that comme forth into the sight of God trustinge upon his mediacion.
It is the office of the chief preeste to put him self between God and the
people, to offer for the sins of men, to pray for the^, and to purchase
the favor of God unto them. But now sense Christ has offered him self upon
the cross for our sins, Heb. x.
and has pacified the wrath of God the father for ever, and hah preserved his
chose^ once for all, yt we shall not more have any need of high priests, which
should offer again for our offenses: if that after all this we attempt to do
sacryfice again for this end, it can not be done with out an exceeding great
injury of God, and open contempt of the sacrifice of Christ. We have no need
at this present to have any other me^ to put themselves between us and god as
chief priests: because that we obtain all favor by Christ only and alone,
i. Timo. ii.
as by our only chief priest, chief head and mediator, by whose means, and
for whose sake our prayer works and sacrifices be not only accepted: but our
selves also. Wherefore Christ only and alone is sufficient for us, neither have
we need of any other chief priests, i. Peter. ii.
because it is a dignity that no man living can use with out ye great
offense of God. Who knows not that Christ only is called of the holy ghost
the head of his church? not only of the church militaunt, Ephe. iiii. Luc.
ii. i. Cor. xv.
but also of the church triumphaunt. Wherein he shall reygne for ever until
the latter day of judgment. Even as it is necessary that he should reygne,
until he has put his enemies a footstool to his feet. Christ will have
this high dignity of the supreme head in his church reserved full and whole
to himself: As he is the true foundation of his church, unto whom only this
dignity worthily agrees, because he is only one, which as one supreme head
has the fulness of the treasures, and of the knowledge and wisdom of God, and
of his favor and all virtue. This is he alone who having the spirit with
out measure rules and governs his church as an universal head, giving to
other men, as to his infer^or members sundry gifts and benefits after a
certain proporcion and measure. ephe. iiii
Wherefore even as in the spiritual church of Christ they only be true
priests, who have the gift of the holy ghost powered upon them, and they be the
greater priests, which have the same in a more ple^tifull measure: And Christ
is the only chief priest, who has the spirit without measure. Of a like
sort they only be true and lyuelye members of the body of the same church,
which have the spirit of god, and they be more noble and more worthy, who
have the same spirit more aboundauntly. And Christ only is their head, who
chiefly and most abundantly has the spirit ofye eternal father.
Wherefore, in that the bishop of Rome intends to attain to the dignity of ye
chief priest, and supreme head of Christ's church: his study is nothing else,
but to make himself equal with Christ in spirtie, knowledge, virtue, power,
and in all other gifts, and graces. Now whether this be a blasphemous mind or
not judge you. For that man, which has not the spirit of god, is not worthy
to be called a membre of Christ, or a priest, or else a christian manne. No,
he is not worthy the name of a man, for his greuouse offenses. Yea he ought
to be banyshed from all christian men's company, and be excomunicated, from
the church of Christ. Yt can not be without a merueylous heynouse offense,
and a deuillishe pride, ones to be so bold, to desire to have the title of the
supreme head of the church of Christ. Ephe. iiii. Psalm. l^vii. i. Cor. xix. c
Where as Paul describes ye true image of ye church of Christ he says:
Christ is ascended on high, and has given gifts to men, some to be
Apostles some to be Prophets, some to be Evangelists, and some to be
Doctors. And it is not to be doubted, but he would also have ordained some
other supreme head in earth, if he had judged it a thing necessary. And the
holygoost in this place, (which should have made so much for this purpose)
would not only have expressed the thing by the mouth of Paul, but also
would have named this chief dignity. When Paul myndeth to persuade the
Ephesians to remain together in one spirit knyt with the bond of peace, the
arguments, that he uses, be these, saying: ephe. iiii.
that (if they be true christian men) they be thevery members of one body, and
they all have one spirit, even as they all be called to one end, and have one
Lord Jesus Christ, one faith, one baptism, one only god, and eternal
father. No doubt he would have also said in this place, (and they have one
Byshope in earth, who keeps the church of Christ in order and concord) if he
had ever minded to appoint such a bishop.


Mas. If Paul had ever spoken such words he had lied galantly. For the
bishops of Rome will endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their power, to
move co^tencion and to set christian princes together by the ^ares for their
own inrichynge.


Lepidus. That thing may chance to be true. But I pray you let me tell on
my tale. Then thimbassador said furthermore: yt is not unknown unto you, that
when the congregation of the Corynthians auaunced themselves some time in the
name of Peter, Cor. i. and.iii. a
some time in the name of Paul, and some time of Apollo, and Paul chid the^
bitterly for so doing: he said not, I will not have you think here after yt I
am the head of the church, neither yet Apollo, But Peter only: But he rather
concluded all manner of men and said thus. What? were you baptized in the name
of Paul? was Paul ever crucified for you? as though he had said: i. Cor. i. b
Truly ye be neitheir baptized in the name of Paul, neither in the name of
Peter, neither of Apollo, neither was there any of the^ crucified for you: but
ye be baptized in Christ's name only. Only he suffered for you death upon the
cross. Only he has redeemed you, and saved you from sin. Only he is your
head, from the which all heavenly gifts desce^d. Only he is your light,
your wisdom, your life, your salvation, and therefore must ye acknowledge
him only and alone to be your supreme head, in whose name only ye must
rejoice. And the^ to knyt up his disputacio^. He said not: man must esteem and
take Apollo, and me for the ministers of Christ, and Peter for the lord and
master: but putting Peter, and him self, ^. Cor. iiii
and Apollo altogether he said: Man must take us as the ministers of Christ.
And in this point he agrees with the doctrine of Christ, who perceiving his
Apostles to contend among themselves for the highest place: because they herd
say that James and John had obtained a prerogative of Christ by the
procurement of their mother, that one of them should sytte at his right hand,
and the other at his left: he said, ye know right well that the princes of
nations bear lordelye rule, and men of power do exercise their might over
them. But it shall not be so amongst you. But he, that will be greater
amongst you, shall be your minister, and he, that will be chief amongst you
shall be your seruannt. For the son of man came not to be served of other,
but to serve other him self, and to give his soul for a redemption, for many.
Whereby it is easy to perceive yt the church of Christ is al together
spiritual. And it is not possible yt any man ca^ be a true priest, neither a
true christian manne in this spiritual church of Christ, onles he have the
spirit of god, and he is to be thought greater, that is more enriched with
strength and habundaunce of the spirit. So that for as much as Christ only
has the greatest plentifulnes of the spirit, he must without controversy be
judged, and esteemed the chief, and head priest of al other. Wherefore if the
bishop of Rome desire the place of the chief bishop, he must of
necessity have greatest haboundance of the spirit, even as Christ had, and
then, when he is equal with Christ, he shall also be chief bishop, and
chief head equal with Christ: but this also is necessary to be known that
the dominion of the spirit is very diverse and contrary, (eue^ as Christ
taught) to ye dominion of ye flesh, for amongst carnal men, such as have
more riches, more strength, more favor amongst me^, more fre^dshipes, and
more nobility of blood, they be ye lords over other, they co^mau^d, they have
other ministers to the^, they be honored and obeyed, and many times they
oppress the weaker, and use tyranny over them. But it is co^trarywise in the
spiritual church of Christ: for such as have greater light of the spirit
they be higher and greater. And they that be such, serve all other by the
help of the spirit, as men that has received greater gifts of god, more
light of knowledge, more grace, more spirit and a greater talent. So that he,
which has received more habou^dance of the spirit helps more, and serves
more the necessities of other, and sets forth the glory of god more
plentifully. And because Christ had most singular plenty of the spirit,
therefore came not he to be served, but to serve for the health of his chosen.
Yea and he served all without excepcion, Mat. xx. d. Mar. x. e. Luc. xxii. b
and that also humblinge himself extremely, until that he (moved of an
exceeding great love) spent his own life upon the cross. Therefore would
Christ have it known to his chosen, that if ye will have a true nobility, and
worthynes, Phil. ii. a.
ye must have a spirit. Christ abused not this spiritual greatness of his,
which was in the highest degree of honor: thereby to challenge any honor?
before manne, or for thobteynyng of riches, or imperiousely to use the service
of his subjects, neither to seek for any private commodity, but to serve
other, and to ^eke for the profyt of other. The power therefore, and
thegreatnes of the ministers of Christ is altogether spiritual, and stands
wholly in the service, and governance of souls health. But ye bishop of Rome
seeks for no other thing the^ to be esteemed great before the world, that he
may be worshipped in earth, as it were a god, and have liberty to use
tyranny over all churches, to spoil; and destroy them at his pleasure. If the
church of Christ were now as in times paste it was ordained to be: he should be
thought greater then all the rest, who is endued with more light from above,
and has received more gifts, and benefits of Gods hand, and this worthynes
of his would he only use in setting forth of the gospel, whereby he might
win as many souls, as might be to Christ. So that be it that Christ had
given the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven to Peter only, and by
him to you that be bishops of Rome: (which thing is not true): what other
power or authority should you have thereby (I pray you) then to preach the
gospel? then to be witnesses that sins be pardoned to them, that believe,
and retained to the^, that believe not? then to administer the Sacraments
according to Christ's institucion? the^ to exhort, to admonysh, to correct
with gentleness and love such, as be prone to sin? then to excommunicat
(which is the chief matter of all) such, as be open notoriouse sinners,
when they amend not after monicion given according to the doctrine of Christ,
and will not obey the church? Thus far extends your power, and authority
given by Christ and no further, except ye will confound, the bounds, and
thorder of the power civil, and the power ecclesiastical.


Mas. This confusion should not our bishop in any wise suffer, and that for
two causes. The first, because he will have all his power esteemed of men to be
spiritual and heavenly, al though he over run the whole world with his
unbridled tyranny. The latter: because if he would say that thecclesiasticall
power might be mingled and confounded with power civil, he might be afraid
lest happily the Emperor should challenge the^ both, and so be made both Emperor
and Pope. Luc. xii. b.
I remember that I have heard tell how Christ was desiered of a fellow to
make division of inheritance between him and his brother, unto whom Christ
made answer, who made me your judge? Who gave me authority to divide
thinheritaunce between you? As though he had said: I came not, neither am I
sent of my heavenly father, that I should chaleng to me any political power,
but spiritual only. I come to preach unto you the whole spiritual kingdom,
and to bring you to that highness of mind, that ye should leave not only the
world but your self also for the glory of god, and not to be an arbitrer or
judge of your stryfes.

If therefore our Bishop were Pope never so much (as he strives to be) and
Christ's vicar in earth, it is very true, that he has no more power or
authority given him by Christ, then had Christ himself. And therefore
whenever there should be any civil matters brought before him in judgment,
he should make answer with Christ, who made me your judge? or else who
gave me authority to divide, or put together, to absolve or condemn, by a
civil fashion of judgment. This power must come some other ways it e^ by
Christ. But I fear me much lest our popes shall by this their new
authority be so much occupied in worldly businesses, yt they shall have no
space or time to think any whit of God. And more over so much shall their
tyranny increase, yt they shall wyllynglye desire and draw to themselves and
to their judgment seats, all manner of controversies not to make an end of
them, but to inuolue them, and make them more doubtful, by the means whereof
the sewtes endure the longer. And furthermore when they be once made drunk
with the blood of martyrs they will sow deadly discord and continual
conten^ion amongst christian princes, and will be the authors almost of all
wars which shall continue for many years. For it is not possible that
common welthes should be quiet, where they shall have rule. But I pray you tell
me in good earnest, brought the ambassador any other authority of scripture
against the Popeshyppe?


Lepi He brought amongst other as far as I remember thautorite of Sayncte
Paul, who wrote to the Galathians that Peter was the Apostle of the Iues,
Gala. ii. ^*
even as Paul was of the Gentiles. Wherefore he was neither the Apostle (said
he) neither the Pope of Rome, neither any of other nations, but of the Jews
only. Neither was he universal Bishop of all christendom, neither you,
that be the bishops of Rome be the successors of Peter, because ye be not the
Apostles nor bishops of the Jews. But Paul should rather have been Pope of
the gentiles, and so much y^ more above Peter, because that ye gentiles, of
whom Paul was the Apostle, were more in number then were the Jews, and more of
the Gentiles were converted to Christ, then of the Jews. And Paul preached
also in sundry places of the world, and brought forth the fruit of the
gospel more plentifully then did Peter, wherefore he was an Apostle more
universal, and more profitable also to the church of Christ. And Paul more
over adds this thing in the same place, that he had no less grace, being
the Apostle of the Gentiles, then Peter had being the Apostle of the Jews.
Then was not Peter a greater Apostle then Paul was. And so consequentlye
doethe it follow, that he not his head, yea and Paul does plainly call him,
in special words, fellow, even as he did both James and John. i. Peter. v.
And Peter also writing to the pastors of other churches commands them not
imperiouslye, as though he were their superior, but exhorts them gently, as
his fellows, calling Christ, and not him self the chief Pastor. And
furthermore when he was rebuked of Paul, Gala. ii.
he said not that he was above all laws, and could not err because he was
Pope: but gave place to Paul when he was checked of him openly. And also when
he was sent by the apostles in to Samaria he withstod them not. Acts. viii.
He said not, it is my office to command, I have authority to send, whom I
will, or else to go my ways if it please me: for I am your head: But he
obeyed their commandments as a membre of the church of Christ. And when
thimbassador would have followed his matter that he intended more at large, and
have brought more places of scripture for the utter subuercion of all the
popship: Then master Falsidicus thinkyng himself not well handled with
thimbassadors manyfolde and strong reasons interruptyng his tale, past all
good manners, as a mad man in his fury cried out with loud voice and said: Ye
of the East churches be full of sects and heresies. And therefore have you of
all other most need of a supreme and visible head in earth, by whose
authority and wisdom ye may be governed, by whom the co^tencio^s that arise
amongst you for sundry interpretacions of scripture may be pacified, ye
thing being declared and opened by the censure and judgment of the chief
Bishop, by the which means ye might know the truth, and remain firm
and stable in the true faith quietly. For this cause should you chiefly
desire this supreme head and gouernoure, who now labor to hinder ye thing for
lack of knowlage of ye profit, that shall enshewe. And therefore can I not stey
my self, but must a little pass the bonds of patience, and speak my mind
freely. If the whole matter were put to me, I know what I had to do. I say no
more. To these words thimbassador answered quietlye. Master Falsidicus: ye
say if the whole matter were put to you, ye know what ye had to do. Because
these words may be taken diversely, saying you expou^de them not your self,
there is none of us, that can well tell what ye mean by the^, some may
peradventure guess, but none ca^ have any certain assurau^ce. So that you
only know what is meant by them, i. Cor. ii.
even as Paul wrote: What manne is he living, that knows the inward parts,
thinwarde thoughts, desiers, and crafts of man, except it be the spirit of
man, that dwells within him? Eue^ so because men see not thinwarde thoughts
of men, they understand not to what end their words tend, and therefore
is it no marvel, if they atteyne not the perfect knoweledge of those things,
that be spoken, namely when the words be douteful and ambigouse. Therefore with
what face dares the bishop of Rome being a mortal manne, challenge unto him
authority and judgment to expound the word of God, as it shall please him?
and to force men to follow his exposicion, be it right or wrong? Yt was the
holy ghost, and not Peter, Luke xxiiii. Ihon. xiiii. Esa. vi.
that opened the minds of thapostles, whereby they might understand the holy
scriptures? and he taught them all his whole will as Christ promised before,
and as Esaias did write, they were taught of god, and the law of god was prynted
in their stomakes, Ierme. xxxii. 1. Ihon. ii.
and written in their hearts from above, as Hieremie prophesied long before,
and John shadowed the same thing saying. Ye have no need of any man's help
whereby to learn: for thanoyntinge it self, that is to say the holy ghost,
shall teach you all truethe. The holy ghost is the trewest teacher of al other,
and one that performs his promise most haboundantly. He is no liar, as men be,
that break their faith and promise, it is he only that can declare the true
sense of the holy scripture, it is he only that can open the minds of men,
that can teach, strengthen, and stablyshe us in all truth, and not the
bishops of Rome. And if you would say that the pope being lightened by the holy
ghost gives light to us: I will answer first. ^. Cor. xii. John. iii.
The Pope is not alone lightened with the light of the holy ghost. For ye holy
ghost inspireth where as it pleases him, and destributeth his gifts amongst
men, to every one as his will is. Wherefore men's consciences must not be
bounden and tied to believe and think that the pope only has the holy ghost,
that the pope only can not err, that the pope only is above the word of god,
that the pope only must be the interpreter, the declarer and ruler of holy
scripture, and that all we must in all points obey the popes judgment.
Because that this is ones suer, that visible things can bring no inward
light, nor confirm men in their faith, and quiet and pacify their
consciences, but the holy ghost only can perform al these things,
plentifully. What needs many words? he is very Antichriste, which boasts
himself that he can give light to the mind either by an inward light, or by
some other means then by thexpresse word of God, as the minister of the
word, by good example of life, and continual prayer. If all we should stand
or fall by the judgment of the pope, why is there so much labor spent in
gatheringe together of counselles? Why spend we our lives with so much pain
in study for knowledge? in turninge our books? if we shall lean to the only
word of the pope. Then in the name of god let us be short, let us come to the
pope, and hear his word as it were an Oracle, and let us worship him as a god.
But Paul the Apostle teaches far after another sort, when he commands
two or three to speak in the church in order one after another, and the rest
diligently to way the judgments of them that speak. i. Cor. xi^ii.
And so the judgment of Ecclesiastical matters must be sought for at the
church, it self and not at the pope of Rome. And further Paul wills in
especial words, that when one of the members of the church speaks, the
truethe be reveled to another, that sits by: him that spoke first to hold
his peace (though he were Pope) and give ear unto the latter, unto whom the
truethe is disclosed though he be one of the basest sort and unlearned. Mat.
vi. i. Cor. iii i. Cor. ii. Esa. xxix.^
For many times god hydeth the secrets of his wisdom from the prudent and
wise of this world, and opens the same to little ones. And in another place he
makes Peter equal with the rest saying: All things be yours, whether it be
Paul, or Apollo, or Peter, as though he should say, let none be your
superiors besides Christ and his word: for Peter, and Paul be your
ministers. Yea and Peter in the first council of the Apostles harkened to
other declarynge his own judgment in that point, Act. xv.
and geuynge authorytye to the church to do, what they should think good,
and willinglye and gladlye to obey the judgment, which the whole congregation
approves to be perfect and suer. Luke xxii.
And although Christ said, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith
should not fail, yet follows it not therefore that Peter could not err. For
he erred after that time sundry times, and namely when he expresselye denied
Christ the son of God. But when Christ perceived Peter's temerous boldness,
y^ shortly after he would shamefully deny him, to arm and strengthen him
against the temptacion, which should insewe, lest the greatness of the fault
might hurl him down into desperacion: he said unto them: Satan goes about
to sift you like chafe and to undo, and destroy you. Yea you had been all
ready utterly lost if I had not prayed for you, and for the especially Peter by
name, that thy faith should not fail, because thou wylt fall foulier then
the rest, Luc. xxii. ^
and I know that God has herd my prayer. For although thou will deny me
with thy mouth, yet thou wylt not deny me with thine heart. Thou wylt sin,
but sin shall not reygne in the, so that in thy heart thou shall yield to
noughtie temptacions. I will suffer thee to have a foul fall, that by the
means thereof thy temerous boldness may be bridelled and rebuked. And again
that after when thou shall come to thy self, and perceive thy own infirmity,
thy heart shall be touched with compassion against those that shall sin,
reysing them up with knowledge, and co^firming, and boldning them with thine
example. Now can I not perceive how it may be proved by the words before
rehearsed, that Peter was Pope, and could not err afterward, neither the
Bishops of Rome after him according to his example.


Mas. We shall wrythe all the words that ever Christ spoke to Peter, to make
for the Popeship of Rome: let us writhe them also when Peter counseled Christ
to forsake the cross saying: Save thy self O Lord. Mat. xvi.



Lepi. What answer then made Christ?


Mas. He said unto him: get the out of my sight Satan, thou troubleste me,
thou haste no perseueraunce of things belonging to god, but to manne only it
is easyto prove that Peter whas chief head of our bishops of Rome, and they
his successors, taking it of this fashion, but tell for the on the
disputacion, I would feign hear the end of it.


Lepi. This ambassador of Constantinople would feign have brought other
reasons forth, and other sayings of scripture against our popeshippe: but the
Emperor moved by our byshope wylled him to hold his peace, and commanded
the other imbassadours, that they should also say their minds. Then the
Embassadoure of Antioche spoke in this wise. Thembassadore of Antioche.
Because me thinks it sufficientlye declared that holy scripture does not
only not stablishe the primacie of Peter, but also seem quite contrary
thereunto: I will speak my mind breflye as I am commanded, neither will I
bring any more reasons, or arguments then this one, although it be easy to
find a number. Be it that we granted Peter to be the universal byshope
ordained of Christ over his church (which thing is not true) yet must it
not therefore be granted that the bishops of Rome ought to be popes, but
rather our bishops of Antioche ought to be the chief, and universal
bishops. Because that our bishops, and not the byshopof Rome were the
successors of Peter. For Peter was bishop of Antioche, and so unlikely a
thing is it that Peter was ever at Rome. To this argument master Pseudologus
made answer in the name of our pope, crying out with a loud voice until his
sides cracked again, saying. Peter was here our bishop in Rome, and our
pope.xxv. years together continually, and in this same city was he afterward
crucified. Then Thimbasadour answered. A pretty reward, for pains taken in
preachinge. But tell me I pray you. In what place of scripture find you that
he was ever at Rome? Then answered master Pseudologus: In no place of
scripture quod he. But it may well be found in our Historiographers, and in
many other books of our bishops. and other holy men. Whereunto
thimbassadoure answered. Then how know you by the word of god, that your
bishops of Rome be the chief universal bishops of the church of Christ,
if ye have not that in holy scripture, that Peter was ever at Rome? Trewely if
ye intend to prove your bishops to be popes by the word of God: ye must
first prove by the same word that Peter was ordained of Christ the universal
head of his whole church. And then must ye prove by the word of god, that
Christ undoubtedly gave the same authority to Peter to make the bishops of
Rome after him chief bishops by continual^ succession, and last of all it
must be proved by suer authority of the word of god, that Peter was at Rome*
and bishop of that city, and dyed there. These things done ye might well
believe that your bishops were popes by the word of God. But there is not
one of these three things, that ye ca^ prove by scripture, especially the
second and the third, as ye your selfs do confess. Wherefore I can not
see with what face ye can bear down so manifest a lie. Then master
Pseudologus said. We know that our bishop is pope, and that with a fulness of
power, and we know that he has received this authority of Christ by the
means of. S. Peter, and not of man wherefore we know him to be pope by the
law of god, and not by the law of man, and we will also hold, and believe
this truth as an article of our faith notwithstanding that none of these
things before rehearsed can be proved by thauthoritie of holy scripture. Then
said thimbassadour.

Because we all be bound to believe the articles of our faith, as the
foundacions, and chief principles of our religion, it is needful that they
appear most plainly by scripture. And you will set fire, and torments
before the whole world, to make men believe that thing, which by your own
confession can not be proved by the authority of the holy scriptures. Where I
pray you can men lay the foundation of their faith, if they be compelled to
believe, and to confess as a necessary article of their faith, your Bishop to
be the universal head of the church of Christ, when there is not one word
thereof in the holy scripture? Yt is an intolerable tira^ny, the like whereof
has not been herd to bind the conscience of men to receive so manifest a lie
for an article of their faith, seeing it can not only not be proved by gods
word, but also all the whole scripture is against it. You ought to be content
to bind men to believe that the Pope has the highest authorite of all. But ye
will further compel them to believe that, that power, and authority comes
fullye, and wholly from God, and not from manne, although that thing can in no
wise be proved by scripture. Furthermore he would have it be believed that it
may be proved by holy scripture that our Bishop was Pope, when you your
selves be forced to grant that it can not be proved by holy scripture, yt
Peter was ever at Rome. Of this chief and universal byshoprike of your
bishop ye can have none other opinion, but that it is a devise of man,
seeing the contrary can not be proved by the word of God: And you will have it
received for an article of ye faith, and that it shall be believed with an
heavenly faith. If ye be not sure whether Peter were ever at Rome, or not,
for the which cause ye chaleng your bishop to be chief, and the successor
of Peter, how can ye have certain knowledge of this your chief Byshoprike,
but upon the saying of men only who naturally be liars? To this master
Pseudologus made answer. The men which said that Peter was at Rome were the
chief bishops of all other, and therefore could they not lie, when they so
said. Wherefore we be sure and certain of our popeshippe. Then the imbassador
said: Ye take for a ground that thing, which ye had most need to prove. That
is, that your Bishops were chief Bishops: and then, again that they
could not err, both the which points I utterly deny. If ye would say,
some saints affirm Peter some time to have been at Rome. I would straight
make answer that I knew not whether they were Saynctes or not, for that there
is no word thereof in scripture. But ye will peradventure say, they were
canonized of our chief Bishops, which could not err: to that will I
answer as before, that ye take that thing for your proof, which remains
first to to be proved. Yea and more over will I say, be it that ^e were
assured that they were Saynctes, yet must it be granted that Saynctes have
sometime erred. And so it may be that they erred even the very same time, when
they said Peter was once at Rome. Namely the thing being spoken of them, not to
that end that it should be received for an article of our faith necessary
for salvation, as your mind is: thus by all means be you in an error. But let
us grant that there has been some reuelacion touching this point, surely I
must needs think that it was an elusion of the devil. Yea be it that it were
God him self, which had reveled the same thing unto you, and that it were
truth in deed, yt it was a reuelacion from god: yet because there is no word
in all scripture of the thing, neither have other men this reuelacion of
yours, ye should in no wise force men to believe this your popeshippe, as an
article of their faith. And furthermore I will prove by strong reasons, that
these historiogrephers of yours, these byshopes, and sayntces, which wrote
that Peter was the chief bishop at Rome, and was put to death in ye same
city, lied unreasonably. And first of all tell me in good faith. What time
say they that Peter was at Rome? and how long dwelt he there? That Peter was
not at Rome.
Thereunto au^swered Pseudologus. That he came to Rome the second year of
Claudius themperoure, and was made bishop there, and dwelt there.xxv. years,
by whose preachinge Rome was brought to the faith of Christ, as both
Eusebius, and. S. Hierome has written. Then answered thimbassadour. This is
once plain (quod he) yt Christ suffered upon ye cross xviii. year of
Tiberius the emperor, who reigned xxiii years. After him succeeded Caius and
reigned iiii. year. Then followed afterward Claudius. Now then if Peter came
to Rome the second year of Claudius, ye must needs grant that Peter came to
Rome within xi. years after Christ's death. Again on the other side: it is
plain by the words of holy scripture, that Paul was not only not converted
to the faith when Christ suffered upon the cross, but it appears also that
he was not converted, when stephane was stoned. Because the scripture is plain
that he kept their garments, which stoned Stepha^ to death. This being so,
Paul himself writes to the Galathians yt he came to Jerusalem.xvii. years
after he was converted, Gala. ii.
and that then he found Peter there. This was at the least the.xviii. year
after the death of Christ. Then if Peter were yet at Jerusalem.xviii. years
after the death of Christ, how can it be that he came to Rome the second
year of Claudius, as you say, which was theleuenthe year after Christ's
death. You your selves may easily perceive when ye say so, that ye speak
directlye against the manyfeste words of the scripture. Furthermore Peter was
at Jerusalem, not only eightene years after the death of Christ, but
the same time also was he sent to preach the gospel not to the Romans but to
the Jews. And it is to be believed that he preached ye gospel amongst the
Jews. Roma. xvi. b
And Paul also in the same epistle, which he wrote to the Romans, because he
saluteth a great many there by name, trewly he would have saluted Peter also,
if he had then been the chief bishop there, as you contend. Wherefore it is
easy to be proved that it is a very false lie, that your Historiographers do
write. But to say the truethe, they, that be named to write this gear, be not
the authors thereof, but they be your lies, which you have annexed
maliciously to their books directly repugninge to the manifest authority of
the holy scripture. Then master Pseudologus brought forth a very old book,
that lay by him, so old that it was eaten with mothes, and worms, wherein
there were certain Epistles I can not tell what, written by Clement, as he
said, whom he judged the first bishop of Rome after Peter. In these
letters written by the same Clement to James bishop of Jerusalem this thing
was contained, how Peter being at Rome, and perceiving death draw nere, in
the presence of a number of Christian men, took Clement by the hand, and in
the hearing of them all said. Brethren, my death is now at hand, as Christ
has reveled unto me. Wherefore I ordeyne this Clement your bishop, unto
whom only I deliver my seat, and the preachinge of my doctrine, into whom
only I translate the same power of loosinge and byndinge, which I received of
Christ. Then said Pseudologus. Lo here may you see how that Peter was at
Rome, and ordained Clement bishop after him, and set him in his seat,
grauntinge him his full authority. Then thimbassadour would see and read
those epistles, and when he had red and weied them he said master mine
Pseudologus. Ye can not cloak your lies so craftily, but they will ap^are as
they be, that is to say, lies, even at the first sight. For these epistles of
youres be nothing else but fayninges of your own without authority, full of
vanyties and lies. And that it is true, I say, hereby it may appear, that even
by your own Historyographers Linus followed Peter, and not Clemente.

And after Linus followed Anacletus, and afterward Clement. Who is numbered to
be the fourth after Peter, and yet would you falsely place him to be the
secounde. And more over by your own historiographers, if ye will account the
course of the times as ye should, ye shall find that James was dead seven
years before your Clement was Bishop: wherefore I can not say by what
reason he could writ to James being dead. And again even in the first
beginning of the salutacion, he calls him Bishop of bishops, who should
govern not only the church of the Jews at Jerusalem, but also all other
churches. And if James were then Pope, trewely then was not Peter Pope, and
therefore could he not make Clement Pope after him, neither by Clemente his
successors. And more over even by the same very words, that ye allege, that
Peter should say to Clement before his death, it can not be proved that
Clement was ordained universal Bishop of all churches: but only the
bishop of the church of Rome. Besides this, if Clement was made Bishop of
Rome by Peter, as you say he was, and not chosen of the people, no doubt his
successors would have followed the same example, which thing they did not, and
therefore it is false that Peter made him Bishop. I will pass over that
neither Eusebius, neither Hierome, number these Epistles amongst Clementes
works. Distinct.xv. Sancta Romana eccles.
Yea and Clement him self in these Epistles prayseth a book that he should
write, the title whereof is Itinerarium Clementis, which book of truth was
never of his making. And furthermore this book makes mention of dioceses,
archbyshoprikes, primacies, and bishoprikes, which orders, and names were not
yet distincted and appointed out, neither does he any thing else in these
Epistles, but set forth the dignity and fredome, of priests: whom he will
have so free, that they shall not intermedle themselves with any handycraft,
for a proof of the which absurdity he cites certain places of holy
scriptures wrythed beyond the nocke. More over in his second Epistle he is so
bold to teach James of what sort he should minister the Sacraments. And yet
that fashion is not observed this day, namely in the administracion of the
lords supper. Furthermore none of the ancient writers make any mention of
these Epistles, neither yet of them yt Anacletus or Euaristus should write. He
cites out of the new, and old testament that it is not laweful for priests
to sacrifice or sing mass, but when the Bishop commands them. which
thing can neither be found in the new, neither in the old testament. In the
fyft Epistle he affirms that all things, wyfes and other, should be common,
and that if it be not so it comes of the wyckednes of men. There be also
in the same Epistles many other folishe things and lies, which he rehearsed,
but because ye may read them your self, I will rehearse no more. Master
Pseudologus showed also certain other epistles written as he said by
Anacletus and Euaristus, whereby he minded to stablysh this popeshippe. But
thimbassadour proved by good reasons that they all were of none authority,
because that it is contained in them that Clement should be his predecessor,
which thing Hierome denies, and also Ireneus. Further, he would not yt
priests should be accused, or judged, for a proof whereof allegeth ye
scriptures with out judgment or reason, he will have Bishops judges in
seculer matters, and that every manne may apeale to them. When it is well
known that, that thing was never granted unto them before the time of
Theodosius the Emperor, and again he says that Cephas signifies a head,
where as in deed it signifies a stone. And furthermore I can prove the
Epistles of Euaristus to be of none authority, not only by that he brings
many sentences of scripture sasly writhed yt priests should not be accused of
any lay me^: but also because he writes ad Gallium, and Bardua^, two Counsels,
in whose time Anacletus was Bishop of Rome, and not Euaristus which thing is
evident by the histories. Master Pseudolog us blushed, and was ashamed
wonderfully, when these things were laid to his charge, because he appeared
openly to all men's sight to have played a false part, which thing, when the
ambassador of Antioche perceived, he left him as he was, and gave place to the
imbassador of Jerusalem, who spoke than wonderfully in this wise. The
imbassador or Jerusalem.
There is no doubt but that Christ, who was the chief and universal Bishop of
his church, preached his gospel chiefly at Jerusalem, in ye which place he
was contented to dye for our sakes. And this is also certain, yt James
succeeded in his room, who was next Bishop in Jerusalem after Christ.
Wherefore if there should be any supreme, universal, and visible head
stablished in earth of the church of Christ militant (because it is
sufficiently proved that Peter was not the chief Bishop) our Bishops of
Jerusalem ought to be Popes and not the Bishops of Rome. For you would
have your Bishops of Rome to be Popes because of none other reason, but that
they succeeded Peter: we may much the better challenge our Bishops of
Jerusalem to be chief Bishops, because they succeeded Christ, in so much
as Christ is greater, and more excellent then Peter. As touching Christ it is
known right well that he was the universal head of his church, and that he
was crucified in Jerusalem. And more over not only Paul names James first
before Peter and John: Gala. ii.
but also in the first consell of the Apostles, where as Peter, Paul,
Barnabas, and the rest of the Apostles speak, he as their head and judge,
said his mind last, which was aproued of all thapostles, and of the whole
congregation. And it is not to be doubted but that, if the church of Jerusalem
be the mother, (as she is in deed) of all other churches, and of whom all
other churches had their beginning, wherefore she ought to be called mother,
as it was determined in Nicene counsel: Then must the bishop of Jerusalem,
as the spouse of the church be called the universal father of all other
churches, and the chief bishop, and bishop over all other bishops, as your
Clement calls him in his first epistle, if it be his as you do allege,
Then thus he said: These words have I spoken, not that I think our
bishops to be highest by any means (for Christ only is thuniuersall head
of his church, who is only sufficient) but to declare unto you by a certain
suer reason, if there must be any supreme head in earth, the same ought
rather by right belong to our bishop, then to the bishop of Rome. Ye may now
see how much vanity there is in your reasons, when our reasons be so
sclender and yet better then yours. For Christ made neither Peter, neither
James y^ supreme head of his church And yet in the first coun^ell of the
Apostles James said his mind last as bishop of Jerusalem, Gala. ii.
and Paul names him before Peter, and John. But it follows not therefore
that he was universal bishop above all other bishops. Notwithstanding this one
thing is true, that our church must be called the mother of all other
churches, not that it ought to govern all other churches, as you make your
argument. Which thing can not be: but because all other churches, had their
original and first beginning of it. Wherefore our bishops have the first
place in the counsel appointed unto them, and be called bishops of the first
seat, because of the estimacion of the city, wherein Christ was put to
death. But they must not therefore be called the bishops of other bishops,
and the universal heads of the church of Christ. The imbassador of
Alexandria.
The imbassadour of Alexandrya, interrupted this imbassadour of his tale
saying. What need we so many words in so plain a matter? If the bishops of
Rome had received this authority at Christ's hand, yt they should be chief
bishops and governors of al other bishops, as you say, al churches and their
bishops with the^ (the church of Rome only excepted) had been from the death
of christ until this day ever still heretics, and scismatikes, because they
never acknowledged him to be their supreme head. And moreover all counsels,
which has been holden until this day, should have been but deuelish
metynges, because they neither allowed, neither declared the bishop of Rome to
be Christ's vicar, and the supreme head of his church. But Nicene counsel
chiefly, should have been deuelys^e, not only because it gave not the first
place to the byshope of Rome, but the fourth: but also much more because they
took so great, and so heavenly a power away from him, the best part whereof
they gave to our bishop of Alexandria, who had the charge committed unto him
of the churches in the East parties, unto whom he was appointed governor. And
the counsel of Affrike should have passed all other in heresy, wherein it was
establyshed, that the bishop of the first seat ought not to be called the
head priest, chief bishop, neither by any such like title, but chiefly
because there was an ordinance made in express words, that the bishop of
Rome by name must not be called the universal bishop. This is very certain,
if the byshopes received this monarchy of god: then were these counselles
deuelyshe, which took this divine power away from them. Cyprian also should
hauebene an heretic, not only because he callethe the Bishop of Rome brother
in his epistles, which he wrote unto him, but much more because he maynteyneth
with. S. Augustine, that there is none, which is bishop of other bishops: and
that it is a great tyranny to desire to be lord over other bishops. And
also your. S. Gregory should not only not have been a sayncte, but also an
extreme wicked and a condemned parsone. For he writes expressly, that he
which, would be bishop of all other bishops, shall not have the place of
Christ in earth, but of Lucifer: and shall be very antichriste himself. And
further he brings in a number of inconveniences, which should insewe, if
the bishop of Rome should take upon him the dygnitie of the chyefe bishop,
as though it were by the law of god.

Then thus he said: Seeing then that this your primacie is not godly, nor of
God, ye must of force grant that it is either of man, or else of the devil.
But it is not of man, as I will prove by strong reasons: wherefore it is of
the devil. That it is not of man this will I prove. The Emperor himself
can not give unto you any spiritual power. For you your selves grant that
this dignity, which ye have is not given you of the Emperor but of Christ.
Wherefore ye must acknowledge Christ to be your supreme head, as all other
Bishops does, who confess not that they received this spiritual authority,
that they have, either of the Bishop of Rome, or else of the Emperor, but
of Christ only. So that the Emperor can not give unto you any dominion, or
power, sauinge that, which is temporal, and that only in such countries as
be under his governance. Seeing then he has no dominion either in Asia, or
eles in Affrike: He ca^ not make you superiors to us, neither have we any
need to have you to be our governors, the princes, that we have be sufficient
for our tuicion. He may give unto you some temporal power: but yet only in
such proui^ces as be under him in Europa, but he can not give you the chief
place, onles he will willingly forsake his empire, and set you in his place,
and make you above him self. Ye cry, and say that ye be Christ's Uicars:
truly if ye be Christ's Uicars, John. vi. b
ye would endeavor your selves earnestly to follow him. When the Jews would
have made him a king, he fled and would not receive that dignity. But you be
far from following his example, whose Uicars ye seem to be, that ye procured
wonderful ambiciously this chief supreme dygnitie, contrary the express word
of Christ, Math. xx. c Mar. ix. d. x^ ^ Lu. ix. e. xx. b i. Peter. v. a
who perceiving the Apostles to conte^d, which of them should be above other,
he said unto them plainly, he would not have them strive to be lords, and
bear rule, as the princes of this world, but rather to serve. Christ him self
as long, as he was here in earth, John. xviii. ^
would take no temporal dominion upon him, that he might holly be bent to the
sauinge of souls, and that no let should hinder him in settinge forth the
Gospel. Math. xx. d
But you, as though ye were superiors to Christ, will like tyrauntes with the
offense of all the whole world challenge unto you an universal dominion. Seeing
the^ this primacie of yours, is neither of God, neither of man, ye must needs
grant, that it is of the devil. Wherefore we all, as many as be here together,
protest with one assent, and voice, in the name of our churches that we will
not admit this primacie, we allow it not, neither will grant we theru^to. But
utterly, and exepresly we condemn it, we will not obey it, but will withstand
this unbridled terannye of yours to the uttermost of our powers. Then arose
master Gooplanus a stout proctour of the Pope, and thus he began. Our chief
bishop (quod he) has not taken this high dignity upon him to the intent to
offend you, spoil you, or to exercise any tera^ny over you, but only to
defend you, to endewe you with honor, and to profit you, and to enriche you
with benefices, titles, dignities, privileges, immunities, benedictions,
stacions, absolucio^s, dispe^sacio^s, pardons, suffrages, and Iubilies, in the
which things he will serve you all, he wylbe the seruau^te of the servants
of god, wherefore ye ought not to withstand him in a thing so profitable unto
you. To this the same imbassador answered saying: As long as ye can not prove
by unanswerable arguments that your Bishop is equal with Christ, in
spirit and love, we will never assent that he shall be our Bishop, and
supreme head. If ye will have us to acknowledge him not only to be our chief
Bishop, but also our chief prince (as by your arguments ye appear to go
about) and that we ought to believe that he may challenge unto him both the
authorities, ecclesistical, and civil: ye must of necessity first show that
he is above Christ in wisdom, power, and love, because it is well known that
Christ would in no wise take upon him any civil governance, in this world.
We be affrayed of so monstrous, and horirible a head. Wherefore we can not
allow this authority, neither that he should be our superior. If you
intend to admit him, take heed ye be not to hasty, for ye shall perceive, to
your utter undoing, that he is no shepeherd, but a bloody woulfe. Then arose
master Thrasibristus so suddenly, and so fearslye that it appeared he could
stay him self no longer. And being indewed with a wonderful power, stoutnes,
violence, and fury: thus he said. What need we have so many words for the
defense of our Popeshypppe, seeing there has been brought strong reasons
enoughe to overcome the grossest wit in the world, in so much that a blind
man may see the truethe of them? Wherefore because these our reasons, our
pleasures, our gentylnes, and fair promises, can not content them, our most
holy father must use his large and endeles authority. And then turnyng
himself and speaking to the Pope he said. You most holy father be the
supreme head of the church of Christ, and therefore be you above all other
parsons, men, Angels, reasons, holy scriptures, authorities, yea and above the
whole world. There is no man may judge you, or else co^ma^nde you, for so it
is come to pass: Now ye be Pope, and being Pope ye can not err. Therefore
only say thus: We be Pope, and we will be Pope, and it is enough. Your power
and authority is so great, that if ye were not pope, (if yet ye once prononced
these words: we will be) ye should be out of hand. Then loking upon the
imbassadors with a fearce countenance, he said: If ye will be rebels to his
holiness, ye shall feel the lighteninges, and thunderboltes of his
exco^munications and cursinges fly in the air, even to the furthest country
in the East, and then shall ye know whether he be pope or not. Moreover we
shall have Cesars help and favor joined to our strengthes, so that all we
coupled in one will defend the popes authority with our sword. Then all the
imbassadours arose at once, to answer this saying with one accord, but there
was a sign made to the popes chaplayne that he should do as he was bidden,
and straighte way he began with a loud voice, the himne: Te Deum laudamus.
The noise whereof filled the air up to the sterres, and all the rest followed
them, crying: whow victoria, victoria, victoria. And even at the very same
instante range all the belles in Rome. The pope himsefe was by and by caught
with men's hands, and borne upon their shoulders, and so they carried home the
most holy father to his place with a great pomp and triumph. Now must ye
not meruaylle though ye saw me, as ye said in the beginning iocunde and
merye.


Mas. Alas what became of the poor imbassadors?


Lepi They were all stryken in a dumpe by and by: and departed to their innes
sad and heavy, taking this great rebuke so well as it might be.


Mas. If I had been in their co^es, I would not have thought, that it had been
good taryinge for me then in Rome.


Lepi. I think no man would use any violence against them.


Mas. Well, I am suer the pope would no more send them wine of Grecia, and
Corsica.


Lepi. Or if he sent any, it should peradventure be myngeled. But now can
I tarry no longer with you for now I see the night drauethe on, and I have an
exceeding deal of business to do. Think ye not, where this disputacion was?
even where there was none else by, saving the popes most faythefull friends,
who would say nothing but that should make for the pope.


Mas. If it be, as you say, either will they hold their peace, or else they
have very little to say to their commendacion.


Lepidus. Ye be in a manifest error. For there was never so great a lie, but
it may be so craftily colored, and painted, that the blind common people may
think it very true. I have now told you all the whole matter, desieringe
you to keep it secret as ye promessed me at the beginning.


Mas. I will do the best I can, but me thinks it will be very hard for me
so to do. I thank you hartelye for your pains for shewinge this pretty storye
so fully, and so diligently.


Lucifer. Beelzebub. I Have thought good to call you again to gether here in
this place, that I might rejoice with you for the birth of Antichrist, so
happy, and so unlooked for: even as the angels reioysed in Christ's nativity.
But now must we lay our heads to gether, and take counsel by what means,
and devise we may establishe this our kingdom, and increase it, and bring it
to the highest degree of all wickedness, and mischief. Me thinks it were best
first to go about so to set forth and amplify his honor, that men by
little and little may take this Antichriste for a certain God in earth, and
honor and magnify him even as their god. That we may use the high
authority, which he has, for a handsome and strong instrument to the
committinge of all kinds of deceyptes, mischefes, and wickedness. We will
pryn^e in men's hearts (as much as in us lies) that Christ gave the keys
of the kingdom of heaven to Peter, and his successors and also full power, and
jurisdiction, not only of the empire of this world, but also of the heavenly
kingdom.

Beelze Truly this thing pleases us very well, so that he have none
authority in hell over us, for we be surely persuaded, that he will come to so
high a degree in abhominacion, and wickedness, that if he should have the rule
over us, but one day, he would bring us into a great deal worse case then we
be.


Luci. Yt is even as thou say. But we will foresee to yt ieoperdy wisely
enough, for my trust is to bring him to such a wickedness that he shall adventure
with his theuish fingers to corrupt the holy scriptures, and shall violently and
mischeuously wryth them to the establishinge, increasing, and excercisyng, of
his intolerable tyranny. I know well they will not be ashamed to say, when
Christ said to Peter, thou shall be called Cephas, that he mente thou shall
be called head, and so was Peter made head of all thapostles, who willinglye
obeyed that primacie. And also that Peter afterward left this chief high
authority to the Bishops of Rome by succession.


Beelze If the matter would come thus to pass, in case Peter should be
raised again from death he should no more be Pope, no, he should have no
manner of authoritte.


Luci. In deed he should have no more then should please our Bishop of Rome
to grant him of his bountiful liberality. And this thing is very notable,
we will cause all their lies to be written in their canons, and so will we
blind the eyes of the unlearned, that they shall take the same canons for
things most holy. And also we shall all cause the church of Rome,
notwihstandynge it is most wicked and heretical, that it shall not only be
accounted for the church of Christ, but also it shall be taken for the head
and mother of all other churches.


Beelze. Surely the churches of Christ will never so take it, though our
churches so do.


Luci. Yes, men shall have this opinion of the church of Rome chiefelye, and
so of all other churches that shall hang upon her, yt they be y^ churches of
Christ though they be ours never so much. We will persuade also that the
church of Rome is without spot, and worthy to be as a glass and ensample to
all ^ther churches.


Beelze. Yea of all abhominacion.


Luci. All shall follow after her as after a chief lady masters that can not
do amiss, who has full power: unto whom all may appele, and from whom none
may appeal, unto whom men must ru^ne for refuge in matters of weight, as it
were to god, because she may be judge to all other, and be judged of none
other, and may call again her sentences as often as her listithe, and change
statutes made in counselles, and pronounce him an heretic, which darreth
speak one word against it whose seat, dignity, and authority is highest, by
the which authority she may gather general counselles together, and by whom
all doctrines shall be allowed or disalowed: who only may determine and stablishe
controversies in religion of what matter so ever they began. Who only may
expound the old canons and the holy scriptures as it pleases her. And that
all men may honor and obey her, though the thing she command seem
never so wrongefull and intolerable. Now if the church of Rome have once so
large authority, and yet be under the pope, even as the wife is in the
subjection of her husband: consider then with your selves how great
authority our high bishop of Rome shall have. For besides all these things
rehearsed, he may bring to pass that the sentence which he has once given
and allowed for good may be vain and of none effect: he only shall have
authority to establish new religions, and al such ordinances as he shall make,
must be received with no less reverence then though they had been spoken with
gods own mouth. Because that his goodness shall be the health of men, and may
have none other judge but god alone, and that it is not necessary that he
should pourge himself of his fault when he is accused by other: because Peter
has left to all bishops of rome by continual succession not only al his
merits, but also his innocence, and because he has authority over justice:
and also because his power is of god, and themperours of the pope, and has
authority full, and whole in earth to apoynt and determine what him lists in
all controversies, that come in question in matters of religion, for he has
the solutions of all controuersyes hid within his breast, and he is the heyer
of all thempier, and of the kingdom of the Romans, and therefore may he do
what he will, for he has as much authorytie as ever had Peter.


Beelze. This only thing, excepted, that he can not raise dead men to life
again, as Peter once did.


Luci. He only has thauthoritie to canonize Saints, he only is above al
cou^selles, and ordinances, he only may dispense against justice, and he only
may change gods definitive sentence. And if it were so that all the whole world
should speak against the pope, yet must ye mind of the pope only be allowed.
He only has ye knowledge of the church, and that after such a sort, that he
only ca^ change the nature of things, and make somewhat of nothing. In him
only must the will only be estemedfor the best reason, that can be devised,
not so hardy that any man should say unto him, why do you this, or this thing
after this or that fashion. For he can make righteousness of wrong, and amend
all things as he shall think good, he ca^ expound, and change laws, and make
al square things round, as one that is neither pure god, neither pure manne.


Beelz. Then shall he be a deuell, or else some kind of brute beast. But I
think it no very hard thing to persuade all this gear to him, his mind is
so wonderfully puffed up with ambicion.

Yet can I not see how men may be made believe, that the Pope is their God
in earth.


Luci. Yea, ye know not that it is an easy thing to deceive the common sort
of the unlearned, namely in matters of religion. You know right well yt they be
naturally enclining to al kinds of supersticio^. There is none so shameful a
lie, nor no deceypt so far out of frame, that the world will not reedely
receive, if it be delivered them by any authority with some color, and
lykelihod of a truth. What christian man is he, which will not wyllyngly
believe, that Christ, is ascended up into heaven, and has left his Uicar here
in earth indwed, and furnished with a full power and authority to do all manner
of things? At the least wise that faults might be amended, which amongst a
number of matters, readely arise in the church by the reason of his absence.
And that especially, when the world has conceived a wonderful good opinion
of their life and learning, which shall be the setters forth of the matter.
And more over we will accurse him, what so ever he be, and declare him an
Apostata, a blasphemer against the holy ghost, irregular, worthy to be
suspended, and disgraded, that will adventure to speak but one word against
our Popehod. And if it fortune that he be a Bishop, or a priest that commit
this fault, we will have him declared excomunicate, delivered into the power of
Satan, an heretyke, a defamed person, an infidel, a committer of Sacrilege, a
Sismatike, a dampened and a cursed body. Who is, that will not be affrayed of
these words? When the very sound of them being spoken is so fearful? If
these threteninges will not be sufficient, then in deed will we attempt most
cruel persecucions, men shall be cast in prison, and shall lose both life and
goods. There shall be no fault in the world more heynously punished then this
one of disobedience against our Popehod. Men shall hear God blasphemed, and
some deny the might of God, and some mock God: and yet shall all men laughe
and make a game thereat as though it were but a trifelyng matter. But if any
manne shall attempt to deny the Popes power, or to deminish the same never so
little, he shall be burned alive with long tormente. More over we will cause
all the books to be burned as many as shall seem to make any thing against
our pophod. Yea, and we will forbid men that they shall not have the holy
scripture in thyr hands nor in their sight under the pain of fire and rope.


Beelze. This thing would they do very gladly because the scriptures be
against them. But it would be so manifest and open sacrilege and wickedness,
that it can not well be cloked with no color, pretense, fraud or craft. Truly
it shall be enough to corrupt the scriptures, and violently to writhe it to their
crooked purpose without al fear or shame.


Luci. They shall not allow nor suffer any books to be red but such as
maynteyne this craft and falshod. So that even as the simple sheep, follow their
shephearde: so shall the Christen men their heads, and we will so endeavor our
selves to blind men, that they shall not only believe and magnify this
high bishop for their private commodity: but they shall also defend it tothe
and nail even to the very death.


Beelze. But how may it be brought to pass, that they shall not see so
manifest a lie, they being the heads of the church?


Luci. We will iuggle their eyes with proud tytles, high dignities, offices,
and benefices, the revenues of whom shall be fat stipendes, that they may make
gaudes and triu^phe with all abou^dau^ce of pleasure. We will also make laws yt
the people shall not only reverence them, but shall also esteem them as gods
for their religions and popish holiness. And again yt men shall always study,
and occupy al y^ wits in their heads to preserve and increase this dignity,
whereunto there may apeare some hope yt they shall atteyne: all shall hang
upon the popes sleue, not for fear only of loss of their office, benefices,
yerlie revenues, and promotions: but also upon hope to get more. Now may you
easily judge whether they will apply the powers of their strength and wit, or
not, for ye settinge forth and establyshing of our pope hod, and the earnester
they will be in this point, the more necessary and profitable a thing it
will be to them to defend the same. For if the popeshippe once fall, they should
all sterue for hunger, because they have none honest craft, or exercise to take
them to. Yea and I will cause, the pope to forbid them al honest kinds of
exercises, and that under a color of religion and holiness, lest peradventure
ye hands and consciences of spiritual me^ should be fouled with laboringe,
they shall all be occupied (such shall be the bosting) about ye health of
souls. So great shall they be that they shall disdain to preach gods word:
neither shall they be otherwise occupied, then in celebrating, again, and
again their cold and supersticiouse ceremonies, and that with such a pomp
and glory, that it shall be a shewinge and a settinge fourth of themselves.


Beelze. In what kind of exercise then shall they occupy themselves all their
life time, for it is a very paynefull thing to be always ydell.


Luci. They shall not be always ydell good sir, but shall have something ado
always, in disynge, cardinge, bankettinge, in wantonness, contencion, and other
such like courtly pastymes. And that they may be more diligent in the
maynteyninge of this popeshipe, I will provide for them under a pretense of an
ecclesiastical law, yt they shall be disbordened, and fre from all exactions of
princes of this world. More over I will make a law whereunto shall be sworn
all bishops, and Doctors, that they shall not only attempt no thing against
this popehod, but also shall maynteyne, and defend it to the vttermoste of
their power. And also for the stablishement of our Antichriste, it shall be
s^ablyshed by a law, that these wicked wretches, moved thereunto by our
spirit, shall sometime congregate them selves together in their wicked
counselles only to keep down, and extinguish (by a common consent) the
treuth of the gospel. By means of the which congregation they shall retain
all the princes and magistrates of the earth to confirm their tyranny, and
to defend this detestable abhominacion of the Pope. And we will make the
world believe that such counselles can not err, which thing will be easy to
compase: men shall be so blind and ignorant. We will also devise for the popes
pleasure a new kind of divinity altogether vain, supersticiouse, void of
learning, heretical and wicked, full of vanities and darkness, of man's
inue^tions, doub^es, questions, and contencions, the mother of all sects,
errors and, abominations.

This evil kind of divinity shall bring in such a darkness, that it shall
hurt and deceive very good wits. There shall be no scole, neither
university, which shall not be hurted and infected with this Antichrist of
ours. Good letters shall be banyshed, and so shall they lack all good
learning, in so much that their children (though they be baptized, and
therefore dedicated to God) they shall learnenothinge* else in their scoles but
vain and filthy tales. And furthermore that the tyranny of this Bishops
empire may be the more stronglye, and surely established, the Popes being
inspired with our spirit shall write decrees, and decretalles, that is to
say: profane, wicked and abominable sentences. And yet not withstanding, the
world shall be in such a blindenes, that they shall think them very holy
decrees. And to conclude in few words, though God only be to be
wurshypped, and prayed unto with a true loving intiernes of minds: yet by my
crafts will I bring it to pass, that the Pope shall command men to pray
not only to Angels, and Saynctes, and to such as were most wicked, and yet by
him canonized: but also unto their Images, pictures, and relics, and that
with as stinking a kind of supersticio^ as may be.


Beeze. Uerely I can not perceive how ever it will come to pass, that
christian men may fall into so manifest vices, wickednesses, and ydolatry.
Of a truethe, if there would come such a time, wherein these detestable vices
might be committed, that ye have now spoken of: I think the christian men
would have more ydoles, then ever had either the Jews, or the gentiles, and
would excede with their wickedness and ydolatry all other nations of the world.


Luci. But I promise you that we may easily bring it to pass by the means of
this our head, that men shall fall both into these, and al other kinds of
abhominacions. If ye doubt how this thing may be brought to pass I will tell
you, that ye may help to set it forward to the uttermost of your powers.
It is not unknown unto you, yt they have a custom in ye church of Christ,
when any christian man suffrereth martyrdom: the rest of the Christian
congregation doethe what they ca^ to have their bodies honorably buried, as it
is a thing both honest and godly. And their Bishops yearly upon the same
day, that those martirs suffered be wont to make mention of their constancy
and victory: to the intent that men should be encouraged, not only to follow
the example of the Saynctes that they may be strong to dye for the glory of
Christ, if the thing so require: but also for a witness of the resurreccion,
that is to come, and to bring men in a contempt of this life, which shortly
will faade, and perish, into the hope of life everlasting. Which devotion
God has soundrye times approved, and confirmed with soundry miracles. Now will
we move and stir men under a pretense of religion, and holiness to rip and
cut up their dead bodies, and to put their bones in vessels of Crystal,
silver, or gold, and to set the^ upon aulters, where the lords supper is
acustomed to be ministered, as in a place most holy, and replenyshed with all
godly religion. In the mean space the people shall flock thither together,
and shall begin not only to pray to the Saynctes, but also to their bones
and relics. Which ydolatry we will confirm with some miracle of ours: by
the same power, that god has permitted unto us, as he promised in holy
scriptures Of this shall arise such supersticion amongst men, and such a
unadvised zeal of religion: that by and by they shall begin to build temples,
chapelles, and aulters, which shall be hallowed in the honor of these Saints,
and there shall the Images of them be set forth to be seen of the people.
Yea and yerelye shall their feasts be kept, that even as a great number of
the Jews ran to Bethania, not for Jesus sake only, John. xi.
but to see Lazarus when they heard tell that he was raised again by Christ
from death: So shall the Christian men run to the churches rather for to
see and worship those Images, and relics of saynctes, then for Christ.
Neither is it to be douted, but that a time will come, when they shall set more
store in very deed by saynctes, then by god, although they will peradventure
be afraid to say so. And also we must handle the pope wisely, whom they shall
take for their god, that he may not only allow these mischiefs, and
abhominacions: but that he may of himself will them, and command them. This
thing will he do not only for the gain and private commodity that shall
arise thereof, when he shall see people ru^ne to dead men's bodies, to Images of
Saictes, to altars, and pictures, and offer there, much money, buyld gorgeouse
and sumptuouse chapels, and churches, and give unto them great yearly
revenues, whereby his kingdom shall be increased, but also for thopinio^ of
religion and holiness that he may show himself as a god in earth, and hab^e
daily to find out new religions and fashions, that were never seen before,
neither known to men, that be alive, neither to the old holy fathers, neither
yet to Christ him self. Then, as tirauntes be accustomed to do, when they
will reign, which make common games, and triumphs, and goodly shows, where
with to occupy men's minds, that the people gasing upon the sightes present
shall have no leisure to fansy how to avoid the tyranne, or to consider how
to discharge their shoulders from the burden of bondage: so shall the pope of a
like sort judge it mete to deuyse daily new rules, new religions, new kinds of
seruinge god, new trades of lyuinge, and new ceremonies. Thus shall he do,
that men being taken, and astonished with merueylinge at these news, and
fast tied with the rope of supersticio^, and blinded with the enchantment of
error: shall have neither leisure, neither mean to open their eyes, whereby to
epsy out the popes abominable wickedness.


Beelze. All this gear pleases us very well, one thing only excepted.


Luci. What is that one thing, which pleases you not?


Beelze Not withstanding that there can no greater abhominacio^ be committed,
then that ye have rehearsed, yet will he now be much worse the^ we. Wherefore I
fear me lest, when he shall dye and come down hither to hell, that as he
passes us in wickedness so he will be above us in dignity.


Luci. Know ye not that as Christ for his humblenes was auaunced above all the
companies of angels: so also must Antichriste for his pride be auaunced above all the orders of deuels? we must take this service well a worth. And as for my
part, suerly I would not stycke to lease my chief rule in hell, of condition I
might wreke my malice upon god. Think ye that he will desiere to be any
thing else over us then our head, as he is in the world the head of our
members?

But I pray you suffer me to make an end of my matter. Ye know right well that
the chosen of God be saved by the mere mercy, and goodness of God through
Christ, who is dead for them upon the cro^se. Yea and that the good things,
which either they have now, or had in times paste, or here after shall have,
all came of the pure grace, and tender mercy of God by the death of Christ,
whi^es they believe in heart and mind, and assuredly feale in the spirit that
all these things be given them of God freely: In the which things
consists the true christian religion. But I by the means of our head, will
praise and magnify by little and little the light of nature, as much as may
be, and that man has of himself, his wit, his wisdom, his power, his free
will: and in the mean space will I minishe the law of God, I will bury
Christ, and shadow the grace of God with darkness so wittely, and so warely,
that men shall believe that they be able (as they shall dream) to fulfill the
whole law of God by a certain influence of his grace granted to all men.
And more over to do certain other works of much more perfection then those
works, which Christ commanded, which works they shall call works of
supererogacion. By the means of these works shall be established sundry new
fashions of living, and new rules shall arise, which shall be allowed by our
chief bishop, though they be plain contrary to the law of God, to Christ,
to the grace of God, and to the gospel. And the professors of these rules,
studying under a pretense and shadow of great holiness, and perfectnes of
religion to amplify the dignity of the chief Bishop, and commending it
above the moon, as blind leaders of the blind, shall first deceive them
selves, and afterward almost the whole vniuersalll world. These new monstrous
creatures shall preach: these shall be believed, when they shall cry that the
law of God is imperfect, and that their fathers have fulfilled that, which
was of God omitted, and have joined many perfections to the law of God, not
disclosed to the world as yet neither by the Prophets, neither by Christ,
neither by the Apostles, without the keeping of the which things men can
not be perfect. Furthermore they shall affirm and contend that men shall
receive the grace of God by this most holy and strong thing called frewyl,
and that they may by the help thereof keep the law of god and fulfill his
commandments full and whole. And besides these works, which god has
commanded, that they be hable to do other works of more perfection. And they
shall hold ye men may make recompense sufficient to the goodness of god, for all
y^ gifts, which either they have received or shall receive at his hand, how
much so ever it be that they have received. And that they can satisfy for all
the sins which ever they have or shall commit and for what thing else so
ever it be, that they be bound to God for. And that they may of themselves
deserve all manner of goods bodily or gostlye, which either they have, or
shall receive of god. So that they shall imagine them selves hable to deserve so
much glory, that god is not hable to repay and reward the thing that he owes
unto them. And therefore shall they fell their merits to other me^ as though
they had superfluous, and to many. And because they can never sell, or give so
many but that they shall always have a number remayninge, they shall make our
holy father the pope the inheritour of their merits, that he may accomplish
all things for all men requisite. And this rich treasorer of merits he shall
sell wonderful dearly in his Iubilies and pardones, and so fond an opinion
shall they have, that they shall think the^ selves hable to deserve gods fre
election and shall think gods heavenly providence, and all things that belong
to salvation to hang upon their fre will, and upon their pope.


Beelze. If it be so as ye say, then is free will a great Lord, and shall be a
boue god him self. For as I perceive he shall either chose or refuse, health
or condempnacion like a lord, and god as his servant shall minister occasions
and time convenient unto him, so shall the will of god be like a bond woman,
and the will of man like unto a Queen, it shall be necessary not that manne shall
apply his will to gods will: but that god shall apply his will to man's will.
Neither can god chose men without the popes license. So that, incase god had
never so reproved, and rejected any manne: and the pope (in whose hand all
power is) minds to save the same manne, gods determinacion shall be void. And
so shall the pope be greater the^ Christ, and man's fre will also, because the
whole salvation of al man kind shall be in their own power. But Christ
aunsweringe the children of zebedee, of whom the one disired to sit on the
right hand of Christ, and the other on the left, said: it was not in him to
give that thing, because all hong upon gods free election, and Christ also
said not true when he so said, for he should have granted that al depended
upon the pope, and man's free will.


Luci. If he were not such a one he should not be Antichriste. And because
the election of god does abase a man, and casts him down more the^ any thing
else, which thing manne being naturally inclyned to esteem highely himself
can not abide, therefore shall it be an easy thing to persuade to men, that
all the whole matter hangs upon his own fre will, and not upon god. Therefore
will the pope never forsake this office, to promote and further this our purpose
by all the means that he can, and that for many other causes, but chiefly for
that man's merits shall be as it were a ground work of all his merchandise
and vauntage. How beit that he may the be^t^r sell and utter the^, he shall
mingle some merits of Christ amongst them, and shall boast that he has the
key of al these treasures, and full authority to distribute, to apply, to sell,
and to give al at his will and pleasure. And also a time there shall come, when
the world shall believe (because they shall think him a god in earth endued
with most great authority) that he can both bynd and loose, save, or
condemn when it shall be his pleasure. Now may ye easelye perceive whether
men will run to him or not, to bye heaven and paradise of him. Oh how many
and how abominable fantasyes shall men commit, when they shall say to
them selves: what care I? of this am I suer that I can be absolved for money.
What a number of souls shall be damned, thinking to be saved by their own
merits, by the popes pardones, and absolutions, because they shall be without
faith and without Christ? Out of this deuelyshe fountain shall spri^g,
Iubilies, statio^s, pardons, absolucio^s, dispensacio^s, relaxations, and an
infinite number of monstors, which daily they shall devise to sell Christ, and
his merits, and heaven and paradise with all. Furthermore we will cause that
this our mischeuouse paricide^ shall by his fraud and craft persuade Christian
men, that Christ with all his merits, passion, death, and benefits be not
sufficient to save, (I will not say the reproved and rejected sort) but even
the very chosen of god, be it that they believe in Christ with never so lively
a faith. For they must moreover of necessity confess all their sins both
open and private, even the very inward thoughts and desiers, yea and all the
branches and circumstances of them, and disclose al thing whether they be to
be spoken or not to a priest of him appointed.


Beelze. This thing is not possible to be done for their sins be
innumerable.


Luci. Suerly our priests can not devise a better way to hold men's
consciences in a perplexity, doutefull, and uncertain. And so when men shall
be in a continual doutinge, whether they be in the favor of god or not: they
shall run often to our priest, and his gain shall always increase, in that
he shall receive well for his absolutions.


Beelze. If there should such a time come, when I might see Christian men
disclosing their secrets even such, as be of greatiste weight, and that
slaunderinge them selves contrary both to the law of god, and the law of
nature, and oftentimes also with no small offense of their neighbor: to a
wicked thief: and should also suffer their wives, their daughters, and
sisters to open ye botome of their hearts and matters of no honesty, not always
to a gelded man but most commonly to a vicious verlet. I would be bold to say,
they were the most foles in the universal world. But tell me in good faith,
what profit should insewe of this deuelishe folishenes, if it should be
brought in to our church?


Beelze. Oh it should much increase and amplyfie the honor of our bishop, and
his members, and be a very great gain, and profit to his church. For then
should men believe that he by his ministers did pardone sins and not god, and
that the same syns were not forgeuen by the vertewe of the passion of Christ:
but by the vertew of the absolution that they herd the priest speak. And in
confession, mention shall be made of all things saving of Christ, and so shall
we bury Christ together with his passion and death, and god with his grace. And
more over what a great commodity shall it be to the pope trow you, when his
ministers by this means shall know all the secrets of princes, I pass over
how that in hearing of women secretly disclose their dishonestie, with all the
circumstaunces thereof, and all dishonest thoughts and desieres: such
confessors being inflamed with the communicacion, and consideringe craftily
how their minds be inclined: will begin many fayer and handsome snares,
(which they may easily make) whereby to hold them, even as it were by the
here of the head, when they are once made pryuye to their secrets. And ye may
furthermore guess that priests will not give their labor in absoluing for god
have mercy: but will rather sell it for no small some of money. And they shall
also require them to do the penance that they have enjoined them. Which
thing shall make much for their commodity, and also profyt not a little to
their holy church of Rome.

And this thing also shall be with out doubt, that the Pope being desirefull of
part of the gain shall reserve many matters, and offenses, from the which no man may be absolved but at Rome of the Pope himself, or else of his
confessors appointed there, so that money must walk largely.


Beelze There be also many sely old wives, which have breathes that savor
not all the best, I marvel how the confessors shall tarry to hear the
rekening of all their faults


Lucie They shall dispatche such quickly with two or three words, with out
tariaunce in searchynge out the bowelles and botome of every vice, as they
shall do with the younger women.


Belze. And how I pray you may we bring it to pass, that this confession
may be used amongst men?


Luci. Ye know well that christian men, which be troubled in conscience, be
straight wont to run to some learned manne for counsel, how they may have
lively faith, and be increased and established in the same, how they may take heed to themselves from sin and be perfect, whom the said learned men
absolve, that is, they show them by gods word, that they be absolved, if
they believe in Christ: and so he gives them counsel, and shows them the
light of truth. Ye know also that such, as be excomunicated be wont after
repentance to come to the priest, and show him that they be sorry for their
offenses, who perceyuinge that it is true, absolueth them, and does notify to
the whole congregation, that they be absolved and amended, by the means whereof
they shall be received of al men as brethren. Then do they inioyne them penance
for their publyke offenses, which they have committed, not that they can
satisfy in the syghte of God by that penance, before whose throne Christ has
made sufficient satisfaction, but to be an example to other, yt neither they,
nor any other commit the like any more. These will be good and handsome
beginninges, whereby to bring in by little and little our confession. For we
will persuade men, that the priest must know their consciences, that they
may be absolved of their sins. And then will they tell all their offenses
both open and secret, yea and they will believe that they be absolved not by
Christ, but per opus operatum (that is) by the work that is wrought of
confessing, that is to say: for the remembryng of their sins, for the shame,
wherewith they be touched in telling their sins, for the contricion, for the
absolucion of the priest, for ye penance to the^ enjoined, and for the Popes
pardons. Neither need you to doubt, whether the Bishop will be content with
this confession, for he will gladly command it to all christian men* and yt
it may be the more esteemed, he shall boast and lie that he received it of
Christ, with such a commendacion that he ought to be burned, which denies it
to be of the law of God. But this thing I would have not unknown unto you,
that such men as be opressed with tyranny they be delivered by death from
all boundage and servitude, if they be not delivered before. But as for the
poor christians, though they dye, yet can they not by any means avoid the
tyranny of our Pope, for at that time especially they be snared, that is to
say, in the hour of death, and be taken prisoners in a place (where or what
it is I can not tell) named purgatory. This purgatory shall be builded by our
Pope full of flame and fire, whereof he only shall have the keys out of
which place no man can get out oneles the Pope license him, and yet paying a
sum of money, whereof shall so much gain arise, that the profyt of that only
shall be more unto him then of all the rest of his promotions and benefices.


Beelze. And who is that shall come in to this purgatory of theyrs? they, which
dye in faith, or out of faith?


Luci. They that dye in faith, for all the other be ours without purgatory.


Beelze. Then is not god with his grace enough for such, neither Christ with
his life, passion, and death, neither the help of so many saints, neither
his own merits, nor confession, nor contricion, nor satisfaction, nor
absolution, nor all the penance in the world, neither Iubilies neither yet
pardons.


Luci. In this our confused kingdom of Babylon all things must be doutful and
uncertain.


Beelze. What? our faith in Christ also?


^uci. That shall be altogether doutful, for this shall they take as a chief
article of their faith, that every manne ought to dout of him self whether
they be chose^ or not? whether god hate the^ or favor them? whether Christ
died for them or not? yea and though he died for the^ never so, yet whether he
satisfied for their sins or not?


Beelze. And how can they establyshe this purgatory of theyrs?


Luci. Our word shall be their ground.


Beelze. How?


Luci. I will show you, when you shall obsesse any man, and their priests and
friars come with their coniuringes to conjure you, ye shall say that ye be the
soul of some of their acquayntance, which died long agone, and remain to
this day in a place full of flames and fire that they call purgatory, where you
must remain until their sins be clean pourged, and that ye shall sone be
delivered if they will procure a certain number of masses to be said for
you, and if they once promise you to do so, then ye will for a testimony of
the matter trouble no more the party so obsessed, which thing ye shall
perform, if it be promised. Then when men shall perceive it to be a matter
in good earnest, they shall think, it to be so in deed. And priests, and
monckes shall favor much the matter for the great gaynes, that they shall have
thereby. Yea, and they shall so favor it, that in continuance of time it
shall be made an article of the faith, though it be a thing most wicked. And
they shall be rewarded with faggot and fire that will adventure to speak one
word against it. And also they shall persuade the unlearned that this fond
flameles fire of purgatory may be proved by the holy scriptures. And here
likewise shall the Popes authority be required, that it may be streatched
out to purgatory.


Beelze. Me thought I herd you speak of masses, what things they be I can
not tell. Wherefore my desire is to know what kinds of creatures these masses
be.


Luci. Truly of other things, yt belong to ye Popes dominion, the mass is
both most holy, and most pestilent, In the outward show, and shynninge, and
beutie it shall be most holy: but yet in deed most pestilent. Ye know right well
that the Lords supper was instituted of Christ in the remembrance of his
passion, and being distributed, as it should be in love and apostolical
simplicity was a thing, and is to this day, that has brought much comfort,
and consolacion to the chosen of God. But now our holy father shall not
only change the substances of it, but also change the accidents of it in
the mass. So that the supper of the Lord shall no more be the supper of the
Lord, neither in substance, neither in fashion, neither in lykelyhod, neither
in show: but it shall be all together contrary and enemy to it self, and
full of wickedness and supersticion. For whereas the Lords supper was first
ordained of Christ to call again the passion of Christ to the remembrance of
the faithful: they, to blot out that excedyng great benefit of Christ, shall
boast that they offer Christ again to his father in their masses, not for the
quick only, but also for the dead: as though they should say. When Christ
offered himself once upon the cross to his father, he made not satisfaction
sufficiently enough for the sins of all man kind, wherefore we offer him
again daily, and nail him again upon the cross, desiring the saints to
help him, to make his oblacion perfect. And where as Christ in the institucion
of his supper appointed bread and wine, whose example his ministers should
follow, teaching what thing it is, and to what end, as Christ did, and
exhortyng other that they should lift up their minds into heaven being
stirred by this heavenly Sacrament, that they should have their eye set upon
Christ only, and so by faith to use him for a heavenly food of their souls:
they to auaunce their dignity and authority, and to cause themselves to be
accounted gods in earth, shall persuade men falsely, that liberty to
minister that Sacrament is only granted to the anointed, shaue^, and oyled
priests of ye pope, that ye supper of the Lord shall be translated by that head
of ab^ominacion the Pope, in to the mass. And they shall boast yt these fat
mass mongers with pronou^cing certain words, (what they be I can not tell)
as it were in an inchauntment have not only by and by consecrated, but also
transformed and transubstantiated ye bread into ye body and y^ wine into ye
blude of Christ. This will they do not only to increase their estimacion, but
also ye men being deceived by eating that host, although they be without
faith, shall think they possess Christ clothes, here and al. Yea they shall
bring men into the belefe, that by the only hearing of one of these masses, or
seyinge the host lyfted up, most plentiful grace and pardone (as they call
it) shall be granted. And like erraunt thieves, they shall rob the laytie of
the cup, that is to say of the one half of the supper, against the express
word of god, to declare that they be more worthy men and in higher
authority, and that there is a great difference between the common people and
the popes anointed. They only shall be fed in their private masses, whom they
shall not be ashamed to sell for money. And they shall keep the bread so by them
consecrate in a box as it were in a prison, and that shall they set forth to
the people to be worshipped as a god. And they shall not only carry it about in
their pompes and open shows: but it shall go before the pope as though it
were his foot man. To be short: Though the lords supper be a thing most
holy, yet being changed into the mass it shall be a thing most pes^ile^t.
Moreover the supper, which was ordained of Christ to be unto all Christian me^
as a pledge of his promise, peace, and concord: thesam^ being once abused
shall be thoriginal and well spring of al discord, dissencion, contencio^,
heresies, and sects, for the diverse and sundry opinions that men shall have
of the same Sacrament. We will also make a law that these priests anointed by
the pope shall have no wives.


Beelze Why I pray you?


Luci. That they may apeare outwardly altogether heavenly, and celestial like
angels, so that therefore men shall marvel more at them, and set the more
store by them. Yea and moreover that the pope, and not their children may be
their inheritor. But chiefly that they may be without the troubles, that
chance in matrimonye and being at liberty under this color, may commit
al kinds of fylthenes, that ever was done in all the world.


Beelze. Think you they will condemn marriage?


Luci. They shall say it is a wicked thing. And though it be agreeable to
nature, ordained of god, confirmed of Christ: yet shall they forbid it to their
nonnes, monckes and priests, and to all their other creatures. Yea and at
certain times they shall forbid it to all men, and in certain degrees, that
they themselves have devised, that by the means thereof they may get a great
su^me of money for dispensations. And at certain times they shall forbid
wholesome meat to be eaten, which god has created to be used to his glory, and
to be taken with thanks geuinge. At certain times of the year he shall not
suffer them to eat but once in the day. But all these things shall
notwithstanding be despensed with all for money. He shall make of this sort an
infinite number of other precepts, which he will say be necessary to salvation.
And so in making new articles of the faith he shall wander through al heresies,
which by man's judgment and wisdom have a certain lyklyhode to set forth
gods glory more worthelye. And to comprehend this large matter in few
words: I will apply all the powers of my wit, that this creature of ours may
do much more hurt to the souls of men, then Christ himself did good. And
it is not to be douted, but that we will make of this church a very Babylon.
True it is, that a thing of such holiness can not be brought in a moment
suddenly to the highest degree of abhominacio^, wherefore in this noble myschief
we must go forward by little and little, lettinge none occasion slip, ye
opportunity of time shall offer unto us. Now therefore shall you have my license
to depart, requiringe you to loose no time


Beelze. We will do your commandment.


Mychael. Gabriell. Christ. CHRIST. Mine angels, see you not how a mortal
manne in earth, being most viciouse, and abhominacion it self, with no small
iniurye and contempt of god aduentureth to settel himself in the holy place,
and to boast himself to be my Uicar, and the universal head of my church?
See you not how under that pretense he has crucified me again? and buried me
again with all my great benefits? my gospel, and my grace? See you not how
he has defiled, and infected the holy church my well-beloved spouse, whom I
my self have redeemed, washed and cleansed, with mine own proper blood?


Mich. We see all together, and marvel truly very much how ye could suffer
(now above four hundredth year) such horrible abhominacions.


Christ. Although the judgments of god be for the most part hid from the
knowledge of humayne creatures: yet must they be taken; as they be in deed, to
be righteous and holy. For the will of God, as it is most right, of
necessity, it is not only impossible that it should err it self, but also
it is a rule of all other wills, and therefore must every creature take it
for best reason. And yet one cause can I bring why god would suffer so
much evil to reign so long space.


Mich. We take the unkindness of man to have deserved these great mischiefs,
and that so it ought to be, ye god should suffer the^ so to fall, as they have
fallen into so great evil, darkness, heresies, and michiefes, because they
loved not thee, as they ought, thou being the chief light, truth, wisdom,
life, and ryghteousnes: neither would they obey thy word.


Christ. There be many causes, why god has so suffered this long space: But
the chief is, that he would make his glory more notable. And you know that
during the reygne of this Antichrist not one of the electes have perished.
Saying they be in the hands of me, and my heavenly father none shall take the^
from me, neither can any of them perish. And ye know also that this wicked
abhominacion with all his malice, crafts, fraud, suttelties, errors,
deceytes, prodicions, offenses, evil examples, michiefes, promises,
flatterynges, rewards, thretnynges, slanders, persecucions, torments, and
deaths have not hurt any whit in any one point the soul of any one of my
chose^: But their malice has rather made mine more glorious, in that their
virtue has been tried, as gold in the furnace: and those, that be false
christians by this proof be declared to be hypocrites. And therefore, whether he
will or not, I have used him as an instrument and a servant for the larger
setting forth of gods glory. And more over, God would have all the deuilles
of hell, and all evil men, to abuse this head of theirs to the distruccio^ my
of kingdom, by deceate and violence, that I being moved by that occasion
should withstand overcome, and destroy, this head of abhominacion, and
triumph worthelye of him, as ye shall shortly see, by the which victory I
might set forth more clearly the power and wisdom of God. Mark therefore now
and ye shall see, how that in destroyeng of him, yt he may be destroyed with more
ignonimie, I will not use my power but the bare word of my ministers, whereby I
will disclose these great mischiefs, and will lighten their minds with the
knowledge of the true^he. I know that men will then open their eyes, and
when they shall perceive that they have been so long time buried in such
darkness of ignorance, in that they have wurshipped abhominacion it self instead of God: they will humble themselves under the strong hand of God, and
shall know what a miserable creature manne is and what he can do when he is
destitute of God, into how many dangers he fallethe headlonge, and how
necessary a thing the grace of god is for him. Now be all mischiefs and
abhominacions come even to the hiest state and degree, that they can come, the
measure is full, their wickedness excedeth and is spread over all: therefore must
I no longer suffer. For as I have promised, I must and will shorten these
woeful days of malice for the love of my chose^. Mat. xxiiii. Math. x
I must disclose this wicked head of this abhominacion to his confusion and
gods glory. For as I have said before, there is nothing hidden but must be
reveled. Ye shall see yt when as I took ma^hod upon me, and appeared visible
into the world although sin reigned stirred up by the law, and ruled all,
with a great force and power, yet I in dyinge upon the cross had the victory
and overcame valiantly all the enemies of God: even so now will I triumph of
this shameless and wicked head of abminacion. First and foremost I will destroy
the tyra^nicall dominion, which he has wrongfully used in the simple
consciences of men: and afterward will I take away from him his temporal
power. And to his further rebuke: Even as the world has taken him for a god
in earth this long space: so will I now cause the world to acknowledge him,
to be the most wicked tyrant, that ever was, or ever shall be amongst men.
You mine angels, that be appointed to the ministry of my chosen, ye shall do
your duties diligently. And to the Gabriel: as thou wast sent to Daniell to
tell him the time of the coming of Messiah, Dan. ix. ^. x. c.
and afterward also to zachary, to signify unto him the coming of my fore
runner John the Baptist, Luke. i.
and last of all to my mother to declare unto her my concepcio^, so shall thou
now go to Henry the eighte king of England, in whose heart thou shall prynt,
and persuade that all delays set a part he drive this cruel tyrant out of
all his realms and dominions.


Gabri. Forsouth we will gladlye (o lord) and with a swyftenes of spirit
perform your commandment,


Christ. Ye shall understand that Henry the eyghte shall deliver his dominions
from the tyranny of this mischievous robber, and he shall not utterly cleanse it
from ydolatry and superstcion, whose rotes be further enteryd in to the hearts
of men, then that they can be pulled out again at the first pluck: For he
shall not long live after this valiant interprise attempted. But I will give
him a son named Edward the sixte, and because he shall be one even after mine
own heart, indwed with sundry godly gifts, as one that shall love me
unfeignedly, and shall perceive how many and diverse ways he is bound to
God, he shall not abide this great and rank enemy of mine. Therefore
following his fathers steps he shall pourge all his kingdoms, and dominions
from all the supersticion and ydolatry of Antichrist. I will be always with
him, neither shall he want of my favor, grace, and defense at any time, and he
shall have a Christian protector, whom I will use as a mean, and instrumente,
and very fyt messenger betwixt me and the king to perform this my purpose,
whom I will give unto him, a very valiant manne both in noblenes, and in
vpryghtnes of mind, and a singular lover and friend of right religion. By
whose wisdom and gravity I will have mine Edward to be instructed, and
brought up even from his chyldhod, that all the days of his life he may have
continual war with all things, that shall desplease god. This chosen
instrument of mine shall be the first that shall bend his spear against the
fornamed mine unpardonable enemy. Whose wonderful example most worthy to be
followed of all other, the rest of the princes of Christendom shall be astonished
to behold: and shall apply them selfs to follow his enterprise, being
incoraged by his worthy virtue. Neither shall it be needful for him to use
any violence whereby to purge his kingedomes of these michiefes, lies, heresies,
supersticions, Simonies, ydolatries, wickednesses, and betraying of ^oules,
wherewith ye whole world was replenyshed by the means of this abhomynable
thief. For all these things though they be very haynouse, shall vanyshe
away suddenly, and be brought to nothing at the coming of the light of my
word, which he shall allwaye use as a continual burninge light, both in
this and all other his doings. Happy therefore shall you English men be, in
that ye shall frame all your affairs earnestly to gods glory to the
salvation of his chosen electes, and my worthy triumph.


Mich. So shall it be.


Henry the eight. Papista. Thomas Archebishoppe of Cantorbury. Henry. WE have
sent for you in to our prsence, as for men, which have more knowledge in ye
scriptures and old writers then the rest of our realm, to resolve us of a
dout, that is come to our mind. Therefore two things we requier of you, the
one that every of you say his mind frankelye and freely, what he thinks,
without respect of favor or displeasure to any manne living. And the other,
that ye keep it secret, and disclose not one word of the things, that shall be
here reasoned. For it is a matter of great weight, and touches our honor,
wherefore we charge you so long to keep counsel until the truethe be
known, and that you have lycense of us to open it. There is a thought entered
into our head, which we be persuaded comes of god: That the Pope who
heretofore has been taken for a god in earth, is very Antichrist, and if we
had certain knowledge that this thing were true, we would, as we are bound,
bannishe him out of all the coasts of our kingdom, not only because he
should no more rob us of our threasure: but much rather, lest he should
any longer exercise tyranny in men's consciences, and bring such a number of
souls in danger of everlasting damnacion. If he were the vycar of Christ in
deed, we would be his loving children from hence forth, as we have been in
times past. Say now every of you your minds soberlye, and trewlye, what he
thinks.


Papi. I can not but marvel very much, when I hear your princely majesty
make a doubt and question of matters, that be most clear, questionles, and
certain. I can not perceive yt it is lawful to think, much less to speak
of such a matter without doing God open wrong. For such holy things, as the
popehod is, ought to be worshipped, and not douted upon and called in question.


Hen. A truth? if it be a truth, the diligentlier it is discussed and
examined, the clerer the bryghter, and more plain it appears. Therefore when
we dispute of this matter truth has no wrong, but rather a benefit.
Therefore if the pope be in deed Christ's vicar in earth, the more seriously
this truth is reasoned of, the more ple^tifully shall it be published abroad,
and all men shall more gladly and redely receive it. So that we will neither do
the pope wrong, neither the truth, but shall rather show the^ both a singular
pleasure. And it is not to be douted, but yt heavenly things must be
worshipped, but now here is the question, whether the popeship be a heavenly
thing or not: and this is ye matter, which we des^er to have discussed


Papi. Peradventure your majesty does mind, to accuse al our forefathers, al
kin^domes, and al Christian men of heresy, by whose judgment the pope has
always been, and is to this day, taken of Christ's vicar in earth.


Hen. That the truth comes to light, is not ye cause, that makes men
heretics, but rather de^iuereth the^ from all error, deceyte, heresy, and
betrayinge. And truly we desire nothing else, then to have the truth boulted
forth by all means possible. In the end of our disputacion, if we shall be
assuered, that the pope is Christ's vicar, we will so take him, as we have done
hitherto, and we shall be much more strengthened in that opinion, without hur^e
of any creature. But if we shall perceive the contrary: and be assured that he
is Antichriste in deed, then surely will we endeavor our selves to rid us
from his tyranny, wherein we have lived hitherto taking him to be a certain god
in earth. And also all other errors, and inco^modities must be taken away,
which spring out of this counterfecte belefe, and more over we will endeavor
our selves to rid other men also from the same. So that I se not what can
come of this dispuputation, but that shall be good and godly.


Papi. Trewly we might worthily be noted of a temerous arrogancy, if we
should think our selves hable to know and judge better then a number almost
infinite of worthy men both in religion and doctrine, who without al question
believed the popeship to be a heavenly thing. And more over, what opinion shall
we conceive of an innumerabe sort of christian me^, which either now be, or
else has been in times past and have died in this faith, or live therein this
day? Surely in so weyghtie a matter it behooves us to leave of disputing, and
fall to beleuinge.


Hen. If such as believed that the popeship was an heavenly thing were deceived,
it is plain that they were neither learned, nor holy in that point. And
therefore ought we in a matter of so great importance, to open our eyes, and
be wiser then they.

As for ye blind multitude, I think must not be followed, who receives that
manifest error for an article of their faith: but if such, as believed that
the pope was Christ's Uicar in earth, were not deceived: but being in this
opinion thought well: Surely we will take them both for learned and holy. We
mind not by this our disputacion, to take from them one jot either of their
wisdom or holiness, but we shall rather be confirmed and strenghtened in
the same good opinion, which we have conceived, both of the^, and of the
Popeshyp. If our intent be to overcome them with the light and knowledge of the
truth to gods glory: putting not our trust in our own strength, but in
the only goodness of god: our godly study must not be called a temerous
boldness. Neither do I allow the saying, that we ought simply to believe it,
that is to say grossly for then should the Turks and Heritykes be excused.
But as Paul says, we must prove all, and take only that is good.


Papi. Surely as for my part, I can not persuad my self in my conscience, that
I may put my tongue in heaven, and despute of the Popeshippe, as though I
doubted of so great a matter.


Hen. Your divines be not affrayed to put their mouths and tongues both in
heaven, and to dispute in their scoles and books, whether God be or not? And ye
same thing dare your preachers also, eue^ in the pulpet, though there be none
that doubts of so manifest a truth, and yet stands it not with your
consciences to reason in a brefe disputacion of the Bishop of Romes primacie.
May it ever come to pass or not, yt the Pope shall be so much greater and
higher then God, that it shall not be lawful to speak of his primacie? And
lawefull enoughe to dispute boldly of gods essencie?


Papista. It is lawful to dispute whether God be or not? Without any remorse
of conscience, and without danger, because the reasons, which be brought for
the contrary part be so weak: and the other so strong, clear, and pithie,
whereby it is proved that god is, that after such disputacion men remain
much more assured. But there can not be a disputacio^ of the primacie of the
Bishop of Rome without prickyng of conscience, because this thing is not so
clear and evident as the other is, that is to say, that there is a God. And
perhaps if it should come in question, we should remain in greater doubt,
then we were before. Wherefore it should seem that it were better to let the
matter sleep, as it is, and not to question thereof.


Hen. Then you your selves grant that the Popeshyp is a doubtful thing, and
again on the other side ye would have us shut our eyes, and believe it, and
embrace it, and undoubtedly to receive it for an heavenly thing. If the
popeshyp were a thing indifferent, which could neither hurt nor profyt the
soul of man, it should seem no matter though we left reasonynge thereof, and
let it remain quiet, as it is without disputacion. But for as much as upon the
Bishop of Rome hangs our salvation, if he be Christ's Uicar in earth, as
they say he is: and again if he be not, upon him contrarywyse hangs our
dampnacion: we have determined to know the truth of the thing. And so much
the more desirouse be we to have this disputacion go forewarde, for that we
see you so earnest to refuse the same. We may be well assured that we shall
offend God in no point of this disputacion, if we do all things soberlye
with a meke spirit to the glory of God, having always gods word for our
judge, which is the only, and everlasting rule of truth.


Papist Because it seems good to your majesty, that it be so, I for my part
have nothing else to say, but that the bishop of Rome is Christ's Uicar in
earth with full power.


Hen We know not whether he be Christ's Uycar or not, but to ye intent to
have a perfect knowledge thereof, I have sent for you. Of this we be well
assured, that the most part of them were exceeding vicious, we perceive also
that ye great eccleciastical revenues, which of right belong to the poorer
sort of Christ, be by him consumed and sold for ready money, and the cure of
souls also, whom the son of god him self redeemed with the price of his
blood. And they be not affrayed to commit so weyghtie a charge (even the
cure of souls) to the children, which be evil borne, and worse brought up:
And to men unlearned, wicked, and vicious, to horse kepers, and to their
cinoedis, Sodomittical boys. We also know that he does not only sell his
privileges, relaxacio^s, composicions, and dispensacions: but his Iublies,
also, his pardons, and remissions of sin, his absolucions, his blessings,
his masses, his buryalles, his Sacraments, yea and the merits and blood of
Christ and heaven it self. And it is well known that they have carried away
great treasures out of our kingdoms, we receyuyng nothing again but ynke,
and parchement, and seals of lead, under pretense of their buyldynges, and
wars against the Infideles they have polled more money from us then all our
kingdoms be worth. A blind man may see, what means they use to rob both
quick and dead. In so much that of the house of God they have made a den of
thieues. And all these things have they done under a shadow of religion, and a
pretense of holiness, If a man could open his eyes, and look upon the discordes
and strives, which they have sown in all christendom, and see the blood,
they have shed, the slanders and offenses, they have committed, the souls,
they have lost, and the viciouse life of them, that wylbe called most holy,
who ought to ieoparde their own lives to profit their neighbor. If (I say) he
could see how they be covered with fraud, unfaithfulness, and deceate, how
they trouble all the whole world with such thunderynges in contencions, as
though heaven and yearthe went together, and all for none other cause, but to
increase their yearly revenues, to preserve their falsely pretended honor,
and their vain titles. Surely he would not judge them to be the Uicars of
Christ, but rather to occupy the ruome of the great devil of hell.


Papista. Be it that their works were never so wicked, yet cease they not
therefore to be Christ's vicars, if their doctrine be sound.


Henry. Yea mary, that is the thing that we be desirous to know, whether he
be Christ's Uicar or not? Whether he be Antichrist or not? Whether his doctrine
be true or false? Whether we ought to wurshyp him, or to banishe him out of
our kingdom. Therefore of these things we be desirous to hear other men's
minds


Thomas arche. When God determined to save his electes, first he disclosed
himself by a certain light showed in the old testament, by his Prophets,
and holy men before he came into the world, and he minded so to do not only,
because he would be known a far of, that men should put their trust in
him, and so be saved: but also that at his coming he might be known again
by the same signs and tokens, and the gentlier received, of a like sort when he
determined for the larger setting forth of his glory to publish the triumph of
Christ, and the perfect and happy state of his electes: he painted forth and
expressed lively in the holy scriptures, that such as have unworthily the
name of christians must have one head in earth full of abhominacion and
wickedness, to the intent that he being disclosed unto us, we should not only
not give credit unto him, but should by all means possible shun his wicked
tyranny. The place of Antichrists reign. Dani. vii.
First therefore as touching the place, god has plainly declared unto us, that
he must be borne at Rome. As Daniell the Prophet wrote, who discribed the four
monarchs of the world under a similitude of four beasts, that is to say
the Empire of Babylon, which was of the Assirians, The empire of the Persians,
of the Grecians, and of the Romans. And out of the head of the fourth beast
(that is to say) out of the head of the monarchy of Rome, sprange a little
horn (that is to say) Antichrist himself. Who has so auaunced his might and
power, that he has broken the power both of the other horns, and also of the
empire of Rome, and has prevailed against the godly. The same thing Paul the
Apostle confirms, ii. Thessa. ii.
saying, before Antichrist be reveled, and apeare very strong there must be
a departinge, or goinge away, that is to say, the people must fall away, or
depart from thobedience of the Empier of Rome, as al holy men take it,
wherefore of necessity it must be granted that he must have his seat at Rome,
for he shall succeed the Emperor of Rome. Moreover John in his Apocalipse
setting forth the church of Rome unto us, to be not the spouse of Christ,
but of Antichrist, says: Apo. xviii.
that he saw a certain whore the mother of all uncleanness and abhomynation of
all the world, gorgeousely arrayed with gold and stone, holdinge a cup of
gold in her hand, with whose migled liquour all the dwellers of the earth
should be made drunk from the highest to the loweste. And further this whore
shall be made drunk with the blude of Saints, and of the martyrs of Christ.
And upon her forehed she had written Babilonia. And lest any man should
doubt, whether John spoke of Rome, or not, Apoc. xvi^.
he says plainly that the whore sat upon seven hills, which thing is well
known to be agreeable to Rome, whereupon it is called the city of seven hills.
Wherefore his seat must be at Rome. Which thing is evident both by holy
scripture, and also by Hierome in an epistle, that he wrote to Fabiola against
Ioninian, to Marcella, to Algasia, in the.47. Chapter of his commentaryes upon
Esaias, and in the second Chap. upon Osee. The Same thing is confirmed by
thauthoritie of Tertulian, writing against the Jews and the gentiles, Cap.
xxxv.
in a book of the resurrec^ion of the body. And of S. Augustine also in his
books de ciuitate Dei. Li. 20. cap. 16
In the same opinion also is Nicholaus de Lyra upon Daniell, and many other
besides. The time of Antichrists disclosinge
And if we will way Paul's words diligently, we shall also know the time,
wherein Antichrist must be disclosed to the world. For writing to the
Thessalonians, that thought Christ should shortly come to judgment, and
mindynge to bring them out of that opinion says, ii. Thessa. ii.
that there shall a departinge come before the day of judgment. That is to
say that men must fall from the Empier of Rome, as Hierom, Anselme,
Theophilact, Bid, Dionise, and almost all the rest of the interpreters take
it. True it is, that Paul spoke this thing darkely lest he should offend
men's minds. Therefore then (says Paul) that great wicked body shall show
forth him self. Yea and he shall not only succeed especially at Rome in his
own strength: but also, as Daniell writes, Dani. vii.
he shall destroy and bring to nothing the rest of the horns, and strength
of the Empier of Rome. So that we now see plainly enough, that the people
has not only shronke from the obedience of the Emperor of Rome: but also
that themperours have had no dominion in Rome more the^ this seven hundredth
year. The bishops have occupied the place in the stead of the Emperors, by
the which bishops chefelye themperoures power has been minished. The
properties and qualities of Antichriste.
Wherefore we must grant that they be right antichriste. Besides this
Christ himself has expressed, and painted forth Antichriste, and al his
qualities in holy scriptures with so lively colors, that who so sees the
pope, and has never so little light of knowledge, and sees his properties, can
not chose but he must also know that he is very Antichriste. And to speak
sumwhat of him generally: Ephesians. iii.
Even as Christ is the head of all his electes, so shall Antichriste be the
head of al them, Colo. ii.
that be rejected of god, which be falsely named Christians. As in Christ
all thresours of knowledge, and wisdom of god be hidden: So in antichrist
shall be hidden with a cover of hypocrisy al mischefes, crafts, and deceites,
giles, and falsnes, which be in the great deuell of hell himself. And moreover,
as the holy ghost is given to Christ, and powered into him without measure and
not he^med in with any bounds or limits: John. 1. Colo. 1.
and as Christ is full of grace and truethe, yea in him dwells all fulness of
perfect virtue and perfection: So there dwells in Antichriste, all vices,
wickedness, abominations, deceytes, and lies without all measure. So that as
Christ is the very true and lyuelye image of God, so shall Antichriste be
the very true and lively image of the deuell. Esa. xi. Psalm. x. Dani. ix. ii.
Thessa. ii.
Wherefore Esaye calls him the wicked one. Dauyd also writes him to be the
head of all wyckednes. Danyell, and Christ himself call him abhomynacyon it
self. Paul calls him the wicked manne, the child of perdition, not only
because he shall be lost himself, but because he shall also destroy all them
that shall follow his steps and doctrine. And also Saint John called him
Antichrist, that is to say, a contrary enemy, i. John. ii.
and a repugninge aduersarye to Christ: and because he especyallye above all
other creatures shall show him self to be an enemy and an aduersarye to
Christ: therefore in that his exceeding contraryousnes against Christ, he is
called Antichriste. Now, as Christ was conceived of the holy gooste, and borne
of the vyrgyne Marye: So shall antichriste be conceived of the spirit of the
devil, and borne of Simony, and ambition, which shall be in the minds of the^,
yt shall declare him pope. Then shall ye pope be created of ye most corrupt and
infected congregation of people, that is, whom they call Cardinals, who as
though they were the very pillars of mischief, shall sustain all the world,
and all the wickedness thereof upon their shoulders. They say this order was
created of god, when he said: The pyllers of the earth be of the Lord, and
upon them he laid the foundation of the world, hereby it is easy to be
seen, whether they understand rightly the holy scriptures, or else wryth the^
violently to their crooked purpose. Who so shall read their histories, and will
diligently consider by what craft, hypocrisy, and dissimulacion, fair
promises, gifts, deceyt and prodicion, and such like wicked means they have
achiued to this Popeshyp, which they so much desired, he shall easily peceaue
of what spirit they were both conceived and begotten. Yea they have given
themselves wholye to the devil so yt they might once come to the Popeshyp: As
it is plainly written of Siluester the second. He that could see by what
spirit the Popeshyp was conceived in the minds of men, and appeared to the
world: should soon know whether it be a thing of God, or of man, or of
the the devil. Four hundredth and four score years after the birth of Christ,
that little horn of Daniel, that is to say, the Bishop of Rome had but little
strength and power of man, because they had none authority but only in
their own dioceses, as other Bishops have. But a bout the year of our
Lord.480. Odoacer reigninge in Rome, it chanced that Achatius Bishop of
Constantinople (who then was placed first amongst the Bishops, and yet used
no authority over them) would have condemned Peter the Bishop of
Alexandria of heresy. And because the Bishop of Rome for the worthynes of
the City was then in some estimacio^: the Bishop of Constantinople wrote to
Simplicius then being Bishop of Rome, desirynge him that he would likewise
declare the Bishop of Alexandria an Heretyke. And of this has ambitious
fellows taken occasion (unworthily God he knows) to dispute of the authority
of the Bishop of Rome. And so far have they gone forward in their ambicion,
that they have not been ashamed falsely to contend, that they are the heads of
al other churches. And on the other side stood they, which took parts with
the Bishop of Constantinople affirmynge their Bishop, and not the Bishop
of Rome to be the supreme head of all other churches. This ambicious contencion
continued amongst these most holy fathers, a hundredth and twelve years. And at
the last about the year of our Lord six hundredth, when Maurice the Emperor
was in Grecia, Ihon the Bishop of Constantinople gathered all the Bishops
of Grecia togethyr at Constantinople, and there was the Bishop, of
Constantinople and not the Bishop of Rome, ordained of them to be the Bishop
of all other churches. But when Maurice wylled the Bishop of Rome to submit
himself and his church to the Bishop of Constantinople, Gregory who then
was Bishop of Rome withstode it, and called him ye fore runner of Antichrist.
And the same Gregory writing to the Bishop of Antioch and Alexandria,
amongst al other thing says: ye know that in the counsel of Calcedon the
title of the universal Bishop was offered to the Bishop of Rome, which he
would in no wise receive, neither was there any of our predecessors yt did
usurp that title. Yea even then (as they say) to confound and rubuke ye
pride of other, he began to be named the servant of the servants of God.
How be it his successor, Boniface the third, a man to ambicious, and
crafty, obtained of Phocas the Emperor by suttill train the dignity of a
Pope. What manner of man this Phocas the Emperor was it appears of his
historye. By violence, fraud, and treason, he came to the Empire, and caused
Maurice the Emperor most cruelly, and most wickedly, and his wife, and all his
children to be killed before his own face. This was the holy manne, who first
gave this goodly creature of the Popeshyp to the world. And this is true, yt
until the days of Constantine the fourth Emperor, the Bishop of Rome was
wont to be confirmed of the Emperor. How be it at the request and entreaty
of Benet the second of Rome, the foresayed Constantine granted to ye Benet and
his successors, that they should be received, and taken of all men for Popes
without the Emperors confirmacion. And so by little and little they crepte up so
high by their crafty diligence, that the Emperor must both be confirmed,
and crowned of the Pope, but yet it is necessary that first he take an oath,
that he will defend the Popehod. Therefore it is not hard to be known, what
manner of spirit it was, that brought the popeshyppe into the world, and how
the creacion of the Pope, and of the Popeshyp is contrary to the birthe of
Christ. Namely when (as Paul writes) Christ glorified not himself, neither
thrust himself to be a bishop, but taking example of Aaron he tarried until
he was called of his father. But these men thrust themselves in violently
until they have made them selves not only equal with Christ, but also above
Christ. Christ being in the shape of god, did cast down himself
willingly, and would take the shape of a servant upon him: But this fellow
being in the form of a man, which is a most abject and vile sinner, so
proudly has auaunced himself alofte that he is not ashamed to brag him
self to be a high light, and a god in earth. And if we will consider, and
way the life, the manners, and the works of Christ, and the pope, we shall
find them altogether quiet contrary the one to the other. Christ was
innocente, poor, and would not trouble himself with worldly businesses, but
was altogether bent to the health of souls, whom he desiered to enrich with
heavenly threasure, he was meke, gentle, refusing both crown and kingedome,
never had he any private affection of favor, either toward himself, or
others his kinsfolk, or toward any manne living, being inflamed with a
great force of the heavenly spirit always sought he the glory of God the father
eternal. He was a peacemaker, sober, subject to all men for the honor of his
father: merciful, and very prone and redye to be pitiful, and therefore he
wept upon Jerusalem, he was godly, shamfast, chaste, most liberal, full of
love, and all other virtues. But all the popes be in all points diverse, and
quite contrary to all these vertewes of Christ. For there is a rotten
dongehill, and puddell within them of all uncleanness, wickedness, and mischefe,
as it is right well known to them, that have any knowledge of them, that be
now a days, and read the hystoryes and lives of them, that be past: and all
though they be very contrary to Christ in these things, that I have spoken
of, more then other men be, that is to say, in all outward actio^ of virtue,
yet in their doctrine, and certain other their wicked abhomynations they be
most wicked, and most contrary of all. For there be certain wickednesses
peculier unto them, which be of exceeding great weight, and be so hainouse, that
they be mete for none other, but for these thieves only. Wherefore it is vere
necessary to grant them only to be the very and chief antichrists for these
only be they, who corruptinge the scripture, and withstandyng the express word
of god, have plucked Christ with their wicked hands out of his high and
gloryouse seat, and yet not being contented with that horrible mischief they
have cast down, oppressed, and buried, and have bannished quit out of the
eyes, and memories of man the redemer of all mankind, and have placed
themselves in Christ's seat, gyuinge to themselves, and with force challenginge
like tyrannes, all that dignity, which parteyneth to Christ alone. Yea they
have made themselves above Christ. So that in conclusion, they would not only
seem equal to god, but also have auaunced them selfs with a deuelishe and
intolerable boldness above god. Ephe. iiii.
That this thing is, as I say, it is evident. For the body of Christ's
church has but one head, otherwise it should be a monstrowse deformed
thing, the like whereof has not been heard of: and should not be abody knit
together with a true proporcion of the members. But Christ is the true, and
only head of his church, a Paul does plainly wryt, that out of this head
is the spirit, life, light, and righteousness powered into all the other
members of the chosen. John. xiiii. John. viii. i. Cor. i.
For he is our life, light, and ryghtuousnes* Now on the othersyde the pope
says: I am the head of the church militant: If ye will have light, and
knowledge of heavenly things, ye must come to me. For I only am a boue all
learned and holy men, above the counselles, and above holy scriptures it
self, yea and also above your faith. Wherefore ye must believe according to my
word, and although the words of holy scripture be the words of god, yet must
they be expounded and declared after my fashyon, and as I say. I am only he,
which can not err. Wherefore as concerning matters of faith every manne
ought to shit his eyes, and trust to my word, and stick thereunto
undoubtedly. The pope says more over: if any manne be dead in the sight of
god, and a sinner, let him come to me, and out of hand by the help of my
absolutions, and pardons he shall live, and be made rightuouse in the sight of
god. As though he should say, I am your light and righteousness, and not
Christ. What thing does pulle Christ violentlye out of his place, and thrust
in himself, if this do not? Psalm. ^i^ Hebr. v.
Christ is our chief and everlasting priest, as it is written of him. Who,
when he had once offered himself upon the cross, found out everlasting
redemption for us, Hebr. x.
and satisfied for our sins, and pleased the wrath of god the father for
ever: The pope says I am the chief bishop of the church of Christ, ye
sacrifice that Christ made was not sufficyent to satysfye for sin, and pacyfy
the wrath of God. And therefore have I ordained the sacryfice of the mass,
and other offeringes, and meritoriouse works. To do thus is not only to
pluck Christ out of his place, and put in him self: but it is also a manifest
confession that Christ was not an imperfecte priest, because that with his
sacryfice he made not suffycient satysfaction for our sins, neither pacifyed
the wrath of god enoughe, and therefore has he need of the Popes help yea,
and it is also a confession, that the holy ghost in holy scripture was a liar,
which thing is nothing else, but a mind to place himself above god. For
the pope can neither lie, neither err in matters of faith, and god did
both lie, and err by his confession. Christ, also is the only mediator
betwyxt god and manne, as it is written. No man comes to the father, i.
Timo. ii. John. ^iiii. 1. John. ii. i. Cor. 1.
but by this mediator, he is the way and the gate, that leads to God, he is
our aduocat, our propiciacion, our holiness, our redemption and health. He
only is our Jesus, and savior, neither is our salvation in any other, Act.
iiii.
but in him only, as Peter writes. And therefore Christ calls all men
to him, saying come to me all ye, that labor and be burdenid with the burden
of sin, and I will give rest and quietness unto you. Mat. xi.
Who so thursteth for salvation, let him come to me, and he shall be refreshed.
John. vii.
But the Pope contrariwise says, I am he, by whom ye may pacifye the wrath
of god, by me only, and by my ministers ye may obtain remission of your
sins. I am the way, that leads to heaven, I have the keys of the kingdom
of heaven. I can open and shute at my pleasure, to whom, when, and after
what sort it shall please me. By me only ye may have life everlasting, and
god wylbee merciful, and pleased with you. Neither will I that ye shall have
Christ alone your mediator and aduocat in heaven: but I will that ye chose
some amongst them, that be dead, such as like you best, so that they be
canonized by me, and take them for your mediators, intercessours, proctours,
advocates, and patrones. I will also that ye seek for your salvation not in
Christ alone, (though Peter say plainly that it can be found in none
other) but chiefly in me, in my absolucio^s, benedictio^s, and pardons, and in
your own works also, and in the merits, and intercession of Saynctes.
Wherefore come to me, all that be troubled with sorrow of conscience, and in me
ye shall find peace. Now whether all these things be most cruel, wicked,
and blaphemouse or not, he may easly perceive, that is not al together blind.
Therefore it is most true, Dani. vii.
that Daniell said speaking of him, that he should be such a shameless
blasphemor, that he should speak against God himself. And we also know,
that according to the doctrine of Paul every christian manne is the temple of
god, and of a like sort the congregation of the faithful, is called the
church of God: and we se that the Pope reygneth in the hearts of some
christian men, which worship him even now, as their God. And also we see not
only how he reygneth in the hearts of sundry men, but also in the
midst of the church militant as the supreme of all creatures. Therefore it
is fullye accomplyshed and performed, that Paul spoke of him, ii. Thessa. ii.
when he wrote yt he should sit in the temple* God (not in the temple builded
by man's hands at Jerusalem: but in y^ hearts of men, and in the militant
church of Christ) as though he were God, and braggeth himself before men as
very God. And because these things, which Paul said, can not be applied to
none other in the world: it must of necessity be granted, that he only is
the same right and great Antichriste, Mat. xxiiii.
and the very self same horrible abhominacion of whom Christ prophesied that
he should stablishe his seat in the holy place. Neither was it enough for him
to thrust him self in to Christ's place, and to auau^ce himself above god:
but also he would deprave the holy scriptures, and be in all points quite
contrary to Christ. That all these things be true hereof it may appear.
Even as Christ has left nothing unproven for us, which are necessary for
the mayntenaunce of our natural life, so is it to be believed that much less
he would leave any of those necessaries unprovided, which should apartayne
to the spiritual life. Therefore must we believe that god has declared unto us
in the holy scriptures as much, as is needful, whereunto no creature must add,
Deu. xii.
neither take away one word, as God by Moses does comaunde, for they only be
in all points perfect. i. Tim. iiii.
Therefore Paul writing to Timothy says. All scripture inspired from above
is profitable to rebuke and amend, to instruct in righteousness, that a man,
who is dedicate to God, may be vpryght and perfect in all good works. Then by
the doctrine of Paul it is plain that those things, which be contained in
the holy scripture be sufficient to make a man perfect: which thing must
needs be granted, for Christ disclosed to his Apostles as to his beloved
friends and children, all that he received of his father. And afterward he
opened their minds by his spirit, and declared unto them the true meaning of
those things, which the same apostles did writ, Antichriste says that the
scripture is insufficient.
preach, and publishe abroad plentifully: So that the gospel is most
perfect and full, as Paul wrote to the Hebrews. And as for the pope he is all
together contrary to all these things, that be spoken. First and foremost he
says that holy scripture is imperfect, and is not sufficient to declare fully
all mattiers that belong to salvation, and that he can add unto it, as he
has done, when he allowed those books that be apocripha, and of none
authority, for holy books, as though they were in the canon. And also when he
made an innumerable sort of decrees, and decretalles, and commandments of man, and articles of our faith. And he says more over (thougheit be closly)
that the twelve articles of the faith delivered and preached by the Apostles
be not sufficient to salvation. Antichriste corrupts the articl^s of our
faith
And then the Apostles be damnned and all christian men, who has not received
the light of the articles, obseruacions, and commandments of the Pope. So
that it must follow (in the name of God) that the Popes were wyser then Christ
him self, or at the least wise were more merciful, because they have opened
so many things to the world, which be (as they say) necessary to our
salvation, and never opened neither by Christ nor god. But what a mischeuous
deed is it, that all these articles of the faith made by the Pope, be all
together repugnaunt, and quite contrary to the articles of the Apostles, and
to all holy scripture, as it is well known. For brefely in the Creade, and in
holy scripture it is comprehended, that it is god by whose goodness and grace
through Christ (who suffered death for us, who rose again, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father) all creatures must
receive salvation, and also feel his plentiful love toward us, through the
holy ghost, and that he, who believes in Christ, shall have life everlasting as
he him self is a witness. But the contents of the Popes articles be all
together contrary to this gear, that is to say: that faith in Christ is not
sufficent to salvation, and that it is necessary to believe, that the Pope has
authority over all. And that we must believe according to the doctrine of ye
Pope, that neither the grace of Christ, nor the death of Christ is sufficient
to salvation, but that our meritorious works must also of necessity be added,
with confession devised by the Pope, and his absolutions, pardons, and prayer
to Saints, and besides all this the fire of purgatory. And that the holy ghost
(as they say) is not enoughe for the understanding of holy scripture, and to
know the will and pleasure of God: but that the Pope must expound all
things. No man can deny, but this is a very settinge of him self above
God. Dani. xi.
Daniel wrote wonderful learnedly of him: saying that he shall induce men
noughtely and wickedly to break their promises, that they have made to God.
For even as God, who is the well spring of all goodness, promised in Aabraham
to be our god, that he would take ye charge of every one of us, and would
give himself for us, making us pertakers of all his felicity: And we again
have promised him, that we will be his people, to ask and look for all goodness
at his hand only, to acknowledge him only our God, and will give thanks, and
render honor and wurshyp to him alone. On the other side the pope says nay to
this gear, that God is angry with us, and that Christ could not sufficiently
pacify his wrath, but that the Pope must help with his authority, and the
Saynctes with their prayers, and merits, and also we our selves with our good
works, and also the deuells with their fire of purgatory. Therefore is it very
true that Daniel said, that he should change the times, (he should transpose
the time of grace into the time of the law, the time of light into the time of
darkness. Antichrist corrupts the laws of God.
Neither think they it a deed mischieuouse enoughe, to make new articles of
the faith, at their pleasure contrary to tharticles of god: except also they
deprave the law of god with their precepts, and commandments, which
commandments be also contrary to the commandments of God. For it is
without controversy, that all the law of God does depend upon the love
toward god, and toward our neighbor, and the pope minding to destroy
both the parts of the law of god, has infected purposely these two chief
grounds, upon the which hang all the law, ^ the prophets. For he affirms
contrary to thexpresse word of God, yt god requires not necessarely of us
that we should love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and all our
mind: but that we should love him above al other things, affirminge that to
be the commandment, and to love god with all our heart is but a counsel.
And as touching our neighbor, of a like sort he says, that it is a
counsel, and a perfection, and not commandment to love our enemy with all
our heart, but that only we ought to show outward tokens of love toward
our enemies. And again, whereas the law is most perfect there says he, that
it is imperfect, and therefore he holds that it is lawful and that we ought
to add some thing unto it, and to do some works besides them that be
commanded in the law of god, which be called supererogatory works, that is
to say works, that be not commanded. For this cause has he delivered new
rules to the world, new trades of living, ordinances, and commandments,
such (it may chance) as he dremed, when he was in some frensy, utterly
pugnant, and contrary to ye commandments of god, whereas god commanded
himself only to be wurshipped: he will also be wurshipped of us, Exodus xx
and moreover commands us, that we shall not only worship Saints, but
also their dead bodies, and relikes. God wills and commands us, that we
shall make no image, neither of himself, neither of any other creature, any
picture or similitude to be worshipped: The pope wills and commands images
and pictures of Saints to be made, to be set up all about in the church in
every corner, there to be wurshipped, that no place there be void of
ydolatrye. Of a like sort god commands that no man should take his name in
vain, that is to say, when a man promyseth any thing by an oath taking god
to witness, he must keep the thing, that he promyseth: but the pope denies
that promise ought to be kept with heretics, (as he takes heretics) that is
to say, with true Christian men: willinge and commanding with express
words, to deceive the^, that they may be betrayed, and burned, though he
have sworn the contrary never so much, taking god, and all saynctes to witness.
Yea he does pardon, forgive, and absolve men from their rightful oaths in
honest civil matters, so that it redounde to his profit and glory, and that
he be rewarded lyberally therefore. God commanded the Sabbath day to be kept
holy. And sense Jesus Christ ye son of righteousness appeared to the world, we
ought to judge all times of grace to be a most holy Sabbath, Romans xiii.
and to take all the times of our life without putting diversity between one
day and another to be all together holy, and to spend all together in the
honor and glory of God. But the pope commands the contrary, that there
shall be a diversity between days, and times in holiness, that some days shall be
hallowed, yet with none other kind of religion, but idelnes, idolatry, and
supersticion, in the remembrance of some feast devised by him, or of some
Sayncte, that he has canonized, all other times he takes not to be holy.
God commands honor to be given to the father and mother, and obedience to
princes, which be ordained of him. The pope contrarywyse wills, that the
children may, contrary to the minds of their parents profess some
supersticiouse, and deuelish kind of relygion, and remain tied therein to
their wicked vows, yea though their father and mother pine for hungar, and
wantethe comfort of their children by the reason of extreme necessity. He will
also have all his priests, monks, and nunes to be fre, and discharged from
all obedyence to their prince, and magstrates, which be ordained of god. God
commands that no man shall kill: but this bloody paricide, and mankiller,
being made drunk with the blood of martirs, and of Christian men grants
full pardon to mankillers and parricides, and to such, as say they fought
under the banner of the cross of Christ, that by the means of this deuelishe
license he may increase, and amplify his cruel tyranny. God forbids
adultery, and all uncleanness, and commands by the mouth of Paul him, 1.
Cor. v^^^
who has not the gift of chastity to to mary a wife: but this shameless
baude does the contrary, he forbids marriage to al, that be anointed of
him, whether they have the gift of chastity or not, as though marriage were an
unholy, and an unclean thing, and not much more holy, and more honest, then
is their wiueles life, and as though according to the doctrine of Paul,
matrimony were not honorable, holy, and undefiled in all states. Yet in the
mean space he grants to such as hang upon him, all kinds of beastlynes,
and filthy uncleanness. And also at sundry times of the year, and within sundry
degrees devised by him, he forbids marriage for none other intent, but to
keep his honor in estimacion, and to get great su^mes of money by dispensinge
therewith. God commands that no man shall desiere another man's goods: but
this thief under the pretense of Annates, Dimes, Pardones, Iubelies,
compositions, absolutions, dispensations, privileges, blessings, greues, and
deuelish coactio^s, he over runs, and robs all the whole world. And as soon as these goods be gotten, or rather stolen together, come he by them by
robbinge or stealinge never so: yet be they straight way made holy, and so
holy, y^ they may not be alienated without this thieves license. But why stand
I so long in this matter? Math. v
For to knit up so great a matter in few words, whereas Christ came not to
break the law, but rather to fulfill it, he corrupted, infected, and depraved
all the whole law. Dani. vii.
Whereas Christ did abrogate y^ ceremonial precepts of the Jews: he has
brought in all the deuelish supersticions of the gentiles. Therefore is that
undoubtedly true, that Daniell spoke of him, that he should change the laws.
And he is not content to profess openly, that the merits of Christ be not
enough, and that he fulfilleth the thing, yt wa^teth in the^: except he may
further have his saing yt he is ye ^uarde and the destrybutour of the same
merits of Christ, and that it is his office to apply them for the quick and
the dead, as he shall think good, as who should say that Christ can not
apply them, or else that he would not provide for the health of souls, so that
there is much more charity in the Pope, then in Christ. What needs so many
words? Christ never had, nor never shall have, neither was there ever a
greater enemy in the world to the gospel, then he is. He has continual
war with the^, that believe in Christ, and with all, that be godly and
virtuous, and them he overcomes with deceyte and cruelty, as Daniell said
of him before. Wherefore we be bound to confess that he is the true great
Antichriste himself. Dani. xi.



Papi. Then erred the counselles, where in it was decreed, that he should be
Pope.


Tho. arch. That is as much to say as: Then erred the Bishops and
Pharyseis, when they gathered a counsel together, and determined to crucify
Christ. I pray you does that seem so strange a thing, ^o confess that they
have erred, which be Bishops by name only, but in deed tyrannes and
wolves, and wretched verlettes joined together in their sessions only to
maynteyne and stablishe their tyranny, wyckedly deprauinge the word of God? If
your counselles can not err, how comes it to pass, that many times one of
them has made contrary laws to an other? And if one counsel be contrary to
an other, as they be in deed, it must be granted, that one of them erred.
Where as they speak purposely of the Pope, the counsel of Affryke made a
law, that the Bishop of Rome should not only not be Pope, but also that he
ought not to have that name.

Then either erred that counsel, or yours. Truly the^ will I believe your
counsel is gathered together by ye holy ghost, and erred not, when I shall
perceive that it was not reuled, and lead by your sensuallitie, ambicious
seeking of honor, and by gifts and rewards, but by the word of God: If you
would expound the scriptures to the contempt of your self, and to the glory
of God, I would think the matter might be well taken. But if ye will be the
Judges of holy scriptures, and then will expound the same, as your dulnes,
tirannye, and self will shall lead you, wrythynge the word of God otherwise,
then the true sense, and meaning thereof leaedeth you to the increasynge, and
establyshement of your tyranny, mynding to usurp the dominion of the earth,
heaven, and hell, that ye may be wurshypped in earth as gods, to the great
rebuke of god: I doubt not but that you are gathered together in the spirit of
the devil. And you intend to prove to me, the Pope to be Pope by authority
of the counsel. But those things that be established in the counsel (as you
say) be of none effect, onles the Pope confirm them: but the Pope can not
confirm them onles he first be Pope: Therefore tell me first how the Bishop
of Rome was made Pope, and how he can not err in confirminge the decrees of
the counselles: and then may ye prove the Popeship by the counsels, for
otherwise is your argument plain false, or at the least way so made in a
circle, that in disputacion it begins again, where it began before to no
purpose


Papi. If it were so that the Bishop of Rome were Antichrist in deed (as you
say) yet for as much, as he has been accounted of Christian men for Pope
so many hundredth years, and the chief Bishop of all other: then the church
of Christ had decayed long agone contrary to his promise, who said I am with
you unto the worlds end.


Tho. arch. As touching this point, the same answer shallbee made to you
now, Mat. xxviii.
that was made in times past to Helias when he thought none alive to embrace
the faith of God, but himself alone, iii. Reg. xix.
to whom God said, I have preserved to my self seven thousands, who has not
bowed their knees before Baal. Even so is it now, for in Europe, Affrike, and
Asia, there were always many christian men, who wurshipd not Antichrist.


Papi. What? were they al Heritikes?


Thomas arch. They were by your saying, for they would neither obey
Antichriste, neither believe purgatory, neither would they keep the feast of
Easter upon the sunday


Hen. Ye have reasoned now enough and enough: now we see plainly, that this
fellow, of whom we moved this question was, and is very right Antichrist. From
hence forth we will in no wise consent to his euilnes, lest god continue his
anger against us. We have suffered to long a great deal so intolerable a
tyranny. We will prove suerly whether he be God, i^ earth or not? And whether
we have more full authority in our own dominions, and kingdoms then he
has, or not?


Papi. Then shall your majesty loose your title of defender of the faith


Hen Nay we will be called the destroyers of the false faith of Antichriste,
and maynteners of the true faith of Christ.


King Edward the sixte. The Lord Protector. Edvvard^. ALexander the great
did set so much by the honor, and glory of the world, that when his father
Philippe overcame more and more Cities, and contryes daily, and all other men
reioysed very much of his victories. Yet he alone being of tender age lamented
very much therefore (not withstanding that he ought to have been joyful and
glad, being his fathers only heir of all his kingdoms) thinking that his
father would prevent him, and take away all occasions from him, whereby he
might compass the dominion of the world by his own wit and industrye,
whereof should insewe worthy renown, and immortal memory, esteminge a
kingdom as nothing without glory: But for as much, as it has pleased God
to lighten our mind with the clear bryghtnes of heavenly doctrine, and thereby
to give us knowledge that he has placed us in this seat of a king, that we
should direct the use of our scepter royal, and the stern of our
government not to the glory of the world, but to the glory of him: so much
more we be studious of the glory of God, above that the glory of the world, as
we know that the one is heavenly, excellent, and durable, and the other vain,
slydynge away, and able to continue but for a while. And we can not but lament
even from the botom of* our heart even in this tender age of ours, when we see
our only Lord, and savior Jesus Christ with no small rebuke of his
heavenly and eternal father driven out of his seat, and kingdom: and such a
cruel, and wicked tyraunte placed in his room. Wherefore we be very desierfull
to restore Christ into his own former place again, that by him god may be
honored, not myndinge in any wise to suffer such abhominacion to remain
within our dominions. All Christian men have ever more abhorred the name of
Antichrist: and shall we have him at home with us. Knowinge him to be such a
one, as he is, and shall leave him vnbannished out of the coasts of our
countries? That shall never be. Suerly all the treasures, honors,
frendeshippes, pleasures, and all the happy conditions of this world can
never make us happy, no not so much as in this life, so long as we see not
Christ him self, and not Antichrist, reign in the hearts of his subjects.
The majesty Royal of king Henry the viii. of famous memory our natural
father began this worthy and noble enterprise, that we intend, whose steps
we will follow for the performau^ce of his will, seeing that he being
prevented with death could not bring that thing to such perfect end, as
his mind was at the first attemptinge thereof. We have determined therefore to
pursewe the famous enterprise of our most famous father, and not only to
pluck up by the roots, and utterly ba^nishe out of our kingdom the name of
Antichrist and his Jurisdiction: but also clearly to purge ye minds of our
subjects from all wicked idolatry, heresy, and superstycyon, and such like
deuelishnes as by him was brought in.

And for as much as there is none other thing that moves us thus to do but
the only glory of god: we dout not but that Christ will be with us, and will
rule our councelles and doings with his holy sprite. And although I dout not
but that you study likewise with an earnest feruentnes of spirit to set forth
this high glory of god: yet have we thought good to disclose this our intent
and purpose to you being our dearly beloved and faithful cou^saylours To
the intent that this godly deed may be the more spedely brought to pass.


Counseil. Suerly your majesty could have told us nothing that could have
pleased us better either that can be more to the glory of God: more
profitable to the common welthe, or else more worthy and honorable to a
Christian king. Wherefore we be compelled to render immortal thanks to God,
and having a taste of your graces wisdom by this thing, to hope for greater
and more excellent enterprises of you then any manne would conceive, in that we
perceive so much sage and ancient wisdom in this your so tender age, and so
fervent a Zeal to the settinge forth of gods glory. For this thing is
commonly seen by the common course of nature that such men as be of the
common sort and of slender courage, be cold and slack in the way of the
Lord, yea and be many times offended with such a confusion and variety of
judgments, when they see noble men so carried with a blind and a wicked zeal
with all that ever they can make for the defense of wicked Babylon, and of
their deuelishe Antichrist, not stayinge with blody hands and blody hearts to
be glutted and made drunk with the blood of Christ and of his electes, and
many times also have they the better hand, as the heavenly prophet Daniel
prophesied. But your pryncely majesty, as one endued with a high and a
heavenly courage, have intended a gloryouse enterprise, and that being styrred
up and inflamed thereunto with a fervent zeal to the glory of god, and ye
have taken upon you the cause of Christ and his electes against all the
enemies of god. Neither can there be any more worthy means devised to set
forth both the glory of god and also of your most excellent majesty. And it
is not to be douted but that god will use your majesty as a heavenly mean and
a fautles instrument to overthrow his great enemy, even as in times past he
used Dauyd for an instrumente to overthrow Goliathe. i. Reg. vii^
Your majesty may stryke of his head as David Goliathes, even with his own
sword, that is to say, with the word of God, which he has most fylthely
abused in despyte of Christ. There were verily not a few of the old
Emperors who attempted the putting down of this tyranny, as Henry the
fourth and fifth, Jews the fourth, Frederyke the first and second, and many
more, who could not overcome him because he reigned in the minds of men: and
the people took him for their god in earth, they feared his thunderboltes and
excommunications, they thought themselves dampened if they contraryed him never
so little, and therefore could they not in good earnest put on their harnes and
take their weapons, with a valyant courage of spirit, to deliver the Christyan
common welthe from this so great a tyranny. Ed. If we mind to overcome him in
short space, we must first go about to bryue him out of the hearts of men:
for as soon, as he has once lost his spiritual kingdom in men's consciences,
he shall forgo by and by all the rest of his iurisdicci^^, without any great
difficulty. And to drive him out of the hearts of men it is not needful to
use sword, nor violence: the sword of the spirit, that is the word of god,
is sufficient, whereby Christ overcame and conquered his enemy Satan in the
desert. For all his whole popeshippe is nothing else but a manifest deceyt,
and lie. What thing can it be else but a lie, to say the church was
builded by Christ upon Peter? and that Peter was instituted by Christ the head
of the other apostles, and of the universal church? and that Cephas, in our
tongue signifies a head? and that when Christ said to Peter, feed me sheep,
he made him the only shepard of souls, and gave to him alone the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and power to loose and bind? yt is also a very vain
lie to say, Peter was at Rome, and that Peter had authority given him of
Christ to leave there, and also that he left there the chief bishops seat,
as in one certain p^ace, there by succession continueally to remain to the
bishops of Rome, (as they hold opinion) it is also a manifest lie, and
deceyte to say, that Christ is not our only savior, medyatour, and
aduoca^. Purgatory also devised by them is a lie, and their lately devised
confessyons, absolutions, pardons, Iubelies, blessings, cursinges, and
excommunications, be all lies. And also their heresies, hipocrisies, Idolatry,
promesses, flatteringes supersticio^, and their deuelishe, and tyrannical
authority, which they usurp, and challenge, with all their whole Popehod be
altogether lies. Wherefore saying the word of god is, ye most bright light, at
the sight whereof all falsehod, and lies be known, and avoided, and the truth
apeareth inuinsible: it must needs be, that eue^ as darkness vanishes away at
ye sight of ye su^ne even so at the shinynge of gods word all lies,
deceytes, treaso^s, and wickedness of the Pope shall decay and utterly be
plucked up by ye rotes. This is ye spiritual sword by whose edge (as Paul
prophesied) he must be slain. Wherefore if we mind to attain honor, and
glory, that never shall perish by this noble enterprise, we must search all
about and get the most faithful ministers of gods word, which be endued
with a great light of ye spirit, in the knowledge, and exposicion of the
scriptures, with a heavenly eloquence, boldness, and lybertye, which ministers
both can, and will prynte Christ in the hearts of man. Then with out
doubt shall Antichrist, and all his whole kingdom be overthrown by and by.
This must be our host, these must be our fotemen, these must be our horse
men, if we mind to overcome this enemy of god. And if we can not find enough
such men within our own dominions, they must be sought for where so ever
they may be found, good learni^g must be made much of, and promoted forward,
good wits must be norished, and provoked to learning and study, that the
heavenly philosophy of Christ may reign always in our kingedom. Then
suerly shall we not be ashamed, when we shall be never so much excomunicated of ye
wicked romish Robber: but we shall rather rejoice, and with a valiant and bold
courage, we shall laugh to scorn his cursinges, and blessings all together:
not settinge a straw by the whole rabble of the rest of his wickedness, his
absolucions, dispensacions, privileges, bulls, and pardons,


Ed. Through the sin of our fore father Adam we be naturallye so frail,
and weak, so blind and froward, yt we seek for nothing else but our own.
Wherefore if we will be moved to set forth and amplify the most high glory of
god, it is he that must move and stir us with his heavenly spirit. And for
as much as we know, and be very well assured that all our desire and
purposes concerning this matter be bent toward the glory of god, and
according to his word, we may be bold to say that this intent of ours is a
work of God. Therefore even as it can not be, that God will forsake him self,
and leave of to be God: So also can it not be but that he will further this
work to a good end (which is not ours, but altogether his,) we doubt not
therefore, but that God will be of our side, and that he will triumph over his
enemies.


Counsel Suerly it shall be a very easy thing to obtain what thing soever is
godly of your majesty's subjects. For even as after the transgression of
Adam, god grafted a certain terriblenes of countenance in manne whereby he
should make beasts affrayed with lokyng upon manne, lest they should hurt
him. So has he endued subjects with a certain natural fear toward their
leage lords, that they may reverently obey them. Wherefore if a Prince or King
intend a thing, and then declare the same to be his mind, and pleasure with a
certain effectualnes, and authority: by and by they all obey, namelye when he
offers matters unto them, that be just and godly, but as for the truth of
the doctrine of the gospel, is of it self most effectual, and therefore we
doubt not but it will come to pass that it shall gladly be received of al
men, especially, when it shall be offered unto them of the majesty of a king,
and he shall confirm the same with vprightnes of lif. Neither is it to be
doubted that the gospel should breed any tumulte in these dominions, or cause
any sedicio^ or losenes of liberty, for Christ does approve, and confirm
chiefelye the power and authority of princes, and magistrates, and causes
men to think humbly, and lowely of them selves, and to love peace and
quietness, and therefore as though they were gentle lambs, it shall be an easy
thing, and no great pain to rule them.


Ed. We know right well that a sick body, which is full of corrupt humors, can
not be purged, and cleansed with out some commocion, and stirryng of the body
and members: and even so is it of our kingdoms. And we also know that the
gospel is a most sweet and pleasant medecin to the chosen of god, although
it turn the stomach of such, as be rejected. And even as he should not be a
good father, who having a son sick, that he could make whole again with
some medicine: and yet durst not minister the same unto him for fear of
stirryng of his body, and so suffer his son to perish with the greatness of
the disease: So should not we be a good king, if, when we shall see our
people sick of a spiritual disease (as in deed we do) should suffer them to
perish eternally for fear of a co^mocion, and should not minister unto them
the wholesome medecin of the gospel, whereby to restore them again to health.
Wherefore we be in a full readynes to adventure not only our honor, but also
our life it self for the wealth of our people, and for the glory of God. There
be not a few, that will go about to stey us from this noble enterprise. They
say that the Greeks, and other nations of the East parts of the world were
punished of God by the tyranny of the Turk, because they refused to obey the
Pope. As though the Popes tyranny were not a great deal greater and crueller
then is the tyranny of the Turk. Or as though Affryke, and Asia had in times
paste been subject to the Pope. Neither mind we to rent or louse the seemeles
coat of Christ, as some peradventure will think, who has cut it into so
many small pieces, that it can be divided no more* But we mind to cut and
tear asunder the veale of hypocrysie that their vice and wickedness may be
known of all men. This thing is without question: as often as ever the Turk
has fought with the Christian men, for the most part he has had the over
hand, which God suffered so to be, not only to punish us for that in stead
of Christ, we have wurshypped Antichrist: but also because he minded by little
and little to withdraw us, and deliver us from the wicked tyranny of
Antichrist. And it is not to be doubted, but y^ even as the Jews be punished
chiefly for the sins of their priests, because they were ye causers of the
death of Christ: so be the Christian men punyshed this day for the sins of
Antichrist, and his priests who have crucified Christ again much more in
despite of God, then the Jews did in times paste. Wherefore if we will
prevail against the Turk, first let us thrust this wicked manne out of the
church of God, which is a home dwelling Turk, for whose sins God being
offended with us uses that whippe for the punishemente of the Christians, and
when god is once pleased, and contented again with us, we shall easelye by
gods help give him the overthrow. Therefore let us drive all heresy,
idolatrye, supersticion, and wickedness, out of the church of god, and then
shall we not only triumph over the turks: but also they will be converted
to Christ, when they shall see the beams of the light of the gospel, and the
holy life of the Christians sprede over al. This arrant these of Rome has
robbed ye world under the pretense of religion, and battle against the
turks, and to deliver the Christians, which be amongst the turks in
servitude and bondage. Let him now drive him self out of the church of god,
if he mind to deliver us out of bondage, which is much more cruel and
tyrannical then the other. Let him drive Satan out of him self and out of his
wicked Babylon and then being converted and armed with spiritual virtues, and
with the sword of gods word, following thexample of Christ, and his
apostles, let him fight against gods enemies. And if it so be that he can
not be amended, but will continue on still in his wicked and cruel tyranny, so
that he will compel force to be made, let it be made, against him, for he
only noyeth more the church of Christ, then all the enemies of god joined
together. We hate not the popes parson, but his abominations, whom all men
ought of deutie to abhor.


Counsel. Even as ye doctrine of the gospel excels all other kinds of
learning in pureness, gentleness, pleasauntnes, propfytablenes, excellency, and
wonderfulnes? So if it be infected once with never so little an heresy, it is
more pestilent and perniciouse then any other. Wherefore let us do all our
endeavor that it being pourged from all false and supersticious imaginacions,
and man's traditions may be ministered to the people, pure, simple, and
sincere, as it is of it self. And as concerning the articles of the faith,
the word of God ought to be sufficient, except we will seem wiser then God
him self. And as touching works, the law that God him self has made,
which is most pure and holy shall be sufficient. Whose precepts be without
spot, sound, and cherefull to the mind. Whereunto Christ's interpretacion
must be annexed. And as for prayer and inuocacion, what shall we rather
allow then the Lords prayer, which the son of God himself taught us.
Which teaches us plainly and fullye what we ought to ask of God. And it
also teaches how we ought to ask all gifts of God, through Christ our
mediatoure,

Forsothe it is a wicked thing to desyer to be more wise then was Christ
himself: who delivered us that prayer as a perfect form of prayer, wherefore
it can not be well to add any thing thereunto. Truly all doctrine that is
necessary for salvation is plain and clear if we darken it not with the
darkness of man's inventions.

We will therefore do our dylygence, first to put a way all such things
as may be a hynderaunce to the goinge forward of the Gospel, and having
always gods honor before our eyes, and the health of souls, we will pray
that he will grant unto us that pureness and earnestnes of spirit, that we may
set forth his glory, and serve him in holiness, and that we may through Jesus
Christ our redemer give all praise, glory, and honor to God the father
everlasting. Amen.


Imprynted at London for Gwalter Lynne dwelling on Summers kaye by Byllynges
gate.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno. Do. 1549.


