A famous and godly history, contaynyng the Lives and Acts of three renowned
reformers of the Christian Church, Martine Luther, John Ecolampadius, and
Huldericke Zuinglius. The declaracion of Martin Luthers faith before the
Emperor Charles the fyft, and the illustre Estates of the Empire of Germanye*
with an Oration of his death, all set forth in Latin by Phillip Melancthon,
Wolfangus Faber, Capito. Simon Grineus, and Oswald Miconus, Newly Englished by
Henry Bennet Callesian. ()

Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain Street, by
great Saint Bartelmewes* Anno* 1561.

Encomy of Martine Luther.
A head where Pallas mysteries were freight,
A face where ^oumy brigh^lye did appear,
An eye yt could discern each mind ^ slight,
And ears conte^pning private ^au^ to hear
A tongue that did pronounce the sacred truth,
A prareirs pen, that painted well the same.
A zeal that moved Tigrish hearts to ru^he,
And could to virtue mild^^s minds inflame
A mind aspiring ay to wysdomes throne.
A heart that never drad the Tirantes might.
A rock yt would remove from truth for none
Disdayning death in quarrel of the right.
These golden gifts, in Luther shined bright
For which he now receives immortal light.
Psalm.cxvi. The death of the just, is precious before the sight of God.

To the right honorable* and his syng^good lord, Thomas Lord Wentworth,
prosperous health, and perpetual fell: city. ()
NOT without immortal praise, and everlasting renown ar the acts and
monumentes of learned men, commended to posterity. For if life without
litterature is (as Seneca says) a death or sepulture of the lively man, and
the body (as Plato witnesses) no body, but a sepulture, cohibiting the mind
from his natural vigor: how much excels he (right honorable and my syngular
good Lord) in this frail estate, who with studies of humanitye garnished, and
with divine knowledge adorned, has not only enriched his natural
understanding: but also made the same almost equivalent to Angels,
comprehe^ding the glorious mysteries of the eternal Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ. Among these, how much Martine Luther excelled, his holy works and
profane monumentes, besides the learned testimonies of many famous Clerks,
abundantly deciare. Reading therefore of late time, the history of his Life and
Acts, setfoorth by the incomparable ornament of good learning Phillyp
Melanethon: I was therein maruaylously delighted, and efrsones perusing the
same. I was ravished with incredible desire to bestow sometime in the
translation thereof. Many urgent causes moved me, whereof y^ principal be these.
First, his integrity of life, godly conversation, and zealous affection toward
the propagacion of Gods holy word. Secondly, his animosity professyng Christ
his Master, his learned conference with the temporal and Ecclesiastical
Estates of Germany, and his contempt of al worldly felicitye and transitori
pomp, in respect of Christ his Master, whom he purely professed, and
sincerely preached. Lastly, y^ lamentable verses, and funeral Oracions of
diverse, bewayling the loss of this pearl of Christianity, and the traduction
of this present historye into the German, French, Spanish and Italian tongues
by certain godly persons exiled their natural country, and dispersed in sundry
Christian Territories, where Gods word is purely preached, and all papistrye
abolished. By which it appears he was no less treasure and glory of his
Country, spectacle and absolute Image of godly wisdom, then terror to all
Papisme, and such as builded the laud of their life, on the s^nde of ambicious
seeking. My rude translacion and simple travail, I dedicate unto your good
Lordship, as to the very Patron and favorable Mecenas of all poor Students.
Whose honorable personage to powder with condign praise ^^ a thing more due to
your deserts, the easy for my rude pen, and more appertains to my duty, then
it stands with mine ability. For who knows your Lordship, and is ignorant
of the rare gifts that harbor in your head, and of the natural bountye that so
brightly shines in your countenance Who has not heard the renowned brute of
your constancye in Christian religion, even in these late wretched days, whose
noble heart, neither tedious and long imprisonment, neither flowing heaps of
worldly adversity could freight with fear, or move to deflect to any sinister
way, and whose virtuous mind in greatest troubles evermore aspired to the high
temple, where God in glory is in throned. I pass in silence your bounty
toward al such as profess God unfeignedly, and publishe abroad the fruits of
their studies. All which most heavenly deserts, do not only merit to be
registered in the book of Fame, but also ministre ample occasion for your
honorable personage (when the fatal Ladies shall spyn out the thre^ of mortal
life) to be calendred in the Catalogue of those virtuous wyghtes. Who for
sundry their prowesses, woorthye exploictes, goodly graces, and syngular
gifts, were by antiquitye consecrate to immortality. And though your honor,
whose life lightneth his profession, and whose profession purelye aduaunceth
the glory of God and his sacred word, disdayneth to be setforth with my rude
pen: yet your Lordshyp must bear with him that of good will pronou^ceth this
of your good deseries. I could wade further in your honors commendacion, but
that I have a certain reverence to trouble with my prolixitye your grauer
affairs. And partlye fear pulls me back, least I be spoiled with the nose
of adulacion, whose honorable ears abhorres to hear your proper praise, and
whose judgment would condemn my temerarious attempt herein. Therefore
sparing to speak that inwardly I conceive, I remyt this argument of blasing
your heroiacal virtues, to such excellent Rethoricians, as far surmounting me
in eloquence and good lytterature, as Phoebus with his bright beams, the lesser
celestial bodies.

Thus humbly besechyng your honor to take in good part, the base and simple
travail of a poor Callisian, and also vouchsafe the Patronage of this
Christian history, or rather myrrour of Christian life. Under whose protection
I publyshe the same abroad. I beseech the eternal God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, to preserve your Lordshyppe, and the right honorable and virtuous
Lady your Wife, send ye increase of much honor, and grant ye the
accomplishment of your gentle hearts desire.

From London this.^^. of November. 1561. () Your honors most humble Orator
Henry Bennet.

The hystory of the Life and Acts of Martine Luther, Doctor of Divinity.
Faithfully set forth by Phillip Melan^thon. (..)
THE reverend Father Martin Luther promised in his fatal time, to publyshe,
as well the discourse of his life, as causes of his conslicts: which he resolved
to do, if death (to greedy of her pray) had not reft us the society of him, and
the heavens accelerated to place this incomparable Jewel among the elect
organes and vessels of God the father. Therefore I judge it necessary that the
consideracion of his particular life be luculently set forth. Since the same
abou^ded with many good examples, that may corroborate in sincere minds ye
fear of god, and not to digres, if I recite ye causes also, for that they
advertise posterity of many excellent things. Further, by this narracion, the
sycophancye and sinistre report of them, ^cla^nder gaynste Luther.
may be refuted, who vaunt he was encouraged by certain Princes and other
eminent Estates of the sacred Empire, to deface the dignity of Bishops, or
provoked with inordinate desire, he brake the band of servitude in his
Monaslical estate. And it had been most requisite this discourse had been
written by him self. For albe it currish detractors would have objected this
common proverb.

Such as with hawtye style, adnaunce their proper praise:
Deflect from Sophies golden saw^s and sue Morias ways.
Yet we, that know what rare virtues harbored in his head, what constancy
lodged in his diu ne breast: are persuaded he would justly and faithfully have
recited his proper hystory, And many grave and godly men live presently, who
would have condemp ned his follye, if he had forged an other historye, as
Po^tes in their poesies are wont to feign, considering he understood the
perfect order and sequel of his acts were not unknown unto them. But since
his fatal day has prevented the publicacion of such an history: I will truly
recite, that partlye by familiare conversation I have seen, and partlye by
informacion and approved testimonies of his perfect friends I have heard.

There is an ancient Famely, and amplye augmented, of mean degree surnamed
Luther, in the territory of the Noble Earls of Mansfield. Mar tine Luthers
Parents first inhabited His ^o try and rentes.
the Town Isleben, anon after they removed to Mansfield, where his Father John
Luther, exercised the office of a Magistrate, and was syngularlye esteemed
among all sorts, for his integrity of life.

His Mother named Margaret, besides that the had virtues worthy an honest
Matrone, this was syngular. There shined in her, continency, fear of God, and
inuocacion, and al other virtuous persons constantly planted their eyes upon
her, as on a patron and president of al moral virtues. I have some time
enquired of her, at what time her son was borne: she answered, that she
remembered the hour and the day of his nativity, but of ye year she was
ignorant. She affirmed he was borne the.x. day of November at night, about a
leven of the clock. And ye cause why he was called Martin, was for that the
morrow after he received Baptism, was S. Martins day. But his brother James, an
honest and upright man, said: the whole The year of Luthers ^^rth.
Famely held opinion, he was borne the year after the Nativity. 1483.

After he was grown to years of understanding, his Parents diligently taught
him to fear and know God, and accustomed him to all domestical duties of
honest virtues. They forthwith addressed him to school, and George Aemilius
Father led him a little Infant to schole, who lives yet, and can record the
truth.

Even about this time the Grammar The ^oun(...)acions of (...)is study.
Schools began to flooryshe in the Towns of Sa^ony. Wherefore the said
Martin, fully fourtene years old, was sent to Magdeburg, with John Keynech,
who has proved a worthy man, and by his virtue acquired high authority in his
Country. There continued since a conglutinate mutual love betwixt Luther and
Keynech, proceeding either of agreement of nature, either of society in chyldish
study. And yet Martine studied no longer then one year at Magdeburg.

Departing from Magdeburge, he repaired to Isenach, where he studied four
years under one Scholemayster, who taught him the Grammar more promptly and
luckely, then any other. I have heard Luther commend his wit. He was sent to
this town, because his Mother was borne in the same, of honest and ancient
house. Here he achieved his study in Gra^mer. And for that he had a lyuelye
pregnant and subtle wit, and passingly apt to eloquence: he was preferred above
his schoolefeeres, and excelled the other young Impes that learned with him in
opposicion of hard questions, in copy of words, in composition of an Oration
in prose, and in writing of Verses.

Having then tasted the sweetenes of learning, as he was prone there unto: he
went to an University, as to (...)he liueli (...)s of spi(...).
the fountain of al Sciences. And if he had found meet and convenient
Instructors: he had known and comprised al kinds of Sciences orderly, so
great was the force of his vndersta^ dyng. And it may be some pleasant study
of true Philosophy, and care to polysh his tongue, would have mollefied his
natural vehemence. But at Erford, he met with the Dialectique of that time, the
which (by dexterity and redynes of wit, vnderst andyng more exactly the
causes and sprynges of instruction, then others his compagnions) he greedely
devoured, and had in memory.

And for that the excellencye of his wit embracing good litterature required
many, and those selected things: he privately red diverse works of the ancient
latin Authors, as Cicero, Titus Liuius, Virgil, and others. He studied not
these as the young scholars are wont, collecting only the Phrases, but as a
doctrine or representacion of humayne life. And therefore intentiuely applied
him self, to under stand the sense and sentence of the Authors. And having a
natural good memory, he had as it were before his eyes pressed, all that he had
learned, or heard. He so excelled in his young years, that the whole
University had his wit in great admiracion.

Being twentye years old, he was His study in the ciui(...) law.
graded Master of Art, and then he gave him self to the study of the Civil
law, by the advice of his familiar and nyghest friends, in so much that they
judged this marvelous pregna^cy of wit and eloquence, ought not to lurk in
obscure place: but be made notorious, hereafter to serve and be a neressary
instrument of the public weal. And the next year, which was the.xxi. of his
age, he sadaynly, and besides the expectacion of his Parents His entry^ into ye
monastery.
and friends, repaired to the Covent of the Augustines at Erphord. Where he
entreated admission, and being admitted, he learned with marvelous diligence,
not only the doctrine of the Covent: but also governed him self with a great
seueritye of discipline, and surpassed al other in all exercises of Religion,
in lections, in disputacions, in fastinges, and in prayers. He was naturally a
small feeder, whereat I have mused much, sith he was of stature tall and strong
of body. I have considered in him this abstinence: Incredible sobriety.
four continual days, when he was well disposed and healthy, he would
refrain from meat and drink. And often times I have seen, when a long
season he would diet him self with a small piece of bread and one hearing.

The cause wherefore he addicted him self to this Monastical order of What
moved him to Monkery.
life: was because he believed the same to be most conformable to sincere
religion, and to the understanding of Gods doctrine, as he has related, and
many has known. Often times he was taken with great and trembling fears,
when he attentively considered the wrath of God, and the marvelous examples of
his punishments, that he was in a manner reft of his wits. And I have marked
at a certain time, that being sore abashed in one disputacion of this
doctrine, because he gave attentive ear thereunto: he was suddenly forced to
remove into a nygh Chamber, and there resting on his bed, he meddled and reported
often His abashmentes at the wrath of God.
this sentence: God has shut up al under our unbelief, to the end he might
extend mercy to all. These abashmentes increased after, but the^ most
asperously he felt the^, when he lost his dear friend and companion, who was
stayne, I know not by what mishap.

Then penurye pricked him not to this Monkerye, but the affection he had to
learn to serve God. Albeit he learned there the doctrine used in schools, he
red the Doctors of sentences, and in public disputacions, distinctly expressed
the difficulties, which other could not unfold, whereat many mused:
Nevertheless, for y^ he sought not in this kind of life to win brute according
to the virtue of his wit, but His study in the holy scripture.
to norish him in the fear of God: he used these studies, as one that esteemed
not to be principal of that he searched and easelye conceived those
scholastical Methodes. In the mean season he red with great affection the
fountains of heavenly doctrine, that is, the Prophets and Apostles, thereby to
frame his life and conversation to the will of God, and so be continued in the
fear and faith of God, as by many things it was apparent. Yea, how much
the more earnestly he coueted this exercise, or holy contemplacion, so much
the more he was troubled with his dolor and abashment.

He declared he was many times He is comforted by an old man.
confyrmed by conference with an old man in the Covent of Augustines at
Erphord. And impartyng him with his tremblyng fears, he learned many things
touching faith, and also told us, he reasoned with him of that Article of the
Simbole, which is: I believe the remission of sins. He expressed unto Luther
this Article in ^re remission of sins.
this sort: We may not generally believe only that sins are or have been
remitted to some, as the Devils believe, they were forgeuen Peter or David: but
that Gods express commandment is, that every man should believe particularly
his sins are forgeuen. And further he said, that this interpretacion was
confyrmed by the testimonies of Saint Bernard, and he had showed him the place
An excellent declaracion of* s. Bernard touching faith.
in the Sermon of the Annunciacion, where it is thus set forth: But add that
thou beleuest this, y^ by him thy sins are forgeuen the. This is the
testimony, that the holy Ghost gives thee in thy heart, saying: Thy syns are
forgiven thee. For this is the opinion of the Apostle, that man is freely
justified by faith.

Luther said he was not only stre^gthened by these words: but ye he was also
instructed of the full meaning of saint Paul, who repeateth so many times this
sentence: We are justified by faith. And having read the exposicions of many
upon this place: he the^ perceued as well by the purpose of the old man, as by
the comfort he received in his spirit, the vanity of those interpretacio^s,
which he had besides him. And reading by little and little, with conferring the
sayings and examples of Prophets and Apostles, and continual inuocacion of
God, and excitacion of faith by force of prayers, he perceived that doctrine
more evidently.

Then he began to read S. Austens books, where he found many goodly The
profit of s. Austins vokes
sentences, among other in the exposicion of the Psalms, and in the book of
the Spirit and the Letter, which confirmed this doctrine of faith and
consolacion that was illumined in his heart. And yet he laid not a side the
Se^tenciaries. He could recite by rote word by word Gabriel and Cameracensis.
He red long time the books of Occan, and preferred his subtlety above Thomas
Aquin, and Scotus. He red also and reuolued Gerso^, but above all the rest, he
red and perused al over Saint Austens works, and committed them to perfect
memory. And thus he began diligently to study at Erphord, where he
continued four years in the Covent of Augustines.

About this time one Staupicius a Institucio^ of the University at Vitteberg
famous wight, who ministered his help to further the erection of an University
in Vitteberge, endeavored also to have Schools of Diuinitye founded in this
new University. When he had considered the Spirit and erudition of Luther,
he called him from Erphord, to place him in Vitteberg, in the year. 1508. and
of his age.xxvi. There his towardnes appeared in the ordinarye exercise of
School and predication. And as it happened that many wise and learned men
attentively heard Luther, namely the Doctor Meller^^ad. The said Mellerstad
would often times say, Luther was of such a marvelous spirit, and so
ingenious, that he gave apparent significacion, at one time or other, he would
introduce a more compendious, facile and familiar manner of teaching, and alter
and abolyshe the order that then was used.

There first he expounded the dialectique and Phisique of Aristotle, and in the
mean while intermitted no whyt his study in Theologye. Three years after he
went to Rome about the differences of the Monks, and returning the same
year, he was graded Doctor, at the expenses of Elector Fridericke, Duke of
Saxdnye, according to the solemn manner of Schools.

For he had heard him preach, well understood the quicknes of his spirit,
diligently considered the vehemence Luther passed Doctor
of his words, and had in singular admiracion those profounde matters which in
his Sermons he luculently and exactly exposed. And that al me^ may perceive
the degree of Docto^ was given him by precipitacion o^ judgment: it is well
known he was then but thirty year old. He declare^ that Staupicius against
his will enforced him to take that degree, saying merely unto him: that God had
man^ things to bring to perfection in hy^ Church, wherein he would employ^
Luther. And though these word were spoken merely: yet it came so t^ pass
anon after, as many predict^ons or presages prove true before change.

After this he began to expound the Epistle to the Romans, and consequently
the Psalms. But how? he declared them so divinely, that it seemed i^ the
judgment of al faithful and learned men, he was a shyning light, ^ bright
Phoebus, that began to clea^ after a long cloudy and obscure sky^ There he showed
the difference betwixt the law and the Gospel. He also confounded the error
that raygned then in schools and Sermons, the which error taught, that men
merit remission of sins by their proper works, and that they be just
before God, by outward discipline, as the Phariseis taught. Luther diligently
reduced the minds of men, to the Son Luther taught Jesus Christ
of God. And as John Baptist demonstrated the Lamb of God that took away the
sins of the world: even so Luther expressly showed that sins are freely
remitted, for the love of the Son of God, and that we ought faithfully to
embrace this bountefull gift. He also illustrated diu^^s other points of
ecclesiastical doctrine.

These happy begynnynges of so good matters, got him great authority,
considering his life was correspo^dent to his profession, and it plainly
appeared his words were no lyppe labor, but proceeded from the very heart.
This admiracion of his holy life much inflected, and allured the hearts of his
Auditors, and therefore many notable personages, familiarly knowing him, and
seeing him innouate the usual Ceremonies, resisted him nothing, but in respect
of the authority, he procured before (as well for that he reveled many good
matters, as that his life was holy) consented with him in his opinions, with
the which they saw the world divided diversely, and therefore were pensine and
very sore grieved.

At this time Luther altered nothing in the ceremonies, but precisely observed
his rule among his fellows, he meddled no doubtful opinions, but expressed this
common doctrine, as principallest of all other, in familiar manner to all men,
elucidating the same more and more, to say the doctrine of repentance, of
remission of sins, of faith, of true comfort in times of adversity. Every man
received good taste of this sweet doctrine, and the learned conceived high
pleasure to behold Jesus Christ, the Prophets and Apostles come forth into
light, out of darkness, prison, and other ordures, to understand the difference
betwyxt the law and the Gospel, betwyxt the promises of the Law, and the
promise of the Gospel, betwixt spiritual Justice, and civil things, which
certainlye could not have been found in Thomas Aquin, Scotus, nor his
semblables.

He considered this also, that many were instigated and solicited by Erasmus
learned works, to study the Greek and Latin tongues, who perceiving a more
gentle and ready order of teaching the before, began to have in contempt the
Monks barbarous and sophistical doctrine: and specially such as were of a
gentle nature and good disposicion. Luther began to study the Greek and Hebrew
tongues, to this end, that after he had learned the phrase and propriety of the
tongues, and drawn the doctrine out of the very fountaynes, he might give more
sound judgment.

Whilst Luther was in this course of study, a certain Dominicke Friernanied
Tecel, a most impudent Sicophant (if ever there raygned any) caused the Popes
Indulgences or Pardons to he carried and sold about the Country. Luther, much
moved with the blasphemous sermons this shameless Friar preached, and having his
heart earnestly bent with ardent desire to mayntaine true religion, published
Luthers Proposicions of pardons.
certain proposicions of Indulgences, which are in the first Tome of his
works, and fixed them openly on the Temple that joins to the Castle of
Vitteberg, the morrow after the feast of all Saynctes, the year, 1517.

This beggarlye Friar always like unto him self, hopyng to obtain the Popes
blessing, assembled certain Monks and Deuines, meanelye seen in Sophistry,
in his Covent, and forth with commanded them to write something against
Luther. And whylest he would not seem to be dombe, he began not only to
inueye in his Sermons, but to thunder against Luther, and balking out his
Asinine brayde, cried: Luther is an heretic, and worthy to be persecuted
with the fire, The sclau^ders of Tecel Iacobite.
and besides this he burned openly Luthers propositions, and the Sermon he
wrote of Indulgences. This rage and heliyshe fury of this bag bearer Friar
Tecel, enforced Luther to treat more amply of things, and to mayntaine the
truth.

Behold what were the begynnynges of this controuersye, wherein Luther neither
suspecting ne dreamyng of any change that might happen in the ceremonies,
did not utterly reject the Indulgences, but required a moderacion in them. And
therefore they falselye accuse him, that blase he began with plawsible
matter, and whereby he might get praise, to the end in process of time, he
might change the state of the Common weal, and purchase authority, either
for him self or other.

And sure, he was not suborned or sturred by Courtiers, as the Duke of
Brunswike wrote that the Duke Frederick was sore effended that such
contencion and controuersye should arise, having regard to the sequel
thereof, that all be it this beginning proceeded fauourablye, yet the flame by
little and little kyndeled, would have spreadde further, as Homere makes
mention of Fame.

Fame is an evil, then the which Homere.
no swyfter can be found:
For she does florysh with her change and gets force by groun^.
Small with first dred, then large the grows, and lifts her in y^ air
Thus to Jones seat through clouds and skies, she blasting does repair.
And as this good Duke Frederick was one of all the princes of our time that
loved best quiet and common tranquillity, Praise of Fridericke Duke of Sarony.
neither was aua^icious, but wyllyngly bent to refer al his counsels to the
common vtilitye of all the world, as it is easy to be coniected diverse ways:
so he neither encouraged nor favored Luther, but often represented semblant of
heaviness and sorrow, which he bare in his heart, fearyng greater dissencions.

But as he was wise, and followed not only profane judgments, which
command the tender springes of ^^ chaunges to be sodeinly oppressed: so taking
in counsayl the divine rule, and well deliberating thereupon which enioyneth
obedience to the Gospel, and forbyddeth to resist the tried truth, and terms
it a blasphemy, horribly condemned of God, partinaciously to repugne the
truth. He did that many wise and godly would have done, he obeyed God, leauyng
unto him his divine power, he read diligently that that was written, and he
would not abolysh, that he judged to be sincere and true.

I know very well he made inquisicion often times, what were the wise and learned
men's opinions touching these things. I know he gently besought Erasmus (in
that assemblye which The Emperor Charles the fifth made, in the City of Colein
after his Coronacion) freely to tell him his opinion, if Luther had erred in
those differences, whereof he principally entreats. Then Erasmus said, that
Erasmus approves Luthers doctrine.
Luthers opinion was good: but that he desired moderation of style in him.
Whereof Duke Frederick wrote after grievously to Luther, exhortyng him to temper
the vehemence of his style.

It is also appare^t, that Luther promised y^ Cardinal Caietanus to keep
silence, provided also his adversaries would do the like. Whereby we may
gather, that at that time he determined not to stir any new debates, but
rather coueted the common quiet, and that he was provoked by little and little to
other matters, through the excitacion of unlearned writers.

Then followed disputacions of difference betwixt divine and humain law,
Declaracion of the principal points of Religion.
of the horrible prophanacion of y^ supper of our Lord, in selling and applieng
the same for other purposes. Here he was forced to expres the cause of the
sacrifice, and to declare the use of the sacraments. Now the godly and
faithful Christians, closed in Monasteries, understanding Images ought to be
eschewed, began to abando^ y^ wretched thraldom, in which they were detained

Now Luther, y^ plainlier to expres the doctrine of repentance, of remission
of syns, of faith, and of indulge^ces, he added these matters: The difference
of divine and humain laws, y^ doctrine of the use of our Lords supper, of
baptism and of vows, and these were his principal conflictes. As touching the
question of the Romain Bishops power, Eccius was y^ author thereof, and for
none other respect, the^ to inflame the fyry wrath of the Pope and Princes
against Luther. The simbole of y^ Apostles, y^ same of Nice and Athanasius he
conserved in their integrity. Further he declares in diverse his works
sufficiently, what innouacio^ is to be required in y^ ceremonies and traditions
of me^, and wherefore they ought to be altered. And what form of doctrine and
administracion of the sacraments he required and approved, it is appare^t by
the confession the Elector John Duke of Saxony, and Prince Phillip Landgraue of
Hessia presented to themperor Charles the.v. in the year 1530. in the assembly
at Ausburg. It is manifest also by y^ ceremonies of y^ Church in this City, and
the doctrine y^ is preached in our Church, the so^me whereof is fully comprised
in this confession: I allege this y^ the godly may consider not only what
errors he has corrected and reproved, and what images he has defaced and
abolished: but also they may understand he has comprehended y^ hole doctrine
necessary for y^ church he has set y^ ceremonies in their purity, and given
examples to the faithful to repurge and reform the Churches, and it is
necessary for posterity to know^ what Luther has approved.

I will not here commemorate, who Who were ^n cause ye ceremonies ^ver changed.
were the first yt published both parts of the Supper of our Lord, who first
omitted the private Masses, and where first the Monasteries were abandoned. For
Luther has disputed very little of these before yt assembly which was made in
the Town of Vangions, in the year 1521, he changed Worms.
not the ceremonies, but in his abse^ce Carolostadius and other altered the^.
Then Luther returning (after that Carolostadius had devised and done certain
things, rather to bread mutiny then otherwise) manifested by evident
testimonies, published abroad touching his opinion, what he approved and what
he mystyked.

We know that politic men evermore, detested all chaunges, and we Chaunges are
dangerous.
must confess, there ensues some evil of dissencions, yea truly moved for
right good causes in this horrible confusion of humayne life, and yet it is our
duty evermore in the Church, to advance Gods ordinance above humayne
constitucions. The eternal father pronounced this voice of his son: This is
my well-beloved son hear him. And menaceth eternal wrath to al blasphemers,
that is such as endeavor to abolishe the manifest verity. And therefore Luther
did as behooved a Christian faithfully to do, considering he was an Instructor
of the Church of God. It was his office (I say) to reprehed pernicious errors
which Epicures table, with a monstrous impudencye heaped one upon an other, and
it was expedient his Auditors dissented not from his opinion, since he taught
purely. Wherefore if alteracion be hateful, and many peryls grow of dissension,
as we certainly see many, whereof we be right sorry: they are in fault partlye
that spread abroad these errors, and partly that with diuelyshe dysdayne
presently maintain them.

I do not recite this only to defend Luther and his Auditors, but also that
the faithful spirits may consider now The governance ^f y^ Church.
and in time to come, what is the governance of the true Church of God, and
what it has always been, how God has gathered to him self one eternal
Church, by the voice of the Gospel, of this mass of sin, that is to say, of
the huge heap of humayne ordures, among who^ the Gospel shyneth as a spark
amyd the dark. As in the time of the Phariseis Zachary, Elizabeth, Mary, and
many other reverenced and obserned the true doctrine: So have many preceeded
us, who purely inuocated God, some understanding more clearly, then some the
doctrine of the gospel. Such a one was the old man, of whom I wrote, that often
times comforted Luther, when his astoneinges assailed him, ^ after a sort
declared unto him the doctrine of the faith. And that God may preserve
henceforth the light of his Gospel, shinyng in many: let us pray with fervent
affection, as Esaias prays for his Hearers: Seal the law in my Disciples.
Further, this advertisement shows plain, that colored supersticions are not
permanent, but abolished by God, and sithe this is the cause of chaunges, we
ought diligently to endeavor, that errors be not taught ne preached in the
Church.

But I return to Luther. Even as at the beginning he entered in this matter, with
out any particular cupidiy: Prudenc^ to discern offices.
so though he was of a fiery nature, and subject to wrath, yet he always
remembered his office, only co^tendyng in his teaching, and prohibited wars
to ve attempted, and distingued wisely offices, wherein was any difference, to
say: the Bishop f^^dyng the flock of God, and the Magistrates that by
authority of the sword committed un to them, repres a certain multitude of
people subject unto them.

Wherefore when Satan contendeth by scandales to dyssipate the Church of God,
and contumeliously enrage against him, and delyghteth to do evil, and
rejoices to behold us wallowe in the puddle of error and blyndnes, sinylyng
at our destruction, he spends oil and toil to inflame and stir up
myscheuous instruments, and mutining spirits to so we sedicion, as Monetarius
and Monetarius sedicions.
his like. Luther repelled boldlye these rages, and not only adorned, but also
corroborated the dygnitye and bands of politic order and civil government.

Therefore when I consider in my mind how many worthy men have been in the
church, that in this erred, and were abused: I believe assuredly y^ Luthers heart
was not only governed by humayn diligence, but with a heavenly light,
considering how constantly he a bode within the limits of his office.

He held not only in contempt the sedicious Doctors of that time, as Monetar
us and the Auabaptistes: but also these horned Bishops of Rome, who
arrogantly and impudently by their devised decrees affirmed, that Saint Peter
had not the charge alone to teach the Gospel, but also to govern commonweals, and exercise civil jurisdiction.

Moreover he exhorted every man to render unto God that appertayned unto God,
and to Caesar that belonged to Caesar, to say that al should serve God, with true
repentance, knowledge and propagacion of his true doctrine, inuocacion and
works, wrought with a pure conscience. And as touching civil pollecy, that
every one should obey the Maiestcates, under who^ he lived in all civil duties,
and reuerences for Gods cause. And certainly Luther was such a one, he gave unto
God, that belonged unto God, he taught God, he inuocated God, and had other
virtues necessary for a man that pleases God. Further, in politic
conversation he constantlye aduoyded al sedicious counsels. I judge these
virtues to be so excellent ornaments, as greater and more divine cannot be
required in this mortal life.

And al be it that the virtue of this Assurance of the doctrine of the Gospel.
man is worthy commen^acion, and the rather for that he used the gifts of God
in all reverence: yet our duty is to render condign thanks unto God that by
him he has given us the light of the Gospel, and to conserve and enlarge the
remembrance of his doctrine. I weye little the braid and sclaunder of the
Epicures and Hipocrites, who scoff and condemn the manifest truth. But I
stay wholly here upon, that the universal Church, has consented perpetuallye
to this very doctrine, which is preached in our Church, where unto we must
frame our life and devotion conformable. And I believe yt this is the doctrine,
whereof the son of God speaks: If any love me, he will keep my
commandments, and my father will love him, and we will come to him, and
plant our dwelling with him. I speak of the sum of the doctrine, as it is
understood, and explaned in our Churches, by the faithful and learned
Ministers. For all be it that some one often times expounds the same more
aptly and elegantly then some other: yet as touching the effect, the learned
and faithful do agree in all points.

Then weying and perpending with my self long time the doctrine that Four
chau^ges since ye Apostles.
has been of al times, it seems unto me that since the Apostles there have
been four notable alteracions after the first purity of y^ Gospel. Origene had
his time. Al be it there were some of a sound and sacred opinion as Methodius,
who reproved the furies and ^otages of Origene, yet he converted the Gospel
into Philosophye in the hearts of many that is to say: he advanced this
persuasion, that one mean discipline of reason deserves remission of sins,
and that this is that justice, whereof is said: The just shall live of his
faith. That age almost lost the whole difference of the Ignorance of time
marreth yt sentence.
Law and the Gospel, and forgot the words of ye Apostles. For they under stood
not the natural significacion of these words: Letter, Spirit, Justice,
Faith. Now when the proprietye of words was ^o^t, which be notes of the very
things, it was necessary that other things should be contrived. Out of this
seed sprang Pedagius error, which wandered largely abrod. And therefore al be it
the Apostles had given unto y^ Church a pure doctrine, as clear and
salutiferous fou^taines, yet Origene meddled the same with much ordure and
impuritye.

Then to correct the errors of that time, or at the least some part of the. S.
Augustine restorer of the doctrine.
God raised S. Austen, who repurged an some part the fountaynes, and I doubt
not if he were judge of dissencions at this day, but he would speak for us, and
defend our cause. Certainly, as concerning free remission, iustificacion by
faith, the use of the Sacraments and indifferent things he consents wholly
with us.

And albeit that in some places he exp^undeth more eloquently and aptly that he
will say, than in some, yet if in readyng any do carry with them a godly spirit
and quycke* understanding, and al evil judgment cease, they shall soon
perceyne he is of our opinion. And where as our adversaries sometime do cite
sentences selected out of his books against us, and with clamor provoke us to
the ancient Fathers, they do it not for any affection they bear unto the
truth or antiquity, but maliciously to cloak them with the authority of the
ancient fathers, in the presence of their Idols, which antiquity never knew
of any these horned beasts and dombe Idols, as we have known in these days.

Nevertheless it is certain, there were see^es of supersticion in the time of the
Fathers and ancient Doctors, and therefore S. Austen ordained some thing of
vows, although he wrote not thereof so straungely as other: for soth y^ best
some times shall be spotted with the blemysh of the follyes that reygne in their
age. For as naturally we love our Country, so fondly we favor the present
fashions, where in we be trained and educated And very well alludeth Euripides to
this.

What customs ^e in tender youth by Natures lore receive:
The same we love and like always, and loathe our ^ust to leave.
But would to God, y^ such as vaunt they follow S. Austen, would always
represent one like opinion and mynoe, as S. Austen. Certainly they would not
clyppe and mutilate his sentences, to serve their purpose.

And the light restored by S. Auste^s Deprauation of Ecclesiastical ministers.
works, has much profited posterity For Prosper, Maximus, Hugo, and some
other like, that governed studies to S. Bernardes time, have for the most part
imitated the rule of S. Austen. And this while still the regiment and rytches of
the Bishops increased, and thereof ensued a mo^e the^ gigantal or monstrous
raygne, profane and ignorant men governed the Church, among the which
certain were enstructed in sciences and practices of the Romayne Court, and
some other exercised in pleadings.

Then the orders of Dominicke and S. Fraunces Friars began, who beholding The
beginning of. 2. sorts of Friars.
the excess and riches of the Bishops, and contempnyng their ungodly manners,
determined to live in more modest order, or as I might say to enclose them in
the prisons of discipline, but first ignorance increased the supersticions.
Then after, when they considered men's minds wholly addicted to the study of y^
civil laws, for that pleading at Rome aduau^ced many to great authority, and
enrytched them: they endeavored to revoke men to the study of Divinity, but
they missed of their purpose, and their counsayl failed them. Albert and his
semblables that were given to Aristotle's doctrine, began to convert the
doctrine The Gospel turned into Philosophy.
of the Church into profane Philosophy.

And the fourth age, not only filled with ordure the fountains of the
Gospel: but vomited poison, to say: opinions manifestly approuyng all
idolatries. Thomas Aquin, Scotus, and their like, have brought in so many
labyrinthes and false opinions, that* the godly and sound sort of deuines have
always desired a more plain and purer kind of doctrine.

Neither can we deny without great impudencye, but it was expedient to alter
this kind of doctrine, when it is manifest that such as employed their whole
age in this manner of teaching, The impieties of ye Scholastical doctrine
understood not the great part of the Sophismes, in their Disputacions.
Further it is plain Idolatry confirmed, when they teach the applicacions of
sacrifice by work wrought, when they allow the invocation of Images, when
they deny that sins be freelye remitted by faith, when of ceremonies they
make a slaughter of consciences. Finally, there are many other horrible and
pernicious devises, that when I think of them, Lord how I tremble and quake
of fear.

Let us render thanks unto God, the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has pleased by the Ministerye of Divine and godly Luther, too
purifye the Evangelical fountaynes of all ordure and papistical Luther has
repurged y^ doctrine.
infection, and restore siucere doctrine to the Church, whereof minding
evermore, we may conioyne our lamentable peticions, and with zeious affection
beseech God to co^^^rine that he has achieved in us, for his holy Temples
sake. Th^s is thy voice and prom^se lyu^ng and just God, eternal father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, creator of a^ things, and of the Church: I will have
compassion on you, for my names sake. I will do it for my se^^e, yea truly
for my self, that I be not blasphe^ed. I beseech thee with ardent affection,
that for thy glory, and the glory of thy son Jesus Christ, thou wylt collect
unto thy self in the voice of thy Gospel, among us, one perpetual Church,
and that for the d^are love of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ our mediator
and intercessor thou wylt govern us by thy holy Gho^^, that we unfeignedly may
call upon thee, and serve thee justly. Rul^ also the studies of thy doctrine,
govern and conserve the policies and discipline of the same, which be the
Nur^^s of thy Church and schools. And sithe thou have created mankind that thou
may be known and inuocated of the same, and that for this respect thou have
revealed thy self by many c^^are testimonies, permit not this small number and
selected ^^ocke (that profess any sacred w^or^) to be defaced and overcome.
And the rather, for that thy son Jesus Christ ready to fight against death,
has p^ayed in this manner for us: Father, sanctifye them in verity, thy word
is veritye. We con^oyne our prayer with the prayer of this our ho^ye Pr^est,
and we make peticion with him, that thy doctrine may th^^e among m^, and that
we may be directed by the same. We heard Luther evermore pray in this wise, and
so praying, his innocent Ghost peaceably was separated from the earthy corpse,
when he had lived al most th^ee score and three years.

Such as succeeded, have diverse monumentes The so^me of all that Luther taught.
of his doctrine and godliness He wrote certain instructing works, wherein he
comprised a salutiferous and necessary doctrine for men, teaching the sincere
minds penitence, the fruits of the same, the use of the Sacraments, the
difference betwyxt the Gospel and Philosophy, the dignity of politic order,
finally the principal articles of the doctrine conducible to the Church. He
composed certain works to reprove, wherein he refuteth diverse pernicious
errors. He also devised books of interpretacion, in which he wrote many
enarracions and exposicions of the Prophets and Apostels, and in this kind his
very enemies confess, he excels all other, whose works are imprinted and
published abroad.

Then al Christians and godly minds conceive what praise he merited, but
certainlye his exposicion of the old and new Testament, with vtility and
labor, is equivalent to al his works. For in the same is so much
perspicuitye, that it may serve in steed of a Commentary, though it be red in
the Germayne tongue. And yet this is not a naked Exposition, but it contains
very learned Annotacions and Arguments of every part. The which both set
forth the sum of heavenly doctrine, and instructs the Reader the sacred
phrase, and manner of speaking in the Scriptures, that the godly minds may
receive fyrme testimonies of the doctrine, out of the very fountaynes. His
mind was not to keep us occupied in his woor^es: but to guide our Spirits to
the very sprynges. His will was we should hear God speak, and that by his
word, true faith and inuocacion might ve kyndeled in our minds, that GOD
might be sincerely honored and adored, and that many might be made
Inheritours of the everlasting life.

It behooves v^ thankefullye to accept his good will and great labors, and
to imitate the same as our Patron, and by him to learn to adorn the Church,
according to our power. For we must refer all our life, enterprises, and
deliberacions, to two principal ends. First, to illustrate the glory^ of God.
Secondly, to profit the Church. As touching the first, Saynct Paul says:
Do all things to the glory of God. And of the second, it is said in the
hundred twenty and two Psalm. Pray that Jerusalem may prosper, and there
follows a syngular promise added in this versic^e, that such as love the
Church, shall prosper and have good success. Let these heavenly
commandments, and divine be hestes allure all men to learn the true
doctrine of the Church, to love the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, and the
true Teachers, and to employ their whole study and diligence to augment the
true doctrine, and maintain concord and unity in the true Church. ()

Martine Luthers declaracion of his doctrine, before the Emperors Majesty,
Charles the fyft, the Princes Electors, the Estates of the Empire, in the
i^urney an^ assembly of Princes at Worms. ()
THE year of our salvation* 1621. about. 17. ^ayes after Passover, Martin
Luther entered Worms, being sent for by the Emperor Charles the fifth of his
name, king of Hispaine and Archeduke of Aust^ich. etc. Who the first year of
his Empire, made the first assembly of Princes in this regal City. And where as
Martin Luther had published three years before, certain new propositions, and
such as before were never proponed, to be disputed in the Town of Witteberg in
Sarony, against the ^^ranny of the Pope (the which not wythstanding were torn
in pieces, condemned and burned by the Papists, and yet by no manifest
Scriptures, ^^ probable reason convinced) the matter began to tend to tumult
and mutiny, and yet Luther mayntained a^ this while openly his cause against
the Clergy. Whereupon it seemed good according to the sollicitacion of the
Romayne Legates, that Luther should be called, assigning unto him an Herald of
Arms, with letter of safe conduct by the Emperor and Princes. Being sent for,
he came, and addressed him to the Knights of the Rhodes place, where he was
lodged, Luther is sent for to Worms.
well entertained, and visited of many Earls, Barons, Knights of thord^r
Gentlemen, Priests and the Co^mon^y who freque^ted his lodging til night.

To conclude, he came besides the expectacion of many, as well adversaries as
other. For all be it he was sent for by the Emperors Messenger, and had letters
of safe conduct: Yet for that a few days before his access, his books were
condemned by public proclamacions, every man believed for this prejudice he
would not come. And ye rather, for ye his friends deliberated together in a
nigh Village called Oppenehim (where Luther was first advertised of these
occurrentes) and many persuaded him not to submit himself to any danger,
considering these beginninges answered not the faith of promise made. Who,
when he had heard their whole persuasion and advise, he answered in this wise:
As touching me, since I am sent for, I am resolved and certainly determined to
enter Worms, in the Constancy in Luther.
name of the Lord Jesus Christ: yea, although I knew there were so many Devils
to resist me, as there are tyles to cover the houses in Worms.

The fourth day after his repair a Gentleman, named Vlricke of Pappenhim,
Lieutenant general of ye me^ of Arms of the Empire, was commanded by the
Emperor before dynner, to repair to Luther, and enjoin ye same at. 4. a clock
in the after noone to appear before themperial Majesty, the Princes Electors,
Dukes and other Estates of thempire, to understand the cause of his
appellation. Whereunto he willingly agreed as his duty was.

And after four of the clock, Vlr^k Pappen him, and Caspar Sturm the
Emperors Heraul^e (who conducted Mart^n Luther from W^^teberg, to Worms) came
for Luther, and accompanied him through the garden of the Knights of the
Rhodes place, to the Earl Palatines palaice, and least the people should
molest him, that thronged in frequency on the direct way to the Emperous
Palaice, he was led by secret stayres to y^ place where he was appointed to
have audience. Yet many, who perceived the pretense, violently rushed in, and
were resisted to no purpose, many ascended the Galleries, because they desired
to be hold Luther.

Thus standing before the Emperial Luther is (...)roughte before the ^mperor.
Majesty, the Electors, Dukes, Earls, and all the Estates of the Empire,
assembled there. He was first advertised by Vlricke of Pappenhim to keep
silence, til such time as he was interrogated. The^ the Ambassador of the
Empire named John Ecke, the Bishop of Triers general official, with a loud and
intelligible voice first in Latin, then in Dutche, according to the Emperors
commandment, said and proponed this sen^ec^ in manner as ensues or like in
effect.

Martin Luther, the sacred and invincible Emperial Majesty, has enjoined by
the consent of all the estates of the holy Empire, that thou should be
appealed before the throne of his Majesty, to the end I might ^nterrogate thee
of these two points. First, if thou confessest these books In^errogacio^.
h^^e (for he showed a heap of Luthers books, written in the Latin and
Dutche tongues) and which are in all places borne, intituted with thy name, be
thine, and thou do affirm them to be thine or no? Secondly, if thou wylt
recant and revoke them, and all that is contained in them, or rather meanest to
stand to that thou have written.

Then before Luther prepared to answer, Master Jerome Schurffe, Jerome
Shurffe.
appointed Luthers Advocate, exclamed: let the titles of the books be red.
Forthwith the Official of Triers named certain of the books, and those
principally which were imprinted at Basile, among the which he nominated his
Commentaries in the Psalter, his book of good works, his Commentary upon the
Lords prayer, and diverse other, which were not contencious.

After this Luther answered thus in Latin and in Dutche: Two things Lut^ers
answer.
are proponed unto me by the Emperial Majesty. First, if I will auow for mine,
al those books that bear my name. Secondly, if I will mayntaine or revoke any
thing that hitherto I have devised and published. Whereunto I will answer as
briefly as I can.

In the first, I can do none other the^ recognize those books to be mine,
which lastly were named, and certainly I will never recant any clause thereof. In
the second, to declare if I will wholly defend or call back any thing comprised
in them. For as much as there is question of faith, and the salvation of the
soul, and this concerns the word of God, which is the greatest and most
excellent matter that can be in heaven or earth, and the which dulye we ought
evermore to reverence. This might be accounted in me a precipitacion of
judgment, and even so a most daungerons attempt, if I would pronounce any
thing, before I better advised. Considering I might recite something less
then the matter imports, and more then the truth requires, if I did not
premeditate that that I would speak. The which, two things would set before
mine eyes this sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ, where by is said Who so ever
shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my Father. I require then for
this cause, and humblye beseech the Imperial Majesty, to grant me liberty
and leisure to deliberate, so that I may satisfye the interrogacion made unto
me, without prejudice of the word of God, and peril of mine own soul.

Whereupon the Princes began to deliberate. This done, the Official
pronounced what was their resolucion, saying: All beit Martine Luther, thou
have sufficiently understood by the Emperors commandment, the cause of thy
appellacion, and therefore do not deserve to have opportunity given thee to
determyne: Yet ^he Imperial Majesty of his mere clemency, ^ rau^teth the one
day to m(...) for thine answer, the which to morrow ar this instaunt hour
thou shall repair to render before him co^^tcionally, thou do not exhibit
thine opinion in writing, but pronounce the same with lively voice.

This done, Luther was led to his lodging by the Heraulo, but herein Luther is
exhorted to be constant.
I may not be obliuious, that in the way going to the Emperor, and when he
was in the assembly of Princes, he was exhorted of other to be courageous, and
manly to demean himself, and not to fear them that can kill the body, but not
the soul: but rather to dread him that is able to send both body and soul
to everlasting fire. Further, he was emboldned with this sentence: When thou
art before Kings, think not what thou shall speak, for it shall be given
thee in that hour.

The next day after four of ye clock, the Heraulde came and brought Luther from
his lodgyng, to the Emperors Covet, where he abode tyi six of the clock, for
that the Princes wet occupied with grave consultacions; a biding there and
being enuironned with a great number of people, and almost smothered for the
preace that was there. Then after, when the Princes were set, and Luther entered:
the Official began to speak in this manner

Yesterday at this hour, Themperial Majesty assigned thee to be here Martin
Luther, for that thou have affirmed those books, that we named yesterday, to
be thine. Further to the interrogacion by us made, whether thou would
approve all that thou confessest in them, or abolishe and make boyde any part
thereof. Thou dyddest require time of deliberacion, which was granted, and is
now expired. All beit thou ought not to have opportunity granted to
deliberate, considering it was notorious unto thee, wherefore we accited thee.
And as concerning the matter of faith, every man ought to be so prepared, that
at all times when so ever he shall be required, he may give certain and constant
reason thereof, and thou the rather so highly learned, and long time exercised
in Theology. Then go to, answer even now to Themperours demand, whose bounty
thou have proved in giving thee leisure to perpend. Wylt thou now maintain all
thy books which thou have acknowledged, or revoke any part of them? or submit
and yield thy self? The Official made this interrogacion in Latin and in
Dutche.

Martin Luther answered in Latin and Dutche, in this wise, modestly and
lowlye, and yet not without magnanimily, and Christian consta^cy, so as his
adversaries would gladly have had him whusted, and abased his courage, but yet
more earnestlye they desired his reuocation, and certain of them persuaded
even so, for as much as he obtained leisure to deliberate.

His answer was thus.

E Emperor, and my most magnificent Lord, and you most excellent Princes, and
my most clement Lords, I appear before you here at the hour prescribed unto
me yesterday: yelding the obedience that I owe, humblye beseechinge, for Goods
mercy your most renoumed Majesty, and your Graces and Honors will minister
unto me this curtesye, to attend this cause benignelye, which is the cause
(as I trust) of Justice and Veritye.

And if by ignorance I have not given unto every of you your just titles, or
if I have not observed the ceremonies and countenances of the Court, offendyng
against them: it may please ye to pardon me of your benignities. As one that
only has frequented Cloisters, and not courtly ciuilities. Neither can I
give other testimony of my self, but that I have instructed and written in
such simplicity of mind, as only I have esteemed the glory of God, and the
institution of the faithful Christians in all sincerity of doctrine.

Most magnificent Emperor, and Luther gives account of his faith before the
Emperor.
you most noble Princes, my most gracious Lords, being yesterday interrogated
of these two Articles objected by your most excellent Majesty If (...) selves
ordain by proper laws, as in the Distinct. 9. and. 25. q 1. and. 2. that the
Popes laws repugnant to the doctrine of the Gospel, and the opinions of the
ancient Fathers, be judged erron^ous and reprobate.

If then I shall revoke these, I can do none other but augment for^e ^o their
tyranny, and not only open w^ndowes, but wide gates, to such an in fernal
i^^^ety, the which will extend more wide, and with more liberty, then yet she
^^st. And by the testimony of this my R^tractacion, their ^aso^ent and
mali^ious kingdom shall be made most licencious, and less subject to
punishment, most intolerable to the common people, and yet confyrmed and
established, spectal^y if this be bruted, that I Luther have done this by the
author^tye of your most excellent Majesty, and the sacred Roman Emp^re. Oh
Lord, what a cover or shadow shall I be then? to cloak their naughtynes and
tyranny.

The rest or third sort of my books are such, as I have written against some
private, and some (as they term them) syngular parsons, to say, against such
as with toothe and nail labored to protect the Romyshe tyranny, and deface
true Religion, which I have taught and professed. As touching these, I
playnelye confess I have been more vehement, then my Religion and profession
requ^red. For I make my self no saint, and I dispute not of my life, but of the
doctrine of Christ.

And these I can not without preiuoice call back for by this Recantacion, it
will come to pass, that tyranny and impiety shall raygne, supported by my
means, and exercise cruelnesse against Gods people, more violentlye and
raginglye, then before.

Nevertheless, for that I am a man, He requires to be instructed if he have
erred.
and not God, I can none otherwise enterprise to defend my books, then my
very Lord Jesus Christ has aided his doctrine. Who being exam^ne^ of his
doctrine before Annas, and having received a buffet of the Minister, said: If
I have spoken evil, bear witness of evil.

If the lord (who was assured he could not err) refused not to have testimony
given against his doctrine, yea of a most vile servant: how much the more I
that am but vile corruption, and can do nothing but err, ought earnestly to
entreat and attend, if any will bear wytnes against my doctrine.

Therefore I require for Gods mercy, your most excellent Majesty, your Graces,
and right honorable Lordshyps, or what so ever he be of high or low degree
bear wytnes, if ye can prove I have erred, or if ye surpass me in the
knowledge of the prophets and Apostles writings, convince mine errors, and I
will be most ready (if I be so instructed) to revoke any manner of error. Yea and
the first that shall consume my books with flaming fire.

I suppose by these it is apparent, that I have perpended, and well weyed, the
peryls and dangers, or the diverse opinions and dissentions that have risen and
grown throughoute the whole world, by reason of my doctrine, of which I was
v^hemently and r^bukefully admonished. As touching my self, I conceive no
greater delectacion in any thing, then when I behold discordes and ^issencions,
resuscitated for the word of God. For such is the course an^ issue of the
Gospel, Jesus Christ says: I came not to send peace, but a sword. I came to
set man at variaunce against his Father.

And further, we must think that our God is marvelous and terryble in his
counsels, least perhaps y^ that we endeavor with earnest study to atchieue and
bring to perfection (if we begin, after we have condemned the word of God)
that same turn not to a huge sea of evil, and (whereof we had need to be
provident) least the Empire of this young and bounteous Prince Charles (in
whom next after God, we all conceive singular hope) be lamentable, unfortunate,
and myserably begone.

I could e^emplify this with authorities of the Scriptures more effectually, as
by Pharao, the King of Babylon, and the Kings of Israel, who then most
eclipsed the bright Sun of their glory, and procured their own ruin, when
by sage counsels they attempted to pacify and establishe their governments and
Realms. It is he that entrappeth the wyly in their wylin^s, and s^buerteth
mountains, ere they feel^ his might. Wherefore fear is the work of God.

I speak not this, supposyng that so politic and prudent heads have need
of my doctrine or admonicion: but because I would not omit to profit my country
and offer my duty or service that may tend to the aduau^cement of the same.
And thus I humbly commend me to your most excellent Majesty, and your honorable
Lordships, beseching I may not incurr^ your displeasures, neither be contemned
of you, through the pursuit of my adversaries. I have said.

These words pronounced the Emperors Luther solicited again to submyt him
self.
Ambassador, who made semblant of good will to check Luther: said that
Luther had not answered to any purpose, neither it behaved him to call in
question, things in time past condemned and defined by general Councels. And
therefore they required of him a plain and no crooked answer, whether he would
revoke or no.

Then Luther answered: Considering that your sovereign Majesty Luthers
absolute answer.
and your Honors require a plain answer, I will geuethe same, neither
crooked ne contumelious in this manner: that if I be not convinced by
testimonies of the scriptures, and by probable reason (for I believe not the
Pope, neither general Councels) be overcome in the scriptures alleged by me,
and the certitude thereof is not found in the word of God, I will not, nor I may
not revoke any manner of thing, considering it is not godly ne lefu^l to do
any thing against conscience. Here upon I rest, I know not what else I should
say. God help me. So be it.

The Princes consulted together upon this answer given by Luther, And when
they had diligently examined the same, the Official of Triers Ambassador of
the Empire, began to repel him thus.

Martin, thou have more immodestly answered, then besemed thy person, and also
evil to purpose. Thou deuidest thy books in three sorts, in such order that all that thou have said, makes nothing to the interrogacion proponed. And therefore
if thou had revoked those, wherein the greatest part of thine errors is
contained: the Emperial Majesty, and the natural bounty of other would not
have suffered the rest that be sound, to be persecuted with fire. But thou
resuscitatest and bryngest to light, all that the general council of Constance
has condemned, the which was assembled of all the nation of Germany, and
requirest to be convinced with scriptures, wherein thou errest greatly. For what
a^ay^eth it to renew disputacion of things so long time past condemned by the
Church and Councels, unless it should be necessary to give a reason to every
man of every thing. That if all such as impugn, that which was decreed by the
Church, and Councels may once get this advantage, to be co^u^nced by the
scriptures, we shall have nothing certain and established in Christendom.

And th^s is the cause wherefore the Emperial Majesty requires of thee a simple
answer, either a negative, or an affirmative, if thou will defend al thy
works as Christian, or no?

Then Luther besought the Emperial Majesty not to compel him to yield against
his conscience, confirmed with the holy scriptures, without manifest
arguments, alleged by his adversaries, and declared his answer was not
crooked, but simple, and direct, and further he had not to say, then he
advertised before, that if his enemies could not extricate with sufficient
arguments his conscience occupied (as they said) with errors, he was not able
to ryd him self out of the snares wherein he was entangled. And whereas the
general Councels have ordained certain things, those therefore not to be true,
for that they have erred, and often times gaynsayd them selves, and for this
cause the enemies argument was of no solidity. Further, he was able to prove,
and would constantly stand to the trial the Councels had erred, and it was not
meet for him to revoke and dysanull that which is manifest, and diligently set
forth in the Scripture.

Whereunto the Offical answered simply to purpose, and said: No man could prove
the Council had erred, but Luther alleged he could, and promised to prove.
And now night approaching, the Lords rose and departed. And after Luther had
taken his leave of the Emperor, diverse Spaniards scorned and scoffed the holy
man in his way to his lodging, hallowing and hoopyng after him a ^on^ while.

The Fridaye following after, the Princes Electours, Dukes, and other Estates,
were assembled: the Emperor sent to al them that were deputed Counseillors,
one letter, containing this that follows: Our Predecessors, The Emperors
aun^wer a^aynst Luther.
who truly were Christian Princes, were obedient to the Romish Church, which
Martine Luther presently impugneth. And for as much as he is not determined to
call back his errors in any one point, we cannot without great infamy^ and
stayne of honor degenerate from the examples of our Elders, but will maintayn
the ancient faith, and give ay^e to the sea of Rome. And further, we be
resolved to pursue Martin Luther and his adherentes by excommuncacions and by
other means that may be devised to extinguish his doctrine. Nevertheless, we
will not violate our faith, which we have promised him, but mean to give order
for his safe return to the place whence he came.

The Princes Electors, Dukes and y^ other Estates of the Empire, sat and
co^sulted upon this sentence, Friday all the after noone, and Saturdaye the
whole day, so that Luther yet had no answer of the Emperor.

During this time diverse Princes, Earls, Barons, Knights of the order,
Gentlemen, Priests, Monks with other the La^tye and common sort visited him.
All these were present at all hours in the Emperors court, and could not be
satisfied with the sight of him. Also there were hyls set up one against Luther,
and the other as it seemed with him. Notwithstanding many supposed, and
especially such as well conceived the matter, y^ this was subtly done by his
enemies, y^ thereby occasion might be offered to infringe the safeconduct given
him, the which the Romayne Ambassadors with all sedulity, endeavored to bring
to pass

The monday following, before supper, the Archbishop of Triers advertised
Luther, that on wednesday next he should appear before him at six of the
clock before Dynner, and assigned him the place. On Saint Georges day, the
Archbishop of Triers great Vicar, about Supper time came to Luther, by the
commandment of his Prince, sygnifieng that at the hour and place prescribed,
he must the morrow after have access to his Master.

The morrow after S. Georges day Luther obeying the Archbishops commandment,
entered his palaice, being accompanied thither with his said great Vicar, and
one of the Emperors Herauldes, and such as came ^^^la^^cions made to Luther to
seduce (...).
in his company out of Saronye to Worms, with other his chief friends Where as
Doctor Voeus, the Marquis of Bades Chaplein began to de clare and protest, in
the presence of the Archbishop of Triers, Ioachyme Marquis of Brandeburge,
George Duke of Sarony, the Bishops of Ausburg and Brandeburge, the Earl
George, John Back of Strasburge, Verdeheymer and Peutinger Doctors, that Luther
was not called to be conferred with, as of a different or disputacion, but
only that the Princes had procured license of Themperors Majesty, through
Christian charity, to have liberty granted unto the, to exhort Luther
benignely and brotherly.

He said further, that albeit the Councils had ordained diverse things, yet
they had not determined contrary matters. And albeit they had greatly erred,
yet their aucthoritye was not therefore abased, or at the least not so erred,
that it was lawful for every man to impugn their opinions. Further, he
alleged certain things of Zacheus and the Centurion, of the decrees and
tradicions of men, and of the ceremonies ordained, affirmyng that al these were
established to repres the vices, according to the quality and reuolucion of
times, and that the Church could not be destitute of humayn constitucions.
Further, that the tree is known by the fruit, the laws have much profited,
and S. Martin, Saint Nicholas, and many other Saints have assisted the
Councels.

Moreover that Luthers books would bread great tumult, and incredible troubles,
and that be abused the common sort with his book of Christian liberty
encouraging them to shake of their ^oke, and to confirm in them a
disobedience. That presently the world was at an other stay, ^he when y^
beleuers were a^ of one ha^t and soul, and therefore it was expedient to have
laws.

This was worthy consideracion, that albeit he ha^ wry^t^ many good things,
and dout^es with a goodly spirit, as of Triple Justice and other: yet now the
devil attempted by wyly means, that al his works for ever more should be
condemned, and that by these his last works it is easy to know the ^re^ by
the fruit, and not by the blossom.

Here he added somethynge of the noone Dyuell, of the Spirit coming in the
dark, and of the fliyng arrowe. All his Oracion was exhortatorye, full of
common places of Rethoricke, of honesty, of vtility, of laws, of the dangers
of conscience, and of the common and particular health, repeatyng often this
sentence in the Proeme, myddle, and ^p^^o^^ of his Oration. That this
adm^n^^^on was given him of a singular good will and great clemency. In the
shutting up of his Oration, he added m^na^inges, saying: that if he would abide
in his purposed intent, the ^mp^rour would proceed further and exterminate him
the Empire, perswadyng him deliberatlye to ponder and advise these and other
things.

Martine Luther answered: Most noble Princes, and my most gracious Lords, I
render most humble thanks for your benignities and syngular good wylles,
whence proceeds this admonicion. For I know my self to be so base, as by no
means I can deserve a^monicion of so great Princes.

Then he frankely pronounced, he The council of Constance condemned ye word
of God.
had not reproue^ all Councels, but only the Council of Constance, and for
this principal cause, that the same condemned the word of God, which appeared
in the ^^n^empnacion of this Article proponed, by John ^usse. The Church of
Christ is the Communion of the P^^^e^^inate.

It is evident the Counc^l of Const^c^ abolished this article, and consequently
this article of our faith: I believe the holy Church universal. And that he was
ready to spend life and blood, s^ he were not compelled to call back the
manifest word of God, for in defense thereof, we ought rather to obey God then
men.

And that in this he could not ad-2noyde the scandale of faith, for there is
two scandales or offenses, to say, of Charity and of Faith. The scandale
Scandale of Faith and Charity.
of Charity consists in manners and in life. The scandale of Faith or doctrine
rests in the word of God, and as touching this last, he could escape it no
manner of ways, for it lay not in his power to make Christ not y^ stone of
scandale. If Christ's sh^pe were fed with pure pasture of the Gospel. If the
faith of Christ were sincerely preached, and if there were any good and
Ecclesiastical Maiestrates, who duly executed their office: we should not need
to charge the Church with men's traditions. Further he knew well we ought to obey
the Maiestrates and higher powers, how unjustly and peruers^^ so ever they
lived. We ought also to give place to our iudgmet, al which he had taught in all
his works, adding further, he was ready to obey them in all points, so that
they enforced him not to deny the word of God.

Then Luther was bid stand aside, and the Princes con^u^^ed what answer they
might give him. This done they called him into a Parlour, where as the Doctor of
Bade repeated his former matters, admonithyng Luther ^o submyt his writings to
the Emperor and Empires judgment.

Luther answered humbly and modestly, he could not, neither would permit
that men should say he would thunne the judgment of the Emperor, Princes, and
supreme Estates of the Empire, weying so s^lenderlye their examinacion, that he
was contented to suffer his writings most diligently to be read over,
considered and judged of the simplest, so y^ this were done, with the authority
of the word of God, and holy scripture. And that the word of God made so much
for him, and was so manifest unto him, that he would not give place, unless
they taught sound doctrine, then the word of God. And y^ S. Au^ten writes, he
had learned to give this honor only The word of (...) only true.
to those books, which are called Canonical, that he believed them to be true
And as touching the other Doctors, albeit in holiness and excellency of
learning, they passed, he would not credit them, unless they pronounced truth.
Further, that Sayncte Paul had written to the Thessalonians, prove all things,
follow that is good. And to the Galathians: although an Aungel should descend
from heaven, if he preach otherwise, let him ^e accursed, and therefore not
worthy to be believed. Finally he mekely besought them not to urge his
conscience, fastened with the ^andes of the word of God and holy scripture,
to deny that same excellent word. And thus he commended his cause and him self
to them, and specially to the Emperors Majesty, requiring their help, he
might not be compelled to do any thing in this matter against his
conscience. And otherwise he would submyt him self in all causes most
obedientlye.

And answering thus, Ioachime Elector, Marquis of Brandeburge, demanded if he
had said he would not yield, unless he were convinced with the scripture Yea
truly right noble Lord (quoth Luther) or else by ancient and evident reasons.

Thus the assemble brake, and the Princes repaired to the Emperors court. The
Archbishop of Triers abode, accompanied with his Official John Ecke, and
Cochleus, and commanded Luther to come into his chamber, Jerome Schurff, and
Nicholas Ambsdorff assisted to mayntaine Luthers cause. Then the Official began
to frame an argument like a Sophist and Canonist, defending the Popes cause:
That for the most part at al times holy scriptures have engendered errors, as
the False arguments for y^ Pope
same of Heluidius the Arian, out of that place in the Gospel, where is
expressed, Joseph knew not his wife til she was delivered of her first child.
Further, he grew to overthrow this proposicio^, that the Catholic Church is the
Communion of Saints, presuming also of Cocle to make wheat, and of bodily
excreme^ts to co^pact members.

Martin Luther and Jerome Schurffe reproved these folyes, and other vain and
ridiculous matters, which Ecke brought forth but modestli, as things not
serving to the purpose. Sometime Cochleus would entermedle his murmuring
chattes, and labored to persuade Luther, to desist from his purpose, and
utterly to refrain thenceforth to write or teach, and so they departed.

About evening, the Archbishop of Triers, advertised Luther by Ambsdorff, the
Emperors promise made unto him, was prolonged two days, and in the mean
season he would confer with him the next day, and for that cause he would
send Doctor Peutinger and the Doctor of Bade the morrow after to him, and he
himself would also talk with him.

The Friday then that was Saint Marks day, Peutinger, and the Doctor of Bade
travailed in the forenone (...).
to persuade Luther simply and absolutely to submit the judgment of his
writings to Themperor and Empire. He answered he would do and submyt any
thing they would have him, so they grounded with the authority of holy
scripture, otherwise he would not consent to do any thing. For god said by his
Prophet (says he:) Trust ye not in Princes, nor in the children of men, in
whom there is no health. Also, cursed be he that trusts in me And seeing them
urge him more vehemently, he answered: We ought to submit no more to the
judgment of men, then the word of God does. So they departed, and prayed him
to advise for better answer, and said they would return after Dynner.

After Dynner they returned, exhortyng as before, but in vain. They prayed him
at the least he would submit his writing to the judgment of the next general
Council. Luther agreed thereunto, but with this condition, that they them selves
should present ye Articles collected out of his books to be submitted to the
Council, in this manner, notwythstandyng that the sentence awarded by the
counsel, should be authorized by the scripture, and prove the contrary with
the testimonies of the same.

Then leaving Luther, they departed and reported to the Archbishop of Triers
that he had promised to submyt his wrytings in certain articles to the next
Counsel, and in the mean space he would keep silence, which Luther never
thought, who neither with admonicions, ne yet menaces could be induced to deny
or submyt his books to the judgments of me^, he ha^ so fortified them with
clear and manifest authorities of the scripture, unless the^ could prove by
sacred Scripture and apparent reasons he had erred.

It chanced then by y^ special grace of god, that the Archbishop of Triers
sent for Luther, resolved presently to hear him. And when he perceived
otherwise then Peutinger, and the Doctor of Bade had told him, he affirmed
that Luther should not have revoked for a great deal, that he had said, unless
he had heard him speak, but that straight he would have gone to the Emperor,
and declared what the Doctors had reported.

Then the Archbishop treated and Familiar talk between the archbishop and
Luther.
conferred with Luther very gently, first remouyng such as were present, as well
of the judgment of the Emperor and Empire, as of the sentence of the next
general Council. In this conference Luther conceled nothing from the
Archbishop, affirmyng it was dangerous to submyt a matter of so great
importance to them, who after they had called him under safeconduct, attempting
him with new commandments, condemned his opinion, and approved the Popes
Bull.

Moreover, the Archbishop bedding a friend of his draw nygh, required Luther
to declare what remedy might be ministered to help this. Luther answered:
There was no better remedy, then such as Gamali^l Counsel^ Gamali^l*
alleges in the fy^te* Chapter of the Apostles, wytnes Saint Luke, saying:
If this council or this work proceed of men, it shall be dyssolued, but if it
be of God, ye cannot dissolve it. And that the Emperor and the Estates of the
Empire might aduertyse the Pope that he knew certaynelye if this his
enterprise proceeded not of God, it would be abolished within three, yea
within two years.

The Archbishop enquired of him what he would do, if certain articles were
taken out of his books to be submitted to the general Council. Luther
answered: So that they be not those, which the council of Consta^ce
condemned. The Archbishop said I fear they will be the very same: but what
then? Luther replied: I will not nor I cannot hold my peace of such, ^uthers
co^^^ncy.
for I am su^e by their decrees the the word of God was condemned. Therefore I
will rather lose head and life, then abandon the manifest word of my Lord God.

Then the Archbishop, seeing Luther would in no wise submit the word of God to
the judgment of men, gently bad Luther farewell, who at that instant prayed y^
Archbishop to entreat the Emperors Majesty to grant him gracious leave to
depart. He answered: he would take order for him, and speedelye advertise the
Emperors pleasure.

And within a small while after, the Archbishops Offical, in the presence of the
Emperors Secretarye, who was Maximilians Chauncelour, said unto Luther in his
lodging, by the commandment of the Emperor: that syn^e he had ben^
admonished diversely of the Emperial Majesty, the Electors, Princes, and Estates
of the Empire, and that notwythstandyng he would not return to unity and
concord, there remained that The Emperor as advocate of the Catholic faith
should proceed further. And that it was the Emperors ordinance, he should
within.xx. days, return securely^ under safeconduct, and be safely guarded to
the place whence he came, so that in the mean while he stirred no commocion
among the people in his journey, either in conference or Sermons.

Luther having understood this, answered very modestlye and Christianly:
Even as it has pleased God, so is it come to pass, the name of the Lord be
blessed. He said further, he thanked most humbly the Emperors Majesty, and all
the Princes and Estates of the Empire, that they had given to him benign and
gracious audience, and granted safeconduct to come and to return. Finally he
said: he desired none other in them, then a reformacion, according to the
sacred word of God, and consonancy of holy scriptures, which effectually^ in
his heart he prayed. Otherwise he was pressed to suffer al accidents for the
Imperial Majesty, as life and death, good fame and reproach, reserving nothing
to him self, but the only word of God, which he would constantly confess,
to the latter end, humbly recommending him to the Emperors Majesty, and to
all the Princes, and other Estates of the sac^e^ Empire.

The morrow after which was the.xxvi. day of Apryll after he Luthers
^parture ^^ Worms.
had taken his leave of such as supported him, and other his ben^uolent
friends, that o^t^n times visited him, and broken his fast, at ten of the
clock, he departed from Worms accompanied with such, as repaired thither
with him. The Emperors Heraulde Caspar Sturme followed and ouertooke him at
Oppenhim being commanded by the Emperonr to conduct him safely home. ()

The prayer which Martyne Luther was accustomed daily to say.
COnfyrme (O God) in us that thou haste wrought, and perfect the work that
thou haste begone in us to thy glory. So be it.

An intimacion, given by Philip Melancthon to his Auditorye, at Vitteberg. The
year 1546. Of the decease of Martyne Luther. ()
THE Scholars assembled to hear the Lecture of the Epistle to ye Romans,
Phyllip Mela^cthon recited publikly, this that follows, at nine of the clock
before noone, aduertisyng he gave this informacion, by the counsel of other
Lords, for that the Auditors understanding the express truth (for so much as
ye lords knew certainly Fame would bl^we sclaunderous blastes every where of
the death of Luther) should not credit flying tales and false reports.

My friends, ye know that we have enterprised to expound Grammatical lie the
Epistle to the Romans, in the which is contained the true doctrine of the
Son of God, the which our Lord by his singular grace has revealed unto us at
this present by the reverend Father, and our dearelye beloved Master Martin
Luther. Not withstanding we have received heavy news, which have so augmented
my dolor, that I am in dout if I may continue henceforth in scholasticall
profession, and exercise of teaching. The cause wherefore I commemorate this
thing, is for that I am so advised by other Lords, that ye may understand the
true sequel of things least your selves blase abroad vain ^ales of this
fatal chance, or give credit to other fables, which commonly ar accustomed to
be spread every where.

Wedensday last past, the. 17. day of February, Doctor Martin Luther syckned a
little before Supper, of his The sycknes of Lother.
accustomed malady, to say, the oppression of humors in the orifice or opening
of his stomach, whereof I remember I have senhim often diseased in this place.
This sickness occupied him after Supper, with the which vehemently contending,
he required secesse into an next chamber, and there he rested on bed two
hours, whiles the pains increased, Doctor Jonas lying in his chamber, Luther
awakened, and prayed him to rise, and call up Ambrose his Childerns
Schoolemaister, to make fire in an other Chamber. In yt which being newly
entered, Albert Earl of Mansfeld with his wife and diverse other (whose names in
these letters for have, were not expressed) at that in stant came into his
Chamber. Finally, feelyg his fatal hour to approach, before. 1^. of the clock
in the morning the. 18. of Februarye, he commended him to God, with this devout
prayer.

My heavenly father, eternal and mercyful God, thou have manyfested unto me thy
dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ. I have taught him, I have known him, I
love him as my life, my health, and my redemption, who^ the wicked persecuted,
maligned, and with injury affected. Draw my soul to thee. After this he said
this that ensues, thryse.

I commend my Spirit into thy hands, thou have redeemed me God of truth. God
so loved ye world, that he gave his ouelye Son, that all those that believe
in him, should have life everlasting. John. 3.

Having repeated often times his Hisdiseas^
prayers, he was called to God, to the eternal Schole, and perpetual joys, in
the^ which he enjoys the societye of the father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, all the Prophets and Apostles.

He^as, the conductor and Chariot of Israel is dead, who has governed the
Church in this lasle age of the world, for the doctrine of remission of
sins, and of the faith of God, has not been compreheneed by bumayne
wisdom, but God has manifested the same by this holy man, whom we have seen
raised of God.

Let us love the memory of this man and the doctrine that he has taught. Let
us learn to be morest and meek. Let us consider the wretched calamities, and
marvelous chaunges y^ shall follow this myshay and doleful chance.

I beseech thee O Son of God, crucified for us, and resuscitate Emanuel;
govern, conserve and defend thy Church.

()

Philip Melancthons Oracion, made and recited for the Funeralles of the
Reuerens man Marrin^ Luther at Vitteberge. ()
AL best in this common sorrow my voice shall be troubled with dolor and tears:
yet I must say somewhat in this frequent assembly, not (as the Paganes solemn
custom was) to sing the Encomye of the dead, but rather to admonish this
company of the marvelous government, and perils of the Church, that we may
consider for what causes we ought to be careful and pensive, what things we
have special need of, and to what examples we ought to direct our life. For
although profane men beholding this horrible confusion in this mortal estate,
supposing althinges are transported by adventure, and governed by Fortune: yet
we confirmed with many evident testimonies of God, let The so^m of ^uther
doctrine.
us separate the Church from the ungodly multitude, let us persuade our selves
the same has been preserved, and ruled by divine providence, and ^et us
perpen^ what is the policye of the same. Let us acknowledge the true
governors, and endeavor to frame our cou^^e conformable to theirs. Let us
^^ec^ Guides and coue^^ent Instructors, whom we may godly imitate and have in
reverence. It shall be most expedient for so meditate and speak of these weighty
and grave matters, as of ten and when mention shall be made of the Reverend man
Martine Luther, our dearly beloved Master. Whom we must tenderly love and
commend, since we know that he was divinely raised to be a Minister of the
Gospel, although many profane me^, and such as contempned the Gospel, hated
him deadlye. We ought also to collect testemonies, The government of ye church.
whereby we may demonstrate his doctrine contained no sedicious opinions
injuriously and with temerarious affection sown, as the Epicurean sect
imagines, but that by his doctrine, the will and faithful worshipping of God,
and his holy scriptures ar expressed, and the word of God y^ is, the glad
tidyngs of Jesus Christ sincerely announced. Al be it in these Dracions
accustomably made in this place, we were wo^t orderly to depaint the particular
ornaments of them, who^ we praised: yet I omit^yng that member of Oration,
entend to treat only of this principal article, Ecclesiastical function. For
the wise and godly will deliberate and determine in them selves resoluteli
this: If Luther has manyfested the necessary doctrine of salvation in y^
Church, great thanks are to be given to God, who has raised him, and we must
commend his industry, faith, constancy, and many other his celestial virtues,
and endeavor the memory of this man may be embraced and reverenced of every man.

Let this then be the Proeme of my Oration. The Son of God (as Paul says)
sits at the right hand of the everlasting father, and ministers good things
to men, that is, the voice, of the Gospel, and the holy ghost, and to
distribute these gifts, he rayseth Prophets, Apostles, Doctors and Pastors, ^
takes these out of our congregation, such as do learn, who profess, hear
and embrace the Prophets and Apostles Doctor sent of go to gouer^ y^ Church
writings. And calls not only those to this warfare, which have ordinari
power, but also he denounces war against them often times, by Doctors chosen
of an other estate. It is most comfortable, and a pleasant spectacle to
consider the Church of all ages, and to remember the bountye of God, who from
time to time hat sent successively godly Doctors, to thend that when the first
were in battayl consumed, other might supply their ranks to atchieue that the
former begone.

The continual order of y^ first fathers The fyr(...) Guides ^ the chur(...)
Adam, Seth, Enoch, Mathusale^ Noe Sem is notorious. This Sem living and
inhabiting the country nigh to Sodom, when the people had forgotten the
doctrine of Noe, and every where honored Idols, Abraham was raised to be Sems
compagnio^ to assist him, to perform this great work. After succeeded Isac,
Jacob Joseph, y^ which Joseph in y^ universal territori of Egypt (which the^
excelled all other kingdo^s in y^ world) illumined the light of doctrine. Then
followed Moses, Iosue, Samuel, David, Elias, Elizeus, whose Auditor was Esaias.
After Esaias came Jeremy, after Ieremye, Daniel, after Daniel Zachary, immediately
succeeded Esoras and Omas, after Onias the Machabees. Then after ensued Simeon,
Zachary, John Baptist, Jesus Christ, and the Apostles. It is convenient to
consider this continual sequel, for that it is an evident testimonye of Gods
presence in the Church.

After the Apostles followed an other The sucssors of apostles
flock, the which albeit weaker, yet adorned with the testimonies of God, as
Policarpe, Ireneus, Gregory Neocesarie^, Basile, Austen, Prosper, Marimus,
Hugo, Bernard, Tau lerus, and many other in diverse places. All be it this last
age was more gross, and stuffed with ordures, yet God preserved always sum
remaintes. And it is clear the Gospel has received much light by the
preaching of Luther.

Then must we collocate him among this select and blisful Troop of godly and
excellent Mirrours, whom God has sent to gather and restore his Church, that
we may understand this was the principal flower of human kin^^* Solon,
Themistocles, Scipio. Augustus, were excellent and worthy men, who established
and governed large Realms and great Empires: yet were they mu^^ inferior then
these our Guides. Esa^ John Baptist, S. Paul, Austen, and Luther. It is
necessary for us to understand these differentes in the Church.

What then are the absolute and true matters y^ Luther has manifested, which
gives great glory to his works, and makes his praise live in the mouth of
men? Many cry out that the Church is disturbed, and controversies planted in
them, not easy to be unfolded. I answer to these: Such is the government of
the Church, when the holy Ghost argues the world, many dissentions grow
through the peruers stubbornes of the wicked, and they are in fault, y^ will
not hear the Luther has manifested y^ doctrine.
Son of God, of whom the Father pronou^ceth: Hear him. Luther has reveled
the true and necessary doctrine, for it is most certain, there was wonderful
gross darkness in the doctrine of repentannce. This discussed, he declares
what is perfect penitence, which is the trusty port and assured comfort of the
spirit astonyed with the felyng of Gods anger. He has illumined S. Paul's
doctrine, which treats, ma is justified by faith. He has expressed what
difference is betwyxte the Law and the Gospel, betwixt spiritual and civil
Justice. He has explaned what is the true inuocacion of God, and revoked the
Church wholly from al Pagane and profane lunacy and furor, who feign that God
is inuocated, when the spirits oppressed with Academical douts, flee God. He
has exhorted to prayer in pure conscience, and has guided us as it were by the
hand to the only mediator the Son of God, sitting at the right hand of
God the Father, and interceadynge for us, and not to Images and dead me, as the
Infidels moved with horrible madness inuocated Idolles and senceles Stocks.

He has also instructed other duties acceptable to God, and so a dourned and
fortefied civil life, as none to this day with more perfection. Further he has
sequestered childish institucio^ of humain ceremonies, y^ customs and laws
lettyng true invocation from necessary works. And that this heavenly doctrine
manyfested might come to posteritye, he translated the Prophets and Apostles
works, into his maternal tongue, with such perspi^uitye, that his traduction
gives more light to the Readers, then the Commentaries of diverse other.

Hereunto he has added many Enarrations, the which as Erasmus Erasmus
testimonye of Luther.
in time paste affirmed, passed all others, that be extant. And as it is
reported of such as reedified Jerusalem that they builded with one hand, and
held the sword with the other: even so Luther fought against y^ enemies of
Christian doctrine, and at that instant devised enarracions, replenished with
heavenly doctrine, and in Luthers conf^i^tes.
this exployte, he has comforted and releued the consciences of many with
faithful Councels.

And as it appears the greatest part of his doctrine, surmounteth the
compass of humayne capacity, as the doctrine of remission of syns and faith.
So must we necessarilye confess he was taught of God, and diverse of us have
seen his conflictes, in the which he learned, that we should persuade our
selves this, that by faith we are heard and received of God.

The sincere and godly wyts shall celebrate forever, the benefits which God
has conferred to his Church by Luther, and first they shall render thanks to
God, then protest, they are much obliged to his learned labors: albert the
Atheistes, who universally have the church in derisio^, esteem an^ judge these
true offices and duties, a chyidysh pastime, a mere folly, and alienacion of
the mind.

He has not excitated indissoluble disputacions, neither proponed to the
Church, the Apple of contencion, nor published obscurities and enigmes. For he
is easy to the faithful and godly, and such as be of sound understanding, and
sclaunderouslye will not give judgment, by conference of sentences to consider
what agrees with the heavenly doctrine. and what dissenteth. And that more is,
the godly are fully resolved* that these differentes were long since
appointed. For since Gods pleasure is we should behold and know his will in the
Prophets and Apostles works (in the which he has manyfested himself) we
may not think his words are doubtful, as the leaves of Sibilla.

But some (which were not peruers) have compiayned that Luther was Luthers
veheme^cie excused.
more vehement, then n^de required. I will not dispute against any: but I
answer this that Erasmus has often said: God has given this last age a
sharp Phisicio^, because of y^ great diseases of the same, and therefore since
he has raised such an organe against the truths enemies, and against the
proud and impudent, as he has said to Jeremy, behold I have placed my words
in thy mouth, to the end thou should destroy and edefye, and also has
pleased him to set before their beards this Gorgon or buckler, in vain they
quarrel with God. God governs his Church not by man's Counsels, netheir will
have his organes all alyke. This is a common thing, mean and moderate spirits
cannot brook vehement motions, whether they be good or evil. Aristides
beholdynge Themistocles enterprise great matters, with a patheticall incitacion
of the mind, whereof he had prosperous success, although he did gratulate the
commonweals prsperity: yet he labored diligently to revoke Themistocles
vehement mind from y^ course.

Neither I deny that sometimes vehement mocions offend, there is none in this
infirmity of Nature, void of spot. Yet if there be any such as the autentick
writers have reported of Hercules, Cimon, and other, deformed and misshapen:
yet apt and vpryght in excellent exploictes. Certainly I must confess that
these be good and praise worthy, and as S. Paul says, if he do his duty well
in the Church, obseruyng faith, and a pure conscience, he is acceptable to God,
and we ought to reverence him.

We know that Luther has been such, for constantly he has mayntained the
sinceritye of the Gospel, and retained an integrity of conscience. Now what is
he (that has known Luther) and is ignorant, with what Luthers humanity
humanity he was garnished? How af fable he was to al such as in familiar
conference, or grave devise had to do with him. How void he was of contencion
and brawle, and yet among these virtues he had such a gravity, as decently
became his calling. His manners were good, his words sweet and pleasant.
Finally, althinges (as S. Paul says) were in him true, honest, just, pure,
amiable, and renoumed, in so much that we may plainly perceive his vehemencye
proceeded of a zealous affection he bare to the truth, rather then of any natural
sharpenes, and here of not only we, but many are evident witnesses. As
touching the rest of his Luthers integrity.
life, which he prolonged to.lxiii. years, employing the same with fervent
affection in the fear of God, and in all good and liberal scieces, if I had
deliberated to say ought in his praise, what ample theme, what abundance of
matter is ministered to me to frame an excellent and goodly Oration. No
inordinate desires, no sedicious counsels reigned in him. He exhorted to peace
and dissuaded war. He meddled not private care with ecclesiastical causes, there by
to enrich himself, or advance his friends. I judge this to be so great
wisdom and virtue, that by humayne diligence it cannot only be procured, but
it behooves high, vehement, and subtle minds (as it appears Luthers was) to
be brydeled divinely.

What shall I say of other his virtues? I often times came unawares Luthers
earnest prayers.
upon him, when he with tears berayning his chekes, prayed for the universal
Church. He prescribed certain hours every day to recite some Psalms, and in
pronouncing them, he expressed his affection, with mourning and tears. He
rebuked ever those that through negligence, or other domestical business, said:
they served God sufficiently, in making a secret zealous prayer, declaring to
them that we have fourmes set forth by divine counsel, to thend that in
reading we may awaken our minds, and with voice testify what God we call upon.

And when occasion was offered to enter in consultacion about imminent
dangerous, we always observed his marvelous constancy of courage, neither
would he lurk appalled, neither represent any face of fear, with the terror
thereof. He leaned always to the Lord, as to his holy ancre, and never waued
in any point of his faith.

Further, he was so ingenious, that alone he considered what was necessary
Subtilty of his Spirit.
to be done in doubtful cases. Neither was he (as many suppose) negligent in
the consideracion of the public weal, neither ignorant of the minds and
inclinacio^s of other, but he well understood the state of the common weal, no
man better, and perceived most prudently the natural dispositions and wylles of
them, with who^ he was co^uersant. And albeit he was of a ioly and politic
head: yet he most gredely red the Ecclesiastical Writers, old and new, and
all the histories, the examples, whereof he converted with a syngular
dexterity, to the profit of man's life, and present affairs His eloquence.


Of his eloquenc^e we have everlasting testimonies, wherein certainly he was
equivalent to any that excelled in art Oratory.

Then with good cause we may lament the lack of him, who in wisdom and
lyuelynes of spirit was so excellent, so garnished with doctrine* so exercise*
with vie, so adorned with many and those heroyical virtues, so elected of God,
for the restoration of the Curch, and finally with so paternal affection,
loving and embracing us, we are like Orphelius, deprived of a faithful and
famous father. And albeit necessarelye we must obey divine order: yet let us
endeavor ye memory of his benefits and virtues may remain immortal with us.
And let us rejoice that presently he is in the blessed and sweet company of God
and his well-beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prophets and Apostles,
Feliciti in the other life.
whose so(...)etye through the faith he had in the son of God, he has daily
desired, and attended. Whereas now he hears his labors only approved by the
judgment of God, and the testimonye of all the heavenly Church, which he
sustained for the propagation of the Gospel: but also taken out of this mortal
body as out of a prison, and entered into a school adourned with more excellent
doctrine, he beholds the essence of god, the two natures co^ioyned in ye
son, and all the couns^^ of h(...) creation and redemption of the church. The
which divine m^ste^^es ^^r^ked, and with compendious oracles proponed he
considered here only by faith, out now more ^u^^^nt. y veholdyng them, he
rejoices and fervently enflamed with the love of God, he renders thanks for
this so great and singular benefyt.

There he learneth wherefore the son of God is called the word and Image of
the eternal Father, and how the holy ghost is the band of mutual love, not
only betwyxt the eternal Father and the Son, but also betwyxt them and the
Church. For he had learned the ru^^mentes and principles of this doctrine in
this mortal life, and mentioned oftentimes these celestial matters, the
difference betwyrt true and false invocation, the true knowledge of God,
beholding the divine manifestacions, and the discernynge of the true God, from
foreged and invented Gods, and these matters he disputed very wisely and graue^^

Many in this Auditory have heard him at certain times expressing this
sentence: Ye shall see the heavens opened, and the Angels of God ascendyng and
descending upon the son of man. In the exposicion of this, he exhorted his
Auditors to plant in their hearts this syngular consolacion, the which
affirms that the heaven is opened, that is to say, way made open for us to
pass to God, the bar of Gods wrath removed from such as have recourse to
the Son, that God is familiarlye conuersaunt with us now, and that he
receives, governs and conserueth such as invoke him. He admonished yt that
The Angels which ascend and descend.
decree of God, which the Atheistes exclame to be fabulous, ought to resyst al
those human doubts and dreades, which keep back the wanderyng minds,
that they dare not innocate God, and repose in him.

Further, he said that the Angels ascending and descending in the body of
Jesus Christ, were the Ministers of the Gospel. Who first by Christ their Guide,
ascended to God, and received of him the light of the Gospel, and the goly
Ghost. Then after they descended, that is to say, they had the charge to
profess and enstruct among men.

He added this interpretacion, that the very heavenly spirits which we
commonly call Angels, beholding the son, are instructed and r^^oy^e in this
merueylous con^unction of two natures, and for that they war under the Lord
for the defense of the Church, they be also governed by his hand.

He presently beholds these so excellent things, and as before he ascended
and descended among the Ministers of the Gospel, by the conduction of Jesus
Christ, so now he sees the Angels sent by him, and has equal fruicion with
them of the contemplacion and consideracion, of the divine wisdom and
marvelous works of God. We remember well what incredible pleasure he conceived
in recityng the policies of the Prophets, their counsels, dangers and
deliueraunces, and how learnedlye he conferred al times of the Church, that he
well declared with what burning desire he longed to be in the societye of these
excellent personages. He embraces these now and rejoices to have mutual
conference in lyuelye voice. These salute their loving companion newly repaired
to them, and jointly yield thanks to God, that he assembleth and conserueth his
Church.

Let us not doubt, but that Luther is in happy and blessed estate. and let us
lament the loss and ^acke of so virtuous and heauely a father, and as duty
byndeth us to obey the wit of God, who has reft us such a rare ^ewel: so let
us understand Gods pleasure is, we should consecrate to etern^^^, y^ memory of
his virtues and benefits. Let us ^hen in this apply ou^ diligence, let us
imitate as we be able, his virtues which is expediet for us to know, that is,
the fear of God, faith, feruecy in prayer, cleannes in ministerye, chastity,
diligence to eschew counsels tendyng to sedicion, and desire to learn. And as
it behooves us, to remember the other faithful governors of the Church, whose
histories we read, as Jeremy John Baptist, and S. Paul. So let us consider
oftentimes the doctrine and order of this reverend father, and herewyth let us
add prayer, and action of thanks, as it becomes us now to do in this
assembly.

WE render thanks unto the, O A prayer of thanks geuyng.
most puissant God, eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ, founder of thy
Church, together with thy son coeternall our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
holy ghost, wise, good, mercyful, ryghteous judge, mighty and having power
over althings, for that thou ga^her^st unto thy son an enheritaunce, and
conse^uest the ministry of the Gospel, and now by Luther have restored the
same. And we pray thee with fervent affection that thou will conserve and
govern henceforth the church, and seal in us thy true doctrine as Esaias
prays for his Disciples, and that thou wylt illumine our understanding by thy
holy ghost, yt in truth we may call upon thee, and live holyly.

Furthermore, because the decease of excellent governors is often a presage or
foreshewing of great inconue nie^ces to come to such as shall succeed I and al
those that profess ministry require you to consider the dangers whereunto the
whole world is subject The Turks invade of one side, and on the other
domestical enemies, threate^ intestine wars. There ^urke also eueri where
licencious and insolent heads, who after they shall cease to fear Luthers
censure and severe correction, will not stycke audaciously to corrupt this
doctrine of us faithfully taught.

Finally, that God may withdraw such inconveniences, let us apply our diligence
to live well, and to study, and let us retein this sete^ce always impressed in
our minds that as long as we shall conserve, hear, learn and love the pure
doctrine of y^ Gospel, we shall be the house and church of God as the son of
God says: If any love me, he will observe my word, and my father will John. 14.
love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him. Let us be
allured with this singular promise, to learn the heavenly doctrine, and let us
be thoroughly persuaded, that ma^kinde and civil governments are co^serued
because of ye church. Let us po^der this in our mind, and be encouraged with y^
imortality y^ is coming, to ye which God has called us, who truly has not
in vain manifested himself unto us by so many testimonies, nor with out good
respect sent his son, but tenderly loves and cares for such as make
account of his inestimable benefits. I have said.

A famous and godly history contaynyng the lives and acts of John Ecolampadius
and Huldericke Zuinglius, excellent Divines, set forth by Wolfangus Faber
Capito, Simon Grineus, and Oswaldus Miconius, and Englyshed by Henry Bennet
Callisian. (:)

Anno. 1561. The last of November. ()

To the right honorable and his syngular good Lord, the Lord Montioy, his
humble Orator Henry Bennet Callesian, wysheth long life with increase of
honor. ()
THAT virtue and felicitye have their beginning of laborious and dangerous
attempts, Demetrius the Pagan Philosopher abundantly declares. For if blessed
estate is accident to none, but to such as fast and endure adversity, and those
that live in pleasure and perpetual rest, are esteemed inglorious Epicures, who^
God neglectes and judges unworthy to co^ten^e with calamity. How famous and
excellent were the ancient Greeks and victorious Romans (right honorable,
and my syngular good Lord) whose virtuous deeds and notable exploictes, not
without great perils and honorable death achieved, ^ystify to al posterity
their incredible desire, as well to enlarge the ^^myts of their (...) and
illustrate with victories their flourishing public weals, as also their
intolerable pains and prudent consideracions to attain to felicity by the
ragged hyls, and sharp thorny ways, which lead to virtue. Hercules, worthily
Prince of all Grecia: what labors sustained he? What ougly Monsters did he
overcome and with what magnanimitye did he penetrate the gresly den of
Pl^toes ghastly kingdom? By what other counsel did Homexe (^udged of y^
learned divine) set before our eyes wandering Ulysses as an absolute Image of
wysdom, tossed with many ^rksome trauayls: but to signify this to be the ready
way to clyme to the palaice of al felicity, and commendable virtue. Such were
Epaminundas, Alcibiades, Phocio^, Alexander the great, Cam^llus, Scipio,
Paulus, Aemilius, Pompeius, Augustus, Brutus, Cato and Cicero, no ^es
ornaments of their Country then express paternes of virtue. These worthi
personages as they shined in glory and live in the learned monumentes of
virtuous writers: So y^ infamous and in glorious Princes, as Heliogabalus,
Sardanapalus, Nero, Caligula, and Co^modus have not only eclipsed the bright
sun of their honors by lascivious living, and coward dread, but obscurely
lurk in the deep ^onge on of loathsome oblivion. It is then appare^t that
nothing in this world can establish our seat in securiti, but only virtue,
the which with incredyble trauayl is procured. If these excellent Orators and
Poets have celebrated the memory of these princes, that only endeavored to
gratefy their Country and common weal: What shall we worth lie write in the
commendacion of John Ecolampadius and Huldericke Zuinglius, who with their
monumentes of divine sapience, have confirmed our minds in y^ fear of God,
fed us with Euange^ical food, and preached to us y^ doctrine of salvation, I
may justly say they were not only equivalent, but also excelled y^ other. The
one a man of such innocencye of life, so sincere in preaching and professyng
the Gospel, so ready to oppose him self to al worldly danger, as no age can
obliterate his memory. The other so magnanimous in thaduau^c^ me^t of Christ's
glory, and his blessed Gospel, so willinglye bent to dye in quarrel of y^
right, merits more praise then to be set fourth with foil of my rude pen.
Their lives are no less mirrours for us vertuouslye to live, then their
blessed departures comfortable preparatiues, teaching us to dye godly. Thus
desirous to gratefy your honor, with some token of my goodwyl I have englished
this history, the which for mani your virtues and goodli ornaments, I dedicate
unto your good Lordship. Which virtues and heavenly gifts, your honor has
not of lats acquired, but naturally are engraffed in your person. There is none
at this present that ^auoreth of any learning but has red the co^mendacion of
your most noble Graundfather Wylliam, Lord Montioy. Who besides nobility of
race, was adorned with such piety and good litterature, as he excelled many
noble men in England. For albeit this victorious Realm* flourished at those
days with many learned instructors, yet the excellency of his courage, could
not be contented, unless he were taught of the famous and incomparable Clark
Erasmus of Roterdam, by whose industry he was so advanced in letters of
humanitye, that not only in his native Country, but in many foraine regions,
his glory and fame eternally shines. Such is the mutual love of learned men,
to consecrate one another in their lucubrations to immortalitye. And to pass
in silence many other his virtues, I will approach nigher. Your honorable father
Charles lord Montioy, following the lively steps of his father, was instructed
of the notable learned man Andrew Hyperius a Germain. Who not only in time of
peace was diligently incu^bent t^ good studies, and furdered good learning, but
in the late famous war, and a^^iege of Boloigne showed his magnanimity, and
invincible courage, where death envying his glory, claimed her just debt of him
not without the lamentable grief and in credible sorrow of a great mani. Your
honor degenerateth nothing from their lawdable steps, entertayning with like
zealous affection Heliseus Bomelius a Germain, who reads unto your honor the
liberal sciences, and whom Phillip Melancthon has in familiar letters praised
highly for erudicion and godlynes. Albeit his learned works published give due
testimony thereof. I pretermit many other your worthy virtues, which justly to
set forth, I leave to such as with greater vessels ca^ more aptly wade in this
sea. Ouely I will end with your piety which is so great, y^ you cannot bear with
any ^ice, that may offend God in your honorable house, your unstayed hand to
relieve their wantes, whom you think woorthye to receive your rewards, and
your zeal toward true religion, which many to your syngular praise
pronounce: In sort y^ when the Patrons of Christian religion ar celebrated with
just encomys among men, your honor is not* vnreme^bred. Thus humbly desiring
your good lordship to bear with the rudenes of my tra^slacion, I commit the same
and the most virtuous Lady your honorable wife, to the tuicion of the holy
Ghost.

At London the last of November 1561. your honors most humble. H. B

The historye of the Life of John Ecolampadius, setfoorth by Wolfangus Faber.
Capito. ()
To the Christian Reader.
I Wyshe thee favorable Reader, to increase in y^ knowledge and understanding
of our Lord Jesus Christ reigning in glory. Our friend Simon Grineus, as well
floorishyng in eloquence and ornate style, as learned in sacred knowledge and
sense of y^ scrip tures, has by his letters faythfullye signified unto us the
true decease of the very organe of Christ, my well-beloved brother John
Ecolampadius. The which information two Counselors of Basile, me^ of syngular
gravity and good fame have with their aduertisment verified to be true, who
expressed in such manner unto us the words and gesture of the deceased, that
me seemed I beheld and heard the lively words he pronounced at the point of
death. These Counselors, were ever present with the Ministers so long as
occasion spared them from public affairs, and specially when he was ready to
give place to nature* They enfourmed he intermitted no time, while he was sick
to commend The last co^mendacio^s of John Ecolampadius.
the sincere doctrine of faith, peace, mutual love, and diligent care of the
Churches to his brethren, whereof al his life studious, then he was y^ more
earnestly moved, yea enflamed when his sycknes was most impacient and do^orous.
Pondering also with himself, what occasion of contencion and diseord the enemy
would minister to y^ selected Christian flock, destitute of the goueruaunce and
assistence of their true Pastor. And fullye I resolve his prayers auayled much
for that after his departure, his Successor in most sharpest time of severity
and persecution, governed the stern ryghtlye, and was not displaced, in sort
that the poor Christians sequestring them selves for a time, and dispersed
abroad in the end assembled, and in like order as in few years before
established their Church and abode. Our part is to render hearty thanks to the
ramous and learned man Simon Grineus, who with compendious clegancy, and
syngular erudicion, has deseriued the decease of this godly man, by whose
example we have perfect president to learn how to behave our selves at the
latter hour. The rest of Ecolampadius life is no less myrrour, which Grineus
has required me fullye to setfoorth. Aprou^nce (I confess) far passing my
power, especially in this miserable and crooked age, and also skyl, if any were
at al with tract of years, loathsome sycknes, and daily exercise empayred and
decayed.

And certes I could none other then encurre worthy note of ingratitude, if the
glory of Christ which shined in this holy man, if thy desire favorable Reader,
proceeding of a zealous affection, finally if Grineus earnest request a man of
approved learning and god lines moved me not to descriue the hystorye of
Ecolampadius life, and comprise in few words those matters which I
perfectlye understand. Thou shall therefore hear of me the very troth (and
no pay (...) historye) barrayne of eloquence and phrases, the truth I repea^e,
will known to many credible persons, fra^^ng ^rast if I should disclose
doubtful matters, and which I could not warrant, to deserve worthily (...), and
stain of credit. Attend therefore to this brief discours^ of Ecolampadius
life, from the beginning to the ^at^er end.

Ecolampadius was borne in Germany, in the year of our Lord. 14^2. Ecolampadius
Country.
in a lytie Village called Viesperg in that Territory which the ancient latins
called Cherusci. ^ys Parents according to the Country, very rich, his Mother
much renowned for her integrity of life, and holiness. Who for her liberality
toward the poor, and good nature, was well regarded and reported among her
neighbors. And when God had refte them of all their Children saving this, they
endeavored with all sedulity and diligence to have him instructed, and from the
very breast nourished in learning and godly fear. Being grown somewhat elder,
his Father determined to make him a Merchant, but his Mother procured longer
exhibition for his continue in study. When he learned his ru(...)me^ts being
very young, he represented such a toke^ of towardnes, that all those that knew
him, ma^ueyled much thereat, for y^ Lord ripened him the ry^e^^er, y^ he might
employe him in his service. Which was the cause his Father, either overcome
with his Wives prayer, or won with the towardnes of the Child, foreced for
no charges. After he had tasted the first foundacions of learning, his Father
sent him to Helteprune, and Heidelberge, to advance him to the study of the
liberal sciences. There he profited so well, that at the.xii. year of his age
he wrate commendable Verses, and within two years after he obtained the
degree of Bacheler, as they term it. And this while be fructified no less in
y^ fear of God, and innocence of life, then in Discourse of Ecolampadius study.
g^od litterature. Being graded Master of Art, he went to Boloigne in Italy,
according to his fathers mind, to study the Civil law, under a Reader thereof
for his excellencye in that knowledge much renowned. But within one half
year after he was forced to return, as well for the air of Italy, which he
could not brook, as for the fraudulency of a Merchant unto whom his father had
delivered money for his maintenance. Then he came back to Heidelberge, where
giving over the Civil law, he applied his mind to Divinity, co^^oygning
therewith good learning and the tongs. Pleas and civil contencions, seemed to
base for the excellency of his wit. He was so careful and studious to
understand the truth, that the ambiguity and ve^acion of questions and vain
sophistry (which pull many pregnaunt and natural good wyts, from the cast of
holy scripture) could not discourage him to leave his purpose. After he had
red Thomas of Aquine, he gave him self to Richard above all the scolastical
writers. He read diligently Gerson, because he seemed more apt to nourish the
fear and reverence of God. He made none account of Scotus, al beit he was
subtle: he stayed not as one musyng, on every subtle question as his
companions did, but hastened to attain to the sum of this profession. And
this while he co^ferred with certain the fruits of his study, and
Ecolampadius hated ambicion.
contemned evermore the public disputacion of such as in common places would
contend, esteming the same to be a mean to corrupt and mar the toward wyts
and good natures of young men, with pride, arogancy, noise and braw^es. He
more desired to learn, then to win Fame by knowledge, which was repugnant to
the nature of his tender years, and the institucion of his Masters. You would
have said he^ had been the suckyng Infant of sacred Verity, and not the Scholar
of doltysh Schoolemaisters. He attempted diligently, as his capacity served, to
understand plainly all the secrets and mysteries of learned truth which was
the cause that honest people commen ded him singularly, both for learning and
virtue. Yea, Philippe Palatine The carle Palatine sent for Ecola^padius
most illustre Prince and Elector of y^ empire, encouraged with his renown, made
him Instructor of his Children, which was the ready way to grow to great wealth,
if he had delited to savor of the pomp and bravery of the world, but the
virtue of his mind borne to embrace godliness, drew him an other way. Wherefore
with all celerity he abandoned the Court, and returned to prosecute his godly
studies again. Finally, for that his Parents, people very devout, were fullye
resolved to employ their wealth on Gods service, and this their only Son,
having no further care, nor hope of any issue, and co^sideryng he was of a
weak complexion, and apt to prove a notable Preacher, they founded in the
Town where they were borne, by the advice and consent of their said son, a
Benefice, having the charge of Preacher annexed, and employed thereon the
principal part of their revenue. And therefore Ecolampadius He was in
(...)ituted Preacher.
was first assigned Governor of that Church, where having resided six
weeks, he procured liberty to return to Heidelberg to increase his studies,
thynking him self not then able to dyscharge the office of a Preacher, which
he well weyed to be no tryuial matter. But first of al he came to Tubinge, and at
Stulgarde he conferred with Capnion, a man at those days very perfect and
skillful in the knowledge of the tounges. Who in sewe days gave him some (...)
of Greek, which he augmented after with private study, that at his return to
Heidelberg, he wrate a Grammar, which he intitu^ed Dragmata, the which since
was imprinted. And at y^ time he learned the Hebrew tongue of a Spaniard, who
sometime was my scholemaister a peruers man, and or an evil conversation, for
he hated us because we studied that holy tongue. Even the^ I was Preacher at
Bruschel, and followed the Bishops Court, about whose affairs, I had
occasion oftentimes to visit Heidelberg, which ministered opportunity to enter
in familiarity with him, and to entertayne ye same with gratifiyng one an other
as time required. This friendshyppe flourished betwyxt us without violacion, or
semblant of unkindness till the latter day. For each of us was participant of
others affairs, and we disposed and ordered all our acts and intentes with
mutual advise and counsel, saving when he attempted the Monkysh estate, which
was contrary to my will. And now that he is departed out of this mortal life: I
will not omit to love him, the which Christ helpyng me, I will largely declare
in his Children, committed to my tuicio^. Then he thought good to repair to
his habitacion to discharge his office, The vanitye of* false Preachers
and preserve the same from all contagion, which might happen to his Church
by the frequency of such preposterous and vain heads, as ^u^ked in great
nombers in ye Universities. During which time I was called to Basile, there to
preach, and then he preached Christ in his Country, to the great admiracion of
al faithful and learned people, albeit then he entermedled many things of the
ancient supersticion, yet some affirmed he was a very severe Preacher, because
he rored not out in the Pulpit, and with pleasant g^sture could not move
laughter among his gloming* Auditors, as was the best^al ^onkes custom, for he
ever observed modestye and grauitye in his ^^^eraunce. This their corrupt and
perverse judgment gave him occasion to write unto me one little treatise
entitled, the ^asti^^^ of passover* wherein be expressed his mind ^^^ye
learnedly, and (as I (...)* not* (...)* years past. Then I (...) with al
sedulity to allure such a companion of study and godlynes to Basi^^, judging
it unworthy that such a toward wit, and hope of Christian Religion, should
l^^ke in a s^^^et (...) of his Country. I entreated Christopher of V^^nhim,
Bishop of Ba^^^^* (...)a d(...) to be a(...)ch^r at Bas^^e.
to send for him, and to ^^^owe him with par^^h^all (...) of the Cathedral
Church. He brought with him si^e Christian Tra(...)s, I remember not y^
arguments of them al, but of one (^^^^s I ^rr^) written of the Virgin Mary.
And these Tragedies pleased well the judgment of al learned Readers. He gave
him self much to write Greek and Latin verses. The arguments of his
Tragedies were not conformable to the rule of faith, for that he wound him self
out of the errors used in the Church slowly and deliberatelye, obeyng rather
the judgment of an apparent and established religion, then the vain
affections of other, which was the cause his Tragedies were not imprinted.

In this broyle, Erasmus of ^otero^ame came to Basile, of purpose to have his
Annotacious upon the new Erasmus aided of Ecolampadius.
Testament imprinted, and to accelerate the same, he required Ecolampadius to
aid him. As he plainly confesses he was aided of him, namyng Ecolampadius a
perfect and true divine, and an excellent myrrour of holiness in life, and in
the knowledge of the three tongues. He was graded Doctor through the
impo^run^tye and coaction of his friends, who judged his parsonage worthy to
be garnished with such a title, the common people much applaudyng the same. It
was high time the lord should be served of such a Minister so instructed, and
ready, and therefore the Chanons of the great Church in Auspurg, sent for him
to preach there: but the harvest of the Lord was not yet ripe, and the
Eua^gelical corn not white enough to receive Ecolampadius appointed Preacher in
Auspurg.
the sithe, considering the life of the common people, was as peruers as the
Ecclesiastical Ministers contagious and corrupt, that the same refused the
hand of the Physician, which moved him to determine his departure* Two miles
distant from Auspurg, there is a Monastary consecrated to S. Alton, wherein
dwells ^ Covent of Moonkes, of the order of S. Brigide, who were bruted to
live more religiously and holyly, then other. Ecolampadius having diligently
observed their manners, desired to be admitted one of that order, and required
liberty for his studies and faith, the which he testefied with these words:
Albeit with.vi. hundred oaths I should oblige my self, I will not keep
covenant, if it happen I may supply the office of a Preacher abroad. The
Moonkes allowed the condition, and showed their privilege, by which it was
permissiue to any to have ^gresse and preach, if heresies began to bu^g^n
Ecolampadius agrees to be a Moonke.
in any Country. Al this pleased well the Bishop of Fri^^^guen, who highly
esteemed and reverenced this holy man. But I (as much as I could conveniently)
resisted this his attempt fearyng the event, as in deed it came to pass, that
he should not find there the repose he desired for his studyes, neither
opportunity to serve his neighbor, and the Christian Church.

Being in the cloister, besides certain sermons which he published, he wrate a
treatise of Confession, very godly, and therefore unpleasant to such as
traffic Ceremonies. For He is prrsecuted.
Friar Glapio, Themperor Charles Confessor, put him in great danger for this
book, at such time as the Escates of Thempire were assembled at Worms.
Wherefore by the persuasion and soliicitacion of his friends, and the Monks
consent, ^e abandoned that Monastery. Before he departed the brute was, he was
committed to prison, the which a learned Chano^ of Auspurge signified unto me
for a matter of truth, when I followed the Archbishop of Mences Court then, at
Halle Sales in Saxony. The iourny of Worms was ended few months before.
Furthwith when I was advertised of these heavy news, I required license for
two months under color of domestical affairs, and addressed me toward
Men's, to deiuse some good mean to releace my brother. Being there arrived, and
entered into my lodgyng, which was the Curates house, suddenly and besides al
expectacion I found Ecolampadlus, devising with Gaspar Hedio. I do not a little
delight, when I call to memory the sweet gretynges, and in credible joy we had
in our me^iyng, and how lovingly we embraced each other.

For four years before he departed from Basile, and since we saw not one
another. And besides I assuredly believed he was kept in close prison: I was
forced two months at the least to keep three horses and two seruauutes, as
well at Strasburg and Basile, as in the common Innes in my direct way, til I
came to y^ Prince at Neurenberg, where then the Princes were appointed to
assemble. Ecolampadius went from Men's, and came to Fraunces Sickengen, a noble
and famous Gentleman, where Fraunces Sickengen a lover of truth.
he began to repourge the Mass, and translated certain fragmentes of
Chrysostom, but for that this worthy man was troubled with unfortunate war
(a man worthy to live at rest, and bear great aucthoritye, so seruently was he
bent to aduau^ce Justice, religion and good learuyng) Ecolampatius departed to
Basile, of purpose to have imprinted y^ he had written, soiournyng with the
said Gentleman. There, by the advice and consent or (...) Senate (albeit
certain Ecolampa dius professes diuini^y^ at Basile.
Sophisies repelled) he began to read Esaias in public auditory, and
immediatelye after at the request of the Curate of S. Martins, he took y^
charge to preach for him, not without the high displeasure of the Papists,
but in the end, he whom he sincerely preached (which is Christ) wan the field.
And al this while he professed Christ five years together, without any meede
or salarye, either of Curate or Preacher. About this time he translated out of
Greek into Latin, Chrysostom upon Genesis, and Theophilactus His translacions.
wholye. A disputacion even now began of the Sacrament of thanks giving,
and being required to say his opinion, he declared y^ same modestly, and
according to the mind Contencion for the Gospel.
of the ancient Fathers, which he faythfullye alaedged, whereof grew
marvelous cont^nc^o^, because some conceived not the sense of his writing, as
he meaned. But it is easy to coniect which way he tended, and what he
demanded, certainly nothing less then to disturb y^ Church, or obscure the
verity. And this while the troth began to flourish in Suicerland, wherefore
Faber, Eccius and other travailed so much (as the brute went) with the
Chiefetaines of Suicerland, that they got a place assigned for a publik
disputacion to discuss the principal points of Religion, that were in
contencion. The journey.
There m^^ Ecolampadius not without great peril, although he had letters of
safeconduct. And for y^ Zuinglius would not appear there, or if he would, the
principals of Zuricke would not have suffered him, doubtyng the enemies
deliberated otherwise, then with simple disputacion to pacify this broyle.
Ecolampadius sustained y^ cause of truth alone, against the r^nckest Papists,
and longest experimented Soldiers of Antichrist. that in nombers repaired
thither. There be living at this present many credible persons, who can testify
with what conscience and dexteritye he cleared him self, besides that the
adversaries have published the truth also. A year after he employed himself,
and did his duty notably well, in disputacion and reformacio^ of Berne
Reformacion of ye gospel at bern
as the acts received of Notaries solemnly sworn, bear wytnes to the whole
world. Incontinentlye after this a great tumult rose at Basile for Sedicio^ at
Basile.
that certain of the Senate and the commonty boldly and with particular
teme^ity, wythstode matters lawfully and of long time decreed for the puritye
of the Gospel, myliding to disanul and abolysh by private authority, the
accords and agrements made by public conser, wherefore it was necessari to
reform, establish, and innouate, as well in ye city as the villages of this
common weal, those matters yt before were ordained for religion according to
the word of God. And in this stir, none demeaned them selves insolently, for
the common people attempted nothing disorderly, save that some pulled down and
defaced Images, which were set up for supersticion, so vigilant was the Senate
to appease al debate, and to reduce althinges to good order, and that they did
was done by ye mean of this grave and holy man, who exhorted them continually
to modesty, peace, and obedience. He was immediatelye after a mean to
reestablish in the Church ecclesiastical discipline, and the censure of The
censure of exco^municacion received.
exco^municacion. The he was called to V^me with Ambrose Blawrer, and Martin
Bucer, where he prescribed order for the Church, and reformed ye same according
to the rule of the Gospel. He passed the rest of his life in like holy
exercises profyting daily, writing, reading, or giving counsayl to The
exer(...)ses of Ecolampadiu^
the churches in Germany, to ye great disco^fort of such as covet not to have
Christ reign over them, but to the in estimable emolument, and thankful
contentacion of the godly and sincere sort. Such has been the order of this
holy man's life to the latter end, true, pure, prone to piety, ready to relieve
men, careful to advance ye kingdom of god, and diligent to subvert ye atte^pts
of satan. This life has he led till he departed without any alteracio^ or
instability. And for y^ he laid foundation and builded on a firm stone, he
never received torment yt could deface, much les ruinate him, he had no^ other
the^ Christ in his heart, taking his leuel at him, as at a blank, and al his
cares, actions, conferences and attemptes, directing his cours^ by him, as by
the aspect of a star, called the lesser Bear, a certain mark. He hoysed up,
and haled down the sails of Christ's ship, as time required. He succored
the The of^^es of a true(...)astor.
afflicted with godly consolacion, he offered pardon to the penitent, the
heavy laden and weary wightes he releued with Christ their only solace. The
stony hearts he forced to relent with hammer of divine wrath. He erected
nothing, but in his ripe time, and when the profit of the Church urged most. He
was a prudent Stuarde, for he well ordered, and egally divided the ordinary food
of the Lords Family, yt which he practiced in his exposition upon Ezechiel.
For then he was more incumben(...)o his outward Stewardship, to the(...)t yt
the false religion abolished among Christians, he might frame and fas^^ion an
uniform and right common w^^le, according to the word of God. Farewell Reader,
and pray with me, that we keeping that way which Ecola^^a^ius has passed, may
through the holy Ghost attain to Jesus Christ in his fathers kingdom. So
be it.

The history of the death of John Ecolampadius, setforth by Simon (...) ()
Simon Grineus wysheth long health, to his friend Wolfangus Fa^er Capito.

I Understand by your letters, that many as well in France, as in other
Scla^nde of yt death of Ecolanpadius.
places, have written unto you ye horrible brute flowen in to foreyn Countries
of the departure of our good friend John Ecolampadius a man of much innocence,
as though he had destroyed him self or his friends secretly made him away,
and that this rumor is aucthorised by certain books published, so that many
far distant hence, persuade this to be no fable. And thereupon you earnestly
require me (yea truly me) that have (...) present in all these affairs,
observed the sequel thereof more circu^ sp^^t^y then other, vpsucked his last
sighs, and closed my friends eyes: in consideracion of our mutual
acquayntaunce long time confirmed, I would grately the deceased with relacion
of the truth, remouyng al suspicio^ from the virtuous and godly, and
confoundyng the sycophancye and sclaunder of the perverse and malicious rabble,
in sort, that the vtility which the wise and ^earn^^ have reaped of his
monumentes, continually may increase in the, and his excellent works be purged
of the sacrilegious accusacions of the malignaunt. Al be it (dear friend
Capito) thanks be given to God, I never yet The insatiable malice of the
wicked aga^^^ the ^^ste and godly.
rested to defend troth with a singular zeal, and to confute these monstrous
lies, which evermore troubled my mind: yet for that and see ordinarely this
evil accident to the godly, that in their life time they be disdained of evil
persons, and after their decease de^o^ed to the devils: I thought it good to
pass in silence the clamor of the adversaries, fearing some would conceive
this were done of brauerye and vain o^tentacion, rather then of any im^elling
need, if we trusted our sei^^^s so sclederly in ye defense of ye good renown
of a man exquisite and absolute in many notable a^^es. But althings depe^y
perpe^ded, I could never be induced to write any thing of the life or death of
him, whom we know well to have lived and dyed most holily. Albeit certain urged
me to this attempt, the which in my judgment is notorious enough by his books,
unless the venomous tongues of curr^^^ detractors in most detestable manner, had
compelled me to do ye same. And what shall I say (my dear friend Capito) what
this means, or how it happens, that a thing deliberatly and with leisure
done in a famous and large city, in the face and audience of a great ^o^ber,
can breed any doubt, much less be taken in contrary part ^^ his adversaries,
so as he who finished his mortal life most blessedly, and was lamented of al
good persons, should be defan^ed to have been murdered (a horrible matter) and
that he which was al his life time of a m^ke and gentle nature, should be
reported ^^ ye informacion of impudent Asses, (...) cruel and bloody hand to
have pulled cut the wretched and miserable ghost Can there be any so senceles,
so infamous, so maleuolent to empayre the good renown of an other, or with
violent irruption to invade a syllye dead carcas* But such is the order of
desteny and course of humayne affairs. Certainly the clear sun of
ryghteousnes, never rises charged with dark clouds, but a so^^yn tempest,
storm and hurl wind follow, menacing the members of Christ a thousand
calamities and deaths: furious wrath and cancred malice spread their force
and impudent sclaunders reign in every place. But as it is our part to endure
and despise these evils, with an invincible courage, and heart prepared to the
cross of Christ, and disposed to patience, so it behooves us not to dissimule
a lie against the honor of God, nor quayle to clear the truth. We therefore
that were present in these affairs, answer compendiously and faithfully the
truth, touching the departure of this godly man, as well to refute the
detractacion of the Sicophantes, as to satisfy the desires of the honest, and
bear witness of his innocence, as reason moves us.

A year before his decease, he was more afflicted with sickness, then all his
life time past, and notwithstanding he was never empesched with weightier
affairs then at y^ instant, for the bot^h which a little before was stopped,
then began to break out, and ouerronning in wardlye his whole body,
marueilously weakened his forces e^tenuated and exhausted with watching. This
while he was moved with an incredible solicitude, not only to se the Gospel
(which now began to floryshe) prosper under him: but also in the broyle of
civil war, then ^yrye hot* and among, sects buddyng and springing one from
another, laboriously to do his duty, and serve his call Wherefore having no
respect to the Ecolampdius trauayles.
troublous season, he watched and travailed much more the^ ever he did, going
on foot through the whole circuit of his Church, exhortinge his own flock
as well as his enemies, and often times grievously and sharply rebuking them, not
without great peril of his life, to reduce them to the right way. Briefly he
employed himself in all things most faithfully diligently and with an ardent
zeal. Furthermore among so many public and particular affairs, among his
ordinary Sermons, he began the Bible, which he was accustomed to read, when
his turn was with an other professor of Divinity, and prosecuting daily the
exposicion of the same, as a true and syngular Bishop of Christ, he made an
excellent work, brynging to light new and old matters, faithfully and
learnedly, through his great know ledge of holy scriptures, and the Greek and
Hebrew tongues. This man alone sustained many burdens one whole year together,
marvelous patiently with his tedious sickness, when the same in wardly flowed
in his members with no less pain, the^ when it brake out. Besides this he
enterprised y^ interpretacion of two strange tongues: I need not to write with
what dexterity. For diverse works of Theophi lactus, Cyrillus, and
Chrisostomus in that behalf bear lucule^t testimony, although it is apparent
they were hastened to tymely to y^ Printers press. He added hereunto the
expositions of those places which are most difficile, and removed from common
sense in the sacred scripture, as his large and learned Commentaries upon Esai,
Jeremy, Hagge, Zachary, Malachy, Daniel, Job, Ezechiel, the Epistle to the
Romans, and the Hebrews, the Gospel of S. John, and his Canonical Epistle,
the which he achieved not long before, evidently declare. And this while he
ceased not to preach. I willinglye pass over his particular affairs, and an
infinite number of answers he gave daily to the Churches I have wondered at his
intolerable trauayles, and priuelye stealyng on him, I would gently rebuke
him, saying he could not live long, and persuaded him to repose and spare him
self, till time of necessity. But his fatal day at hand, he hastened and
perfected all, as one that certainly knew his dying date was not far of. Even
at this present Suicerland broyled Suyces war.
with civil and lamentable war, Zuinglius the valiant Champion, and
deliverer of Papistical thraldom among his, and diligent reformer of the
Euangelical purity, was cruelly slain in battle.

There was also a treatye of peace made to the great discomfort and hea uines
of such as vnfame^^ye feared God. These doleful and miserable myshaps, abased
the courages of al men, when either through pe^^^lent air, wherwyth the City
and his house was infected, or through the scabbe which corrupted and putrified
his inward parts, there appeared a b^tch upon his huckle bone, where all the
bones assemble, and immediatlye after enflamed his body with a most vehement
heat, no doubt it was a Carbuncle. His color was pale and earthy, and as hot
as fire, and notwithstanding al these common and private diseases, he omitted
not to preach, write and read Lectures: but as a worthy soldior hardened and
pacient in his pains, abandoned not his standing, until the violence of his
malady enforces him to keep home, and reit on his bed, setting all busynes
aside. We that were his friends reasoned and conferred with the Physician,
then after with the Chirurgian, as well of the nature as regiment of his
syckenes, and even the the Physician gave us faint hope of his recovery, partly
considering the nature of his disease, and partly the weakness of his body, but
when he he had considered althings, he wronght the best and rediest help for
his redres. A day or. 2. after, his heat began meanly to aswage by art and
order of the Physician, and the botch being rypened, ministered ease for the
vehement heat to respire, so that now we began to hope of his health. And albe
it he took in good part the travail and service of his friends: yet he
prayed them not to take so great pains, for that he was assured he should not
escape this sickness. And this while Brotherly and friendly visitacion of
Ecolampadius.
his friends of al estates, and the godly and grave Counselors of the City
visited him, offering to gratefye, and declared their faithful and loving
hearts toward him. It was also by decre of the Senate ordained that the
Phisicio^s should employ their whole knowledge and endeavor to entreat him
well. You should have seen such conflewence of brethren, and devout persons to
visit, comfort and watch with him, that where many before frequented his
house, now a whole world seemed to occupy the same. His malady still continued
at one stay, the eight day passed, the Phisicions agreed not in their
consultacions, although alyke they did their duties as friends in all
diligence and fidelity. They assayed all remedies, but this ragyng sickness
overcame al their medecines, notwythstandyng that the chief ordinary Physician
of the City confessed that the sycknes so long rooted and grounded in him,
overcame not so much as the weakness of his body which of long time had lost al
strength. For the botche ran not as it was wont, but retired inward^ye, and
yet his sycknes decreased nothing (all be it his heat was temperate) but
augmented in his bowels, with grievous pain of his head. Then the Physician
that had special charge of him, resysted with al force and new medecynes his
sycknes, and concealed no part of his industry and cunnyng toward his Pacient.
Furthwyth his strength began to return, and we almost persuaded of his
recouerye, for it appeared visibly that nature wared stronger in him. And
suddenly besides al expectacion, ye paya raunged along his right side, and
apostumed with great quantity of fleume, gathered in his bowels, and flowing in
abundau^ce, but as it appeared since, it was ye last conflyct nature had, for
by and by his heart began to tremble, his eyes to seitle in his head, his
members to fail by force and violence of his sickness. Then ye Physician began
to dout, and we despair of his recovery, but he ye long past was prepared to
this banquet, and with deep syghes groned for y^ same, forced not for our
consolations, but with an invincible courage bad us be of good comfort Then
calling to him the Ministers of the Gospel, his companions in profession, with
the pryncipall of the Church, he made the this Oration.

Ye see brethren in what state mine Ecolampadius last exhortacion.
affairs rest, the Lord approaches to call me hence, I am therefore desirous to
confirm and establish my soul with the perfect joy of our Lord, and
consolacion of you my dear friends. What shall we the servants of God say in
this fatal farewell, ye jointly be coupled together in like love toward the
Lord, like study, like care, and like doctrine? Salvation is procured for us,
ye faithful hope of Gods kingdom by Christ is conquered for us, his doctrine
is true, his light shyneth even at our fete, wherefore abandon al sorrow, al
dread of death, all error and all doubt. What rests then but constantly and
faithfully to follow Jesus Christ, as we long since have begun: First in purity
of doctrine, secondly in life conformable to the lively word of God. Christ
puissaunt enough, will of his infinite mercy give order for the rest and
preserve his Church. Endeavor then with all alacrity of mind, my dear
brethren, to make your light The way to overthrow Satan.
shine, so as God the Father may be glorified, and the name of Christ
resplendish and have light by the brightness and integrity of your conversation.
Love one another unfeignedly, having god ever more before your eyes. Men preach
the truth in vain, and little prevail words, for if we will subdue Satan, if
we determine to shape this world after Christ, this specially that now is we
had need of a clear and holy life, of a heavenly courage and mind. See ye
not what clouds appear, what tempest begins to noise, what alienacion of
minds, what impiety reign, yet ye must be constant and courageous, assured
the Lord will dispose al in just order. O ye I might be with you in your
tribulacions, and expose this my life for the truth, but it may be so, for as
much as the love of godly men, and the band in Christ is indissoluble, and
have all things common among them. Such discourse had Ecolampadius
concerning religion, generally with us his brethren, and then he began to touch
him self. Where I am sc^aundered (says he) that peruerslye I have corrupted
the truth. I force not, for praised be god, I depart to appear before the
throne of Christ in pure conscience there shall I truly know if I have seduced
the Church, I leave you witnesses His protestacio^ that he taught the verity.
of this mine opinion and attestacion, the which I maintain and confirm in
these my last sighs. And when he had said this, the brethren gave him their
hands, and faithfully promised to take care for y^ church. The morrow after,
which was the. r^ day he had laid sick, he commanded his Children to be
brought before him, and first he took them by the hand, then he stroke them on
the head and notwithstanding their tender years could not conceive the fathers
mind (for the eldest was but three years old) Go to (faith he) Eusebie, you
Irena, and you Alith^a, my dear Children, i^u^ ye God your father. And when
their Mother had made a sign of grant, ^he would fulfill his commandment,
he vended his eyes toward his wy^^, his mother in law, and other his (...),
saying: I have with this my last restament bound ye that ye end(...) my
Children be such, as I said even now, and as I have ever desired, that is,
fearing God, peaceable, meek, and true. And after all those that were present,
had given again consent, and faithful promise to observe his request, he
caused his children to be re(...)ed from him. This was the last night, and all
the br^^hen were with him, with whom (it seemed having de(...) ^o rest) he
conferred very ly(...). A certain friend of his came in again that went
forth, whom he required to ^^l s^m news, the other answered he knew none.
But I will tell thee news says Ecolampadius. Every man was silent to hear
what this might be, I shall be shortly says he with Christ my Lord. Anon
after one demanded him if the light hurted him not, and laying his hand on
his stomach, answered: here is light enough.

The daw^ing of day appeared, and the Sun began with his radiaunt beams to
clear the whole world, when his fatal hour approached. His last prayer which
we could understand, and which he pronounced with great pain, yet casye to be
understood: was the.li. Psalm of David, which contains David's penitent
prayer for his sins, the which this godly man recited at large in the
presence of us, with sighs drawn from his divine breast.

This done, he paused a while, and as one sodaynelye awakened, said this
prayer: Jesus Christ save me. This was the last voice that issued out of that
venerable mouth. We were ten brethren kneelyng round about his bed, and
lyf^ynge up our hands, we made our prayer unto God.

It was uowe clear and perfect day^* and the su^ne ascended our horisont, when
this holy man rendered his ghost to God his Creator, so meekelye, humbly, and
with such affiaunce in Christ his Lord, that al good people were no less
comforted with his godly end, then they had been edefied by his virtuous life.

Thus Ecolampadius ended his days, whose life shied in integrity and
innocencye. The cause recited in the beginning, moved me (yea truly me, that
have been a luculent witness with diverse credible persons, of all these things
written) not to swerve from testification of the truth, but faithfully to
advertise the same. And now my dear friend Capito, since you have exhorted me
to set forth his fatal end: reduce you to memory, the order of his life. For
you know what pleasure the godly shall receive, and what prouocacion this
shall be for the^ to imitate his godly steps. I do not in vain require you to
attempt this, for no man can more lively descriue the same then you* with who^
all his syfe time he had great familiaritye and learned conference. Then seeing
this ample occasion is offered unto you, to satisfy the thurstye expectacion of
the godly, and gratefy the gredye desires of all honest and virtuous people. I
doubt not, and the rather at the contemplation of my request, you will publysh
to the whole world, the great abundau^ce of grace, it pleased the Lord to
poor in this man, who is worthy to be calendred in the Catalogue, of famous
and godly pyllers of the Christian church. Farewell. *)

The history of the Life and Death of Huldericke Zuinglins. Written by Oswa^d
Mi^^^^^s. ()
Oswald Miconius wysheth perfect health, to his friend Agathius Ber^^^^^.

YOUR request is (dear friend Agathy) I should publysh a matter as worthy
notice, as surmounting the compass ^^ing skyll. For great things require
supportacion of great power, as yet I have ramforced only. For I am both
weak to attaynd to high matters, and naturally given to atchieue low
enterprises. Think you this is a triuial argument to discourse I will not say
descriue the historye of Zuinglius life? for such is not your desire, weying
the sterility of my skyl and eloquence. Tully the Prince of al good learning,
and the famous Plutarche, might with their greatest vessels wade in this large
sea, without eclipse of their glorious cunning and elegant style. So great is
Zuinglius among his sincere friends, and so s^^lly esteemed among his
illiterate and profane enemies, hereof springs your doubt. There be some (you
allydge) that in praising him, make the same a myrour of godlynes, and some in
contemning him, paint him out like an horrible and monstrous wight, which
moves you to marvel, the earth can sustain so facinerous a creature.
Thus ye laud of his friends alluryng you to reverence. and the sclau^der of his
foes, provoking you to abhore his life and acts: You seem to suspende your
resolute judgment of him, and his learned works, and therefore requires to be
credibly informed by some his familiar friends of his demeanure and
co^uersacion, that (such is your zealous affection) as his excellent momuments
shine in all Christianity and sincere doctrine: so they may receive condign
credit, and godly report of all Christian people. I may right boldlye
affirm, I knew Zuinglius familyarlye, who was my Mecenas, and with whom I had
learned conference, for ye which I am obliged unto him manyfoldly. But what can
I give, so barrayne of eloquence, and ornate phrase? If you did not remember
me, I should forget my just debt, now that you press me, I will do what I can,
and y^ more is, I dare be bold to say, this compendious narratio^ will delight
you much For I write as I have had experience, trusting you will communicate to
none this discourse, but keep it to your self

Zuinglius was borne about the year of our Lord. 1487. in a Village, The place
^her zuinclius was orne.
called Doggiens, otherwise named y^ wild house, as high situated, as any
Mountain in Suicerland. I have been fond to believe he gathered Dininity by his
near neighborhed to heaven, considering he had not his like of long time in
holiness of life. His Father hight Nicholas Zuinglius, his His parents
Mother Margaret Meyline, both persons of good fame. His father was renowned,
as well for his integrity, as temporal preferment. In his Country he was a
principal Governor, and we^ esteemed. This man having good hope of his young
son, bestowed him with a Priest his Brother, to try if he were apt to take
learning, and understanding by the same his towardnes, he put him to a
Scholemaister, under who^ he prospered so well, that his Instructor could not
limit him so much to learn, as he had ready wit to receive. Therefore he was
sent to Basile, being but.x. years old, and had to Master one Gregory Binzle
a learned and ready Teacher. There he profited in small time so well that he
gained in disputacion, and conference of study much more then other his
fellows, which moved the elder Zuinglius was a Musician.
Scholars to stomach him. He excelled in the art of Music, as it is incident
to them that be naturally bent more to one science, then an other. His
Instructor Binzle, loving him dearly, considered well the manner of teaching
then used, was far to base for such a ioly and pregnant wit, and therefore
returned him to his Parents praying them to place him, where as he might receive
instruction according to his capacitye. Then was he sent to Berne, there to
study under one Henry Lupulus, a learned man, and famous in Poesy, who first
aduau^ced Zuinglius is sent to Berne.
and professed letters of humanitye in Suicerland. This man red unto him
approved authors, of who^ he learned the purity of the Latin tongue, and
understanding of Authors with good judgment. He also learned to write Verses
and could scan and judge others Poesy. He had not fullye consumed two years in
this study, when he had grounded so His study of Philosophy.
well, as he might build thereupon the study of Philosophy. The^ he repa^red ^^
Vienna in Au^triche, where he learned the sum of Philosophy, and augmented
his knowledge in letters of humanitye. In few years after he was called home,
and fearing intermission of exercise of learning, he returned to Basile, where
he communicated his skyll to many. And being elected principal of S. Martins
College, he began to profess good learning, to the singular commoditye of al
his Auditors. At vacant times he curiously examined Philosophy, and the vain
Co^mentes of Sophistes, to arm himself the more strongly, if in time to come,
it chanced him to dispute against them. (...) his grave studies with some
(...) melody, as he was pleasantly wy^^^^ lively, and me^y conceited. (...) ^e
^a^ly after, he learned to play on all Musical instruments, to then^e he
might quicken his mind, def^tigat^^ with studies, and return to them with
more alacrity I doubt much (dear friend Agathye) hold you can believe The
profit of M^^^^.
this, for hereby his enemies have ^a(...) ^^^asio^ to^ (...) him, a^^enging
Music is an alluring ^aite to ^eche rous lust, and no encouragement to gentle
study. I have heard the peruers pronounce euilly of him, and specially the
Babilonical Priests, who live licenciously, and wallow in Venus ^^ddie. But
who lives so ^^^^e of spot, that can escape Momus blast, we will not be
discouraged to advance his praise, what so ever Mioas Mates, and blind
Bussards chat. Is not this an evident argument, he used Music saw dably,
considering he persuaded (...) stubentes to give them selves thereunto, and
wherefore might he refrain? since there is nothing that rejoices the sorrowful
mind more the Music. After he had long time travailed, as well in liberal
arts, as in the study of philosophy, he received ye due guer^o^ of Schools,
to wit, the degree of Master. The which he took not so wyllyngly, as to
condescend to the opinion of men, who judge none learned, unless they ^e ^ecked
with these brave tytles. A while after as the matter and order required, he
employed his study Theology corrupted with Philosophy.
in school diuinitye, but by and by he perceived yt it was but loss of time,
and that by worldly wisdom, God and Philosophy were mixed together, in such
sort, that of this vanitye, barbarousnes, or rather vain glory, there was no
certain hope of any sincere doctrine: yet he continued in this exercise, as
though he had been an espial or loker on the enemies camp, till Zuinglius
chosen Pastor of Glaris.
those of Glaris elected him their Superintendent, without taking the order of
Prie^thod. The which he took afterward, being con^^^ayned to perfect that,
that the other had begone Having received this order, he wholly addicted him
self to study, specially of holy Scripture. For since that time he made none
account of good learning, but where the same served his turn in the sacred
scripture, and preachinges. And for this purpose he Things requisite to a
Preacher.
learned Valerius the great by rote, because of his examples. He considered,
that he that had the charge to instruct the flock of Christ, ought to be
garnished with the science of many things, and specially with divine
knowledge, more then with eloquence, and elegant phrase to expound althinges
duly, and for the vtility and capacitye of every one. He endeavored with all
sedulity, to atchieue this, perusyng always the new and old Testament,
elucidating the proprieties of the text and applying them as he thought good,
to the profit and benefit of those of ye Country that heard him. By this time
he had so increased in divine knowledge, that the virtuous and learned judged
him well exercised in holy scriptures, and a perfect Divine. Yet he was not
contented there with, until he had the knowledge of the tounges to supply that
he lacked. Wherefore he gave him self first to the Greek tongue, by help of
Lexic^ns, or Greek Dictionaries and translacions. He wrate S. Paul's Epistles
in Greek, and learned them by rote, so as he understood them better in Greek,
then in Latin. The like he did in all other books of the new Testament. But
having learned of S. Peter that holy scripture is not understood by
particular interpretacion, he lifted his eyes to the heavens, beseching the
holy Ghost to be his Instructor, and prayed daily he might have that grace
given him to understand sincerelye the sense of the holy Ghost. And fearing
whe^re we ought to ta(...) the knowle^e of y^ holy Scripture
least under color of the holy Ghost he should abuse him self, he
conferred that, that was written, and illustrated the dark places, by the
plain, in sort, that when he preached the scripture, every man might plainly
perceive he was taught of the holy ghost.

By this mean the knowledge of heavenly trough long time obscured, to the
great detriment and perdicion of souls: was happily restored unto us He judged
of the Catholic doctors as they judged of them selves, that we must read
them with judgment, and try them by the Canonical scriptures, as by a touch
stone, otherwise they be ordinarely so corrupted, with medley of Philosophy and
man's reasons, that it is impossible there should be any order in conforming
them to the authority of holy Scripture, a thing in time past attempted and
put in ure.

Then he practiced his skyll in this manner: He proclaimed and made war
against a^ notable disorders and enormities, specially against the pensio^s
(for so we term the presents that Princes Zuinglius zeal against
Pensionaries.
make to some particular parsons to leauye Soldiers, to aid them in their
wars) desiring to abolish the^, and to reduce the Country to the pristinate
estate, and former simplicity. For he considered, unless he purged the sountaxne
of all euyls, Christian doctrine could not settle and take sure foundation.

You may not here Agathy say: Is it possible that Zuinglius yet a Papist,
should think of the Gospel? Credit me, it is more then.xxvii. years past,
since these Block heads charged him secretelye to be an heritik, as well for
this that is rehearsed, as for that he approved John Picus of Mirandolas
propositions, set up at Rome by him in time past to dispute, the which
notwithstanding he could not obtain. Hereof sprang the hatred, infamy,
exclamacion, and wyly working of the children of the world against Zuinglius,
and increased even as his virtues augme^ted. The other contrarely that were
godly affectioned, as some ancient and virtuous personages, with certain
Priests of a less corrupt life, esteemed him so hyghly, as they trusted by
his endeavor, the justice and integrity of the ancestors should be remised in
their old estate. At that time he announced the grace of the Gospel, in sort,
that he said little of the abuses of Rome, or nothing at al. For he thought it
was necessary that truth first known, should work in the hearts of his
auditors, so that when they had well vnderstanted the true co^ntaundements, they
might discern the false and repugnaunt. And truly, such was the qualitye of
time, he could do none other. For in this contrariety of opinions and
rebellion of people, the truth had rather ben rejected, then y^ abuse reformed.
Truth it is in this point I cannot clear this young man of all suspicion of
sin, although with sacred desire to serve God, he circumspectly took head by
evil example to abase the authority of heavenly doctrine. Thus Zuinglius
demeaned him self at Glaris. And in this broil he had good occasion offered
him to repair to the hermitage for a season. Thither the Lord Thibaut
Gerolzege a Baron invited him, a man as well affectioned to learning and learned
men, as to true religion, who was the administrator of our Ladies Hermitage.
The cause that moved Zuinglius to repair thither, was the singular desire he
had to publish Christ and the verity, among diverse and far distant nations,
who for the famous brute of y^ place, in frequency flowed thither, and partly
the goodly opportunity he supposed to find there to come to a more perfect
understanding of the Greek tongue. And happily the event answered his
expectacion, for there he manifested Christ, and got perfect intelligence of
the Greek, to understand more eas^ly the new and old Testament. Even about
this time the congregation of Zuricke, destitute of a Preuther, ^uborned
certain, who did their vndeuour to place Zuinglius their Superintendent. He was
ignorant of this, till that a Chanon of the City required him, if he would
Zuinglius called to Zuricke.
discharge the province of a Preacher, and be their Pastor at Zuricke. He
answered he was content, and trusted, that if the grace of god was preacher
and received in so famous a place, the other Canto^s or quarters of Suiderland
would follow that example, and by this mean a godly reformation would ensue.

And all be it he was assured he should not have like salarye as before, yet
he said, if they would appoint him that function, he would endeavor to
dyscharge the same. But he would not require it at the time of esertion, as
many are accustomed, to procure the voice and suffrage of other. I was
suborned, I truly Agathye, to give Zuinglius my voice, which I gave, and
received grant for him. Who was immediately sent for, and admitted with y^
incredible joy of al good persons. A while after being in the Chapter of the
Chanons, he proponed unto them, what he determined to teach the people, to wit,
the history of our Savior Christ, according to S. Matthew, so as his virtue,
whose name they did advance should not be buried any longer, to the detrime^t
of divine glory, and health of souls. Further, he protested he would not expound
the same by humayn sense, bindyng himself by oath to any private Interpreter,
but by conference and industrious collection of scripture, and by the
intelligence of the holy ghost, the which he hoped to obtain with humble prayer
made unto God. This his resolution made some heavy and sorrowful, and some
joyful, even as the voices before were not al alike to admit Zuing lius. He
began to execute his promis at the Nativity of our Lord. 1519. and since
pursued the same. During his Martine Luther.
continue in this, Luthers name began to grow in credit, and many bought and
red his books. And albeit Zuinglius as then red the^ not, yet he exhorted in
his sermons his auditors to bie and read the^. The reason that moved Zuinglius
to do this, was because yt people, reading them and understanding, Zuinglius
employed no time in studi of them, might consider in both a conformity and a
grement of teaching and opinion drawn out of the holy scriptures, and be the
more enflamed to ground upon and addict them selves to the truth. This godly
devise had profitable success a while after. Truth it is, the order he
observed in preaching made much also, whereby the simple as well as the learned
and ingenious might profit. For he explaned the scripture so plainlye, and with
such dexteritye, that he was loathe any should depart from his sermons, unless
they were edefied and enriched with godly lore. And as he manifestly taught y^
truth, and that with great diligence, so was he vehement, and sharp in
reprouyng vice, as much as ever was any man. Above all the rest, he inueyed
against the Pensionaries, the oppressors of the poor, and the dissolute, idle,
and delicious lyuers. He used such a majesty in rebukyng, as never none the
like before, when he thundered with terrible words against the Pensions and
dissolute living, because he would not seem to dashe and astonyshe the
Estates, or such of the Commonty, as thronged among the peruers, and reprobate
in hearing his sermons, he ever more added this: That this my vehement rebuke
may not agreue and trouble thee, O virtuous man, understand I touch thee not,
nor in this matter I have to do with thee. Sometime he digressed from his
theme, when matters interceadyng enforced him too surcease his begun
purpose. But now the blessed and happy time expired, the sou^dest and best part
of the people embraced truth, he discoursed in his sermons against things
less tolerable in the Church, he condemned the private gaynes of Priests,
and such as by private power abused the church, which moved the priests and
laity to omit no time of consultacion, by what wyle, or policies they might
entrap him. But of this perhaps I will discourse more at large. Now let us
return to his studies: Among so Zuinglius Lectures.
many laborius affairs, he ceased not to read al approved Greek authors, as
Homere, Thucidides and Lucian, that is more plain and easy, Theocritus,
Hesiodus, Aristophanes and other, till he had read and reuolued them all.

And for that his study required, and Andrewe Boscheustyn learned in the
Hebrew tongue, was come to Zurick to profess the same. Zuingglius was his
diligent Scholar, who received forth with a marvelous taste of this tongue. And
having obtained of the Senate, the erection of a College of good learning, and
the three tounges, he solicited the same to send for James Cepor(...)us a young
man well learned in those tounges, to be a public professor there. Under whom
he determined to atchieue all that concerned the Greek Grammar.

Awhyle after by conference of the Seventy and S. Ieromes translacion, he took
boldness to expound the text of Esaias and Hieremy, right excellent Prophets,
accompanyenge him self with Leo Judah, who had then studied and trauayled in
that knowledge and Felix Mantius, who since was defamed with the heresy^ of the
Anabaptists. He studied continually stanoyng up right, and prescribed certain
hours to study, at which he never failed, if he were not pressed with
matters of importance.

From earlye morning, till ten of the clock, he applied him self to read,
interpretate, instruct, and write, as time and occasion required. After Dinner
he attended to such as would confer with him in any matter, or required
counsel, or he devised and walked with his friends till two of the clocks,
at which time he returned to his study. After Supper he walked a little while,
and then after he gave himself to write letters, the which sometimes he used
till mydnyght. Further, if the Senate had need of him in any urgent matter,
he was always ready at their commandment.

And now Agathye, if it delyghte you to hear Zuinglius trauayles against the
enemies of truth, and the attemptes of wy^ye woorkers, we must deryue our
dyscourse from a far there and higher beginning.

Albeit that Fraunces Lambert Friar obseruant of Anguio^, whose name is well
known to the French and Germayne nation, ought not to be enrolled among his
enemies: yet for that of the first and principal he broched this busynes
against Zuinglius, he must not here be buried in the vale of oblition. He came
to Zurick in his Friars weed, and disputed openly against Zuinglius, touching
the intercession of Saints, but I cannot tell who pricked him, if it were the
truth, or that he set but a face thereon. For after certain propositions, he was
contented to be reformed, and gave thanks to God, that he had revealed the
truth unto him so plainly by his excellent Organe. Awhyle after came John
Faber, and Martine Blanshe Preacher of T^ding, addressed thither by Hugo,
Bishop of Constaunce, at the request of the inhabitauntes of Zurick. And albeit
as they reported, they had none other Commission the^ to understand the cause
of the differentes, and endeavor to pac^fy and end them: Nevertheless occasion
so offered, and matters so falling out, they fell into question of the Gospel,
the intercession of saints, human constitucions, and other things in such
^ort, that they passed and consumed their whole journey in disputacion herein,
and not with out emolument, For all the assembly, which was about six hundred
parsons considered well, how vile and frayl al worldly matters were respect of
celestial things. It sufficed not the Bishop to have sent these foresaid
parsons. For anon after his Suffragan came to Zuricke in deliberacion to
persuade them to believe the intercession of Saints, and the sacrifice o^ the
Mass. The which by his book published abroad, and approved by many schools,
he has labored to confyrme. But he lost time: For a certain noble man of
illustre famely, and magnanimous, being demanded what the Suffragan had
gotten, he answered: The Vicar has driven away the Sow, and we bring the
Pigs, or as I might sai: the Suffragan has beaten the bush, and Zuinglius
has taken the Birds. These things so happily fynished by y^ singular goodness
of almyghtye God, Zuinglius was enforced to set pen to the paper. I will not
here enterlace the Catalogue of his books, nor declare the vtinty of them,
considering they be published and bear sufficient wytnes of them selves. I will
briefly say this: there is a sound doctrine iuigned with simplicity in them,
and I know not where any more efficacy or solid^tye may be found in any
man's works, then in his in mine opinion. In this hurly burly, I cannot tell
what aduertisment the Pope had hereof, but incontine^tly he addressed his
Ambassador to us, and wrate his Apostolical letters or schedule, the tenor
whereof ensues.

Adrian the Pope, the syrte of this name. We^de^oned S^^^^e, we great A letter
sent by Adrian y^ Pope to Zuinglius.
thee well, and send ou^ Apostolical benediction. We a^^^^sse our reverend
Brother Enn^u^* Bishop of Verules, domestical Prelecte, our Messenger, and
of our Apostolical Sea a prudent, and faithful member, to repair to the
invincible and most confederate nation unto us, an^ our Apostolical Sea, to
streate with the same of matters of importance, and which appertain as well
to the said Sea, as to the whole estate of the Christian common weal. Albeit
we have enjoined him to propone these things publickely, yet being enfourmed
of thy virtue, and effectually The Popes mandate.
embracing thy devotion, as his whom we singularly credit, and have in special
regard. We have given express commandment to the said Bishop our
Messenger, to deliver unto thee our letters apart, and to advertise thee of our
good will toward the same. We therefore exhort thy devotion in our Lord, that
thou credit him in all things, and that thou have in reco^mendacion our
affairs, and the affairs of the Apostolical Sea, as we have thine honor,
advancement, and profytte, by this mean thou shall encurre our special grace
and favor. Given at Rome at S. Peter's, sealed with the Fysshers King. 23. day
of January. 1523.

The cause y^ moved me to publishe this letter here, is to testify y^ if
Zuinglius had been more ambicious, then he was sincere and godli, he might have
had preemine^t estate, and abundance of wealth. For not only the Pope wrate
unto him, but also to Fraunces Zuiggien to practice with Zuinglius, to lean to
the Apostolical sea, and maintain that part. At a certain time I prayed
Fraunces to tell me what the Pope promised for the same. He answered:
certainly al save his Papistical chair, or Apostolical sea. Even now the
Gospel began to florysh, and was esteemed of the greatest part, for a heavenly
troth, namely of the Senate of Zurick, and of the Council of the. 2. hundred,
wherefore Zuinglius began to study to reduce things to a better state and to
proceed orderli. They altered first those things which empesched the
propagacion and advancement of the Gospel. The nombre of Priests and Moonkes
were grown in tract of time to a more huge multitude, then need required, for
matter of religion. It was then ordained by the Senate, through the persuasion
of Zuinglius: that the nombre should be abridged and reduced to few, and those
necessary for the service of y^ Church, provided that none should be deprived
or expelled their benefice, but enjoy the revenue of the same, during their
life, and deceased, none to be substitute in their place. The three orders The
Monks see at lyberty.
of Monks were spoiled of their religious attire, and put al together in a
place, whence they might go forth as often, and when they thought good without
any contradiction, either to marry or to apply their study. If any would not
savor y^ swetenes of the Gospel, they had lybertye to go and do where and what
they would, in such sort, as none had his conscience charged. The
ecclesiastical revenues were employed upon the ministers of the Church, y^
professors of good learning, the rest of the priests and Monks and on the
poor. There were found among these young men of great expectacion, and purely
affectioned to the study of piety. Such were reserved in hope to serve the
church, and were nourished through out the whole signory of Zuricke, and after
were employed as need required. Zuinglius also a zealous man toward sacred
and good learning had builded the foundation of a school, which had not been
infer our to any, if death had not dissolved by fatal stroke his godly purpose.
Further, he deputed certain of the Counsel to understand and examine the
state of Matrimonye. He persuaded to abolyshe the Images, which were then
worshipped, to deface and tear in pieces the Mass, and to set up y^ Supper of
our lord in his integrity

From this time forwards the heresye of the Anabaptists began to bourgen,
who would not permit that Heresye of Anabaptists.
little Children should be baptized, and after rebaptised them selves, and
proceeding with an enraged mind, they rushed into the most horrible heresies
that ever reigned. As soon as Zuinglius perceived this, for that y^ principal
Authors* were his friends, learned men, of Zuricke and of his flock, he
endeavored by familiar conference to reduce the^ to ^anity of mind. But when
he saw, that what they concluded Zuinglius oppo^^th himself against the
heresies of the Anabaptists.
in his presence, reuolting anon after, they observed no part of their
promise, and heaped nombers of disciples sequestrynge them from the Church, and
framyng another new, it was erpedient for him to resyste Satan, and publikly
confound them Believe me Agathy, I was present at nine several times, and heard
their friendly conference and vehement disputacions, it shall be superstuous to
enlarge any further hereof. Certainly their mouths so swarmed with injurious
Injuries and blasphemies against Zuinglius.
reports and blasphemies, that they abashed not to charge and lay on Zuinglius
all the euyls and mischiefs which are figuratly setforth in the reuelacio^ of
S. John. This pestiferous sect was of this nature, the more we travailed to
repress their insolencye, the more they increased in their furor and raging
heat. Wherefore the Senate was enforced to proceed against them by way of
imprisonment exile, and death, as not against Anabaptists, but perjured,
rebel, and sedicious parsons, for y^ they esteemed vanitye, more then veritye,
preferred vice above virtue, and embracing sedicio^, hated security. And it was
necessary to sense and fortefy y^ godly with books, least they might be seduced.
The last that was found of this sect was Baldasar Hubmer enseigne bearer of the
Anabaptists, who of a friend and fellow of y^ Gospel was become a mischeuous
foe. This first with writing bewrayed his wickedness, after in the presence of
the deputed Counselors approned the same. For being escaped from Walshut, a
Town situate by the Rhene, he came to render him self to the Lords of
Zuricke, where he was apprehended. He required the Lords of the Counsel he
might confer with Leo Judah, Sebastia^ Economus and me. The which was
granted unto him for the second time. We traualied so much with him, that
undoubtedly he promised to submyt him self the morrow after. Coming then from
the Senate house to the Temple, he ascended the Pulpit, after Zuinglius was
gone down, and confirmed all that he had taught before, saying he was moved
thereto, because Zuinglius had praised so much that virtue Constancy,
intitulyng and calling so his partinacious opinion. He was then brought back
to prison, where he was deteyned, till Zuinglius secretly released him, and
sent him away, not without money and a guide. And arriving at Constance, he so
detracted and most impude^tly defamed Zuinglius, that he was forced with an
Apology to clear himself to the brethren, wherein largely he treated
Disputation at bad^
of the Anabaptists horrible heresye.

Now ye require to understand the disputacion at Bade, and first of all what
was the cause the Lords of Zuricke would not permit Zuinglius to be there
present. But for as much as the whole discourse of the same is diuu^ged and
imprinted, I had rather address you thither, yet doubting I should seem
ignorant of the whole. I send you the Lords letters of Zuricke to John Eccius
with the safeconduct and promise of good men, that invited him to confer with
Zuinglius, and discuss the sacred troth of the old and new testament to the
common profit of all the Church. For Eccius had enterprised in two Epistles
directed to the Ambassadors of the league, to convince and confute the errors
and heresy of Zuinglius, by the reading of these letters, and for that Eccius
made none account of y^ that was written to him, you may understand the Lords
intencion, why they stayed Zuinglius, although he himself answered
sufficiently that matter* in his works against Faber, and would to God I had
even now that disputacion to send to you. Al be it he was not present in the
disputacion: yet he labored as much with care, diligence, counsel,
advertisement, exhortacion and writing, which he sent to Bade, as though he had
aided against the enemies of y^ truth. For my part I desire nothing more, then
to have seen him face to face disputyng with Eccius at full liberty: I believe
the.v. little Cantons of Suicerland had given perfect judgment, where the lie
or troth had rested, but it was not lawful for him to be there. Since that
time, findyng security in trauayl, he went to Berne where was Murnerus and
Eccius, with. 4. Bishops, and certain principal Moonkes, which the counsel of
Berne required under surety to repair thither. Troth it is, he was guarded
with. 200. men of arms to pass by the confederate Countries. He made also a
long journey to Marpurge, to confer with Martine Luther, and Phillyp
Melancthon, of the Eucharistical Sacrament, not doubtyng any thing, because it
was a place void of danger. You cannot choose but evidently perceive, he has
endured great trauayles in these affairs. Diverse called him teacher of new
opinions, because of his judgment of the supper of our Lord. But I believe if
they had red with equitye, and well weyed that y^ he wrote to the Princes of
Germany, assembled at Ausburg, they would have judged other wise. I remyt you
to the book, fearing is lose time. For what persuasion will avail him, that in
the same treatise of the Supper of our Lord, will not perceive and learn the
truth? Hitherto we have treated of the pains and trauayles he sustained to
defend the verity, and now we will declare the peryiles he incurred for the
same.

After that the Priests and Monks were expulsed their Cloisters, and other The
Pristes and Monks* growe^ on of credit.
Religious houses, and sentence ^iffinitiue pronounced against them, that
received Princes pensions, they attempted diverse ways to destroy him. I will
write of them that be notoriously know, and pass in silence his secret and
lurkyng enemies. At a certain time there knocked one at his door after my*
night, and prayed him to come and visit one nygh dead. His Deacon answered, y^
he would not awaken his Master, but repair to the sick him self. The other
importunatly refused, so as he bewraied his wretched intent, wherefore y^ Deacon
faining he would go and awaken his Master, shut the door closely, and suffered
the Caitiffe to tarry there at his pleasure. And when it was day, Zuinglius
had intelligence, this was a subtle sleyght. First, to take him so daynlye,
then to snaff^e his mouth, and stop his speech, and so to carry him away in a
boat. Awhyle after, they had prepared a horse secretly, for the like purpose.
Further, we have sent an e^pial wandering up and down in the Town, and wearyng
a long swerd hired to encounter Zuinglius, and then to murder him. Likewise two
Inhabitaunts of Zurick, whom I will not name, came one night when they we^ well
wh^tled, and assailed Zuinglius house, threw stones, brake the wyndowes,
belched out raylyng words, ^ so insolently demeaned them selves that no
neighbor durst rebuke them They stayed not, till stones, strength and sclaunder
failed them. In y^ morning the Counsel was advertised of this tumult, the
gates of the City commanded to be shut, and men clad with armure to search them
every where, until that certain women, which consented to this mischeuous and
scelerate fact, disclosed one of them, for y^ other a little before was escaped
the town. This one was found in a new caske, and committed to prison, and
after many sentences given, was appointed a perpetual prisoner, and in few
wekes after released at the request of those of Berne. Often times Zuinglius
supped with his friends, or with such as came to the town, in his return he
never went unguarded home. The Senate in this troublous stir caused ward and
watch to be kept about his house. But if he found security in this their
vigilant guard, certes, he was molested with thousand other troubles. They
called him Pensionary, because in time past he received a yearly pension of
the Pope, ignorant then it was any sin. As touching that he excused him
self to the Germaynes in this wise: Where as I have had to do sometime with
the Pope, that is ceased now long agone. I thought then it was lawful to
receive his money, to maintain his party. But when I knew mine error, I
religned his pension, which is the cause y^ Popes Deputies conne ^e small
thanks: yea, defame and scorn me, as though I were cu^pable, for as much as
they persuade men, that in taking the Popes money, God is sincerely served. And
writing to Berchtho^^ Ha^^er, and Caspar Megander, touching Princes presents,
he says thus: I esteem the glory of Christ, yea mine own, more then all the
treasure of worldly Princes, much less the benefits and ^argesse of one King.
I have learned what princely rewards pretend, so that avarice has no more
place in me, albeit she is familiar and atteding upon old age. And his aduer
saries not satisfied to call him thief, ad^u^^^erer and heretik, to defame his
doctrine and abase his credit, they hyssed and barked at him publicklye, as
though they had been ^unatike persons. But when these silly mad doltes saw they
prevailed not against the Gospel and servants of God: they converted their
stingyng and hyssing against such as had received the word of God, hoping to
irritate them, and pull them from the savor of him, who seemed to be the
author (as they peruersely judged) of their evil. They so reproched and mocked
him, that the Senate of Zuricke determined in re^u^se these injuries, and
c^^^u^^lius assaults. I had need to write a large volume, to such as desire
to understand or descriue his affairs. In the end there were appointed new
confederacies for the tuicion of Christian doctrine, with out viola^yng or
doing prejudice to the ancient all^^unce, which was not done without the
syngular diligence and great travail of Zuinglius. Not that he attempted any
thing against the peace (for never like ^lagitious devise could penetrate the
brain of such a lover of his Country) but that by this pollecye he hoped to
eradicate the ^yces then swarmyng, and to plant the true and sincere Religion,
to the honor of God* and the common profit of Swicerla^d, or else in defending
Gods cause, thus to inflame all men's hearts to praise the Lord, and by the
magnificence of this new confederacy, to astonish and dash the adversaries,
thereby the sooner Zuinglius writes to his friends.
to win and reclayme them to Christ. This incontinently moved certain furious
Papists to fall to weapons, and broche intestine war. Whereupon Zuinglius
wrate to his friends in this manner.

I will repeat unto you that I have often written, that is, that ye be
constant, and not dysmayd with the war, for ye peace that some solicit so
carefully, is a war and no peace, and the war that we enterprise, is peace
and not war. For we covet not ye blood of any living creature, and abhor
the effusion of the same in this commocion: but our whole intent is to
interrupte the licencious government of some. If this he not taken in hand,
the Gospel shall never have his free course, nor the Ministers of the same
live in security. Our determinacion tends to no cruelty, but all that we
deliberate, is friendly and paternal. We desire to preserve such as by
ignorancy procure their perdicion. We be resolved to defend liberty, wherefore
disdain not our enterprises, for certainly they be more godly and just then is
reported unto you. Credit* us, and be not seduced by such as accuse us. Ye
have tried our constancye and faythfulnes, and well perceived our enemies
leuity, and dissimulacio^. Be present with our company, and observe constantly
the faith ye owe to God and men. What shall I say further? dread nothing, we will
atchieue al things so prosperously (God helping us) as ye shall not be a
shamed, nor repent ye have combyned your selves with us.

These were Zuinglius words, which I have recited here to declare how
iniustlye he is nominated of certain a Bloudsucker. It is most true he was
magnanimous and constant in greatest dangers, but always cyrcumspect,
provident and wise. He never thursted the blood of any, no ^ot of his
extremest foes, which every wise man and Christian Minister ought to detest.
The very ground and foundation of al his enterprises, was the liberty of his
Country, the virtue of the Aunceltors, and the glory of Christ, what so ever
his enemies ceblaterate the which I protest in troth before God. He was twyse
in the wars of the confederates, which bare y^ name of a Monasterye called
the Chapel. He wyllinglye went to the first, because he would be present at
the consultacion, fearyng any thing should be decree^ there contrary to right
and equity. The matter was ended well, and without effusion of broud. I have
heard him say he perceived more malice, and peruers counsel there, then ever
before he red in vokes, or had learned by experience. In the second war he was
elected Pastor of the army, where he went vnwyllyngly, foreseing the peril
that was iminent. The condition of the war mysliked him marueilously, and the
rather for that he saw the enemies victailes cut of, understanding well what
myschiefe hunger would bread and compel. Albeit to speak truly, after those of
Zurick had enterprysed the same (whereunto certain whom we know prycked them
of a good zeal, hoping in the mean season there would be a consultacion and
treaty of peace made, notwithstanding the Lords of Zuricke had chose the
warce) Zuinglius was not determined to alter any thing, doubting the enemies
would make no account of them, as he passed not much to wythstand their
invasion.

Fourtene days before the army was encamped, I heard him twyse say in pulpit
where he preached, in the midst of this broil: I know well what this means, all
this is to procureiny death. He declared secretly to certain of his friends,
that the blasing star which appeared many wekes, and which we supposed to
portende Ecolampadius decease: signified his fatal fall. The Soldiers of
Zuricke rushed forth in great disorder. I cannot but sorowfully lament, when I
call to mind that doleful time. They marched not like men of war in even
ranks, but like a sort of venturours, some straglyng abroad, some runnyng
before and behind the Enseygne, destitute of conduct counsel, and pollecye,
and accorded not one with an other.

I cannot name them to be any great number of me of arms, for where they were
mustred. 5000. they appeared not in the field full. 4000. Then as this little
number approached to encountre a huge army and in perfect order, Zuinglius
followed mounted on horse back, according to the manner of the Country. I cannot
express the dolor and sorrow I sustained, when I beheld him, truly I was
astonished there with. We mourned all that day, and made our humble prayer unto
God. But he had decreed an other thing for us, and not against us, as I
holily expounded the same. For by this we have learned to be more circumspect,
and to take better head, reuerencyng more the Gospel, and fearyng God also. And
the enemies that resisted the Gospel, are now disclosed, and manifested to us.
About the euenyng of the day, we were advertised that the battayles had joined
very hotely, and that we had lost Zuinglius. The brute went he was thrice
dismounted, with the check of the Troop, but incontine^tly he was helped up
on horseback^ again, and the fourth time he was stryken on the chynne with a
terryble blow, and falling down from his horse upon his knees, he said: what
evil hap is this? they may flea the body, but not the soul, and this spoken he
departed in our Lord.

After this overthrow, the enemies hauyug good leisure (for our Soldiers were
retired into place of safegarde) sought for the body of Zuinglius. But who teld
them he was in yt battle and slain? The body being found, was condemned,
and after sentence given, dismembered and burnt to ashes. Behold y^ discourse of
Zuinglius life, lo the accident of his death which he suffered for the singular
affection he bare to his Country, and Christian common weal. Truth it is,
this end is horrible in the sight of mortal men, but precious before God, and
is predestinate to al faithful Ministers by divine justice, if y^ Lord of his
grace and syngular bountye, spare them not.

I suppose Agathy, I have satisfied your request, I have observed as I
promised, troth joined with breuitye, not forcyng for fine terms, and elega^t
phrases. I pray God some learned and godly man, succedinge me, may descriue
and beautefy this historye, as truly, ornately, and learnedly, as the profit
of the studious sort, and the dygnitye of this excellent man do require.

Farewell, it may please you to accept this my travail in friendly part. At
Zurycke the year 1532. (:)

Virescit vulnere virtus
To the favorable Reader.
IHumbly require thee, favorable Reader, to bear with such faults as have
escaped in the prynting, I trust in the next impression more emendaily to
publish these godly histories. In the mean season I thought good to admonish
thee of one absurdirye, which might argue mere ignorance, if I would not
advertise thee of the same. In my Epistle dedicatorye to the Lord Wentworth,
where as is written (and the body is no body, but a sepulture) reat sepulcher.
The rest I submit to the learned correction.

Farewell.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britayne str^te, by
great S. Battelmewes. ()


