A confession of the most ancient and true christian catholic old belefe,
according to the order of the xii. articles of our common Creed, set furthe in
English to the glory of almightye God, and to the confirmacion of Christ's
people in Christ's catholic old faith. By I. D.

Psalm. 116. I believe and therefore have I spoken.

Roma. 10. The belefe of the heart justifies, and the mouth confesses to
salvation.

Imprinted in Sothewarke by Christophor Truthal.

Cum priuilegio Regalj.

In April. 1556.

To the unfeigned fauourours and lovers of the pure word and Gospel of Jesus
Christ, enhabiting within the cities and diocese of Couentrie and Lichfelde,
and in all other places, where it has chanced me to have occupied the rowme
of a Preacher: Grace, mercy, and peace (joined with earnest repentance, and
constaunt faith, in the doctrine of the Gospel) from God the father, and his
son Jesus Christ, the common and only saueour of the world.
MY most sounng friends and brethren (concerning our common faith in Christ our
Lord) where of late days I am contemptuously and slanderously reported, and
named among some, to be an erroneous fellow, one of the new learning, an
heretic, one of Latimers sect, and I wotte not what: Be it known to the
world, that I am none other, tha^ a true christian man, regenerate and
instructed (now in my middle age) in ye blessed schole of Gods most holy
Bible and Testament (thanks be to his fatherly bounteous mercy therefore) and
sythence I have not followed the sect of any earthy man, nether grounded mine
opinion, faith, or doctrine, upon any new learning or heresy, but upon the
most certain pure vnfailing true word, and learning of almighty God, sent
down, revealed, and taught from the seat of his Majesty, and preached at his
commandment by the fathers and prophets, by Christ his son, and his holy
Apostles: and also regestred and specified in the rolls and euide^ces of the
holy sacred scriptures, to be the fou^dacion, rule, and law, for the true
catholic church of God to be builded upon, and ruled by, from the beginning
of the world, unto the last day of judgment.

And here upon only have I set the building of my faith (Jesus Christ him self
being the head corner stone) Ephe. 2.
and according thereunto I have diligently and faithfully taught and instructed
my parisheners and neighbors, as unto my vocacion I considered it iustlye to
apperteyne.

Notwithstanding, like as S. paul reports, that Apollo and he were
ministers, 1. Cor. 3.
by whom ye Corinthia^s believed, as God distributed unto every one: even so do
I acknowlage, and (from the botome of my heart) unfeignedly confess, that the
reverend father of blessed memory Hugh Latimer was to ye Hugh Latymer.
very death a right worthy instrument and minister of God, by whose most
wholesome doctrine, sincere example of godly life, and constau^t friendship
toward me, it has pleased thalmighty Lord, to open unto me (among many
other the most unworthy) the true christian faith, and to call me out of the
damnable darkness of Antichrists iniquirie, in to the true light of Christ's
gospelles verity.

And like as the people of Berrhoe (by diligent reading and examining Act. 17.
of ye scriptures) found that Paul's doctrine was both right, true, and
certainly good: even so do I undoubtedly credit, and plainly testifye, the
doctrine as well of the glorious martyr of Jesus Christ, Hugh Latimer (concerning
Iustificacion, and other articles of the christen faith) as also of the most
reverend father in God and right constaunt confessor of Christ Jesus, Thomas
Cranmere Archbishop of Cantorbury (concerning the blessed sacrament Thomas
Cranmer.
of Christ's precious body and blood, most catholikely and syncerely set furthe
in print) not being sedde by any carnal affeccion toward their persons,
nether for worldly promocion, but because I have perfitly proved their
doctrine, to be contained in the holy sacred scriptures: by testimony and
waraunt whereof, they and other ministers of Christ's gospel, have taught, and
set furthe the true catholic doctrine and word of man's salvation
accordingly.

And forasmuch as I esteem them men, which (without sure hold of the
scriptures) might both have deceived and ben deceived, therefore I and all other
(that be knytte together in one true vnto^, and knotte of Christ's spirit)
lay our foundation and ground work, not upon flesh and blood, yt is to
say, upon no man's word (of what power, virtue, wisdom, learning,
authority, estate or co^dicio^ so ever he be) but upon ye vnfailing true word
of the almighty euerlyuing Lord God.

In the mean while, if any man can teach me better, and more truly, by the
holy canonical scripture, I am content (as reason is) gladly and heartily to
follow him, and willingly give him place, with co^digne praise, and great
gramercies. But as for any other doctrine of faith, besides the scriptures, or
contraryr to the authority of the scriptures, either else by violent wrasting
and wrythyng of the scriptures out of of their own sense, or right meaning, I
shall (by the assistence of gods merciful help) never suffer my self to be
plucked away from the simple, plain apostolic true faith: because man is
freely justified by this says, and every faith contrary to this, is a dead
fruteles faith: and every doctrine not founded upon, or contrary to Gods
holy book To. 3. 4. Iac. 2. Gal. 1.
the Bible, is to be hold accursed: yea although it were preached, set furthe
or commanded by an Angel of heaven, much more by any mortal creature,
though it be never so great a King, Queen, governor, or potentate.

And concerning the holy canonical The holy canonical Scriptures
scripture, I (among other poor ministers of the Gospel) having charge of
soul, and following the examples of other christian churches and teachers, have
believed, and taught my parisheners and neighbors, and so still believe and
testify, on this manner of way following. The canonical scripture (I mean the
holy Bible) which is ye true vnfailing declaracion of the eternal will of God,
delivered by ye holy Ghost, and preached and diligently declared unto the
world (unto ma^kinde, I mean) by the holy prophets and chosen apostles, is
of al other the most ancient, most perfect, and most excellent doctrine,
co^prehe^ding and teaching absolutely and fully, al yt is necessarely required
to ye wholesome know lage of God, to true faith and the true worship of God, to
true christian righteousness, and to the framyng and ordring of honest,
blessed, and holy life.

And forasmuch as the Canonical scripture (the Bible I say) is the self same
word, that the eternal God him self has spoken and taught, and therefore
endures permanent, to be a lantern unto the fete, and a light unto me^nes
fotesteppes and procedinges for evermore: it has fidelity, authority,
certaitie, truth, estimacio^ and perfection pleinteously enough in it self: so
as it ought not to be made authentike again by the church, or by authority of
the witness of men, either yet to be pice^^, and patched it with the
tradicions of men. And albeit men's spirits are not hable to accord with some
books and textes of the scriptures: ye matter is not much to be passed upon. For
we know, that men's judgments ought to be applied and obey unto the
scriptures, and not the scriptures unto me^nes judgments.

And touching the interpretacion of the holy canonical scripture, this have I
thought, and (after the examples of other christen ministers) I have taught,
and yet still I think, and confess unto the world, that it ought 1. Pe. 1.
not, nor must be interpreted or expounded after any man's opinion or thought
(much less after every man's pleasure and fantasy) but by it self, and of
it self, as well according to the propreties of the tongues wherein it was furst
written, and by diligent wayeng and consideracion of the sayenges that goo
before, and those that be joined together and follow, with all the
circumstaunces: as also according to the meaning of other places, that seem
either more plain, or like there unto, or else contrary: by the line and rule
of faith and charity.

And where the fathers, the doctors of the holy church have interpreted
Doctors.
and expounded the scriptures after this manner, and have in no wise blenched
nor swarued from this law and rule now before mentioned: them we do with
heart and good will acknowlage, and take for faithful and dilligent
interpretours of the scripture, and honorable instruments of the holy ghost,
whose paynefull labors and industries our Lord God has used in the church,
to the glory of his own name, and to the profit of his faithful flock. And
therefore we not only reverence the^, but also think not well of such men, as
have them in contempt.

But as for all other doctrines and tradicions of men (how glorious, how gaye,
how high authority, title, or au^cientie so ever they be commended or bragged
to be of) if they be not founded and grounded upon some testimonies of the
scriptutes, and also if they pull us from God, from the scripture, and from the
true faith, or be hinderous unto us in the same, I think them altogether
vain, unprofitable, and of non effect, yea rather pernicious and noysom: as
Christ him self openly reports of them, Matthew. 15.

Moreover the only intent, scope and end of the canonical scripture is this:
that al men of all naciones, cou^treyes and places might be by it instructed
and taught, concerning the grace of God, concerning the redemption, bounteous
liberality and salvation, that is pleyntifully bestowed and given in Jesus
Christ, unto this most wretched and most corrupt sinful world: and also
concerning charity and faith, namely that the people being now regenerate,
might be partakers of this salvation by true faith, the holy children of God
the father, and heirs of al his heavenly substance.

And touching the faith of Christ. I and such other poor slaundred Ministres
have another taught, nor do believe any other thing, than that is delivered unto
be from the holy apostles, and that we have received of our christian elders
and faithful forefathers. And that same I for my part (sithence it pleased
God to translate me from the Antichristian darkness of popery in to the
kingdom of his son) have constauntly and faith fully kept hitherto pure in
every condition. And the same I purpose (by the help of Christ's gracious
favor) to keep still and confess, with the true catholic church of Christ,
while the breathe is in my body: and yt is eue^ thus.

























Now forasmuch as God has given me grace (thanks be to his merciful
goodness therefore) to pitch my staff, in ye fou^dacion of this most holy,
most asicient, and true catholic faith: And to thinke^t you shall plai^ly
know, how I understand ye said articles of my Creed: I do truly say, and
plainly confess, touching the furst article: that there The furst Article.
is but one only, blessed, eternal and almighty Lord and God, in the holy
sacr^o, inseparable, and vnconfused Trinity. God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost. And what so ever is in the nature of things as well visible as
invisible, it is well and rightly created and made of God, to the be hoote and
profit of man, and by him it is also preserved, bestowed, and administered.

And therefore God is the father of mankind, not for his creating of mankind
only, but also for his daily conseruacion, eternal goodness, mercy,
providence, comforting and helping of mankind.

Concerning the second Article, I believe and confess, that God the father,
The. 2. Article.
became a father, not only after he had made ma^ki^de, but yt ye same God was
also a very father from everlasting, so yt he has also one only eternal
sone, eternally begotten of God ye father, after a divine and unspeakable
manner. This son of God (I believe and confess) is of the fathers own
substance, and of all one being, of like equality, and consubstaunciall with
the father: of all one substance (I say) nature, power, and virtue, and very
natural Lord and God, above all, in all, and through al things.

Notwithstanding we confess the son to be our Lord, most chiefly, for that
he has delivered, and made us free, from the lordeship, power, and tyranny
of the devil: and having paid our raunsom with his own precious blood, which
he sheadde for us, he has made us his own peculiar people: whereof I shall
speak afterward at more large.

Touching the third Article, I believe and confess, that the same son The.
3. Article.
of God, which eternally has been and is with the father, has also in this
world, taken upon him the very nature of man, of the flesh and blood of ye
blessed virgin Mary, which was Abraham's daughter, and borne of the stock of
David, according to the promise of God, declared by his ministers and
servants, the Patriarchs, and prophets: and being borne of her (she
remaining and contynuing still a chaste and a pure maid) very God and very man,
in one inseparable person, without confusion of the natures of his godhead and
manhead together, he became like unto men his brethren, touching his reasonable
and immortal soul, and his mortal body, in all things, sin only except.

And after this manner I confess, that he was conceived very natural man, in
the womb of that chaste and most pure virgin, and of her blessed blood, not by
the carnal company of man, but by the holy ghost: And that he was borne of the
same virgin, very man, howbeit holy and pure without sin. For all men else,
are (according to their own nature) both conceived in sins, and borne the
children of wrath unto death.

And in this behalf I do plainly Original ^^nne.
confess original sin. For inasmuche as all mankind (as well the infauntes,
which have not yet committed actual faults, as others of further age) are
originally poisoned Psalm. 51.
with sin, and therefore subject unto death, as the wages of sin: from To.
6.
the which sin and death, mankind could not be in any wise delivered and
redeemed, but by Christ alone: for that cause it was requisite, that Christ,
which should put away the same poison, should he conceived and borne holilie
and purely without al spotte of sin, to thinte^t he might 1. P^. 1. Ephe. 5.
To. 3. 5.
offer a pure and a clean sacrifice for all, both old and young, to make us
pure, and free.

Concerning the fourth Article. I believe and confess, that the same son The
4. Article.
of God and of Mary, our Lord Jesus Christ, in going about the business and
affairs of our salvation, did perfitly and fully declare the way of salvation
here upon earth: And that he (to show us more certainly, that he is the only
Lord of life and death, which is only hable to help, and at whose hands al
help must be sought) cured all manner of diseases, ceased the rageing storms
of the wyndes and of the sea, suppressed the power of satan, troade down all
power of adversaries, forgave sins, and raised up the dead unto life.

And after all this, he gave him self willingly (and of his own accord) unto
death. And was shamefully and spitefully brought furthe and delivered by the
Jews, cruelly tormented of the gentiles, and last of all giltlesly nailed upon
the cross.

And here I confess that this same our Lord Jesus Christ, very God and very
man, suffered (not for him self, but for us, and for our sins sake) most
grievous pains, undeserved stripes, and bitter sorrows: and in his humayne
nature (which could dye) he was undoubtedly dead and buried: and in his soul
he suffered most extremely ye bitter sharpness of Gods judgment, and the
very pains of hell, yt he might deliver us there from.

And I most faithfully and certainly believe, that this blessed passion and
death of the innocent son of God, Iustifica^ion.
is the only, perfect and eternal righteousness, and iustificacion of man
before God, and the true satisfaccion, ransom and payment for ye sins of
all the hole world.

And therefore forasmuch as I am thoroughly instructed in this most certain and
sure strong argument of this our true, and undoubted christen catholic faith,
I plainly confess, that man can in no wise be justified, pourged of his
sins, or find any shifte to satisfy or to be cleansed of them, either by any
works or merits of man, but only by ye free grace of God: that that is to
say, by the most blessed passion and giltles death of the crucified son of
God. And that we are made partakers of the innocence and merit of ye death
and bloodshead of Christ, at such time, as we do constauntly and faithfully
believe, that the son of God is our own: and that he suffered that bitter
death for our sins, to make us righteous and blessed.

For I will in no wise contemn (or reckon as of non effect) the most
favorable free grace of God, which opened it self most expressly and plainly,
in ye passion and death of Jesus Christ.

But I think rather verily, and surely believe and confess, that we should
openly cast away, and count ye death of Christ to be of no^ effect, in case
we should seek or think to be cleansed, saved, and justified from our sins,
by any other means, than through faith, by yt only bloodshead, death, and
rau^som of Jesus Christ: in as much as we hear the holy Apostle S. Paul say.
I despise not the grace of God: for if righteousness Gala, 2. 3.
come by the law, than Christ dyed in vain. And also: If the enheritaunce
come of the law, than it is not of promise. But God gave unto Abraham by
promise: so that they which have faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

As many therefore as in the old law, from our furst father Adames time, unto
the coming of Christ, were blessed and justified, I believe verily and say,
that they were made blessed, holy and justified through faith, of free pardon
and grace, by none other, but by Jesus Christ, ye blessed sede alone.

Touching the fyfthe article I believe and confess, that Jesus Christ The. 5.
article.
very God and very man, in the self same body, that was hanged on the cross,
and from thence taken down and buried, rose again from the dead. For
although our sins be perfitly purged by the Lords death, and a most full
satisfaction made thereby for the same: yet hope of life is restored unto us,
and faith in him is engendered in us, by his resurrection. For if he hade not
risen again, we could not have thought, that death had been overcome. And so
we could not have believed, that he hade satisfied for our sins. For death is
the hyre of sin. And death remaynyng in his force, sin must also be thought
to remain. Moreover Boddes spirit and faith (whereby Christ's death and
merits are applied unto us) be the gifts of Christ raised from the dead. Of
Christ (I say) which has washed us clean from our sins in his own blood,
and so is become the propiciacion or mercy seat for our sins, and not for
our sins only, but for the sins of all the hole world: and now having
dyed for our sins, and being risen again for our iustificacion, he reygneth
and trihumpheth over death. Notwithstanding his very flesh and bones, that is
to say, his very humayne body with his reasonable and human soul, was not
deified, that is to say, not changed and turned in to his Godhead, but only
clarified.

And the clarificacion does not consume, waste, nor take away the propreties
of a very human body, either the substance or facion thereof: but only
despecheth and delivers the body and the state of the body from all diseases,
whether they be corrupcions or infirmities: that is to say, from fear,
dread, sorrow, heaviness, from all carke and care, from hate, from carnal
love and covetous desires: from false Joys and griefs, from affections,
troubles, ho^gre, cold, heat, weariness, and from al manner of infirmities,
saintnes and smerte, and specially from mortality and corruption: And on the
other part, it makes the body and the facion of ye body glorious, clear,
immortal and incorruptible.

Such a manner of body S. Paul's wonted phrase is to call a glorious and a
spiritual body: not that it is afterward no more flesh, nor that it is
changed and turned in to the spirit, 1. Cor. 15.
but because it is no more subject to any cares or griefs, or to corrupcions,
uncleanness, or infirmities of ye flesh: and because it is garnished and
beautified with vncorrupcion, immortality, and many other spiritual gifts
besides, out of nombre.

And like as the body of Christ, after it was risen up from death, remained
still a very body, notwithstanding it was become after the resurrection
immortal and glorious: even so shall the bodies of all faithful folk (at the
general resurrection) be made like unto the body of Jesus Christ, whereof I
shall speak more largely, in the eleventh article of our faith. For Christ
our Lord (by his glorious resurreccion from the dead) does most evidently
prove and declare, that he has despeched sin quyte out of the way, that he
has overcome death, which comes by the occasion of sin: that he has
restored life, that he has conquered hell, for all them that are true
faithful beleuers, and that he has mightily put satan to flight.

Concerning the sixthe Article, I believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus
The. 6. article.
Christ ascended in to heaven, with the very self same his human body, that
rose again from the dead, and sithence exerciceth not his dominion and
government here upon earth, corporally. For according to the nature and
propretie of his very humayne body, he is in no mo places but in only one, in
one self same moment.

And forasmuch as he has carried our flesh in to heaven, and has placed it
at the fathers right hand, that is to say, in everlasting joy and felicity,
all faithful beleuers know now for a certainty, that the way to heaven is
vnshutte, and set wide open, and that they also shall (through Christ, in whom
they believe) be carried both body and soul in to everlasting life.

For the Lord him self (with manifest Ioh. 17.
and plain words) has said: I will father, that where I am, there shall my
servant be also.

Seeing than that ye body and flesh of our Lord and brother Christ, is abiding
and rests now in heaven, our flesh has this certain and assured hope, that
it shall be carried thider also, and there (according to Christ's promise) Ioh. 14.
shall have a perpetual dwelling place.

Further more Christ our Lord sytteth on ye heavenly fathers right hand, that
is to say, even he yt is both very God and very man, reigns and has
dominion, in like power, and like glory, with God ye father: so as al things
are in subjection under his power: and he with the father and ye holy ghost,
vpholdeth and perserueth al things, and is also wourshipped and served, the
undoubted true and eternal almighty God. The chief bishop and most high king
of al faithful people sits on ye right hand of God. Christ Jesus is ye
only, eternal and faithful true bishop and priest of al true beleuers.

It is he, yt does most trustily plead al yt matters and causes of his
faithful people, before God his heavenly father

It is he, ye offreth up all our good wishes and faithful folks prayers to
God the father.

It is he, that appears continually in the sight of God, prayeng and making
intercession for them, and gives them his blessing. And so those that be of ye
true faithful belief in deed, will another seek, allow, nor receive any other
mediator, intercessour, spokes-man, attournaye, or entreatour, but Christ
alone.

He is that only and eternal sacrifice and oblacion, which being ones offered
for all, endures for ever, cleanses, and sa^ctifieth al them, yt are true
beleuers.

And even he, this self same high Bishop and priest of ours, does daily (with
his spirit and word) instruct and teach his church and congregation, and
gives them trusty and sincere upright men, to be their teachers and ministers,
whom he also garnisheth and decketh with his grace, and most excellent gifts,
and defe^deth from al evil.

Upon Gods right hand sits Christ our most roial king, the king of
kings, the judge and mighty Lord of heaven and earth. He it is, that
informs and ordreth his church and people, with wholesome and good laws,
according whereunto they frame and address all their matters, to the love of
God, and of their neighbor.

This king of ours beholds us faithfully, and lays up all our griefs and
sorrows trustily in his heart. He is content with good will to hear the
complaints, suits and desires of all his faithful flock, and is never
wearied nor grieved with the tediousness of them.

He also is that most pleynteous fountain, which always gives liberally and
yet never wa^teth, which only fills, and yet is never the less, nor any
whitte decreaceth. From him there can nothing at all (no not so much as me^nes
inward thoughts) be hidden or kept secret. He is the righteous true judge,
iudgeing after the intent and purpose of the heart, and renders as well to the
good as to the badde, all that they do, without all respect of persons.

Those that be oppressed he relieueth, with his joyful and comfortable
succor: But as for the^ that are stowte, arrogau^t and proud braggers of
their own powers, when he sees his just time, he is on ye bones of the^
straight ways, and hurleth them down and the neck before. There is no manner
of thing, but he has a respect and a consideracion unto it. His infinite
wisdom in every thing and every where uses just and right deserved means.

He (by his exceeding great grace) sends faithful, trusty and good me^ to be
governors and rulers. And the^ he directs and maynteneth in his church. And
contrary wise, he does somtymes take away good governors (as he did lately
our most christen king Edward the sixte) and sets up naughti and wicked
persons in authority now and than (as bloody bishops, proud popish
pestilent priests, and unnatural merciles forayners) to reign, and rule ye
roast, to punyshe hipocrites cou^trefaicte gospellers, and worldlinges withal.

To be short, Christ does at all times defend and keep those yt his be, from
their enemies and foes, both visible and invisible. After this sort Christ
sits on ye right hand of God, and thus is he the only head of his faithful
believing people, the only and most high bishop, ye most roial and everlasting
king and prince of them that be his. He is never out of their congregation and
company, he is always occupied in the mids of them, so yt he needs another
the service, aid, nor assistence of any vicegerent or help fellow. For he is
the only and everlasting su^ne of righteousness, which altough (as concerning
his humayne corporal presence) he be in one only place in heaven, yet he does
work se^siblie and frutefully, with his virtue, light, glory, nourishement and
power, in all them that be faithful.

In co^sideracio^ hereof, I admonish, and in Gods behalf require you (as I
have, according to mi litel tale^t always taught my parisheners, and in other
places, where I have occupied ye rowme of a preacher) as well to pray, and
without ceassing to call upon God, through Jesus Christ, and always faithfully
to set furthe his praise according to the doctrine of the holy scriptures, as
also to beware and take heed, that ye make no inuocacion nor prayer to the
saints departed, for help or succor: forasmuch as to make any moo or any
other mediators, intercessours, spokesmen, sutours or attournayes to the
throne of Gods mercy, for any necessary thing either bodyly or goostli, but
only Jesus Christ our alone everlasting sacrificer and advocate, is the
horrible transgression of the furst co^man^deme^t, dishonor to the high
majesty of God the father, prejudice to the honor and dignite of Christ's
euerlastig priesthode, blasphemous against the schole learning of ye holy
ghost, utterly against our common catholic Creed, and contrary to the doctrine
and example of all the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, evangelists martires,
confessors, and virgins, that have any name or comme^dacion either in the
old testament or new, and a plain denial and falsifyeng of the hole body of
the blessed Bible, the most undoubted true holy word of almighty God.

Concerning the seventh Article, I believe and confess, that the state The. 7.
Article.
of this season, and this corruptible world, which has his beginning and was
created of God, shall have also his ending, and be utterly despeched: and that
at the final despeche of the world, Christ our Lord shall in ye same body
that was wounded and nailed on the cross, come vnfailingly in the clouds of
heaven, to judge both the quick and the dead.

For at such time as the most part of this world shall layne and hold with
the power of Antichrist, flyrting of the time, in most horrible contempt of
both God and his word, and walowing themselfes in all kind of sin,
abominacion and lust, and shall devise and set their minds upon mocking and
persecuting of them that be true faithful christian beleuers: than shall Christ
at a sudden cheoppe (as it were lightenyng from heaven) com in the clouds with
his holy angels unto judgment.

And the same hour, as many as have died from the beginning of the world unto
ye last end of the world, shall by the might and power of Christ, rise
strayghtwaye again unto life: and the other that are not than departed this
life, but have lived still unto the last day, shall in ye space of a moment,
or the twincling of an eye, be changed from mortality and corruption, in to
immortality and vncorrupcion.

And after that, all me^ of al parts of the world shall be restored and
gathered together, and be presented and stand before the judgment seat of
Jesus Christ, and shall see the judge over their heads corporally, in the
self same body that he fuffred in. And than the righteous judge our Lord
Jesus Christ, shall pronounce and give his last and most just judgment upon al
flesh, in the same manner and form, that he long agoo told before hand,
Matthew. 25.

Than shall every one receive according to their works. Than as Christ's body
was at his ascension taken up from the mount Oliuete, so shall they that be
faithful, by ye might and power of God, be taken from this earth, both body
and soul, and carried up in to the clouds unto Christ our Lord. Him they
shall follow, and with him shall they dwell in everlasting joy, for evermore
continually to abide. And those that be unfaithful and wicked shall be
delivered to the devil (whose cha^piones and householde servants they were)
to feel and abide (both body and soul) such pains, sorrows and torments, as
no tongue ca^ express, for ever to endure world without end.

In this behalf I have always besought my parisheners and hearers (and so now
I require the^ eftesones to the same) to set ever before their eyes, and
diligently to print in their minds, that last judgment of God: and with
earnest repentance of their former filthy life, to give themselves unto
christen charity and good works. For like as ye holy scripture does clearly
and evidently show, that we are not made righteous, blessed and holy, by our
own merits and good works, but by the only grace of Christ through faith,
so that all glory and honor must be manifestly and plainly ascribed and given
to the only fre grace and pardon of God, and to the redemption of Jesus Christ
his son: even so have I ever taught, and now (by the waraunt of Gods most
holy word) confess and constauntly affirm, yt this doctrine of faith is
unavailable and of non effect to impenitent hooremongers, bawdes, gluttones,
dronkerdes, oppressors, brivers, Idolaters, men pleasers, epicures, and other
wicked unfaithful persons. And that this lively justifying faith is the
worker of all manner of good works (what so ever they be) according to the
word of God.

For he that is justified and made righteous (as faith only justifies and
makes righteous) does live also justly and righteously: and justly and
righteously does al things. And he yt does faithfully believe the word of
God, does without al doubt perceive and know, that to be good which God
commands, and that to be evil, what so ever he forbids. Yea it is the
very wonted manner of faith it self, to move and enforce the justified man to
eschew that is evil, and follow that is good and right.

Moreover he yt perfitly and thoroughly by faith understands the matter of
man's salvation and redemption, both doubtless love both God. and his
neighbor. And love is the perfect fulfilling of the law: yea in the love of
God and a man's neighbor he^geth all the hole law and the prophets.

These manner of works which be the fruits of the spirit, faith and charity,
and that we should fall to amendment of our life, and what so ever the word
of God does furthermore commend unto us, like as all faithful preachers and
Ministers do diligently teach and set furthe unto the people: even so they
abhor and reiecte all such works, as folks are used to fantasy and devise
of their own brains, devotion, or good intentes, contrary or without the sure
warrau^t of Gods word, how virtuous or how holy so ever they be esteemed, or
how long so ever they have been accustomed and used. For as saint Augustine
says, When the truth is manifestly De vnico Baptis. Li. 2.
showed, custo^ ought to give place unto the truth. And moreover he allegeth:
Let no man prefer custom before reason and truth, for reason and truth do
always shut custom out of the doors.

And the holy martyr S. Ciprian says also: we ought not to pass what our
elders and fathers that were before us did, but much rather what Christ (which
was before all men) commands us to do.

This also do all godly preachers and ministres warn the people of: that no
man that walks in the commandments of God, and is rich in good works in
deed, set his works in Christ's place, nor put any as^^aunce, confidence, or
trust in the^, as though he were made righteous, holy and acceptable unto God
for his works sake. For it is ye only death of Christ, and free grace and
pardon of God, that makes a man acceptable unto God, and fit unto all good
works: yea to speak truly and plainly, All the good works that true
faithful people do, are nothing else, but a certain free working, that the
grace of God enforces and procures. Wherefore all that is spoken in the
scriptures concerning the merit and reward that the faithful shall have,
ought rightly to be judged and taken for the grace and free gift of God. By
reason whereof S Austi also taught, that all the good works yt the faithful
do, are the grace of God, and ye God does crown and reward his own merits
in the faithful, which he of his bounteous liberality reputeth, as though
they were our merits, or as though we of our selves deserved the^.

Touching theight Article, I believe and confess, that the holy ghost, the
third The. 8 Article,
person in Trinity, is the very true and eternal God, with the father and the
son: and that our Lord Jesus now reigns and administreth al things in his
church by ye holy ghost, as he him self said: I will pray the father, and he
shall give you an other comfortour to abide with you for ever, even the spirit
of truth, which the world can not receive, because he sees hi^ not, nor
knows him. But you know him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you. Be
shall teach you al things, and put you in remembrance of al things, what so
ever I have spoken unto you. And again he says: I tell you truth, it is
expedient for you, that I go away. For if I go not away, that comfortour shall
not come unto you. But if I goo away, I shall send him unto you. And wha^ he
comes, he shall reprove yt world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment.
Therefore all those that be true preachers and ministers have plai^ly instructed
and taught their parisheners and people (as I according to my poor talent have
done) ye our Lord Jesus Christ is not now corporally with his church here upon
earth, but that he works and reigns in his faithful flock, by the holy
ghost proceeding from the father and him, and by the same spirit does comfort
and sanctify the faithful. All the joy, all the virtue, and all the
sanctificacion that is in the faithful, is of ye spirit of God. And without
this spirit of God, there is nothing either holy or perfect. There is no man in all the wide world, that has faith of him self, but as well faith as al
other good gifts are of the spirit of God: as the holy apostle S. Paul does
manyfoldly, and in many places of his epistles teach and make mention, but
specially, Ephe. 4. and. 1. Cor. 12. The. 9. Article.


Concerning the nynthe Article, I believe and confess, yt all they, which truly
believe in Christ throughout all ye hole what the true catholic church of
Christis.
universal world, are one body and one church of Christ, who^ he sanctifies
by his holy spirit in his own blood. And all they are with one only bo^de and
knot of faith, and through love united and knit to Christ, and one to another
among them selves, like members all of one body: and principally they are made
partakers of the free grace and gifts of their head and saueour Jesus Christ.

This church is holy, this church is begotten and borne of the word of God
recorded in the holy scriptures: this church does frame and order al things
according to the word of God: this church lives in christen sobrenesse and
honest discipline: this church (always when it may, and having no necessary
let) is partaker of Christ's most holy sacraments, which be two in nombre,
Baptism and the Lords Supper.

From this church, the holy scriptures and sincere teachers thereof do exclude
and bar out, another the use of marriage from any state or profession of men or
women, nor the possession and propretie of worldly substance, nether honest
occupacions or worldly travails, ne yet the ordres and degrees of rulers and
magistrates, another higher powers, nor nobility, ne yoma^rie, nether bond nor
free, master nor servant, nor any such estates of me^. This church, albeit
not many wise after yt flesh, not many great estates, nor many noble are
chosen members of the same, yet for as much as every long and nation under
heaven, both Psalm. 113.
of the Jews and of the gentiles, and some of every state, praise the name of
the Lord, from the rysyng of the Sun, to the Sun setting: and seeing the
voice of this church is heard throughout all the coasts of the hole world,
and (as the prophet says) has spread her branches unto the Psalm. 80.
sea, and her boughs unto the ryuers: therefore according to this article, it
is ryghtly called the catholic or universal church.

And because it is begotten and borne 1. Pe. 1.
of the immortal sede ye word of God, mentioned in the scriptures, hears
the voice of her head and shepeherde Jesus Christ, sleeth from the voice of
Ioh. 10.
all strange doctrines and spirits, yt be without or contrary to that word,
and does all things (like an obedient wife) as her husband Christ bids
Ephe. 5.
her in his written word: therefore is it also iustlye called the holy church.

But forasmuch as the supremacy, iurisdicion, power, antoritie, laws and The
popish church.
doctrine of the bishop and church of Rome, be not grounded upon Gods word,
which the Lords sheep, that is to say, his church and flock hears, nor
has be^, nether ever shall be heard received and obeyed in all tongues and
nations of true christen people, but of a certain folks in a few realms,
dominions, and people, whose eyes satan the God of this world has blinded,
and bewitched their minds (among whom Christ nevertheless scatters his sely
sheep, and defends them under the shadow of his gracious wings, even as the
he^ne does her young chickens) therefore it follows manyfestlye, that the
bishop and church of Rome with all his sacrificeing chaplayns and other
me^bres and co^plices whosoever, depending upon or cleaning to the supremacy,
new and strange laws, constitucio^s, decrees, traditions, and customs of the
bishop and church of To. may not be justly called the catholic or universal
church of Christ. And forasmuch also as the supremacy, laws, customs,
canones, decrees, and doctrines of ye bishop and church of Rome (for the most
part) with their me^bres are not borne nor truly grounded upon the fou^dacio^ and
immortal sede of the word of God, another do the papists frame and administre
their tradicions, doctrine, religion, sacraments, and ceremonies, according to
the testament and gospel of God, but upon the devises, and power of men: The
teachers and mainteners of that Romish power, supremacy and religion with their
members and co^plices are falsely called ye holy church: Because that church
or flock of christen sheep, whereof Christ is the shepe-hearde and head,
harkeneth to his voice and teaching alone, and follows not the voice or
commandment of strange tradicions, but does (concerning the wourship and
true service of God, and touching the necessary health of soul) only that
which the Lord God commands, another blenching on the right hand nor on
the left.

But contrary wise, like as the particular churches of Arria^s, Donatistes,
Pelagia^s, Marcionistes, Eutichianes, Mahometistes, Idolaters, libertines,
Anabaptists, and other sectaries, and fantastical spirits of error, be ye
variable malignau^t church, whereof the prince of this world ye devil, is ye
undoubted head. And the teachers and defe^dours of errors are by the apostle
S. Ioha^ called Antichrists: But so forasmuch as the Romyshe church of the
ruffling rabines and popish tippet men with their accomplices the papists, do
not only not found nor ground their authority, decrees, tradiciones, and
doctrines (for the most part) upon ye sure rock, the word and gospel of
Christ (which, as Chrysostom says, is the only mark to know the true
church In Math. ca. 24. Ho. 49. in opere impersecto
of God by) but also in some points they wraste and wrythe, and falsely allege
textes of the scriptures for their carnal pleasure and profit, and in the
chiefest articles of the catholic christen faith (like most fantastical
spirits of error, and sowers of most wicked sects) they repugne and teach
contrary to the gospel and scriptures of God, altring the immutable ordinance
of Christ, and setting up strange sacrifices and godseruice, propounding other
articles of faith, and means of salvation besides Jesus Christ, making the
commandment of God of non effect, for ye aduau^ceme^t and mayntenau^ce of
their own traitorous tradiciones, and teaching doctrines of deuilles, 1. Timo.
4
as forbidding of meats and marriage: And forasmuch also as the church of the
papists ca^ not abide ye pure word of God, nor to have it publicly in ye
vulgar tongue for Christ's flock to be fed withal, but with banishing and
slaundering the everlasting testament and blessed Bible of Jesus Christ, and with
persecuting, emprisonyng, and murdering of the preachers and witnesses of the
same, set up their own gloses, co^stituciones, customs, devises, dreams,
tradiciones and procedinges of men, contrary to the written word and gospel of
God, contrary to the patriarchs, prophets, Christ, and his apostles, and
contrary to the proceeding and example of the fathers of ye primative church:
And seeing moreover, yt the church of the papists had her beginning,
proceeding, continuau^ce, power, aduau^ceme^t and success only by force of
wicked Emperors and other naughty princes and traitors, under false pretenses
garnished and decked with the usurped name of catholic church, and other
cou^trefaicte titles, and hipocritical colors: and is also mai^tened and
vpholde^ by treason, murder, sacrilege, fraud, rauine, craft, sorcerye,
co^^uring, flattery, lyeng and marchau^dise of men's souls, to uphold their
idleness, pride, cruelty and wyueles hooremo^ging wtal: I confess and
plainly affirm, yt the same swarm and co^gregacio^ of papists, I mean as
many as teach, willingly mayntene, and obstinately defend ye supremacy,
tradiciones, and doctrines of the Romysh religion, setting aside ye Bible of
God, are Antichrists: And (among other erroneous churches of heretics) ye
chief particular malignau^t church of ye devil and of al errors: And that the
church and sea of Rome (according to ye Dan. 7. and 11. Apo. 13. and. 17.
descripcions of Daniel and John thapostle) is ye very hoore of Babilo^ (where
with ye kings and pote^tates of ye earth have committed spiritual fornicacio^,
and are dru^ken with ye cup of her obominaciones) ye sinful synagoge of satan,
ye most cursed kenel and cathedral church of Antichrist: And also yt ye bishop
of Rome (yt head of ye same church) is ye undoubted singular great Antichrist,
the man 2. These. 2.
of sin the child of perdicio^, and the principal adversary, yt makes
batail with the lamb, and exalts him self above all yt is called God, sitting
in the temple of God, and vau^ting him self to be God, whom the holy apostle S.
Paul speaks of, 2. Thessa, 2. and is now (by Gods most merciful benefit)
revealed in our days, and herafter, the Lord with the blast of his mouth shall
destroy him and al his littour, and finally command the^ to be cast in to
utter darkness, to Matthew. 21. 24.
have their mede and porcio^ among hipocrites, where shall be weping and gnashi^g
of tethe, for ever and ever world without end.

This matter shall appear more plain in certain Homilies (entitled Antichrist)
which I have translated in to english, and now by the goodness of God, they
are put in prynt accordingly. For I promise in the sight of God (he assisting
me with the power of his holy spirit) yt I shall be an enemy, to the vtermost
of my poor possible power, unto the errors of that popish malignaunt church
and satanical Romyshe religion, while I live, and after my death no less than
an enemy.

Notwithstanding like as I never ^ought ye hurt of any of the^, either in
their bodies or their goods, but by charity and al gentilnesse to win the^
unto ye truth, if it might be, even so I beseech almighty god, from ye botome
of my heart, if it be his godly will, to grant unto the yt be wrapped (through
infirmity and ignorance) in the darkness of popish errors, the light of
his pure gospel, with hearty repe^tau^ce and amendment of their judgments,
to be new creatures in Jesus Christ, walking in the true fruits of Christ's
faith and love: and as well to do, as I would do my self. Amen.

Touching the tenthe Article, I believe and confess, that almighty God The. 10.
Article.
by his grace and mercy in Jesus Christ, gives unto all true faithful
beleuers free pardon and forgiveness of al their sins (if they will
acknowlage and confess them unto their only and true goostly father God) at
what time so ever they shall repent. And this I take to be the true preaching
of the Gospel.

But as for the unbelievers, and such as persiste still in their unbelief and
impenitent wickedness, it is not possible for them, ever to have true
perfaicte forgiveness of their sins.

And I do confess, that al sins are not alike, nor after all one condition,
but that some sins are greater tha^ some, and some sines more grievous than
some: as their manner is to tend against the glory and love of God, against
faith, and the love of a man's neighbor, some more than some, some less than
some.

I say moreover, that what so ever is committed against the law of God, that
is to say, contrary to the will and word of God, that same is sin.

Wherefore no faithful preacher or ministre does make God the author of sin,
but we declare, that ye original poison of sin began in the apostata of
God, and the common adversary of mankind, and in man's own corrupt will.
Howbeit we deem not, but that god thorough his infinite wisdom, ordreth and
disposes men's sins to his glory and wealth of his chosen.

And where I have learned in the holy scriptures, that the remission and
forgiveness of sins is another borrowed nor bought for any money, or for any
other ware or corruptible thing: And seeing S. Petre did (in Simon Magus)
bitterly curse and cry out upon all them (and their money both) which think,
that the gifts of God may be bought out for money: Albeit I saw no great
occasion (during all the time of my ministry) to speak much against pelti^g
Romish pardones and pilgrimage gates, for the people did abhor them almost
of their own accord: yet because the horrible supersticion of the popes
poticary ware (which the idolatreus priests used before time, and now set
freshely a sale again, instead of wholesome medicine to the soul, and al for
money) is through false persuasions of covetous lyeng hipocrite priests,
through goodly gaye shows and long co^tinuau^ce, ca^kred deep into many
peoples co^scie^ces, especially of old folks and supsticious wilful women: I
declared unto my parisheners and neighbors (as place and occasion of matter
served) yt the co^iured water, salt, palms, ashes, images, candles, masses,
diriges, and such other like, being raised and set up without and contrary to
the word of god, only of covetousness, and for filthy lucres sake, to occupy
ye rowme, and to claim the merit, honor, and virtue of Christ's death and
bloodshead, were not only vain and unprofitable dumme ceremonies, but also
most heinous and damnable supersticion. And in consideracion thereof I besought
them (and so I do still) in the bowels of Jesus Christ, and as they will avoid
ye peril of their own damnacio^, not only to put no confidence, trust, nor
affiaunce in any of them, but also to flee from the^, and abhor them as ye
most present pikepurce and pestilent poiso^ of ye soul: And namely that
private popish mass, wherein forasmuch as the creature is worshipped in ye
stead of ye creator, ye idol of bread is carried about, reserved and hanged up
to be gased at and worshipped in the stead of Christ: the priest eats and
drinks alone: the one half of the sacrament is nypped away front the lay
people: their is no public thanks given of the priest and the people for
Christ's passion. Finally Christ's most sacred institucion is altered, defiled,
and quyte turned vpside down: And seeing furthermore, that the Mass is demed
and used as a sacrifice propiciatorye: that is to wete, to purchase and give
remission of sins both to the quick and dead, which is the only office,
work, and merit of ye one only sacrifice ones offered for all, when the body
of Christ was broken, and his precious blood sheadde upon the aultare of the
cross, for the forgiveness of the sins of al mankind: Therefore I affirm
and constauntly confess, that the same apishe painted Mass is not only
unprofitable and vneffectual to purchase or give remission of sins either for
the quick or for the dead, but that it is also the damnablest idolatry, and
supersticion (as ye may see by the causes rehearsed) ye most detestable
defiling of the Lords most sacred supper, the most cursed doctrine: the most
horrible heresy, and ye bawdiest spiritual hooredome yt ever satan inverted
to break faith, love, and knotte of marriage between Christ the husband, and
his spouse ye christian flock: the greatest prejudice to the honor and
dignity of Christ's cross and passion, the maintenance and chief keye of
Antichrists cursed kingdom, the priests chief marchaundise and money mart:
and finally, the deuilles own yole game or entrelude. For as Bede in
rehearsing S. Augustine upon 1. Cor. 10. says: Quid lusui puerili magis Simile
est, quam idola colere? what is more like a boys game, than the worshipping of
ydoles? What cuckoldrye that cursed Mass causes, what for nicacion it
enticeth, what careless life it occasioneth, what idleness and mischief it
mainteneth, what vngeau^ce of God it provoke, it were to long to make
rehearsal at this present, yea it cannot possibly be expressed with tongue or pe^ne.

Therefore assure your self, that like as if a man thrust his body and his
clothes in to a furnace of hot scaldi^g pitche, he shall mar his clothes,
and put his body in peril of destruction: eue^ so he that thrusts him self in
to the presence, worshipping or hearing of the mass, and other popish
supersticiones, marreth his new garment Jesus Christ, as much as in him lies,
and puts him self both body and soul in perile of perpetual damnacion.

And as every honest hearted husband would not only be ashamed of his wife, but
also (onles she repented) put her out of his company for ever, if she were
both an harlot of her living, and a common bawd, to stand by wha^ her
neighbors wives were defiled also: eue^ so our saueour Christ being the head
and the husband of all the hole christen congregation, is ashamed, offended,
dishonored and angered, when any man or woman keeps company with that
hooremo^ging mass, or stands by, (...) in presence wha^ other christen
people are defiled with it.

If a gelous husband can not abide to have his wife to be kissing and familiar
with other men: Remember that the almighty strong gelous Lord God can not abide
to see his wife the christen flock, to commit hooredo^ before his face with
Antichrist in ye mischeuous mass. Away, away (says the prophet) get Esa.
52.
out from thence, you that bear the vessels of the Lord. The vessels
signify not only your souls, but also your bodies, which ye ought to possess
and keep in holiness and honor: 1. These. 4. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 3.
because they are the me^bres of Christ, and the temple of God. Who so ever
defyleth the temple of God, the Lord shall destroy him. For the temple of the
Lord is holy, which ye are. Seeing than you belong holly unto Christ (as well
body as soul) and that you have no power of your selves, being the spause of
Christ, and the very temple of God, wherein the holy ghost makes his dwelling:
what a do has the temple of God with Idols?

Take heed therefore in time. For though God of his merciful benignity did
bear with us in the time of ignorance, yet we may not look, that he will do
so now in the time of stubburne wilfulness, seeing the light of his glorious
gospel is spread openly before al our eyes, so that no prete^se nor excuse in
that behalf will be pleadable at the bar, before our most just judge and
gelous husband Jesus Christ.

I know well enough, it is as hard a case as Susannes case was. But forasmuch
as it is a matter (in mine opinion) both vndisputable and vndispe^sable, our
best sauegarde is to resign our own carnal reasons, and commit al to the
providence of God, saying with Susanna: It is better for me to fall into the
hands of men without the deed doing, than to transgress the law of the Lord
my God.

In she (will some say) God is merciful. It is true. His mercy is on the^ that
fear him, throughout al generacions. But wittingly and willingly to heap
sin upon sin, in hope of gods mercy, is most shamelesly to abuse the
goodness of God, and stamp under foot the graces of his spirit, and according
to ye hardness of ye heart yt can not repent, to lay wrath together in stoare
against the day of wrath, at the open declaracion of the just judgment of
God, which shall render to every one, according to this deeds.

Nevertheless I say not this, to drive mine old neighbors and country men in
to desperacion, for setting up or hearing of that wicked Mass, but to move
them unto earnest repe^tau^ce, and to power out their continual humble hearty
prayers and grievous gronynges before the throne of Gods grace, as well for
pardon of their deserved evil, as for the repulse of this massing mischief out
of the realm: and to the intent they may also have a good hope of god des
mercy, yt he for his son Christ's sake, will defend and deliver his
persecuted flock, by so^ doughty Daniel, as he did Susanna, according to his
promise by the prophet David: Now for the comfortles troubles safe of the Psalm,
12.
nedy, and because of the deep sighing of the poor, I will up, says the
Lord.

Alas wha^ was there more comfortles trouble? Wha^ was there more need? Wha^ was
there more cause of deep sighing, than now? Repent therefore for Gods sake,
repent and pray.

And forasmuch as we another know nor acknowlage any other Purgatory
purgacion or purgatory clensing away of sins, but only the blood of Jesus
Christ, I have ever taught, and still do affirm, that the souls of the^
which be departed this life, are pourged or scowred no where else, another in
any purgatory fire nor popes scalding house: but I say, yt the powches of them
that be alive are rather emptied and scowred by purgatory purgacion, through
these false lyeng lickepeny dreams. A faithful man's soul, as soon as it
departs from the body, go the straight to heaven, and ye unfaithful man's
soul straight to hell: as it shall anon be declared more plainly.

In like manner the religious life of cloystre men and women is not to be
compted meritorious for the remission Cloistre religion.
of sin, nor among the states of an holy life (as it is used under the
papacy) but rather an idle supersticious, and an Antichristian life, a very
enemy to the religion and doctrine of Christ and his apostles, and good for no
honest use in the common weal, as their filthy deeds found in ye kings
visitacion are not yet out of remembrance.

Concerning the eleventh Ariticle, The. 11. Article.
I believe and confess, that these our bodies, wherein we do work in this
world, either good or evil, shall rise again from the dead, and non other for
them, nor in their stead, that is to say, that this same flesh of ours being
raised up at the later day, shall by the power of God, risepfitly in deed: and
that dead folks souls being returned tha^ to their raised bodies, shal-be
joined and coupled to them again: and that all manner of folks (be the good and
badde) shall rise and appear accordig to S. Paul's saying: We must 2. Cor. 5.
needs be all presented before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the works of his body, according to that he has done in the
body, whether it be good or badde. Nevertheless the righteous shall after
thexample of their head Christ, be gloriously clarified in their bodies unto
vncorrupcion, eternal life, and everlasting joy, that no tongue can express.

Than shall the righteous shine like the su^ne in the kingdom of ye father:
where contrary wise ye unfaithful folks shall not be clarified, but shall be
made immortal and incorruptible, that they may endure eternal sorrows, pains,
heaviness, and torments, world without end. But this resurrection of the
dead shall be in the last day, when our Lord shall come (as we said before) to
judge both the quick and the dead.

Finally as to the.xii. Article, I believe and confess, that after this our
transitory The. 12. Article.
life, there shall an eternal and everlasting life follow, which God of his own
mere grace and favor prepared for mankind before the beginning of the world,
and has promised it in Christ to al them that be faithful, and will both
truly and faithfully perform and bestow it upon the^. So yt wha^ a faithful
person departs, his soul goes another into any judgment, nor into any
fire, ne into ye slaughterhouse of any manner of pain, another does it fall on
siepe (for it can not sleep) nor dies t the body (for it ca^ not dye) but
only it departs from ye body, and is by the power of Christ taken up and
received into everlasting joy and bliss. And co^trarywise, almighty god of
his justice has prepared and ordained after this life eternal death also, yt
is to say, eternal and everlasting pain, eternal torments and sorrows, and
everlasting da^nacion for all them, that are unfaithful and can not repent: so
that when an unfaithful person dies out of the favor of Christ, and
perishes in his sins: his soul also (as soon as it is out of the body) is
straight carried to hell, and put in to everlasting sorrows and torments.

And albeit the unfaithful man's soul shall at the resurreccion of the dead
return to his body, and be joined again unto it, yet it shall be driven away
with the body and with the devil him self, from the sight and presence of God,
in to everlasting pains, eue^ as the faithful people shall at the last day
be received both body and soul, in to everlasting joy. Amen.

Lo, my good brothren and loving friends, This is my belief, this is my faith,
this is the pith and su^me of ye chief and most matters that I ever taught among
my parisheners and neighbors, during the time of my ministry.

And I am sure that this is no new fangled nor erroneous doctrine, neither any
ki^de of heresy, but ye most undoubted true, and the very catholic christen
faith, and the most ancient and substauntical learning and doctrine, believed
and preached by ye prophets and apostles, as they received and learned it, of
ye Lord God him self.

And although tyra^nes and papists with other fantastical spirits of error,
do conspire, convent, murder, emprison, rack, and rage never so craftily,
never so maliciously, never so slanderously, and never so furiously against
the preachers and ministers of this faith, yet ye devil him self and the gates
of hell shall never prevail against it.

Therefore seeing it has pleased our most merciful God to give unto me (most
unworthy wretch) his gracious light of this faith, and particular charge in
this ministry: Considering also, that Jesus Christ would not, that the
candelles appointed to serve his householde with their light, should be shoued
under a bushel, but be set openly upon a candlestick, to give light to all
them, that be in the house: I thought it my duty in conscience, to put you in
remembrance of the true christen catholic faith, now in these dangerous
days of persecucion by writing, which I ministered unto you in open doctrine,
to the comfort and salvation of so many as continue steadfast beleuers and
obedient folowers of the same.

At yt time ye hooded chaplains of Antichrist, not only would not speak ones
against my doctrine, either in Lichefelde, Couentrie or else where, but also
allowed it, co^me^ded it, thanked god (in words at least) for it. And some
offered me for my pains money and large rewards, which I thank God, I have
kept my hands clean from, yet hitherto, as I report me to their own
consciences.

At yt time they confessed themselves thoroughly persuaded and manifestly
co^uicte by the only streynght and power of Gods open word, without further
co^strai^t. And so were they chearished, and lovingly used, and entreated with
all lenity and ge^tilnesse, not susteining the loss of one halpeny of their
lyuinges, nor trouble of their bodies, for any point of religion. But what
charity and ge^tilnesse is showed now a days unto such poor ministres as be
in my case, and with what face and streinght of shameless lies and merciles
tyranny they defend their popish pedlarie and drowsy dregs of Antichrists
alelomes, God knows, unto who^ I commit both my self and ye truth of my
doctrine: which nevertheless is not mi doctrine, but the doctrine of all the true
catholic christian church, which I have (by gods pleynteous mercy) sucked
out of her spiritual pappes by faith, whereby God has made me hable now, thus
to vttre and speak.

To be short at a word, I proteste and co^stau^tly affirm in ye sight of
almighty God, ye knows yt thoughts of all Psalm. 8. Act. 10.
men, and of his son Jesus Christ, which is ordained to be ye judge both of
the quick and of the dead, yt I never taught nor preached any thing unto my
parisheners or else where, touching any of these Articles aforesaid (during
the time of my ministry by ye kings license) but yt as well I was bounden (by
force of my ministry) to preach and teach in pain of my da^nacio^, as also
my parisheners and hearers to believe and do after, in pain of their
damnacion* Wherefore I pronounce with the Gal. 1.
holy apostle: If any man preach any other gospel, than that we have preached
and taught, cursed be he. Seeing than, that Christ taught and spoke among them
by me, let the^ not esteem that manner of speaking and teaching (though it were
homely and plainly) as the word or speech of man but (as it was in deed) the
very word gospel, and voice of Jesus Christ, which is not only the power of
God to save To. 1.
all that believe, but also the thing whereby every one of us shall be judged, at
ye great day of reckonyng.

Seeing also that the true preachers of Christ's gospel (among who^ God of his
mercy appointed me to be one) are a good savor unto God, both in them that
are saved and in them that perish: in them that perish, ye savor 1. Cor. 2.
of death unto death, and in the^ that are saved, the savor of life unto
life: I beseech you for the vnspeake able mercies of God, and as you tender the
salvation of your own souls, cast not away that most pleasant heavenly
poysye of the sweet smelling gospel of God, but hold it hard to the nose and
senses of your souls, yt the stynking carrion of Masses and other filthy foil
of blasphemous popish idolatry and wicked life poison you not unto
everlasting death.

Give no credence to those idle belied bussarde bishops and priests, wethere
cock bishops and priests.
which in blessed king Edwardes days, seemed to be fauourours of ye gospel, and
furtherours of the kings pcedinges (as they termed it) and now for their own
filthy gaynes sake and pleasing of me^, they shut up ye kingdom of heaven (ye
glorious gospel of Christ) before men, another entering in them selves, Maith. 23.
nor suffering them that would, but some of them (contrary to their own
conscience) persecute it: and yet for cake and pudding would turn again (like
wethercockes) which way so ever the wind blows, as a man will have them:
and being blind guydes, take upon the^ to lead the blind, until both fall in
to the dike of ppetual da^nacio^.

Deceive not your selves with the example of your forefathers and elders, Elders.
which were conceived and borne in sin, and brought up in ignorance, as well
as you: but rather do after the commandment of the pure spottles lamb of
God, Jesus Christ, which was before your fathers, and is the very eternal truth
it self, as ye heard before, by S. Augustine, and Saint Cipriane.

Follow not the facio^ of this frentike world, nor the rash opinion and The
multitude. Ephe. 4.
trade of the mad multitude, which walk in the vanity of their own mind
and not after Christ, nor in the consideracion of any judgment to com: but
rather be you renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man,
that after God is made through righteousness and true holiness: considering
that all our troubles and veracio^s are the rod and correccion of our most
loving heavenly Hebr. 13.
1. Cor. 11.
father God, that we should not be damned with the wicked world.

Be not careful for meat, clothe and wealth of the world, either for Care
of worldly living.
your selves or for your wives, children or family: but seeing the almighty
eternal God him self is the father of the fatherles, and the prouider and
defendour of the widow: and seeing also he forsakes not the godly, nor
suffers the righteous man's sede to beg their bread, but opens his hand,
and fills every living creature with the largess and pleyntie of his
blessing: cast all your care upon Christ's back, which shall feed your sede
and householdes, and shall never see the righteous left destitute.

Dread not the dangerous tyra^nie Tyrannes
of Antichrists soldiers, nor the bragging oaths or chittre chattre power of
ye prati^g pie, or any such other, seeing the nature of that kind of birds
haunteth not hens nestes for love of the hen, but to fill their belies with
the yolke of her eggs: and seeing that all the hears of our head are nombred,
ye may be assured that they shall do no more against us, tha^ theternal purpose
and hand of God has determined. For God is faithful which will not suffer us
to be tempted above our ability, but shall give us a way out with the
temptacion, that we may be hable to abide it.

Be not afraid brethren, Gods iron rod is as strong to beat them back,
as ever it was. He that dwells in heaven, laugheth them to scorn, and will
combre their stomachs one day, so sore, that they shall not know which way
to turn the^. Let them run on (their rageing race) until they bring them
selves out of breathe.

And on ye other part, Fire, fagottes, hemp, galowes, stocks, fetters, and
prison make us like to ye image of the son of God, and the suffering of death
for ye gospelles sake, is the fulfilling Col. 1.
of that is behind of the passiones of Christ in our bodies, to bear witness
against tyrannes and wicked papists, and to be an example and encourageing of
the hole congregation.

The death of such as suffer for the gospel, is so precious in the sight of
God, that it is the end of al troubles and sorrows, and the beginning and
entrance of such joy and treasures, as no eye has seen, no ear has ^o.
5. 1. Cor. 2.
heard, nor any heart is hable to perceive. This is most certainly true, which
as it is easily spoken or written, but very hard for the cowardly flesh to
believe it, or to think on it, when the very pynce of trouble and persecucion
comes (as I know by mine own fearful experience enough and to much) even so
I beseech God to lighten our hearts and remembrau^ces with his holy spirit,
that when the hour and fytte of sorrow and veracion comes, we may
co^stauntly, willingly, and ioyously lay the cross on our sholders, and
march forewarde lustyly to the batail, that is pitched against us, following
the same trace, that our captain and saueour Jesus Christ has led us the
way, so as by many tribulations, and the strait Math. 7.
way, which few find, we may enter in to the kingdom of heaven, and receive
the crown of eternal glory that never shall fade away.

And be not deceived (my brethren) with the doublefaced doings, and toyeng
trades of those politic, subtle, sleightye wise men and nyggardly nyppe
crustes, which like as they favor and have set up the Mass, with all
diligence: some not only for ancient custom and opinatyue deuociones sake (as
draffe is good enough for swyne) but also for pretensed obedience and nien
pleasing, regarden the mass (which is the deuilles inue^cion, and the
workmanship of Antichrist) more than they do the sincere word and
sacraments of God, ministered according to Christ's own institucion: so do
they love and care more for their fair Abbeyes, and rich wealth of
ecclesiastical possessiones, than they do either for ye mass or for any other
religion, as by their fine fruits (if they were forced to make restritucio^) it
would most evidently appear, for all their devout mass hearing.

But above al other, abhor and bliss you from the participacio^ and company
of ye Divorced priests.
kind of damnable dryuelles ye priests, which (in king Edwardes time) coupled
them selves in marriage, some to avoid suspicio^ of popery, some to hyde ye shame
of their filthy doings, some for men pleasyng, some to do as other did, some for
one respect, some for an other: And now (wha^ the doctrine of devils is set up
again, and the popish powers of the world favor not that chaste condition of
life) these dryuelles not only ex^sse their faithless hearts in breaking the
inseparable knotte and bo^de of lawful marriage, forsaking and casting of their
wives: whereby it is evident, yt their intent was only to cover their fleshely
hoorishe lusts with the clooke of marriage, without any inward conscience to
live in a chaste married life, but also (to show them selves ye right Nu. 21.
2. Pe. 2.
successors of Balaam the son of Bosor, and to make their blasphemy and
damnacion more notorious) they renounce, recant, and abjure their marriage, at
Antichrists commandment: and like damned dogs (whom the eternal burning
galowes of hell groan for) they are returned to their vomit of massing and
other Romish religion, crucifyeng afreshe and making Hebre. 6. Matthew. 12
a mock of the son of God, and most shamelesly blaspheme the holy ghost,
whereof they shall be forgiven another in this world nor in the world to come.

Let them take their time while it lasts, for seeing they have forsaken to be
the members of Christ, and seeing they are made the members of the harlot of
Rome, and become the temples of satan, to bear hell about with them, and to
glorify the devil in their bodies and in their bodily doings. Their final
damnacion is surely at hand. At that time they shall know, that it had been
better for the^, to have been made like unto the image of Christ, in suffering
the losses and reproaches of the world for a littell while, and shortly after
to be made partakers of his glorious resurrection and eternal bliss, than for
a litel beastly belly cheer (yt shall sone have an end) to suffer afterward
perpetual pains and torments with their predecessor Judas Iscarioth world
without end.

Nevertheless I wish them repentance even from the very botom of my heart.
Nether do I speak this upon any displeature or uncharitable affeccion
conceived against any man's person or worldly quietness, but only that it
greueth the very heart root of me, to see the institucion of God so horribly
dishonored, the honorable state of marriage so shamefully slaundred, the
congregation of Christ so grievously offended, the abominacio^ of Antichrist so
beastly obeyed, and the holy ghost so desperately blasphemed.

Alas, why do they not considre, how haynons a sin it is, to give such an
occasion of slau^dre and ruin to ye church of God, and how small a gain it is
to win a small pelting promocio^ of worldy living for a short space, and to
cast away ye price of Christ's precious blood, in utterly da^nyng their own
souls, and bequeathing themselves to the devil for ever more. For if Baalams
mortal blind ass rebuked yt blind prophets folly, much more shall ye
immortal worm of these Asses (nay Iudases) consciences rebuke and accuse the^
of their blasphemy and shameful slydig from the truth, at such time as being
past repentance, they shall curse ye day, yt they were borne in, and the very
hour wherein they were begotten. These men be of that company, unto whom the
holy ghost bids us not to say so much, as God speed: nether to eat nor
drink with them.

Finally good brethren, be not partakers Mass hearing goss pellers.
of ye example and faint carnal excuse of those yt say, although they goo to
the church and be present at ye Mass, yet they worship none but the living
God in their hearts, and hate the Mass as much as we do. Which saying is
much unlike to be true, but seems rather a vain pretensed fantasy, and
preposterous wrasting of some textes of scripture, wherewith the Devil deludeth
the senses and souls of many tender carpet gospellers, at this present time of
trial, to bring them past repentance. For Christ our saueour says: No man
can serve two masters. So it follows, that forasmuch as the body (which is
the one part of a man) serves the devil: the soul (which is the other part,
and joined with ye body) cannot possibly serve God. For God requires the hole
man, to serve him, with all the soul and powers of man, or else he reckons
it not only for no service at all, but also takes it for very enemytie. And
therefore he says: He that is not with me, is against me.

The body go the not to Mass with out the company and consent of the soul.
And therefore it must needs be granted, that ye soul is carried with the body
to serve the devil at Mass, and not the body carried away by ye soul from
that most stinking idolatry and supersticion, to the pure service of God.

Because Christ died for theternal salvation as well of the body as of the soul,
the holy ghost commands us also, to bear and glorify God in our bodies,
and that every one should possess The gaynes of going to Mass.
and use the vessel of his body, in holiness and in honor. And to bestow our
bodies upon the service or presence of ye sinful filthy Mass, is not to
possess the vessel of the body in holiness and honor, but to defile the
hole man with filthynesse and dishonestie, to break wedlock with Christ our
husband, to offe^de the weak for whom Christ died, to comfirme the wicked in
their popery, and so to provoke the vengau^ce of God, upon both the body and
the soul.

Saint James says, that a double minded man is inco^staunt in all his ways,
and may not look to obtain any thing of the Lord, where so ever he prays:
much less will God grant his peticiones, which he makteh in that temple, where
God by the same peticion makers presence is dishonored, and the congregation
(which is the right temple of Christ in deed) is defiled.

The scriptures teach us, that at the great judgment, every one shall receive
according to the deeds that are done by the body. And at the general
resurreccion, the body and the soul shall be joined together, perpetually to
abide either joy or sorrow: so that the body must needs goo to hell for
defiling it self with ye abominable Mass and other popery: And the soul can
not chose, but goo with the body, and take such part as ye body does. For
God will not part stakes with the devil. Therefore it is but a vain pretense and
a very mocking of God, to say, that the heart and soul serves God, seeing the
body joined with the soul serves the devil in the sight of God and men. So it
seems manifest, that such gospellers, as be mass hearers, are not spiritual
gospel folowers, but carnal gospel slaunderours, and walk after the flesh:
upon whom the holy Ghost gives sharp sentence, sayng: If ye live after the
flesh, you shall dye.

Considre brothren, that we are now after our sincere gospelling, led of the
holy ghost in to wilderness (as Christ was after his baptism) to be tempted
of the devil. Therefore we must either take the deuilles counsel, and so
distrusting the might and merciful providence of God, make stones, stocks,
and idolatrous popish Masses, bread to poiso^ our selves withal: or throw
our selves down headlo^g from the high pynnacle of Gods temple the
celestial Jerusalem in to the botomles pit of all errous, infidelity and
hell: or fall to the deuilles fete, and take him for our good Lord. Or else
contrary wise sticking fast to the scriptures and gospel of Jesus Christ, bid
ye devil, auaunt Satan, with all his mummyng. Masses and styncking
supersticion. We will non of the^, though we never have bread, and though we
be torn in pieces for it.

Every cowherde will (for covetousness of wages and fee) be glad to be
retained in garrison, and set the better leg before (as though he would be a
good soldier) while no daungier of batail is at hand, and while there is
peace, and take all one part. And so in blessed king Edwardes days, every wan
(almost) pretended frendeship and forewardenesse to the doctrine of the
gospel, and english church service, seeing the Magistrates and multitude
layne to that side: some of conscience, some of flattery, but ye most men for
the commodious gain that they found by church lands and goods, not mynding
to amend their lives toward God by the gospel, but under color thereof to
augment their lyuinges and pelf in this world.

But like as if a soldier ru^ne from the army of his sovereign liege Lord to
the enemies side (although he say, his heart was with his sovereign still, and
yt he ran away only for fear) must needs be demed a traitor, a cowhearde,
and rennagate: even so shall every one that professes ye name and religion of
Christ, to be one of his soldiers (for our life is a very warfare upon
earth) be demed and conuicte of high treason against his most natural
sovereign liege Lord Jesus Christ, king of all kings, which in time of his
spiritual wars for the gospelles sake, renneth away from his standarde and
garrison in to ye deuilles camp, to take part with popish massemongers, the
most deadly foes of Christ's gospel and bloodshead.

Now is the field pitched, now our enemies bend their ordinance against us
face to face, now they see the camp of gospellers weakened and lie open unto
their municiones. They see some fall to their side, some speak fair, some
dissemble, and few are glad to abide the bickering, and that makes ye cruel
papists to make so thick Laru^mes, and to com on so lustily with their hot
skyrmishes on every side against Christ our captai^ and al his army roial
Howbeit seeing Christ has the victory, and shall make al his enemies his
foot stole: and seeing also he promises patentes of so large honorable fee
and wages to such his soldiers, as by pacient suffering of persecucio^s stand
ma^fully to his standarde, and abide the end of the fraye: as he by his
heraulde of arms, thapostle Paul makes open proclamacion in his coat
armor, saying: If we dye with Christ here, we shall live with him 2. Tim. 2*
everlastingly: If we suffer with him here, we shall reign with him in his
eternal glorious heavenly kingdom.

And on ye contrary part, forasmuch as ye same proclamacion declares the
pain of such of us, as re^ne away from Christ's ensign or sta^darde, saying:
If we deny or forsake him, he will also deny and forsake us. And wha^ ye
general mustre and pay day comes (where the constaunt soldiers shall be
crowned with glory and honor in the eternal heavenly kingdom) Christ the
captain and judge shall say unto such shrinking traitors and cowheardly
rennagates:

Auaunt you workers of wickedness I know you not. Get you hence you cursed in
to everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. I think
therefore it is necessary good and very high time for us, to arm our selves
cappe a pee (as the same Heraulde of arms Paul commands us in king Jesus
name, Ephe. 6.) and for our own sauegarde and vauntage to keep batail raye
through persecucions, troubles, rebukes and slau^ders of the world, and follow
the sta^darde of Christ's bloody cross lustyly, and to bestere us like tall
fellows, in mortifieng our own flesh, especially having before our eyes the
fore rennyng example and view, not only of all the martirs and confessors
that have been soldiers of the same band, and skyrmished in their own blood
from ye days of Abel unto these days: but also the present constaunt courage
of the most faithful soldiers of Christ, Thomas Cranmere Arrchbishop of
Cantorbury. Hugh Latimer, Micholas Riddley, Ihon^ Hooper, Robert ferrar,
Rolande Tailour, John^ Rogers, Laurence Gaunders, John^ Bradforde, John^
Filpotte, Robert Glouer, and John^ Cardemaker with many other both men and
women, which did boldly in ba^des spleaye Christ's hanner in the mids of his
enemies, and willingly have sheadde their blood for the salekeping of their
forte, I mean for the defense of Christ's invincible gospel: as well to the
great comfort and encorageing of the rest of Christ's army, as to the
confusion and vaynquishing of Antichrist with all his blood thirsty
shauelinges and massemonging kyndome, for all their proud bragges and impudent
rusting.

Nevertheless how faint and how weak a soldier I my self have be^ in this
behalf, mine own experience (at my furst entry in to the gospel) taught
me.x. or.xi. years agoo. By reason whereof being afraid of mine own
weakness, and partly being enforced from my vicarage by malicious force and
rage of some unthankful people, pertly because I was laid wait for by
writtes, processes, and cruel threateninges of D. Ermestede and certain other
traitorous hearted papists (which recanted their errors and popery in ye
kings visitacion) but chiefly being loath to fall in to mine enemies hands, for
fear of blasphemyng the truth, by reason of mine own synful weakness, or
rigorous enprison meant, I departed from my vicarage somewhat before extreme
trouble came. And albeit I did confirm this doctrine of faith in sundry
sermones within my parish, in that rude rageing tempest, and offered to have
done the like in other great parishes there about, where they durst not receive
me: yet mine own conscience accuses me, for that I tarried not there still to
ye uttermost. And therefore if that have been any occasion of offense or
stombling block to any of Christ's congregation (as I trust it has not) I
most heartily heseche the^ to forgive me that weak wickedness and wicked
weakness.

And like as it has pleased God of his merciful goodness to hold me still
in the confession of the same vnfailing truth, that I taught privately and
openly in those parties, during the time of my ministry: even so I trust he
will grant me the continuance of this faith unto the end (the rather at ye
conte^placion of your good hearty prayers) and grace to seek only his glory to
the comfort of his poor afflicted flock, with that litel talent that he
has lent me.

And if it be his godly pleasure to cast me in to his enemies hands, I trust
he will also give me will and streynght manfully and joyfully to give my life
for the confirmacion of this my faith.

Now for a farewell, I beseech you also good brothren, pray (after your wonted
manner) continually to ye mercy seat of God, that it would please him, to
defend and encreace his church: to grant his gospel a joyful free passage
and prosperous success through out the hole world: to hold his merciful
hand of proteccion over ye realm of England: to give us true repentance,
and to forgive us all our sins: to succor, help and comfort all yt be in
daungier, necessity, trouble, erile or in ba^des for his glorious gospel and
words sake: to bring in to ye way of truth al such as have erred and are
deceived: to forgive our enemies, persecutours and slaunderours, and to turn
their hearts: to streynghten such as do stand, to comfort and help the
weak hearted, to raise up them that fall, and shortly to tread down the devil
under our fete: and with his almighty power, to destroy Antichrist with al his
swarm of shauelinges and cursed kingdom: And finally to have mercy upon all
men: Amen.

Good brothren, I beseech you by ye mercifulness of God, forgive one an other,
love one an other, bear one with an other, chearishe one an other, exhort one
an other, co^sorte one an other, and (to your power) help one an other, so as
we may in the mids of this rageing tempest and skyrmyshe of persecucio^, be
co^stau^t in faith by the holy ghost, joyfully loking for ye coming of ye
great God, and our saueour Jesus Christ, and finally to be found to ye laud
and glory of his grace among the righteous, which shall shine like the su^ne in
ye kingdom of our heavenly father, by the merits of his only dear son
Jesus Christ our Lord, brother, and everlasting saueour. To who^ with ye father
and the holy ghost, be al glory, power and praise, now and for evermore world
without end. Amen. And in the same one immortal, almighty God, I bid you al
most heartily well to fare.

Your poor servant in the Lord. Io. Old.


