The acquital or purgation of the most catholyke Christen Prince, Edward
the.VI. King of England, France, and Irelande etc. and of the Church of
England reformed and governed under him, against al such as blasphemously
and traitorously infame him or the said Church, of heresy or sedicion.

They are gone to Baal Peor, and run away from the Lord to that shameful
Idol, and are become as abominable as their lovers. Ephraim flies like a
bird, so shall their glory also.

Ose. 9. To the nobility and to the rest of the charitable christen laytie of
England, John Old wishes grace and mercy from god the father, and from Jesus
Christ the common and only saueour of the world, with the gift of perfect
faith and earnest repentance.
Forasmuch as the preachers in England now promoted and set up in throne by
the Queen's highness, as well at Paul's cross as commonly in open pulpittes (in
place of Christ's sincere gospel) spewe out with scolding, roaring, and
railing, the abominable poison of Antichrists tradiciones, as holso^ medicine
for the soul: infamyng therewith the order, form, and use of preaching, prayer,
and administracion of the holy sacraments, set furthe and exerciced by common
authority in the church of England reformed under the government of the
most christen King and mayntenour of Christ's catholyke faith, King Edward
the.vi. and most vilie slaundering his famous father King Henry the.viii. for
banyshing the violent usurped power and supremacy of the Romyshe ancient
Antichrist, for being dyuorced from his brothers known wife, and for taking
justly upon him the title and estate of supremacy incident and aperteynyng (by
the undoubted ordinance of God) to his Regal office and imperial crown: So
that every indifferent heart enlumyned either with the spirit of God by the
instruction of his holy word and gospel, or with any common understanding of
natural love and civil duty of obedience to his sovereign liege lords,
Gods lieutenauntes under Christ upon earth, perceaueth those false prophets
and proud pau^ched praters to be therein not only horrible blasphemers of the
holy ghost, enemies of christ's cross, tearours of his seameles coat,
defylers of his blessed ordinances, comp trollers of his holy Apostles and
primatyue true catholic church, and most bloody furious ravening wolnes
among his sely sheep, but also most hard hearted heretics, most heinous
traitors against ye crown and their country, most sedicious rebels against
the unity of peace and tranquillity of the realm, most perjured pestilent
papists, and most wavering wethercockes: like as in their further fruits they
are notoryously known to be holowe hearted hooremongers, most sawcye shameless
sodomites, the manciples of myschief, and very slaves of Satan, and (if they
repent not the more spedily) the most fit fire brandes of the perpetual
flaming furnace of hell. Albeit no few in England have most faithfully
resisted the babbling blasphemye and false forged fables of the mytred maskers
and shaven swarm of shameless sodomites, not only in suffering ho^ger, told,
poverty, unquietness, and paynfull prysone, but also in pacient bearing of
the cross of fire, galowes and sweorde even unto the death, to the comfort
and streynghtenyng of Christ's weak flock, to the conuertyng of many yt were
woefully wrapped in popish errors, and to the confusion of the lusty railing
reprobates them selves and all their train: Yet considering it the bounden
duty of every true hearted subject to defend with all his possible power, the
innocence and truth of his natural soue rain against the traitorous talk
and envious injury of railing reporters, and specially in Christ's cause
(whose ministers and officers all Princes and Kings ar) whose word and law
al chrystianes are most straytly debt bounden not only to embrace, with ye
belefe of the harre, but also to confess it openly with mouth a mydde mo^g
the aduouterous sinful generation of rule and power of this world, and
spiritual wickedness in heavenly things: I have thought it no less tha^ my
duty, being a natural english man, and sworn to the loyalty and obedyence
of those worthy famous christen kings against the sodomitical Sire of Rome,
and all foreign powers (as all those perjured wetherrockes the shaven sorcerers
were) to answerre the forsworn swarm and rabble of railing rutterkines, in
defense and purgacion of christ's catholic flock, Priests the locustes of
England.
called the gospellers church, specially respecting the christen euangelical
church of England reformed and governed by the ordinance, rule, and
practice of Christ's most holy sacred euangelical law, under our forsaide most
christen catholyke sovereign, King Edward the vi. who, according to the
principal point of his regal office and charge (and according to the
fotesteppes and examples of Moses, Joshua, David, Salomo, Ezechias, Josias,
Iosaphat and other most godly governors and kings, which have their
perpetual co^mendacion in the regestre of gods voke for their hearty
diligence and travails in the aduaunceing of his pure religion) sought chiefly
the glory of God, the honor of christ crucified, his own edifyeng and
discharge of conscience, and the instruction and government of his subjects
in the true knowlage, faith, fear and love of God and his glorious gospel,
and to build the church of England (committed of God to his Regal charge)
only upon the foundation of the Prophets and apostles, and to scowre the same
from the cursed customs, and traunting tradicio^es of Satan's sinful sinagoge.
Albeit I could make a docket of remembrance, how you of the nobility (that
were put in authority and trust under the king) might and ought have answered
and used those lecherous lieng locustes, according to the order of justice, by
examples both of divine and profane histories, and by the substau^cial godly
lauful laws of the realm, for their traitorous sla^dring and railing upon ye
lords anointed, their own natural liege lord, for their recaryeng of their
infernal father the abiured antichrist of Rome in to England again, for their
procuring of foreign powers in to the realm, for their false foxelye forgeing
of fables (among the busye headed vulgar commones) against their natural
nobility, and for their others to deuelishe demerites besides: yet now seeing
you have already run to far, against your own consciences, so that it
seems almost to late for any admonicion or reme^brau^ceing to synke in to your
hearts, being afraid of every barking blaste of Antichrists bawdye beagles,
and contentig your selves to be led (like an ox) by horn and ear, as it
pleases the^ to appoint, til they have brought you to blocklaye fair in to
the slaughter house, as they have done a great sort of your best fed
fellows, I shall spare my pe^ne, and with my continual prayers for your
preseruacion from their clouthes, leave you to God and your selves. In the
mean while, having occasion and opportunity, I shall shape those wicked worms
a reasonable answer, least in keeping silence and wynkyng at their licencious
liberty and wickedness, we seem to be afraid of their obiectiones, and so
make folks believe, they were true, or to acknowlage that the faults, whereof
they spitefulli slau^dre us, were in us in deed. The scripture also by the
eua^gelistes and apostles commands and binds us to defend the truth, to
refute lies, to bear record unto the truth, and to acquyte the faithful
christianes in their innocencye and right. But what can a man do in so furyons
a rageing rabble of adversaries, and Iniuryous entreatyng of men? Or how should a
man begin to defend the church, seeing such a sort of cruel and
maddebrayned enemies obiecte so many and so heinous crimes against us, and dyng
on as it were with quartre strokes on every side? When. S. Paul the preacher
of the Gentyles and most chosen vessel of Christ was accused him self of the
Jews, in a singular good cause, even the cause of the gospel, furst before
Antonius Felix, and eftesones before Portius Festus lieutenauntes of Iewrye, of
many matters, and was more than ouerlayde with the power, eloquence, authority,
and reputacion of his adversaries, and could obtain another place nor space, to
answer unto every point thoroughly, he thought he should defend him self and
his cause well enough, if he might show by some evident and most plain homely
short reasons, that he never taught contrary to the scriptures, nor against
the hope of Israel, but that he was injuriously enuyed and pressed of his
enemies for constantlye preaching and defendyng of the hope of the
Resurrection, which the Israelites hold.

And now following his most godly and singular good example (and vsyng the
help, order, and almost the very words of a certain notable profou^de
learned Pastor, who has done the same in latin, in defense and purgation of
the christen gospellike flock and church committed to his spiritual charge)
seeing I am barred out of place and time (as an abiecte out of my natural
country) so that I can not possibly answer to all their odious objections in
order and one by one singularly by them selves, I shall yet by the help of God,
do mine endeavor to declare and set before all men's eyes (by the way of
translation, rather mine own edicion) that which is most chief and general
matter in this cause, with the most clear and plain arguments that I can:
that is to wete, that the Church of England reformed and governed under King
Edward the.vi. was no heretical, schismatical, nor sedicious Church: and that
all other Churches embraceyng the Gospel in assemblable wise, are no heretical
nor schismatical Churches, but ye undeniable church of Jesus Christ both
true, faithful and catholic. Wherefore I beseech you right honorable lords,
right worshipful gentilmen, and the rest of my charytable christen
countrymen, for the love and loyaltye ye you bare and owed to your most
christen and most loving sovereign liege lord and master King Edward
the.vi. read or hear this simple short treatise patiently and gentlye,
inasmuche as I shall do my diligence as euidentlye and in as few words as I
possibly can, to speak not of all things, that might be alleged in this
behalf, but such reasons only, as chiefly and principally concern this
present cause.

The first Chaptre.
First where Christ our Lord says, ^he Gos^llerschur ^e recea^eth the ^ole
Scri^tu^e.
my sheep hear my voice: the church of Christ (which to be known from the
church of Papists, is called the gospellers church, as the church of
England in King Edwardes time was) does acknowledge and receive the Canonical
books both of the old Testament and new, as those that were proclaimed and
spoken out of Boddes own mouth. There is none of them, that it denies or
refuses, but receaueth and reteyneth the^ al holly and perfytly. Another does
it capciously reason, about ye receauyng of those books, who has received
them, or who has refused them: nor whether is of greater force, the autorite
of the church receauyng the scriptures, or of the scriptures them selves
received. For albeit we read that S. Austen wrote thus: Non crederem Eua^
gelio, nisi ecclesiae catholicae autoritas me co^moue ret. I would give no
crede^ce (says he) unto ye gospel, if the autorytye of the catholic church
did not inoue me: yet Berson the chancellor of Parise, Gerson.
a right excellent famous man in his time, does in his second book De vita
spirituali like a discrete profou^de learned clerk, say: S. Austen in that
place, takes the church for the primityue congregation of those faithful
christian men, that hard and saw Christ, and were his record bearours. For
when, there crepte out diverse so^dry Bospelles in the church, while the
apostles and disciples of Christ were yet living, they that hade seen Christ
him self, and hade hard his apostles, could testifye which were right and
true, and which were not. Ireneus also in the.xi. chapter of his.3. book Contra
haereses, shows by many manifest proves, that there ought to be but only 4.
gospelles, and yet he makes no mention of the church, that there ought to be
but only 4. gospelles, because the church has received no moo but only 4.
but because the Lord has so appointed. For there was never man that in any
Conuocacion or Synod assembled al for that purpose from the beginning,
confirmed the Canonical books of the scriptures, or decreed which were
canonical, which were not, but the thurche as it received them of the writours,
and autours the holy Prophets and Apestles the^ selves, eue^ so did it deliver
them (as it were by hand) unto her posterity. It was late ere it bego^ne to
be decreed in counsels upon canonical and not canonical books of scripture:
not that there was no diuersitye of them before that time, or that the books of
holy scripture had none autoritye before that time (as they hade and must have
dyuine autoritye in deed, although there hade never ben counsayl holden) but
that the holy men of God were disposed to show their judgment also, against
such as bare to vnfrenly a mind against ye canonical books of scripture. And
we confess al, that ye church is builded and set upon the foundation of the
Prophets and apostles: so if the doctrine of ye apostles and prophets be the
foundaceon of ye church, tha^ it follows of necessytye, that the autoritye of
ye doctrine must needs be of greater force and importance, than the authority
of the church. We therefore in England did receive, as the Gospellers church
else where does still receive al and singular Canonical books both of the old
Testament and new, and namelye those that the Greek wrytours Melito, Origene,
and Eusebius Caesariensis, and of the Latins Cipriane and Jerome have affirmed
by their own hand wrytynges, to be taken and reputed of the ancient fathers,
yea even from the beginning, for the undoubted true Canonical scriptures.

The second Chapter.
AS touching the truth and perfyte integritye of these books, Of the truth and
perfection of the canennical scriptures.
we doubt nothing thereof at al: and in such places as be doubtful and hard to
understand, we teach men to make recourse unto the oryginall fountaynes
wherout they were translated. S. Austen contra Adimantum the 3. chap. says:
Si admittamus haereticis, quod caussa^tur, libros sacros esse corruptos, nullus
erit contentionum finis. That is: if we grant unto the he retikes (as they
find fault) ye the books of holy scripture are corrupt, there wylbe none end
of co^tencion. And in the, 2. chap. of his.xi. book Co^tra Faustum Manichaeum,
he says: Si de fide ex emplarium quaestio verteretur, sicut and in nonnullis
quae paucae sunt and sacrarum literarum studiosis notissimae sententiarum
varietates, vel ex aliarum regionu^ codicibus vnde ipsa doctrina co^meauit
nostra dubitatio dijudicaretur: vel si ibi quoque co dices variare^t, plures
paucioribus, aut vetustiores recentioribus praeferrentur. Et si adhuc incerta
esset varietas, praecedens lingua, vnde illud interpretatum est, consuleretur.
If question should be moved, concerning the credence to be given unto the
copyes of the books of holy scriptures, as it chances in some diversities of
sentences, which are but a few, and known (at the fyngers ends) to them
that be students of holy scriptures, either our doubt must be resolved by the
textes of other cou^treyes whence that doctrine came, or else if the textes
themselves did varye in that behalf, the greater nombre should be preferred
before ye fewer, or the auncienter before the younger. And in case ye diuersitye
were yet still uncertain, it should be tried by the former tongue wherout it
was interpreted or translated. For the same Austen rehearceth in an other place
and it is alleged in ye decrees Did. 9 vt veteru^ libroru^ fides de Hebraeis
voluminibus examina^da est, ita nouorum veritas Graeci sera monis normam
desiderat That is: like as the truth of the books of the old testament is to
be tried by the Hebrew textes, so must the books of the new be ruled by the
truth of the greek tongue. And again in the.xi. chaptre of his second book De
doctrina Christiana, he says: Latini homines and duabus alijs ad scripturarum
diuinarum cognitionem opus habent, Hebraea scilicet and Graeca, vt ad
exemplaria praecedentia recurratur, si qua^ dubitationem attulerit latinorum
interpretum infinita varietas. Latin men (says he) had need of two other
tongues also to the perfyte knowledge of holy scripture, that is to say, the
Hebrew and Greek, that they may have recourse unto the original copyes, in
case the infinite diuersytye of latin interpretours have caused any doubt Thus
much says Austen, whythe has taught us to be more favorable unto the
sundry translaciones of the Bible, and to judge more purely of the authentike
book being written in bys own language, tha^ those me^nes wonted manner is,
which taking upon the^ to have the holy ghost, bind all the church
universally unto the common received latin translacien contrary to the
judgment of all the ancient doctors of the church: and condemine all godly
and faithful interpretours of the Bible fowlly of ingratitude.

The.iii. Chapter.
We of the church of England reformed and governed under King Edward the
All truth and godliness to be sought in the scripture.
.vi. and al other gospellers churches do constauntly believe, that all truth
is to be sought and believed, and that all godliness and true serving and
worship of God is most pleyntifully comprised in the holy sacred authentike
hoke the Bible, so that the man of God is perfytlye prepared unto all good
works, unto all good parts of office and al duties doing. And on this wise
does the gospellers church deem and think of the Canonical scripture. Wherein
it diffreth toto much from the church of heretics, that most unjustly either
defame the scriptures of uncertainty and imperfection, or else do not receive
some particular books thereof, or if they do receive them, yet they corrupt and
myngle mangle them, and contend with tothe and nail that all things
necessary to godliness and salvation, are not fully contained in them.

The, iiii. Chapter.
ALso where S. The menyng of the scripture. 2. Pe. 1.
Petre pronou^ceth in plain words, that propherye, that is to say, the
declared scripture was not brought by the will of man, but the holy men of God
being enforced spoke as the holy Ghost taught them, and that therefore the
scripture (which is the word of prophecye) is not of man's private
interpretacion: furthermore where Paul according to S. To. 10.
Petres words, commands us to moderate prophecy, that is, the office of
interpretacion after the proporcion of faith, and that the interpretours use a
discrete sobriety, and abide within the bands of faith, as the Lord has
bestowed unto every one the measure of faith. The gospellers church admits
not every interpretacion of the scriptures after every ones opinion, but that
only which is fette out of the scripture self, which is of the spirit of
God, by whom the scripture is inspired, which agrees with him self in every
thing, and accords with the rule of faith and charity, whereof we shall anon
speak more largely. For the scripture can not be expounded by any other
spirit than by the self same, by whom it was delivered and set furthe. (...).
8.
As Thrist says in the gospel: If you have God to your father, why do ye not
know my speech? ^^m. 8.
And the apostle says: He that has not ye spirit of Christ, is none of
his. And again: what man knows the things that be of man, Cor. 2.
but the spirit of man which is in him: so the things that be of God, non
knows but the spirit of God. But we have not received the spirit of the
world, but the spirit which is of God, that we may know what things are given
unto us of Christ. In deed after such sort we affirm, that the scriptures
are clear, which the heretics contend to be obscure, so that in this behalf
we have no thing to do with them.

The.v. Chapter.
IN this case we do in no wise reiecte nor contemn the disputacions, reasons,
what is be attri^^ted unto the fath^^ the interpretours of script^re.
and expositions of the holy fathers (I mean the ancient old byshopes and
doctors of the church) upon the scriptures, as Ireneus, Origene, Chrysostom,
Ambrofe, Jerome, Austen, and such other like, so their exposition and
judgments vary in no point from the rules of the Apostles. For their mind
and will was, that their wrytynges should be none otherwise demed of, nor no
further fidelity attributed unto them. Hereof let S. Auste^ him self tell the
tale, where he writes to Fortunatianus in his third epistle in these words:
Neque quorumlibet disputa tiones quamuis catholicorum and laudatorum hominum
velut scripturas canonicas habere debemus, vt nobis non liceat, salua
honorificentia, quae illis debetur hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis
improbare atque respuere, si forte inuenerimus que aliter senserint qua^
veritas habet, diuino adiuto rio vel ab alijs intellecta uel a nobis. Qualis
ego sum in scriptis aliorum, tales volo esse intellectores meorum.

That is, we ought not to repute any men's reasons and sayenges, though they
be catholyke and praise worthy men, as we ought to do the canonical
scriptures: as though we might not (saving the reverence due unto those men)
improve and reiecte any thing in their wrytynges, if we chance to find that
they mean otherwise than the truth has, whether it be understood by the
help of God of us or of others. As I am in the wrytynges of other, such would
I have to be understanders of mine. The same S. Austen does more largely
expound this his judgment in his epistle to S. Jerome, and in the 5. chap. of
his. 11. book Contra Faustum, and in his. 48. epistle Ad Vincentium, and in
the. 3. chap. of his. 2. book, De Baptismo co^ tra Donatistas. Furthermore he
reasons upon general Counsailles with Maximinus bishop of the Arianes in
his. 3. book, and among other things says: Sed nunc non ego Nicenum, nec tu
debes Ariminense, tanque praeiudicaturus, proferre consilium: nec ego huius au
thoritate, nec tu illius detineris: scripturarum authoritatibus non quorumque
propriis, sed vtrisque co^munibus testibus, res cum re, caussa cum caussa,
ratio cu^ ratione concertet. But now ought not I (says s. Austen) to allege
the Cou^sail of Nice, nor thou the counsel of Arimine, as though to have yt
vpperha^de there by: but by the autorities of the scriptures not by every man's
own authority, but both sides having common witnesses, let matter plead with
matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason.

Here you see S. Austen calls us from counsailles, yea even from the most
sacred couunsail of Nice, unto the authority of the scriptures.

Panormitanus therefore (a writour of late days) seems not to speak fondly
nor falsely, where he says, Panormitanus.
Plus crede^du^ est vni laico afferentiscripturas, quam genera li concilio
vniuersalem representanti Ecclesiam, si scripturas non afferat.

There is more credence (says he) to be given to one lay man that brings
forth scriptures, than to a general Cou^sail, which represents the hole
universal church, if they bring not forth scriptures. Therefore if the sayenges
or judgments of fathers or expositions of the scriptures varye from the
canonical scripture and the rule of faith, there is no cause why any man should
lay against us, that the fathers were right famous learned men, singular holy
men and men of reverend antiquity. For the prophets and apostles of Christ
were greater learned, more holy, and of more ancient antiquity than they.
Another is there any cause why any man should charge us with the multitude of
churches, that have agreed in this or that meaning, or in this or that
exposition. For the consent of Christ's prophets, Apostles and Patriarchs is
worthy much higher reputacion in sincere religion and godly understanding of
religion, manifestly revealed unto us by the scriptures. And if a man would
reckon us up thus many and thus many great realms and hole countries that are
of this judgment or that, we will cheoke him with the travails of one man,
eue^ poor Paul, which filled all places full with the plain sense and simple
understanding of the Gospel from Jerusalem and the coasts lyeng round about
unto Illiricum.

The.vi. Chaptre.
NOtwythstandyng in this behalf I may not say nay, Of the catholic
v^derstanding of the scripture.
but the holy fathers the old interpretours of scriptures do many times make
mention of some certain undeniable and most catholyke meaning of the
scriptures. But yet we may not understand that of their own peculiar
expositions, seeing they varye very often in their interpretacions and disagree
with them selves, and accord not with other interpretours of most excellent
judgment: yea and wondrous many times one reprehendeth an others exposition.
As we need to seek no further examples but of S. Jerome in his Commentaries
upon the Prophets. And the catholyke church of God has always had and has
yet at this day, a certain catholic and assured true exposicion of the
scriptures, grounded of the concordaunce of faith, and set forth for Christ's
people to follow it in all points: wherein al godly men, albeit they dissent in
other matters, yet they agree in it: as where we read in scripture that God made
heaven and earth, that he spoke unto the fathers, and that he has and does
still reward the good and punish the evil: the catholic understanding of
faith bids us understand those sayenges of the true ever living merciful
God, and not of a fearce cruel God that were a maker of evil, as Cerdon,
Mercion, and Manicheus in their fond fables flirted out the matter. Also where
we read that God works al in all things: the catholic sense of faith
charge us, that we take not God to be the author of sin. For we bring and
commytte sin (as it were by enheritaunce) even of our own original vicious
poisoned nature. And ye holy people (while they live in this world) are
endaungered to sin, and are saved by the mere mercy and free perdone of God,
and not by their own merits. Furthermore where the scripture speaks of God,
and calls him the Father, the son, and the holy ghost: the catholyke sense
of faith and of the church byddeth us understand, that God is one in
substance, and three in persons. And where the scripture affirms Christ to
be very perfect God and very perfect man: the catholic sense of the church
byddeth us understand Christ to be and abide in diverse natures but not
confused in them selves, and yet in one inseparable person. Praxeas and
Sabellius confound and iomble the persons together. Arius denies the son
to be very God consubstancial with the father. Valentinus denies the son to
be very man of al one substance with us. Nestorius disseuereth his person.
Eutyches and Timotheus make the natures of his Godhead and ma^heade al one. But
the catholic church always reteyneth her own true right understanding of
the scripture: which for all that the holy fathers in their written works and
disputacions against heresies have declared and confirmed by yt scriptures.

For that cause the holy fathers have ever objected the catholyke mind of the
church to heritikes, howbeit they did straight ways confirm and declare the
same by the scriptures, and deduced it religiously out of the chief principles
of our faith.

As I shall anon speak of these matters more at large. And this self same
catholyke sense and understanding of the scriptures, the gospellers church
keeps diligently perfect, and sound even at this day, as King Edward the.vi.
and the church of England did in his time.

The.vii. Chapter.
Therefore ye gospellers church does not call every one at aue^ture (tagge and
ragge) to be ministers of Gods holy word, Ministers of the gospellers
church.
but such men as be furst exerciced in the holy scriptures, and in the
catholyke understanding of faith with the church. For there be chosen unto the
holy ministry of the church, men of sound doctrine and vpryght life,
according to the Apostles rules. And like as saint Paul, when he ordained
Timothee to be bishop, byndeth him as it were with an oath, 2. Timo. 5.
to preathe the Gospel syncerely, saying: I charge the in the sight of God and
our Lord Jesus Christ and of the chosen holy angels, that thou keep and
observe this with out rashenesse of judgment. 2. Timo. 4
And eftsoon he says: I charge thee before God and our Lorde-Iesus Christ,
which shall judge both the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, preach the word, be fervent, and reprove in season and out of
season. etc. Even so does the Gospellers church bind their ministers by an
oath, that they make no new gloses nor exposicions of their own heads nor
utter in their docerine any thing against the scripture and the true catholic
understanding of faith: but every where and in every point both to respect and
only follow the canone and rule of faith. And in the yearly conuocacions
which the gospellers church uses, there is diligent inquisicion and search
made upon the pastors, and upon the life and doctrine of every minister,
whether it be sou^de and vpryght or not, least the sorer fall of the minister
should make a good part of the church committed to his spiritual charge, to
fall miserably into evil with him.

The like order was appointed and set furthe by king Edward the.vi. to his
church by his publyke commission and commandment, only the fault of not
executyng the same was in some of his corrupt doublefaced dreamyng
counsailours, and traitorous hearted Popish Bishops and ordinaries, by whom
the virtuous good King was deluded.

And so in this matter again we are most far of from the heretics church by all means. For the heretykes (both Papistical and Anabaptistical) like as they
run when no man sends them, nor have any regard to the said general rule,
inasmuche as they be a rule and a law to them selves, even so may they in no
wise abide any reformacion or correction.

Of the chief principles of our faith and religion.
In deed the Gospellers church does most religiously keep the catholyke
understanding of the church and the chief principles of the true catholyke
religion and doctrine. Our congregation believes and embraces the first
promise that the eternal almighty God him self made and pronounced in
Paradise, saying: Ge. 3.
I will set enemitie between the and the woman (or that specially appointed
woman) and between thy sede and her sede. It shall tread down thy head, and
thou shall tread upon his heel. For we know and acknowlage that the furst and
principal ground works of our faith and salvation were sattled and
comprised in this promise. For we are lost through our own sin, but we are
saved by the mere mercy of god through christ, in who^, like as God has
freely chosen us from everlasting, even so he opens unto us by his word (wha^
it is best time in his sight both for his own glory and our commodity) that
we through his grace should believe in Christ the son of the most sovereign
high God and of that excellent woman, Hebr. 2.
the most blessed virgin Marie, and so be saved. For Christ by his painful
passion has broken and stamped under foot the head or kingdom of the Devil,
in that he has conquered death, abolished sin, and despeched damnacion
quyte out of the way from all faithful christianes.

The.8. Chapter.
We and our Gospellers churches do believe and religiously embrace that only
and eternal covenant that God made to Adam, The coue^aunt of ^od with ^en.
furst in Paradise, and afterward many times renewed and plainly compacted
with the holy fathers, as Noe, and singularly with Abraham the father of the
beleuers, adding thereto the Sacrament of Circumcision. For the Lord appeared
unto Abraham, (...). 17.
and said unto him: I am El Saddai, a mighty strong God, every where present
and omnisufficiently fillyng all with all good things. Walk before me and be
perfect, and I shall raise up, that is, I shall repair my covenant between me
and thee, and between me and thy sede after thee in their generations with an
everlasting covenant, that I may be thy God and thy seeds after thee.

Al these sayenges we apply also unto us, ^ala. 3.
in that the Apostle said: if you be of Christ, than in deed ye are the sede of
Abraham, and heirs according to the promise: in that Baptism was given unto
the church instead of Circumcision: and also in that we have received Jesus
Christ our Lord the end and accomplishement of all the promyses.

Our churches do religiously embrace the most holy tables of this eternal
covenant, The tables of the covenant.
graven with the very fyngre of our almyghtye sovereign Lord God, in two
tables of stone with great mystery, and to the intent they should the longer
endure and given to the church of the Israelites and of al faithful beleuers
throughout all the hole world, of God him self by his most blessed servant
Moses. In the which as it were in a certain ha^dsom short su^me (and yet most
fully expounded) we have recyted and contained al mystical matters perteynyng to
godliness, and the most sure testimony of Gods good will toward us, and
the most perfect rule of al out offices and duties.

These tables (I say) that were written with the fyngre of God, and proclaimed
beforehande with Gods own mouth in that great church at the mount Synai, we
keep entier perfect, sound and incorrupt: we take away nothing, we altre
nothing, we putto nothing, we leave out nothing, we thrust in nothing contrary
to Christ's mind, we change nothing at al. From the botome of our hearts
therefore we abhor Idolatrye, which we se also condemned so zelously and so
earnestly of the prophets and Apostles. And therefore we should think it
abominable wickedness, in case there be seen in our temples (dedicated only
unto God) any Images either of God him self or of his saints, much more of
profane men or women. S. Paul reasonyng with the most wyttye learned Brekes
of Athenes, Act. 17.
says: For as much as we are the generation of God, we ought not to judge
that the alwelding God is like unto gold or silver or stone craftily graven,
or unto the inuencion of man. By means whereof we read also that S. John the
Apostle and Evangelist charged Christ's Church, saying: Babes beware of
Images: ^. Io. 5.
which words the ancient writour Tertullian in his book De corona militis
expounds thus. Custodite vos ab Idolus: non ia^ ab idolatria quasi ab
officio, sed ab idolis; id est ab ipsa eorum effige. Indignum enim vt ima go
Dei viui, imago idolis and mortui fiat. That is, keep your selves from ydoles,
not now from ydolatrie, as from the service doing, but from the ydoles, that
is, from the very images of them. For it were wrong, that the image of the
living God should be the image of an ydole, and of a dead thing. Therefore our
churches are by these words acquieted from the crime of heresy, which a great
meignye of bishops, preachers, and Papists (with stampyng and staryng,
scolding and roaryng) charge us wythal, and for none other cause, but that the
images of God and his saints be thrown out of all Christ's temples, and were
in no wise received any more in King Edwardes days, but the scriptures of the
living God set in their places. There is no doubt (says Lacta^cius, Li. 2. ca
19.
Consta^tinus scholemaister) but there is no religion, whersoeuer an image is.
And S. Austen in his Cataloge, wherein he rehearceth all the heresies of his
time, reckons among them, one Marcella, a woman of Carpocratia, which
worshipped the images of Jesus Christ, of Paul, of Pythagoras and of Homere,
with making addracion and incensing to them. For the holy martyr S. Ireneus in
the 24. chap. of his first book Contra haereses reports that the heretics
called Gnostici did worship the express lively painted image of our saueour
Christ, the pattern whereof they sent unto Pilate the lieutenaunt of Iewrie who
found the means to have Christ, set furthe (as an heathen man) by image like
unto him self when he was alive, by singular connyng payntours and caruers.
And yet that bishop and martyr inueyed to the uttermost of his power against
that image, which the Gnostici set so much price by: A
and if it were now to be had, it should be reputed among the most holy
relics.

But this Bishop was not a severe earnest persecutour and enemy of images and
image service alone: for it is known to all men what Epiphanius the Bishop of
Salamine Cyprus did, (...)
as he writes of him self in his greek Epistle, that S. Jerome translated
into latin: which doubtless he would not have done, if he had thought
Epyphanius fact to have be^ sacrilege.

Epiphanius also saw a veil hanging in a certain church door stained and
painted, and having an image as it hade ben of Christ orsom saint. But he
plucked it by the end, In tomo Hiero. 3. fo. 73. b
and re^t it down thinking it unworthy that the image of a man should heng in
ye church of Christ, contrary (as he says plainly) to the authority of the
scriptures. And he exhorts John bishop of Jerusalem, to charge the elders and
ministers of that place, ye they should heng up no such vailes, which come
against the religion of Christ. For he said it was more besemyng the duty of
a bishop, to see that such scrupulositie (for so he terms the use of images
in temples) should be taken out of the way, which is not worthy of the church
of Christ. Now there is no good ground for the papists to obiecte unto us the
sentences and decrees of Gregory B. of Rome, Damascene the greek wrytour
(Bardiners great clearke) and of the seventh Synod, which they call the Synod
of Nice, against these so clear and so substau^cial authorities. For these
that I have alleged are of much more auncientie and certayntie tha^ theyrs be.
Therefore who so ever reports us to be he retikes, because we lack images,
let them first prove the law of god heresy, let them prone the testimonies
and judgments of the Prophets and Apostles heresy, and let the^ prove the
sayenges and doings of Ireneus, Tertullian, Lacta^tius, Epiphanius, Auste^,
and Jerome to be heresy, and when they have done so, let them com and condemn
us of heresy also. And so they will do one day, when they ca^. But if they
spare them, let them be good to us also, Now will we return to our purpose.

Our church (called the gospellers church) does religiously hold and
confess that most excellent and most true godly belief called Symbolu^
apostolicum or the apostles Creed. (...). apost^ Creed.
Which though it be purported in no place of the scriptures in the very same
form of words that we rehearse it in, yet it is all holly, and every title of
it fette out of the apostles writings. This Creed comprehends the most
plenteous full form of belief, so that our elders did by it (as a most tried
and certain sure rule) always prove and try, who were true right catholic
beleuers, and who were false beleuers and heretics. Sym^n. is.


S. Cipriane in the exposicion of this apostles Creed says, that this greek
word Simbolum is a declaracio^, a collacion or a gatheryng of sundry matters
together into one form. And for this cause this same declaracion is set and
compacte together by conference of the apostles doctrine, that thereby it might
be known, who confessed Christ truly according to the rules of the apostles.
The holy Martyr Ireneus after the rehearsal of the apostles Creed, says: Li.
con^ haereses. Ca. 3.
Forasmuch as ye church dispersed throughout the hole universal world has
received this confession and Creed, it observes it diligently, as though the
hole church were dwelling all in one house, and preaches and confesses it
after all one consonaunt sort, as if all the church had but one mouth. For
albeit the speches in the world be unlike, yet the virtue and power of the
declaring thereof, is but all one and the self same one. And another the language
that is in Spain, nor the speech that is in France, ne the languages that are
in the east cou^treyes, ne yet the Egipcians tongue, nor the Lybianes speech,
another the languages that are used in the mydle parts of the world: but as the
sun of gods making is but one and the self same one in all the hole
universal world, so does the light and preaching of the truth shine every
where and lighteneth all folks that are willing to com to the knowlage of the
truth. And another the bishop of the church him self that has the best
vtterau^ce, speaks any thing else but these articles, another does he that is
of slenderer vtteraunce, speak any less. For seeing there is but one and the
self same one faith, another does he that is hable to vttre it at large,
speak any more, nor he that can not vttre the matter so plenteously, speak any
less. Thus much has Ireneus. Therefore it is most certainly out of
peraue^ture, that the full form of belefe, is most fully comprehended in the
Apostles Creed, and he that constau^tly and purely continues therein to the
end, shall doubtless obtain everlasting life, as Athanasius says: who so
ever wylbe saved, before al things it is necessary that he hold the catholic
faith, which faith except every one does keep holly and undefiled, with out
doubt he shall peryshe euerlastyngly.

Another does Christ's church of the gospellers cleave supersticiously and
frowardly unto the words, neclecting the holy sense and right meaning: and
therefore it joyfully receaueth all declaracions and conferences of faith
(called in our common speech, Credes) whether they be set furthe by the holy
fathers or true faithful counsels, though in mo and more copious words, yet
nothing varieng in sentences nor conteynyng any contrary matter. Therefore we
receive and reverence the Creed of Nice and of Athanasius, and the second set
forth Creed, called Symbolum Constantinopolitanum, and all other good
definitions of faith agreing to those same. And so we reprove and reiecte al
heresies, and hold accursed al heretics condemned by the holy scripture
either in the Counsels or out of the cou^sailes. And so we condemn Simon
Magus with al Symonye, Basilides, Valentinus, Marcion, Braxeas, Artemon,
Montanus, Nouatus, Sabellius, Appollinaris, Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius,
Manicheus, Nestorius, Eutyches, Priscillianus, Donatus, Pelagius, Heluidius,
the Monothelites, and all other of the like leven. So that the church of
gospellers is not a congregation of heretics, nor a swarm of schismatikes, as
the Papists and settaries do wyckedly and falsely lie upon us, but a true
christian and catholic church of Jesus Christ.

The.x. Chapter.
THe very cyuile law it self does also reckon us among the catholics. For the
Emperors Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodotius writing to the people of
Co^stantinopole give them this decreed commandment. We will that al people
whom our imperial clemency has the government of, live in that religion,
which S Petre the apostle set furthe to the Romans, as the religion that he
him self makes mention of, bears record even unto this day: the which it
is evident that bishop Damasus and Petre bishop of Alexandria (a man of
apostolic holiness) did also follow. That is to say, that we should
according to the apostles discipline and doctrine of the Gospel, believe one
Godhead of the father and the son and the holy ghost under like Majesty and
holy Trinity. Those that follow this law, we command to take upon them and
embrace the name of christian catholics: and the rest as (witles and mad
folks) we judge to bear the infamye of heretical learning. etc. If any man
be ignorant what was the faith that the holy fathers Damasus and Peter B. of
Alexandria professed, let him learn of the ecclesiastical histories. They
varied not one tote from the apostolic and Nicene Creed. Therefore seeing we
believe them with all our hearts, we are purged clean from the slander of
heresy, which our adversaries goo about wickedly to discredit and blemyshe us
withal.

But I know well enough, they will charge us, that we do not only not receive
the tradiciones of the apostles, but also contemn them and vtterlyreiecte
them: and that therefore it is but lost labor for us to pretend an incorrupt
sou^de faith, specially forsomuche as the imperfection of the doctrine of the
apostolic scripture is most fully perfyted by unwritten tradicion by word of
mouth, and for that cause the unwritten tradicions to be of equal authority
with the apostolyke holy scriptures. And seeing we reiecte the traditions, it
follows that our doctrine and faith is not perfyte.

Now in as much as our aduersaris the Papists make these ye top and root of
al their matters, as they them selves report in their open decrees and books:
we will talk a little (as sortenesse of time shall suffer) of the traditions of
Apostles and Fathers. I find this word Tradicion many times in the holy
Apostles wrytynges. Tradicions.
For where the history of the gospel was not written from the beginning of any
man, the Apostles of Christ, as they saw with their eyes, and heard with
their ears, and received out of Christ's own mouth, so did they declare in
deed the words and deeds of Christ to the congregacions, by tradicion, or
lively word of mouth, but yet not without scripture. For look what they
learned and preached of Christ, they confirmed the same by the scriptures of
gods law, of the Psalms, and of the prophets, And at lenght when God saw
time he admonished his Apostles by the holy Ghost, that they should enrolle
that lynely tradicion partly in to wryltyng them selves, and partly should
cause other to write up the rest. For so the Evangelist Luke reports, that he
with al diligent forsyght and sure search of all things before hand, wrote a
most certain true history as they instructed him, which from the beginning
had seen with their eyes, and part of them also hade ben ministers of the
things themselves, which they spoke of. Such a wytour was Mark also. As for
Mathewe and John the Apostles, they were both seers and hearers them selves.
Now for as much as the church of Christ has these scriptures at this day,
it can not be chosen but it has also the full faith, doctrine or tradicion of
the Apostles. For the Apostles in their writings left out nothing, that they
believed necessary, and that seemed to appertain to the making up of the
doctrine fully perfect. I am not alone nor the furst that auouche this. For
there were that have spoken the same before me, Ireneus and Papias, very
ancient old doctors of the church. For Ireneus in the first Chapter of
his. 3. doke Contra Valentinianos, says: we knew not how our salvation was
bestowed unto us by any other men, than those by whom the gospel came unto us:
which they at that time preached unto us, and after ward by the will of God
they delivered unto us in scripture, that is, in writing, to be the foundation
and pillar of our faith. Another can we safely say, what they preached, before
they had parfyte knowledge.

And Papias in Eusebius Caesariensis says: Eccl. histo^^i. 3. Ca, ^lt.
Mark (when he was Petres interpretour) did diligently put in writing what so
ever he kept in memory, as necessity required. For this one thing he thought
upon, that he would leave out nothing that he had heard. The Apostles therefore
wrote all that was necessary unto the salvation of al faithful beleuers: As
John the Apostle reports in the end of his gospel most manyfestly ye he has
done. (...). 21.
Jesus did many other things (says he) which are not written in this book.
But these are written, that ye may believe and live. This scripture therefore is
sufficient to inform our faith fully, and to attain everlasting life.

Therefore we are certainly assured that we have the declaracion or tradicion,
which the apostles taught concerning the salvation of faithful beleuers,
sufficiently and fully comprehended in the scriptures. Touching this tradicion
the apostle Paul making mention in the furst to the Corinthianes, says, 1.
Cor, 11.
that he delivered ye unto them which he received of the lord. Another speaks
he in the words by and by following any thing, but the same that we read in ye
gospel written almost word by word. In the same epistle he speaks also of
the same tradicion, and says: I delivered unto you that which I received, 1.
Cori. 13.
that christ died for our sins according to the scriptures, and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures.
Again he makes mention of his manner of teaching or tradition 2. These. 3. but
he opens in plain flat words which a one it was. And in the.2. of the
Thessaloni.2. he speaks eftesones of tradicion: Therfort brethren (says he)
stand and hold fast the tradicions which ye have received, whether it be by
word of mouth or by epistle sent from us. Now Paul comprehends all his
hole doctrine, which he calls by a general term, tradicion, in word
spoken, and epistle written, By word, he understands the preaching of the
gospel which he hade preached presently to the Thessalonians by lively word
of mouth, after such sort and reason as the other Apostles also preached
Christ unto other nations, which Luke also put in writing, and Paul himself
preached to the Romans by his written Epistle. For I said that Luke did with
most circumspect diligence put in writing those things that he hade learned of
the Apostles touching Christ's words and deeds.

Eusebius reports, that the old fathers: understood these words of Paul
(according to my gospel) of the gospel of Luke. And in deed Paul him self in
the.1. and 15. Chapters to the Romans, testifyeth that he preached the Gospel
to the Romans in his written epistle plain to al men's understanding. For in
his epistles he treats of the matter more briefly being absent, which when he
was present with the^ he had taught more at large, reformyng by his written
epistles those errors in the church, which the false Apostles had sowed
abroad, the time while he was absent: and admonished al men of their duty,
and reformed if any thing were diminished. And for as much as there remain
four consonaunt books of the Gospel, and fourtene Epistles of Paul (as I will
not speak of other Apostles epistles) who could doubt, that the tradicion or
doctrine of the Apostles is not fully delivered and registered unto us?

In the Acts of the Apostles we read that Luke made mention of the Apostles
decrees, Act, 15.16.
which other men ral tradicions. But it is expressed in clear plain words
by the written epistle that the Apostles sent furthe at their conuocacion time,
what they meant by their decrees or tradicions. Act. 15.
For thus they write: It seems good to the holy Ghost and us, to charge you
with no more than these necessary things, that is to say, that ye absteyne
from things offered to images, and from blood, and from strangled, and from
fornicacion.

Surely this decree (which is a right Apostolic decree in deed) does by all
means contrary the tradicions falsely called the Apostles tradicions,
wherewith faithful christians are grievously burdened in ye church at this
present. For ye true Apostles of Christ say: It seems good to the holy ghost
and us, to charge you with no more. Lo, to charge you with no more, say they.
For Paul's adversaries, against whom the hole conuocacion house of the Apostles
and elders gives sentence, Look Socrates in eccle. histo. Li. 15. ca. 22.
contended that christians must needs be circumcised, and observe the law of
Moses. And made the rest of the Apostles autors of that their false doctrine.
As in our time also many under the pretense of the Apostles tradicions, do lay
heavy burdens upon free faithful folks necks with opinions and ceremonies.
But what is the Apostles sentence of them? We gave them (say they) no such
commandment. They went forth from us, but they were not sent of us. They are
distourbours of the congregacions. Out of the which apostolic sentence Saint,
Paul did doubtless borowe his words, which we read in the beginning of his
epistle to the Galathians, in this wise: Gal. 1.
I marvel that ye are so sone turned from Christ, which called you by grace,
unto an other Gospel, which is nothing else, but that there be some which
trouble you, and intend to peruerte the Gospel of Christ. Nevertheless though
we our selves or an Angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. The Apostle in
repetyng this same sentence declares, how ware christen folks hade need to
be in receauyng such obseruaunces, as are set furthe in the title of the
Apostles tradicions. For all tradicions are condemned and denounced accursed,
which burden and ouercharge christen men's liberty, and what so ever they be
that are not agreeable with the written gospel and doctrine of the apostle
Paul, yea and with the preaching of the rest of ye Apostles, which is al of
one sort and consonaunt in every condition.

In the.15. (...).
of Matthewe there is also mention made of the tr^^^^ons of Elders or Fathers
(as (...) in the first to the Galathians) which Christ our Lord him self
utterly co^de^neth, because they were not agreeable to the scripture and law of
God: and calls Esaye the prophet to witness with him, which also condemns
al such tradicions of man, saying: They worship me in vain, teaching
doctrines which are men's precepts. Therefore Tradicions, that is, al
doctrines and obseruau^ces that are not agreeable to the scriptures, or proceed
of a Iewishe supersticion, are barred out of Boddes true service and worship,
how gloriously so ever they be garnyshed with the title of ancient fathers.
And the Apostle him self writes also against them. Collos. 2. Thus much of
the judgment of scripture concerning Tradicions.

Now as touching the fathers, Note how bold Ireneus is to call the Pope and
his shaue^inges heretics.
a man may easily gather of their own wrytynges, how sore heretics did
combre the holy fathers under the cloak and pretense of the Apostles
Tradacions. For Ireneus in the.2. chapter of his.3. book Contra Valentinianos,
says: when heretics be reproved by the scriptures, they fall straight ways
to accusyng of ye scriptures, as though they were not well, or were not of
authority, and that they be spoken after diverse understandings, and that
such as know not Tradicions, can not find the truth by the scriptures. For
traditions were not given in writing but by lively word of mouth. Thus much
says Ireneus.

And what do^ the Papists obiecte else unto us now a days, when we lay for
us most evident clear scriptures? They are come to such a wickedness and
shamelessness, that they stick not to pronounce in their open books, that the
chief fountain of al errors is to receive nothing but only that which is
contained in the scriptures. For they say, there is an other kind of doctrine
besides, which they call tradicions, wherein if a man be not well skilled, he ca^
another go vpryghtly in the scriptures, nor have any perfection or certainty in
the only scriptures. Which saying, as it is not spoken without great reproach
of the eternal truth, even so they take no head, but receive those tradicions
also at adventure without weyeng of them, which the holy fathers themselves ser
out for the Apostles tradicions. For I see that the tradicions which they set
furthe, be not of al one kind. For there are, which they call the fathers
tradicions, but not directly the Apostles tradicions. There are also which they
would have to seem all together apostolic tradicions. And there is a diversity
in these also. For there are some that be utterly historical tradicions, that
rehearse what Christ, and what Christ's Apostles have said or done: of which
sort Eusebius reports that Papias rekoned up many. Eccl. histo i. 3. ca. 39.
And the same wrytour clouteth in other matters, as though they had been told
him by lively word of mouth, and certain strange parables and doctrines of
our saueour, with diverse flyme flammes besides. And concerning the tradicion of
John the Apostle touching the age of our Lord Jesus Christ (which Ireneus
speaks of) he that sees not it to be a vain flamme flewe, Contra Walent.
^i. 39.
sees nothing.

The tradicion of Policarpus, Eccl. hist. li. 3. ca. 28
that John ran away from the bayne, wherein Cerinthus the heretic was, least
he should fall, agrees gayly with the scripturely doctrine of the Apostles. Let
us therefore in this kind of tradicions hold that is to be holden in all
points, prove al things, hold that which is good.

There are also tradicions set furthe of rites and opinions, De peccat. meritis
and remiss. li. 1. ca. 20.
but yet they are not in all points like, another observed nor received of al
men S. Typriane and S. Austen rehearse a tradicio^, whereby the communion was
used to be ministered unto young children under both kinds, as a necessary
matter unto salvation: but who medleth with that tradicion at this day?

Epiphanius contra Aerium writes it to be a tradicion of the Apostles, that
folks should.vi. days before Easter eat nothing but bread and salt, Eccl.
hist. li. 5. ca. 24.
but Ireneus reports that all churches observed not that, as Eusebius tells
the tale.

In an other place it was said, Damaseen Ang. dc Bap. contra. Dona. li. 2. ca.
7. l^^. ca. 42 li. 5 ca. 23 and de cura pro mort.
that the Apostles commanded the Passover to be celebrated after the manner of
the Jews. But Socrates the history writer in the.22. chap. of the.5. book
Eccl. histo. speaks against them.

Epiphanius Contra Valesianos, says that the wyueles life of ministers, is a
tradicion. In an other place it is read that the Apostles commanded by
tradicion, that folks should pray and offer for the dead: which unless it
be vnderstande^ of thanks gening, who is it, ^ Cor. 7. ^ Io. 5. ^ Thessalonians. 4.
that sees not such manner tradicions manifestly repugnaunt with the doctrine of
the evangelists and apostles, and for that cause nothing is to be attributed
to these and such like? Finally I see S. Ireneus in sundry places wonderously
preach and beat upon the tradicio^ of the apostles. And that is it that our
adversaries wraste and wrythe to all their feyned trynkettes and tradiciones of
the Mass, of Images, of Mo^kery and cloister life, and the rest of such
trumpery. Howbeit the holy man Ireneusin these principal places understands
nothing clles by the apostles tradicion, than the commune sense and
understanding of our faith, and the very apostles Creed. I will not desire to
be believed in this case, if Ireneus him self say not the same that I have
said. Read his.1. book Contra valentinianos, Ca. 2. and.3. and his.3. book
the.4. chap. In both places he does agreably rehearse the articles of faith
in order one by one, and wha^ he has done, he plainly calls this profession
of ye faith, a tradicion.

Of this tradiction spoke Constantine the mighty Emperor in his Epistles,
which Eusebius makes report of almost in the end of his.3. book De vita
Conslantini. Thus far therefore the gospellers churches without any business
embrace the tradicion that I have now spoken of: but as for other tradicions,
whether they be Apostles or fathers tradicions, they lay them to the rule of
Gods word, and as they agree or disagree, they either reiecte them or
receive them, according to Christ our Lords own commandment, Math.15. and
Col.2. Whereof I have already spoken before. And I pray you, wherein think you
the gospellers church offends in this behalf? Herein it has nothing adoo
with heretics, who hade devised to teach false opinions unto such as were to
simple, under pretense of tradicions, and contrarywyse to tear in pieces,
corrupt, yea and to deny and stamp under foot the true tradicion, that is,
the Apostles Trede.

In this behalf I could dryng furthe a great deal against our adversaries,
who reckon this predense of tradicions of much force against the very
scriptures and the simplicity of tradicion, yea and for the affirmyng or
confutyng of any matter what so ever it be. But I will keep this in store till a
better and a further leisure.

Hitherto I have treated as briefly as I could, of the most certain and pfytest
principles of the Christian faith. Whereby I trust it does specially appear,
ye the English Church under King Edward the.vi. and the rest of the
gospellers churches have devised no new doctrine of faith, but enibrace and
confess the old faith with all their hearts: and that they reiecte no point
of sincere doctrine, whether it be proved by the scriptures, or by traditions
consonau^t to the scriptures: and therefore we are most far of from new
fangled fellows, and obstinate heretics.

The.xi. Chapter.
SO the poor gospellers church being confirmed by this true doctrine of the
true faith, ^ustificati^n.
looks to be justified, that is, to have full forgiveness of all their
sins, righteousness and everlasting life, of the only free mercy and grace
of God by Jesus Christ, that dyed and rose again for us. We believe that Christ
with al his gifts is received by faith, and that by faith Christ dwells in
our hearts. And that faith is learned by the word of the Gospel, is craved and
asked of God by prayers, and given freely by the holy Boost.

We attribute not that unto man's merits and man's works, which we know is
due only unto faith, nay, unto Christ our redemer, and to the fre grace of
God. Ephesians. 2.
For Paul says: By grace are ye saved through faith, and not of your selves.
It is the gift of God, and not of works, that no man should boast. For we are
his handy work created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
prepared, that we should walk in them. Therefore we know and acknowlage that
works which proceed out of a true faith, by the spirit of Christ (powered in
to our hearts) and done after ye rule of Gods word and christian charity,
are good works in deed: and we affirm, that except those that be justified,
practice those works diligently, it is but lost labor of them to beast of
their faith, as Petre the Apostle teaches us and says: Give all diligence
in your fayeth, ministre virtue, in virtue knowlage, Jacob. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
in knowlage temperaunce, in temperau^ce patience, in patience god lynesse, in
godliness brotherly kyndnesse, in brotherly kindness love. For if these
things be among you and be pleynteous, they will make you yt ye another shall be
idle, nor unfruitful in the knowlage of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he yt
lacks these things is blind, and gropeth for the way with his hand, and
has forgotten, that he was purged from his old sins.

This doctrine of grace and merits, of faith and works has no smell of
heresy. And so it eftesones clearly appears that the gospellers church is
the true church of Christ.

And if they lay to our charge, that our doctrine is iustlye condemned,
because we constauntly affirm, that man is justified by only faith: this is
to answer them, that we have feyned no new kind of speaking in this behalf,
another do we alone affirm, that faithful beleuers are justified by only
faith. For we borrowed that manner of speaking of the very scriptures of the
apostles and evangelists, and of certain doctors of the church, that are no
heretics but true catholics. For I have already showed plainly enough, that
we contend not by this our saying, that faith is alone, that is to say,
unfruitful, If righteousness come of the law, than Christ died in vain.
but that faith is the only cause of our salvation. For it is certain that we
are justified not for our own works sake, but freely for Chrites sake, and so
our sins are not imputed unto us, and that justified folk do the works of
justice, and yet seeing the faithful know, that they are justified freely, they
ascribe not iustificacion unto works, albeit they doubt not but God allows
the works of faith. If it would like our adversaries to condemn of heresy,
the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles, with Origene, Chrysostom, and
Ambrose, which say most many festly that the faithful are justified by only
faith. In deed we had rather be heretics with them, than right fellows and
catholykes with our adversaries.

The.xii. Chapter.
THe same poor Gospellers church denies not absolucion to such as have
fallen, The wounds of sin are healed by Penance.
but we confess that pure penance is a wholesome medicine to heal sinners in
ye church, if when they be accused by the word of God, and enlumined with the
holy Ghost, they acknowledge and confess their faults and sins to God, and
be heartily sorry for their offenses, and trust to be forgeuen through Christ's
merits, and then lead a new life.

Now it appears again in this place, that we ymagine no new doctrine of
penance in the church of God. It is new fangled stuff that is feyned of
sins to be confessed (except a man will be damned) not only to God, but also to
his own priest, by all circumstaunces even to the uttermost small thought. It
is new found marchaundise that is feyned of cases Papal and episcopal
reserved, Act, 16.
of satisfaccions and indulgences. When the keeper of the prison at Philippos,
fell to ye Apostles fete, and besought them saying: Sirres what must I do that
I may be saved? they told him. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved and al thy hole house. Saint Petre gave none other cou^sail to the
citizines of Jerusalem, Act. 2.
that were pierced in their consciences, and said: what shall we do, you men
and brethren? Petre answered, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Itsus Christ to the remission of sins. etc.

And on this facion we read that the Apostles used the keys of ye kingdom of
heaven, The Key.
when they received them of Christ, and after this sort they opened the
kingdom of heaven to faithful beleuers. And on this wise ye gospellers church
uses yet still ye keys yt Christ has given them. So that we have Christ's
old keys, and not the Popes new monstrous polling pikepurse cross keys.

Lactantius which was never noted of error in treating upon penance, Li. 4. c.
20.
after that he hade said, there is no salvation found but within the catholic
church, he adds by and by: But for a smuch as heretics think theirs to be
also the catholic church: it is to understand, that it is the true church,
wherein is religion, confession, and penance, that holsomly cures sins and
sores, whereunto the frail flesh is subject.

Therefore seeing this wholesome medecin is not wanting in the gospellers church,
wherein desperacion is also singularly beaten down, and sure hope fast fixed
and confirmed, who can doubt that the gospellers church is the true church of
Christ?

The.xiii. Chapter.
FVrthermore there is in our church brotherly admonicio^, ^dmonici^n and
^rotherly ^^rrection.
correction, and some reformacion of men's faults and offenses. For though
all be not yet fully well herein as godly men could wyshe it, yet there is some
Christian discipline practiced in the gospellers church.

There is two manner of disciplines, the one of the clergy, and the other of the
laity. The gospellers church by keeping of conuocacions and other convenient
means in Germany keeps the clergy in order to do their duty. And so King
Edwardes will and commandment was, to have his clergy. as for the discipline
of the laytie, it confisteth in good laws, and diligent execucion of them. And
how that is used among the Germans, let other men report: As for me I know
nothing, but hear that it is godly handled. And though al is not so perfect
as it should be, and that their sharp roughe censure does not thwyte away
all offenses at once, yet every good man knows that many things are reserved
to be plucked up by the roots in yt judgment to come: every godly person
acknowlageth his fault, and is sorry for it, as often as he does less than he
perceaueth the Lord requires him to do. I could demand of the Papists, to
show their discipline which they have in their church: but because I know
them as shameless as wild coltes without discipline, I hade rather defend the
innocence of the gospellers church, whereof I am an unworthy membre, than at
this time to cast other men in the tethe with their faults: I leave that to
the discussyng of better learned and fyner wytted men than I am.

Thus far I trust the chief marks (...) found in the poor gospellers
church, and therefore we have nothing a do with the churches of heretics and
schismatikes.

The.xiiii. Chaptre.
Prayer and inuocacion of God by Christ.
There is also retained and kept in the gospellers church (as it was in
England under King Edward) the holy sacred and right divine prayer, which
Jesus Christ the son of God him self has given us, as a handsome short
sum of all prayers or forms of prayers, and is written, Matthew. 6.

There is used and exercised in the Bospellers church (and so it was also under
King Edward) the true inuocacion and calling upon the true almighty God, with
due thanks geuyng for the gifts and benefytes that we have and do receive of
him. And that inuocacion we keep sincere and pure. For we use our vulgar
common known tongue in all things, whether we sing, or pray without syngyng.
For who knows not that it is free either to sing or not sing in churches, as
is requisite or not requisite for the congregacions? We call upon God alone,
our most merciful alknowyng and almighty father, yea and we call upon him, as
he him self has taught us, by Jesus Christ our Lord. As for creatures, we
call upon none of them, another instead of the creator nor with the creator.
We call upon him, Romans 10.
in whom we believe: but we believe in God alone, and not in creatures, therefore
we call upon God and upon no creature. As for the saints departed (whose
souls live with God in heaven) we make no prayer to them. For inasmuche as the
scripture teaches us, that in God alone is all pleyntifull fullness of all
good things, and that Christ Jesus does at al times continually, diligently,
faithfully, and most perfitely accomplish all the parts of a most faythefull
intercessour with God the Father: there is no cause left, why faithful folks
should turn unto others, than unto God alone, or desire help at any other,
than at Jesus Christ, unto God the Father.

Come to me (says Christ aloude) all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
(...). 11.
and I shall refreshe you. ^o. 16.
Verily I say un to you, what so ever ye shall ask the father in my name, he
shall give it you. Hebr. 4.
And Paul says: we have not a high priest that can not have compassion on
our infirmities, but was tempted in all points, like as we are, but yet without
sin. Let us therefore go boldly unto the trone of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

What offense now does the gospellers church in this case, which in obeyeng
the precepts recorded in the Evangelists and Apostles wrytynges, goes the
straight high way unto Christ, and desires to be commended unto God by his
only intercession? It is not readde in any place of the scriptures, that any of
the holy Apostles, while they lived here upon earth, required the intercession
or help of any Patriarch, Prophet, or Martyr. They did all call upon God by
Jesus Christ alone. Why should we than follow strange examples? This is the
true and pure calling upon God, this is the true serving of God, and a
sacrifice to God most acceptable, Hebr. 13. To. 12.
as Paul after the Prophets bears plain record. Therefore there is no
heresy nor schism found in these cases. Saint Austen in his exposicion of
this place of John, Babes, if any do sin, Super epist. Io. canonicam. 1. Io.
2.
we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the righteous, says: John
drunk the secrets of hydden mysteries out of the Lords breast. He (for all he
was such a man) said not, you have an advocate with the father, but we have an
advocate. He said not, you have, nor you have Christ, but he put in Christ and
not him self: and he said, we have, and not you have. He rather put him self
in the nombre of sinners, to have Christ his advocate, than put him self an
advocate in Christ's stead, and be found among the proud damned. Brethren, we
have Jesus Christ the righteous an advocate with the father, he is the mercy
seat of our sins. He that has holden this, has done no heresy: he that
has holden this, has done no schism nor sedicion. Thus says Austen. Than
seeing we follow the commandment of the Apostle, which did another heresy nor
schism, and seeing we call not upon John now living with Christ in heaven to be
our advocate, but upon Jesus Christ alone, we may not be justly called either
heretics or schismatikes.

The.xv. Capter.
YEt for all this the Gospellers church contemns not the saints in heaven,
Honoring of Saynctes.
nor hyndreth them of their due glory. For we so honor them, as the holy
scripture teaches us to honor them. We judge honorably of them, as it
becomes us to judge of gods elect. We thank God for their faith and
doctrine, and we pray that we may atteyne to their company.

We love them as brethren, we praise them as teachers and examples of faith,
we defend them against railers and wicked wretches, as faithful persons and
worthy of eternal glory, we acknowlage them as dear friends and brethrem of
the son of God, we preach of them as of ye ercel lent instruments of God,
by whom he has wrought both our salvation and wonderful weyghtye great
matters besides.

Now I trust no man will say, that we are enemies to the saints reigning with
Christ in heaven, seeing we attribute thus much unto them of a sincere and
reverent unfeigned heart, geuyng to God that is Gods, and to his saints, that
is theirs.

The.xvi. Chapter.
A Gayn, Sacram^^tes of Christ a^ the cure^.
the gospellers churthe has no new Sacrament, nor any mo, than God him
self has ordained for it. If there be any other discipline or obseruaunce, we
so reverence and use it, as the Lord has commanded to use it, or as the
forgeyng examples of the Apostles have taught us.

Therefore the Church of England under King Edward the.vi. hade not, Baptism^
and the gospellers church else where at this day has not any new
Baptism, but the old Baptism, even the same that with calling upon the name
of God is given in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, to the forgeueneffe of sins.

By this baptism we believe that all are baptized to be one body through the
spirit of Christ, (...) 6. (...) l. 3.
and that baptism does always work effectuallye in faithful beleuers: For
Christ does always wattre the me^bres of his body with his own spirit.

So are we therefore the true members of Christ's church, ^^e head (...)
mem^^^s of the ^^^rche.
under that one head, king, shepeherde, and most mighty hye priest Jesus
Christ our Lord. We are not schismatical cut of members. For we stycke fast
unto our one only head Christ our Lord, another do we fall from the feloweship
of the members or body of the church, wherwyth we are knytte together in
spirit, faith, and love: than why are we called schismatikes? If we did put on
an other head, or departed from the true me^bres of Christ, and were coupled to
other strange members, and so co^stituted a new church, we might iustlye be
noted for schismatikes: but now sense we acknowlage that there is but one only
church, and that it is the communion of saints dispersed throughout all the
wide world (in the feloweship whereof all our possible endeavor is to remain)
and seeing we cry with S. Petre, and say: Lord, Io. 6.
whyther shall we goo? thou haste the words of eternallyfe, and we believe and
have known, that thou art Christ the son of the living God: why (I pray
you) are we called schismatikes?

The.xvii. Chapter.
We do also participate and feed of al one self same table of the Lord with
all saints through out ye hole church of Christ rendering thanks for the
unspeakable benefit of our redemption. The Lords Supper.
We eat al one spiritual meat, we drink all one spiritual drink with al
faythfulles throughout the holy catholyke church. We are al one bread and one
body with Christ and with al faythfulles. By what right therefore are we called
schismatikes? Will our adversaries condemn us of heresy, because we believe,
that to be the best form of celebratyng of the mystical supper, which Christ
him self has instituted, and the Apostles delivered? will our adversaries
condemn us as heretics, because we obey Christ's biddyng, Drink of this all,
and communicate under both kinds? Will our adversaries condemn us of heresy
because we worship Christ the son of God and of Mary syttyng on the fathers
right hand, and not hidden under the kinds of bread and wine? will our
adversaries condemn us as heretics, because we acknowlage Christ to be the
only priest, and that the one only sacrifice of his body only once offered upon
the cross, is ever of sufficient and perfyte efficacy in God the fathers
sight to cleanse the peoples sins: and because we observe the mystical supper
for a remembrance of the sacrifice, that was offered for us on the cross once
for all? Than let them furst condemn Christ him self, which instituted these
matters none otherwise: let them condemn his Apostles, which have taught us so
to believe and so to do. But if they think it wickedness to think any such
thing, than let them cease to charge the gospellers church with the crime of
heresy, which thinks nothing herein, which does nothing herein, but as it
has received of Christ our Lord him self, and learned of his holy Apostles.

The.xviii. Chaptert
THe Apostle S. Petre speaking of wicked teachers, Obedience to Prince. and
magistrates. 2. Pe. 2.
says: They despise authority, they are presumptuous, and stubborn, whythe
fear not to rail upon them that excelle in honor. etc. we therefore abhorryng
that kind of doctrine, and condemning that ambicious, stubburne, presumptuous,
and raylyng rebellion of those men, do heartily honor Princes and magistrates;
and teach all other to do the like, allegeing S. Petres lesson: Fear God, 1.
Pe. 2.
honor the King. And S. Paul's saying: Give to every man therefore his duetye,
Romans 13.
tribute to whom tribute belongs: custo^, to whom custo^ is due: fear, to
whom fear belongs: honor, to whom honor perteyneth. We allow schools and
study of good sciences, and to our power (un boasted be it) we do faithfully
and diligently endeavor our selves to further them. Further more we do not
damn good and just political laws, nor necessary defenses justly taken in
hand, ne just punishments against offenders. We do not improve political
rule and government, honest buyeng and sellyng, good sciences and lawful
occupacions, propretie of goods and lands, and such like, which the
pretending apostolical sectaries the Anabaptists did before time find fault
wythall.

We teach folks also to flee idleness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
and to labor with their hands, according to the Apostles rules: as we are
constrained also for causes of necessity to abandon mo^kery and cloistre
lubbers in our co^gregacions. For the solitary life, which the old fathers
make mention of, is an other manner a matter, than this is, which at this day
(where they continue) is a heavy burthenous plage almost to al common
wealths. And to recke^ up all that can be spoken, we have no thing adoo with
either sects or schismatikes.

The.xix. Chapter.
THe Apostle S. Paul by the holy spirit of God prophe cieth, The difference
of me ates. 1. Timo. 4
that in ye later times there shall come most corrupt men, which shall give head
unto deceauable spirits, and do^^^^nes of deuilles, for byddyng marriage, and
commaundyng to absteyne from meats, which God has created to receive with
thanks geuyng unto the faithful.

And so we preach sobre fasting, and yet we bring no meat into an evil name,
but always grant free use of meats. Howbeit we teach, that abstinence is to
be kept for a time, from al meats, what so ever we perceive do make the flesh
over stout, so that it obeys not unto the spirit.

As for marriage we forbid it unto none, either order or lawful age, 1. Cor.
7. Hebr. 13. 1. Cor. 16.
whether it be man or woman: albeit we wype not virginity from her due praise.
Marriage is honorable among al men, and the marriage bed undefiled. But we
deteste al uncleanness, fornicacion, adultery, inceste, and abominable lusts.
We deteste dronkenesse, surfettyng, ryote, and al vntemperaunce. We teach
temperaunce, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Hebr. 12.
sobre diete, and chastity. We teach with the Apostle Paul every one to
possess his vessel in purity and holiness, without the whyth no man shall see
God.

(...) that Christian charity is the most propre right mark of faihtfull
christians, Chur^^e and works of mercy. Ioh. 13. Math. 25.
as our saueour says: In this shall all men know that you are my disciples,
if you have love one to an other.

Therefore we condemn malicious manslaughters, furious bloodsheading of Kings
and Princes, unjust wars, treasones, murders, wytchcraftes. etc. For we
know that mercy and gentilnesse is more acceptable before God, Ose. 6. Math.
9.
than all other virtues. I require mercy (says the Lord) and not sacrifice,
and the knowlage of God, more than burnt offringes.

Now hereof it comes, that seeing we be co^stitute in the same body that all
the holy saints of God are, we suffer for this faith and for this doctrines
sake, the self same persecucion, that all that have confessed the same faith
that we do, have suffered sense the days of Abel unto this present. Ioh, 15.
If you had been of the world (says our Lord in the Gospel) the world
would love his own. But because you are not of the world, but I have chose^
you out of y^ world, (...)

For all though we be sinners, and do all amysse in many things, yet this
may we justly reioyte in, that our adversaries hate us not for sins sake,
but for godliness and sincere professing of Christ's religion. For we should
have been a great deal better taken of many a one, if we would fall in to the
same ryotous losenesse and in to all filthynesse of religion and manners that
they do. 1. Pet. 4.
Therefore we are not sondred from the fellowship and communion of the thurche,
that has been from the beginning of yt world unto this day. We are
souldyours with all saints under all one Emperor and captayn, we have the
same hope and expectacion that they have. We repose all the necessaries of our
life, salvation, and help, in one only and the self same paymaister, even our
lord God Jesus Christ. So we be true members of y^ true church of Christ
though our adversaries have hitherto synfully accused us (the members of the
gospellers church) of heresye and sedicyon.

(...) us up their old song, ^^uersaries objections.
that we are fallen from the holy church of Rome, that we have gathered a new
fangled schismatic church together, which has another head nor continual
succession of bishops: and therefore that new fangled church is no church,
but a conspiracy of a few mystye rascal knaves crept out of a sort of
obscure fellows and denounced accursed long ago, and slaketh and abateth again
daily more and more, to bewraye it self by that token, seeing it is not
stable, as Bamaliel said, it is of men and not of God.

Here unto we make this answer at few words. Above all things it is to be
weighed and consydred, which a one the true church of Christ is, and where it
is. Not all that are called Israel (sayrth the Apostle) are Israel: Romans 9.
even so all that brag of the name of the church, be not the true church:
but ye is the true church, that is knyt to her one only husband and head
Christ, that hears the voice of none but of her only husband and shepeherde
Christ, and continues with al saints in him. From this manner church we never
fell, whether it bear the name of the church of Rome, the church of
Alexandria, the church of Consta^tinopole or the church of Antioche. For what
so ever is or ever was of Christ, of truth, and of true godliness, in these
or in other churches throughout the wide world, we embrace it with all our
hearts, and endeavor our selves to keep that syncerely still unto the end. But
in deed we are fallen from, and abhor the Romyshe wickedness, the Romyshe
errors, the Romyshe corrupcio^s, the Romyshe lies, the Romish false iugglyng
knackes, and all abuses whence so ever they be, as we utterly also abhor the
Ieweship and Mahumetes religion. We do very well agree with the old states of
the churches of Alexandria, Antioche and Constantinopole, but with Mahumetes
corrupcion of them, wherein they stick all fast at this day, we agree not. We
agree very well with ye old church of Rome, which ye chosen vessel of God S.
Paul made so much praise of: but we agree never a wit at this day with the
extreme corrupcion of the church of Rome, which their own very friends can
not chose but speak evil of, because of the horrible abominacions of it. Are
we therefore fallen from the church of Christ, because we (according to
Christ's own mind and commandment) renounce and cast away the errors: of
the church of Rome? The holy prophets of God, the natural son of God Jesus
Christ our Lord, with his chosen Apostles, were undoubtedly in the body of the
true and catholic church of God, albeit they had no feloweship the while with
that church that vaunted them selves to be the true church of God: Nay, that
church excommunicated and persecuted the Prophets, and Christ and the
Apostles, and condemned them openly for heretics and schismatikes. But yet
they were true faithful men and catholics nevertheless for all that.

And how comes it to pass that the gospellers church is called a new
fangled church; which have their relacion from hence to the beginning of the
world: which have Christ the eternal son of God to be their fou^dacion, and
acknowlage the Apostles and Prophets to be her founders, and shows in her
self all the tokens of the true church in the sight of all men?

That is not an headless church, which acknowledges and reuere^ceth Jesus
Christ the son of God, the same, I mean, whom the Apostles name the head,
and the salvation, the king and chief high priest of the church.

Another is the gospellers church without continual succession of bishops,
seeing it has her relacion even unto the Apostles of Christ.

Christ hade the continual rabble of bishops and pristes in the cathedral
church of Jerusalem ever against him. The same was against the apostles also.
But yet who will therefore deny, that the Apostles churches are the true
churches? Who will reprove Christ's doctrine and his Apostles of lyeng, except
it be a man to wicked to tell of? Besides this I could tell, what a manner one
the succession of bishops of Rome is, namely of them, that have made their
neste in that Satanicall seat for these five hundred years, if I would do as
Suetonius did: and if I lusted (as he disclosed the most shameful filthy lives
of Emperors) to blase out ye cursed false parts and abominable wyckednesses
of many bishops of Rome, and if I lusted to expound this saying of Paul: There
shall starte up from among you, Act. 20.
men speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them. etc. But it is
enough to play touch and go in these matters, because I speak to men of
understanding. That church is not of a few folk, that is dispersed all the
world over, and comprehends all those that be faithful: except our
adversaries peradventure mean that which Christ our Lord spoke in the
Gospel: Mat. 22.
Many are called, and but few chosen. And again. Narowe is the gate and
strayte is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it.
There is also no conspiracy in us to any euel purpose, but an holy consent to
the doctrine and obedience of Christ. As for mystye knaves we are none, for we
cast no mystes nor dark clouds to deceive any man, but we allure al me^ to
the most clear light of the gospel.

Another is the gospellers church builded upon obscure men and holden accursed,
but of Christ's own Apostles, which were most famous notable men in all the
world. For albeit the preaching of the gospel was brought unto us by those
me^nes ministeries, who are of most high co^mendacion among the godly, yet we
give not thanks for the beginning of so precious a Jewel unto men, but unto
Christ the son of God. Paul was the furst that preached the Gospel to the
Corinthianes, but for all that he would not have them called Paulinianes, but
he would have them called Christianes. If Christ which is the true light of the
world, if the Apostles which are the light bear ours of ye world, be obscure
men and accursed, we grant that our doctrine came of obscure and accursed men.
But I am sure, they that go about to bring them into that slander, shall have
light enough (and to spare) in their kingdom, where hell fire shall be their light.

They also make a most open loud lie, in saying ye the gospellers church of
Christ abateth and slaketh every day more and more. Sure they prate that,
because Germanye was so lately assaulted and afflicted with wars, and because
of the horrible alteracion in England. And do not the lyeng wretches see, that
as Bermanye was tried as gold is in the fire, even so is England by martires
blood? The Lord said to Petre: Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to sifte you,
Luce. 22.
as it were wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And
when thou art converted, streyngthe^ thy brethren. As for Petre he fell, and
denied his master: yea his master was also hanged on the cross, and all his
disciples ran away. But yet who ca^ gather thereof, Ergo Christ's doctrine is
false? Ergo the Apostles church is not the church? Are not our adversaries
advised, ye all which will live godly, must needs suffer persecucion? Or why do
they not see, ye they are feign perforce, with a sorrowful heart to confess it
to be true, that in all their high po^pous ruff, their kingdom is every day
more and more rent, cut of, and slydeth away: and that Christ's gospel is
clearly preached daily more and more, and takes good root in very Italye and
France, and is surely planted (for all their massing myschief and tyrannous
tormenting) in wooful England: it puts forth his grene buddes in Polone, in
Hungary, in Islands not a few, yea and in very Turkye also. For as fast as
kings and Princes (by the incensyng of bishops and priests) psecute
faithful christian people with fire and sweord, and for all that the wise of
this world lay their heads together, and take cou^sail among them selves, how
they may hyndre the kingdom of Christ, and thwyte away the preaching of the
gospel, yet they are never the farther for all their adoo: the gospel blows
his horn still, and will do (let the world stamp and stare) even to the last
day, til the son of God shall come, and give rest and glory to his afflicted
fre^des, and servants, and cast his enemies headlong from his presence in to
the lake of vrymstone, that shall burn for evermore. Now if a man will gather
out of al this simple treatise and declaracio^, the very marks of ye true
right catholic church of Christ, and will with advised diligence behold the
gospellers church (whom the Papists charge with heresy) observing whether ye
more sure right marks of the true church may be found in the gospellers
church, he shall utterly confess, that the gospellers church is gorgeously
furnished with them, and therefore clear acquieted from all accusacions and
raylyng reports of al traitorous papists and adversaries. For the gospellers
church receaueth al and singular holy sacred canonical books. The true marks
of Christ's ^atholike ^hurche.
both of the old Testament and the new. To them we give credence in all
points without contradiccion or doubt, as authencicall, that is, having of
them selves full and perfect absolute authority. In them we affirm that all
truth is to be believed, and al mysteries and offices of godliness are in them
fully contained and taught: and therefore we refer all the affairs and
businesses of the church, and al questions unto them, and we give sentence,
ordain and refourme after the definitive judgments of them. How be it we
receive not every man's judgment of the holy scripture, but the most
catholic and right meaning, grounded upon the mind of the holy Ghost, and of
the conference of scriptures one place to an other, and conformable in all
co^dicions to says and charity. In this behalf we are not unthankful but
thankful to antiquitis, and set much price by the labors and travails that
the old ancient fathers bestowed upon the expounding of the scriptures, and
we gladly use the godly interpretacions of the ancient prelates of the church,
which diffre not from the rule of holy scripture. The gospellers church
permits not the interpretacion of the scripture and the charge of the
co^gregacions to every man at adventure, but to such as be thereto lawfully
chosen and appointed by the rule of the Apostles. We believe and religiously
embrace ye chief principles of the christen faith, namely ye first and health
giving promise made of God in Paradise co^terning Christ our redemer, breaking
the head or kingdom and power of the devil. We religiously embrace that only
and eternal covenant that God made with our first parents at the beginning of
the world, and afterward many times renewed it with the holy fathers. We
religiously believe and obey the most holy tables of the covenant written with
the fyngre of God, and conteynyng the hole mysterye of al godliness. We
religiously receive and use the most anntient articles of belefe, called the
Apostles Creed, comprehe^dyng all the mysterye of faith: which we fully and
syncerely believe with al our hearts, and confess it also with open mouth: and
thereupon we directly condemn all heresies and heretical persons. We stycke not
also to receive al declaracio^s and definicions of faith, whether they be of
Cou^sailes or of Fathers, so they agree with the Apostles Creed. Another do we
refuse old ancient Tradicions, if they agree with the doctrine of the
gospel, and the apostles scripture. We preach the grace and merccie of God in
Christ, we profess, that faithfulle christianes are justified by ye only
merit of Christ, through only faith in Christ, and not by man's works or
merits. And therewith all we teach that a true faith can not chose, but bring
furthe good works: James. 2.
and we affirm with S. James the apostle, that a fruteles faith is a dead
faith. We acknowlage that al men are sinners, and that all do amysse in very
many things, and therefore sinners have need of perpetual salve: and we affirm
that penance is the health geuyng salve to them that believe in Christ. And in
this behalf (as in other cases) the Keys of the kingdom of heaven have
place. Herein we neclecte not discrete admonicion and brotherly reformacion. In all these matters we pray continually to God without ceassyng. We use ever the
pure calling upon God by the intercession of Christ alone. We receive and use
another mo nor fewer Sacraments than God him self has delivered unto his
church. By Baptism we have entrance into the church, thorough baptism we
are washed and bounden by vow unto God. We also (the poor church of
gospellers) are nourished with the mystical Supper, we celebrate the
remembrance of man's redemption purchaced by the body broken and blood shead
of Jesus Christ. We (the gospellers church) give thanks for gods benefits,
and so we openly profess our faith. We therefore abide in the unity of the
mystical body under one only head and King, high priest and shepeherde
Jesus Christ: we are not sondred from the most fast knytte feloweship of the
faithful me^bres. We think honorably of Princes and magistrates, that they
are the ministers of God, and therefore they ought to be obeyed and to have
their duty. We condemn nothing in the political or civil states that is not
repugnaunt with godliness. We forbydde not meats, which God has made to
faithful folks use. We forbydde not marriage to any order or state either of
man or woman. Fornicacion with al uncleanness and intemperaunce we utterly
deteste. Specially we commend charity to be kept toward al me^. We serve
God with willing liberality to our power.

We do patiently bear the cross that is laid upon us, for the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that abydyng constau^t in the fellowship of the body
of the church, we may receive reward with all the saints which from the
beginning of the world have suffered persecucion for righteousness sake. There
is no new fangled stuff in the gospellers church: all is of the old sort,
doctrine of Faith, Belefe, the Keys, Prayer, the Sacracramentes, and all
together. It departs not fom the head Christ: it is not torn from the
members, that is, from the communion of saints.

These true marks of the true right tatholike church of Christ, when thou
fyndest in the gospellers church, why doubtest thou to call and freely acknowlage
it to be the true right catholic church of Christ? Why doutest thou to
forsake al them (as liars traitors and slanderous railours) that report it
to be an heritical, schismatical and sedicious church? I do not now (nor in
all this hole treatise) speak of them, that goo on with their religion upon a
certain zeal, and speak evil of us rather through instigacion of other, tha^
upon their own mind, being not yet so fully skilled, as to know how pure and
sincere our religion is, God lighte^ their hearts: But I speak of those
specially, which are called learned men, and the leaders of the common sort,
and are not ignorant of our doctrine and doings, and for that cause they most
doggedly and falsely slander us: of envy, hatred, and malice against the
truth, yea rather of covetousness tha^ ignorance, and yet they ca^ make non
end of their false slanderous railing.

Now forasmuch as it is more clear than the light at none days, having wyped
and driven away all the mystye dark clouds of all our adversaries, that the
gospellers church is the true right and catholic church of christ, it shall be
our parts doubtless, to continue constauntly in this true gospellike church of
God, and to goo on forewarde chearefully in the way of the lord, which we
have once already entered in to. If this world condemn and persecute us, we
know that the lord him self in times past told us before hand of non other,
of no pleasau^ter, of no better: for the world first persecuted him. If ye
rabble of mytred masters of mischief, which vaunt them selves to be the general
counsel laufully assembled to gether in the holy ghost, do accurse us: let us
considre, that ye lord him self was condemned before us of the high bishop
and college of priests and elders. Let us remember, that our God does bless
them, that bless the sede of Abraham, and does curse them that curse it: and
that we for our true faith in Christ, are the true sede of Abraham.

In the mean time let us contynually make our hartye earnest prayers to GOD
our father, by Jesus Christ our lord and saueour, without whom we can do
nothing: that he would grant us streynght to persevere, and constauntly to
continue in the blessed truth of his gospel, and to abide still in the right
catholic church of Christ. Amen.

Truth has the victory.

3. Esdr. 4. This is the victory, that ouercomethe the world, even our
faith.

1. Io. 5. Emprinted at Waterford the.7. day of Nouembre. 1555. *


