THE ANATOMYES of the True Physician, and Counterfeit Mounte-banke: wherein
both of them, are graphically described, and set out in their Right, and Orient
Colors.

Published in Latin by John Oberndorff, a Learned German: and Translated into
English by F.H. Fellow of the Coll. of Physicians in LONDON.

Hereunto is annexed: A short Discourse, or, Discovery of certain Stratagems,
whereby our London-Empericks, have been observed strongly to oppugn, and often
times to expugne their Poor Patients Purses.

LONDON Printed for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at his shop in Powles
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Flower de Luce and the Crown. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir John Popham, Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England, and One of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
GAlen one of the most famous Well-springs of Phylosophie and Physic (Right
Honorable) compares, Lib. de praecog. ad Post hun qui rep. Tomo quarte.
unlettered Emperickes and Quack-saluers, unto Thieves, and Robbers; making
this only difference betwixt them, Quod hi in Montibus and Syluis, Illi, in
confortiss. Vrbibus insidientur. That is, they take a Purse by the highway, in
Woods or Forests, but these do it in the most frequented and Populous Cities.
This grave, Iuditiall, and Peremptory verdit and sentence, of that great
Philosopher, and renowned Physician, does more closely attach, and strongly
arrest our ignorant Intruders, and bold Periclitators in the Practice of
Physic, then all the world is aware of. This (I hope) shall evidently appear
unto your L. by the two Treatises ensuing, the one of them, being written in
Latin by a Learned German, and by me put into an English Coat, for the good of
my Countrymen: and the other, a short Observation of mine own.

It is a Maxim among Divines, that Simulata Sanctitaes, est duplex Iniquitas.
In like sort it may be said, that fained knowledge is double Ignorance, both
because it is Ignorance, and because it lies, and counterfeiteth Skill and
Science. For if it be a point and part of good wisdom, for a man to see and
acknowledge his own weakness and insufficiency, and thereupon, to keep
within Compass, and meddle not (with the Shoemaker) Vltra Crepidam: It must
needs be an increase of Folly, Vanity, and Arrogance, for any, to pretend
Skill and knowledge in those Things wherein they are altogether unacquainted,
and to profess those Arts, which they never learned. But our Emperickes and
Impostors, as they are too ignorant either to Teach or Practice Physic (which
they never saluted from the threskhold) and too insolent, and arrogant to
learn of the Masters of that Faculty, or to be reduced into Order; so are
they most dangerous and pernicious unto the Weale-publike. Among wild Beasts
(says one) Envy is most Sauadge and exitiall, and among tamed Beasts Flattery.
The reason is, because the Sycophant is least of all feared, and most
difficultly discerned and discovered. These Crocodils, disguised with the
vizard of fained Knowledge, and masking under the specious Titles of
Physicians, and Doctors, not attained in Schools, but imposed by the Common
people, do with their Absolonicall Salutations steal away the affections of
the inconstant Multitude, from the Learned Professors of that Faculty, and
with their Loablike Imbracings, stabbe to the heart their poor and silly
Patients, ere they be aware, or once suspect such uncouth Treachery. The more
worthy and excellent the Object of any Art is, the greater, and more dangerous
is the Error of the Artist, if he fail in his Office. If a Tailor mar a
Garment, or the Potter break the Vessel he should make, the matter is not
great. But as he said in the Comicall Poet, Grave est Periculu^ in Filio: So
great is the Hazard, and greater is the Fault committed in the Body of Man,
the Domicil and Palace of the immortal Soul, and (as Zoroaster calls it)
audacis Naturae stupendum Miraculum. I omit as small matter, their living upon
the Spoil, and deceiving the People of their money and substance (which yet the
good Magistrate does undoubtedly respect) but their heinous offenses against
the precious Health and Life of Men, (whereof London has many woeful
Experiments in a year) are altogether intolerable, and in no wise to be
silenced or pretermitted. Nevertheless it is strange to behold, and consider,
how these circumforanian Impostors are dignified by the People, flocked and
resorted unto in whole Troops, sought out far and near, and equalized with,
nay (which is the greatest Indignity of all other) preferred and extolled
before the most Grave, Learned, and best Experienced in that Profession. If a
man have a scruple in Conscience, he will not repair unto an Hedge-priest (as
they are called) or bare Reader, having no more Divinity the^ a Child of ten
years old, for resolution, but to some Learned, godly and Iuditiall Divine. If
a Suit in Law, he will not resort to a Husbandman or Artificer, for Counsel
and Direction, but to a Skillful, well studied, and approved Lawyer: And yet
(such is the extreme folly and madness of many Men), that in case of Health
and Life, (Things most precious) they think every Tinker, Bankerupt, or
wandering Fugitive, who has over run his Creditors, forsaken his Trade, and
seeks to live (like a Droan without any Calling) a sufficient and complete
Physician, to advise, counsel, and direct them. It will be said, that these
Good-fellowes have been observed to perform some Cures, and to have good
success in their Actions. It has been likewise known, that a common Mariner,
the Master and Governor of the ship dying, or miscarying by some Accident,
has safely brought the Bark to shore, and arrived at the wished Haven: and
yet no man (if he may choose) will willingly sail with such a Pylot. A Company
of untrained and raw Soldiers, which never saw Field or War before, have
vanquished, and put to flight a Band of Veterans, invred for many years, and
well exercised in martial Affairs. And yet no Commander will prefer the
punee, and fresh water Soldier, before the ancient, tried, and
well-disciplined Warrior. Vna hirundo non facit Ver, Though that be admitted
(which notwithstanding if the Instances be well scanned) will be a difficult
matter to prove) yet I hold firmly (with incomparable Galen) my former
Position, that they are bad and dangerous Members of the State, and in no sort
sufferable in any well-ordered Commonwealth. I do therefore presume to offer
these my slender travails unto your L. who as you are a zealous Lover of your
Country, a for-ward Professor of the Gospel, an incorrupt, and upright
Iusticer, a Friend to Virtue and Men of Desert, a professed Adversary to all
Malefactors: So I nothing doubt, but you will take upon you the Patronage, of
the Learned and honest Physician, against the Ignorant and Couzening
Mounte-banke. Among your other manifold, and Honorable services, performed to
your Prince, and Country, (whereby you have commended your Name and Memory to
all Posterity), it is not the last nor least, that by your watchful
Providence, and healthful Justice you have cut off great numbers of
Grassators, and Robbers, and in a manner, cleansed, scoured and rid the Realm,
of those Monsters, and sauadge ravenous Beasts in the shape of Men. And I am
persuaded, that your Ho. Endeavors in furthering and contenancing the catching
and suppressing of these tame Beasts, or rather wily Foxes and Panthers, who
with their subtle fleights, sugared words, and sweet sents, do allure, entrap,
and circumuent the Simple, and pray upon both their Goods and Bodies at their
pleasure, will be no less acceptable to God, profitable to your Country,
grateful and commendable unto all succeeding Ages, then the former. But I need
not spend words in persuading your L. who have already declared, your
Honorable Inclination and forwardness unto that Business. Therefore fearing
to be tedious, I desire only the continuance of your Honorable favor unto the
Society whereof I am, in their just and honest Causes, and Affairs, and wish
unto your L. from my most inward affections, increase of Honor, Length of
Days, prosperous success in all your Honorable Enterprises for Gods Church,
and your Countries Good, Health of Body, Tranquillity of mind, complete
Faelicitie in this world, and Eternal Happiness in that, which is to come.

Your Ho. most humble, and addicted Clyent. F. H.

IN ERVDITISSIMAM DISSERTATIONEM DE VEro and falso Medico, Clarissimi and
dexterrimi Medici Domini D. Ioannis Oborndorfii.
Epigramma.
QVI Squis es infestis, qui conflictabere morbis,
Fac ratio Luctae constet vt ista tuae.
Fluctuat, incerto Natura relicta a duello:
Auxiliatricemque indiga poscit opem.
Si rectum quaeras Medicum: geminaueris hostem
Morbo, and victrici congrediere manu.
Sin faisum: gemino Natura occumbet ah host:
Namque nec Alcides sustinet ipse duos.
Hinc male si proprijs se credit viribus aeger,
Peius ad insulsum confugiet Medicum.
Ergo ne pecces, hoc erudiere libello,
Hostem vt praevertas, Thesea quaere tuum.
Caspar Stemper D.

IN THEOREMATA DE VERO MEDICO, NOBILIS ET CLARISSIMI VIRI, Domini Ioannis
Oberndorfferi, Physici and Medici celeberrimi.
PSeudo prophetae Orbem Cacocaussidicique replerunt,
Quid Medicos mirum gliscere degeneres?
De puduisse quibus decus est, qui pectora fraud
Plena, manus letho, labra Thrasonis, habent.
Multum vasa sonant inflata, and inania semper,
Strenuus ore magis, quo magis art rudis.
Nequior vtque quis est lingua, sic jura fidemque
Promptior astutis dissecat insidijs.
O nimium tortos praua vortigine sensus,
Orbem, at non dabitur ludificare IOVAM.
Quando venit scelerum grauis and iustissimus vltor,
Fraus, fraudisque faber quilibet, igne perit.
Interea felix, qui quit dignoscere VERVM.
A FALSO: oris IOVAE, instar is est DOMINI.
A VLLI educis Medica PRECIOSIVS Art,
JANE, and O BERNDORFFI hinc nobile nomen habes,
Nobile nomen habes, genus and doctrina SVPREMVM
Tefaciunt Medico nempe cluere Choro,
M. Christophorus Dana verus Ratisp. P. L. l. m. accinebat.

AD NOBILEM ET CLARISSMVM VIRVM, IOANNEM Oberndorfferum, Medicae disciplinae
Doctorem: in suam Very Falsique Medici Schemam.
OMnia nunc passim toto vertuntur in ORB;
Flebile ad exitium cuncta minanter eunt.
ARTS dispereunt meliori semine natae,
Atque suas miserae semper habent strigilies.
Prostrant Artifices Docti non ass vel vno:
Vulgus apud fatuum docta cohors perijt.
Et quid non tentant exosa Catharmata: LEGIS
Diuinae satagunt commaculare Libros.
Enthea conspurcant mysteria; front petulca
Audent in Magnum verba tonare Deum.
Ecce Fori Coruos ex illa part; furenter
In SACRA IVSTITIAE quam sine menterunnt?
Incessu grandi grallant, tetramque superbe
Depressant, oculis, vultu, animoque Truces.
Scilicet and sunt HI quos Tu cane peius and angue
Vitabis, been qui discupis esse Tibi.
In MEDICA felix quis non hodie Art triumphat:
Quin quoque Natura prosiliunt Medici.
Spermologi, errones, nactae, monachi fugitiui
Divendunt Medicas indubitanter opes.
Fures, Carnifices, and quae de faece popelli
Res prope decoxit perdita turba suas:
Omnes hi Medici venerando nomine gaudent:
Et quod turpe magis, turpe, senilis Anus.
O MEDICINA, DEI quae prodita ab ore patescis,
Tam foedis pedibus (proh) temerata iaces.
Exulat, HIPPOCRATIS Diuina scientia, nemo
Ingenium sequitur, docte GALENE, tuum.
Quilibet ex proprio fabricat medicamina sensu:
Pro placito fingit gramina nata sibi.
Morborum quaeris si causas: abdita sunt haec,
Responsant, sibi quae vendicat ipse DEVS:
Quas non inquiri fas est sine crimine magno.
Sicque rudem ludunt turpiter Art gregem.
At Tu, qui triplici munitus pectora ferro,
Tam male tornatos non bibis anre sonos:
Fluctuat in dubia tamen heic sententia mente,
Very quae MEDICI certa figura siet:
Hunc cape, quem donat nativa ex art Libellum
OBERNDORFFERI sedula cura Tibi.
Pellege, sed praesens animo, Livore subacto:
Livor enim plana nescit inire via.)
Is TE ductabit per amoena vireta: docebit,
Perdiscas MEDICVM quei been nosse VIRVM.
Monstrat inaniloquos, impostoresque nefandos:
Qui populoque solent imposuisse rudi.
Hos si cognoscis: Tu grata mente memento
AVCTORI grates nolle negare suas.
Martinus Oberndorfferus, Cantiaebius Palatinus, Iurisprud. stud.

THE ANATOMYES of the True Physician, and counterfeit Mounte-banke: wherein both
of them, are graphically described, and set set out in their right and Orient
colors.
Antithesis. 1. Part. 1.
Whosoever purposes to attain the right noble, Asclepiadean: before all
things, it is requisite, that he be wholly carried, and as it were ravished,
with a natural and heroical instinct and inclination unto that Study.

For it is not possible for any man, unless

But he that is thereunto framed, and disposed by Natures indowment,

Especially if he be of an ingenuous, and Schollerlike Disposition,

For this is the very storehouse of Erudition, the most necessary

Who before he set upon, so long and laborious a Study, beside Pallas golden
chain: I mean thoroughly furnished, with those Arts and Tongues, which are most
requisite and necessary in a Physician.

For these are the well-springs and Fountains of all humanity, wherewith if
our Physician be not thoroughly watered, he can never bring forth any good or
wholesome Fruit. For as these liberal and general Arts lead us (as it were
by the hand) to the sweet and silver streams of Natural Philosophy: so
Philosophy brings us (after some good acquaintance with her) to the
spacious, goodly, and beautiful Field of Physic.

It is needful likewise, that he bring with him an eager appetite, and
insatiable Desire, to penetrate, and diue into the Mysteries of that profound
Science: wherein there are so many hidden secrets, far removed from the Eyes
and Sense of the Vulgar sort.

Whereupon, that he may the more easily and happily attain the knowledge of
these things, he places himself in some famous University, replenished by
the benign aspect of Heaven, and clemency of the Air and Soil, with refined
and brave Wits: where (as in a Mart of Physic) he does not only store
himself with variety of medicinal furniture of all kinds; but does likewise
often enter into the lists with his Corriuals, and exercises himself in
discussing the difficult Controversies, of that learned Faculty: choosing for
his Masters and Standerd-bearers, such as are of greatest learning, and most
renowned and happy Practice, and such as do teach the Art painfully and
faithfully, that by these means he may more joyfully and speedily aspire unto
the top of his Desires.

Neither is he wanting to himself, but duly waying that Occasion is swift,
slippery, and bald behind, he catches her by her fore-lockes: with daily and
singular diligence he strikes the Iron, while it is hot, and takes the Time
whilst Time serves.

By this means, he lays a sound and sure foundation of his Art, readily
apprehending, firmly retaining the precepts thereof, and prudently applying
them to the use of his Patients.

Moreover, he seriously bethinketh himself, that this divine, and most learned
Study, requires not a laizie, drowzie, and slothful-snorring Therfites: but a
painful, vigilant, and industrious Ulysses, having a cheerful and undaunted
Mind, against all dangers, and troubles whatsoever.

Hereupon he daily and painfully exercises himself in reading the learned
volumes of those ancient Worthies, who have faithfully, and fruitfully
delivered this Art unto Posterity, the only Solace of humane Life: he
diligently frequenteth the public Lectures of Anatomy: and afterward himself
does make open Dissection. To conclude, he spares no pain, but climbeth the
high and steep Mountains, rangeth through the low valleys, pierces the woods
and thickets, enters the Caves and hollow Dens of the earth, searches
thoroughly the spacious and wild fields, the banks of sweet and running Rivers,
to attain the true knowledge and nature of multiforme Simples.

And that be may comprehend and understand the nature, properties, and virtues
of all these, he refuses no travail, nor forbeareth any cost, referring and
applying them all, to the commodity, benefit, and health of Men.

In the mean while (like a Diogenes or Timon, who desires to be alone and
singular) he does not refuse to join with learned Physicians, when they visit
their Patients, and confer together about the curatio^ of Diseases: but does
heedfully observe those learned Colloquies, and Consultations, and carefully
commit them to memory: putting likewise his own hand by little and little unto
the work, and in Cases of difficulty and danger, is nothing ashamed to follow
the Advice and Direction of skillful and well-pratised Physicians.

But to atchiue all these things happily, and successively, sufficient Time and
Opportunity are necessarily required.

For the learned, ample and divine Art of Physic, which requires a whole
man, is not learned in the space of one or two years: but for the largeness,
excellency, worthiness, and profunditie thereof, the whole Life of man is
hardly sufficient.

If we expect that this heavenly Science implanted in the mind, and purchased
by so many sweats, and more then Herculean Labors, should yield a plentiful
harvest to the good, and welfare of Mankind.

Thus you have briefly (as it were) the birth, education, and institution of a
true Aesculapian: to whom if you oppose your Changeling and masking Mount
bank, you shall find them to agree like Harp and Harrow. 2.

For it is clearer the^ the Sun, that the whole Rabble of these Quacksaluers,
are of a base wit, and perverse Nature, having no more natural Inclination, or
Disposition unto this study, then the Ass to the harp.

For all these Bragadocian Thessali, which boast of their skill in this
Profession, covering their Asses ears, with the honest tytles of Doctors and
Physicians, as with a comely Mantel, and practicing Physic to the unavoidable
and lamentable hurt and danger, of their poor and miserakle Patients, if you
consider them aright, for the most part are the abject and sordidous scumme,
and refuse of the people, who having run away from their Trades and
Occupations, learn in a corner, to get their livings, by killing of Men.

And if we pluck off the vizards wherein these disguised Maskers do march, and
bring the^ to the Light which (like Owls) they cannot abide, they will appear
to be runnagate Jews, the cutthroats and robbers of Christians, slowbellyed
Monks, who have made escape from their Cloisters, Simoniacall and perjured
shauelings, busy Sir John lacklatines, Thrafonical, and unlettered Chemists,
shifting and outcast Pettifoggers, lightheaded, and triuiall Druggers, and
Apothecaries, Sun-shunning night birds, and Corner-creepers, dull-pated, and
base Mechanickes, Stage Players, Iuglers, Pedlers, prittle-pratling Barbers,
filthy Grasiers, curious Bath-keepers, common shifters, and cogging Caueliers,
bragging Soldiers, Bankerupt marcha^ts, lazy Clowns, one-eyed or lamed Fencers,
toothlesse and tatling old wives, chattering Char-women, and Nurs-keepers, long
tongued Midwiues, scape-Tibornes, Dog-leethes, and such like baggage, and earth
dung.

In the next Rank, to second this goodly and sweet Troop, follow Poysoners,
Inchanters, Soothsayers, Wizards, Fortune Tellers, Magitians, Witches, Hags,
with a rablement more, of that damnable Crew, the very filth and dross of the
world.

Now, if you take a good view of these sweet Companions, you shall find them,
not only mere Dolts, Idiots, and Buzzards: but likewise Conremners and Haters
of all good learning.

For the greatest part of them disdain booke-learning, being altogether
unacquainted with liberal Arts, and never came where Learning grew.

For every one of them, though in his own opinion an other Chiron, yet either
has no books at all, or if he have a great Library, to make the world
believe he is a great Clarke, yet he lays them by the walls to feed the
Moathes, but never peruseth them: nay many times cannot, so gross is his
Ignorance.

For Books (witness Galen, the incomparable Master of Physic) are
Monuments, and Registers, of those who are before learned; and no perfect
Instruction for Rudsbies, and Idiots.

Neither does the possession of a great Library, and multitude of Books, make
a man learned: no more then Ajax armor would make Thirsites a stout Soldier:
But the painful and diligent reading them, and applying them to use: as the
skillful use of weapons, not the wearing of them shows and proves a good
Warrior.

But these (for the most part) rush into Apolloes Temple, with unwashed hands,
and unlettered heads: and as they are as blind as Beetles, so they have not
so much as a desire to see into the mysteries of that abstruse Faculty: they
either use no Teachers at all, or else make choice of some Thessalicall
Empericks as learned as themselves, or some smoaky Chemist, or black Vulcane,
able to teach them nothing but that which must afterward be untaught: yet
notwithstanding they swell like the Terentian Thraso, with a vain and phoppish
conceit of skill and knowledge, as though they were the only profound Doctors,
and learned Physicians of the world. To conclude, they are such as cannot abide
to take any pains or travel in study: they reject incomparable Galens
learned Commentaries, as tedious and frivolous Discourses, having found through
Paracelsus Vulcanian shop, a more compendious and short way to the Wood:
spending Time, the most noble and precious creature of God, either with doing
nothing, or vainly and foolishly, about toys, as in finding the Foolosophers
stone, making Potable gold, or in doing that which is evil and pernicious, as
in making some pleasant and refined poisons, under the names of Turbith
mineral, or Butyrum Arsenici, to keep Charon from wanting work; or else with
a troubled and shittle head, tossed too and fro like a feather, and turning as
often as the weathercock, they never bring any thing to good effect, or
perfection.

Others are so notoriously sottish, that being over head and ears in the myrie
puddle of gross Ignorance, yet they will by no means see or acknowledge it:
so that they know not so much, as that they know nothing.

For to give an instance in the most absolute, exquisite, and divine frame of
man's Body, if they can show a rude Description thereof, hanging in their
chamber, and nickname two or three parts (so as it would make a horse to
break his halter to hear them) they think themselves jolly fellows, and are
esteemed great Anatomists in the eyes of the Vulgars.

Now in the knowledge of Plants they are old excellent, and will roundly show
you Spynach in stead of Sorrel, a Nettle for Betony, and Colchicu^ for
Saffron, and that very demurely without any blushing.

Others (as wise as these) affirm very confidently, if not impudently, that
the knowledge of Plants and other simples, appartaineth not unto them, but to
the Apothecaries.

But it seems to me very ridiculous, if not altogether dishonorable, and
ignominious, that he who takes upon him to be an other Apollo and great
Doctor, should not know the Instruments of his own Art.

Now they are not so ignorant and doltish, but they are as envious, impudent,
and wainscot-faced. And since there is no punishment allotted unto Ignorance in
the weal public, saving the blot and brand of Infamy, that is so familiar and
accustomed unto them from the cradle, that it touches them no more then a
flea-byting. And Impudency is so rooted in the bones, and bred in the flesh,
that they not only in secret lash and whip with their venomous and serpentine
Tongues, all honest and learned Physicians, but at their pleasures do tyrannise
and excarnificat men's bodies, and through their bayard like boldness, and
licentious impunitie, make havoc of their silly Patients, making experiments,
and trying their Tartareall conclusions, by more then Tragical Deaths.

For there is no crime so heinous or odious, which lewd and lost Companions do
not perpetrate, unless they be bridled and restrained by fear of punishment:
but if the Magistrate look through the fingers, and wink at their
naughtiness, or else maintain and patrocinate them therein, then they carry
all away smoothly, and sleep soundly on both sides.

But these men should do far better, never to undertake those things wherein
they have no skill, then to profess those Arts which they never learned.

Now it is the honestest and safest course for good and learned Physicians,
(since they have no power in their hand to redress these Enormities, and that
there is small hope of a better world) to have no society with these
Barbarians, enemies to all Antiquity, Humanity, and good learning, least they
hear the old saying, Like will to like. As was said of the Devil dancing
with the Collier.

Antithesis. 2. 1. Part.
IF we from hence proceed to the Course of life, and practice of a right
Aesculapian, we shall see him differ as much as white and black, from the
croaking, and hedge creeping Quack-saluer.

His maine and principal drift and endeavor, by means of his education in
those studies, which wholly ravish the mind with the love of Virtue, is, that
as a faithful friend, and well-willer of Nature he may religiously,
vnspottedly, and charily preserve the precious healt and life of man, and
conserve the Estimation and Dignity of that most honorable and worthy
Profession.

For he thoroughly wayeth and considers the excellency of his Arts subject,
Man, that noble, admirable, and incomparable work of Jehovah, the Temple of
the holy Ghost, the most eminent and clear Myrrour, and Spectacle among all
creatures, of the divine wisdom, Justice, Goodness, I say Man framed after
the similitude of the Eternal.

Which noble and worthy Creature, commits his dearest Self and Life into
the hands and trust of our Physician.

Concerning whom, together with all his Operations, and Practices in his
Faculty, he is to give account unto Nature and the Author thereof: the Eternal
as a careful Inspector, and sincere Judge of them, in the day of that great
and general Assise, and everlasting Sabbath of the world.

When he seriously and diligently pondereth these things, he must needs
remember his own Condition, and that it concerns him to look well to the
vpshot and Conclusion.

Hereupon he attempteth nothing, he appoints and determines nothing, but
with sound Advice, Council, and Judgment, searching out with great care,
industry, and diligence, the nature and force of present Maladies (weighing
all things in the balances of Reason) with great and singular Dexterity
repelling them, and with admirable wisdom, foretelling and presaging future
Calamities.

He accounts nothing more dear unto him, then the Health of his Patients,
whereunto he is wholly devoted, refusing no labor or danger, be it never so
imminent, to attain that end. Nay he co^sumeth himself with grief and care
for other men's Calamities, reckoning their woes, his own miseries: and all to
this end, that he may perform the office of a true Physician, and deliver his
Patients from unavoidable Perils, and rescue men as it were out of the jaws of
Death.

For Physic being the Art of helping and healing, not of killing and
excarnificating, (as Scribonius says well) the Professor thereof, our
Physician, does not value men by their Fortunes, and Places in the world, but
reaches out his helping and healthful Hand unto all that desire his
assistance, and makes sure never to hurt any, but help as many as possibly he
can.

Hereupon, as beseems a good and virtuous Man, he carries not two faces
under one Hood, but his Heart and Tongue, his words and actions agree and go
hand in hand together.

For he endeuoreth by all means to show himself prudent, bashful, trusty,
grave, modest, constant, courageous, courteous, and affable.

For all these fair Virtues do usually attend them, who have been rightly
conversant, and trained up in Apolloes School.

Among other Virtues he greatly embraces Taciturnitie, and Secrecy. For
there are many Mysteries of the Art, many Diseases of Patients, which to blab
abroad, were neither seemly nor expedient. Many things are said and done by
these like parties, many Accidents fall out in their houses, which are to be
concealed as Secrets, and not to be carried out of doors, and cried at the
Cross.

For it is a Sign and argument of a Gentleman-like Disposition, and amiable
Discretion, to keep close things to be secreted, least all our Wit seem to
lie in our tongues end, and not to be lodged in the Head or Heart.

And as he is secret and discreet, so is he likewise Sober and Temperate, that
he may be fit and ready to visit his Patients, at any hour of the day or
night: being as good an afternoones-man, as a mornings-man.

For as Galen witnesses, a good Physician ought to be as studious of
Sobriety, as of Verity.

So in his attire there is no superfluous Curiosity, Courtlike Pomp,
far-fetched and foolish Finicallitie: no nor Diogenicall nastinesse, and
Lazerlike slouenie: but therein he labors to be decent, comely, and frugall.

Moreover he is contented with a mediocritie, and ioyeth in a mean Estate, not
greedily gaping and breathing after Riches, being sufficient to himself, and
knowing that they of their own accord, follow an industrious and laborious
Hand, unless a Man's lot fall among such as are altogether Clownes and Sowters.

And that he may avoid all sinister Cogitations, and Suspicions of evil, and
dishonest dealing, he cautelously shunneth and shuts out all churlish,
malignant, newfound, and suspected medicines, admitting those only in his
Practice, which are easy, safe, benign, undoubted, secure, and approved by
long Use, and certain Experience of the ancient Worthies, and great Masters
in Physic.

And in all these things he carries himself discreetly, ingenuously, and
without Cunning and Deceit: not refusing to submit his Prescripts and Forms
(if need require) to the Censure and Judgment of learned Physicians, willingly
yealding to confer with them, and (to use great Hippocrates words) embracing
willingly any learned Colloquie, least by any means he should seem to play
the Coward or Flincher.

For Truth being of that Nature, that she never hides her Face, or fears to
behold the Light, so the true Philosopher or Phisitio^, (for those two in our
Age make one) is sociable, and ready to communicate, hearing other men's
Opinions and Judgment with great delight, only to this intent, that by this
friendly Conference, and diligent Inuestigation, he may be confirmed and
encouraged in his good Course, and the Patient receive more assured, and
certain Benefits.

2. Antithesis. 2. Part.
NOw if you compare with him, our suborned and masking Mounte-barke, whose wits
are as dull as a door nale, they will be found as far different and distant,
as Michaels Mount, and Cheuen Hills.

For where shall you find any one in this Crew, who has any spark of Religion,
or drop of Charity? where one that has any right sense of Compassion, or
common Humanity? But to speak plain, (though it be horrible, so much as to
think) the greatest part of this Pack, are no better then rank and arrant
Atheists.

And to speak within compass, you shall sooner find a black Swan, then an
honest man in this Bunch: but if you prye narrowly into them, you shall
discern notorious Impostores, old beaten Foxes, and Cozeners; not Friends and
Favorites, but sworn Enemies to Nature, and Mankind: laughing in their
sleeves at their Budget full of wyles which they carry in their bosom, most
basely and wickedly, prostituting both Themselves, and the Art.

For this lost Companion, having a Foxes Head, and an whorish and wainscotted
Face, considering that nothing is set by in this Age, but that which is
profitable, that wealth is more esteemed then Honesty, and that Riches make
the Gentleman, and that Money makes Virtue stand behind the door, he sets
this down as a Maxim, and Conclusion, that wealth must be had, though with
the Injury and wrack of Piety, Equity, Humanity, and common Honesty, and
therefore prising Man, that immortal, and excellent Creature, the grand Miracle
of the Eternal, at naught, he carries himself Impiously, Desperately, and
Craftily, in all his Courses, casting as it were the Dice upon his Patients.

Hereupon he pronounces all Things darkly and doubtfully, as if Apollo should
gave Oracles from his Threefooted stool. And if he happen at any Time on a
Truth, you must pardon him, it was more then he was aware of. Now, all is Cock
sure, he will pawn his Life and Credit (not both worth a Rush) all shall be
well. By and by, with a Stoicall Countenance, he threatens Danger and Death:
breathing at once both cold and hot, and all to this End: that which way so
ever the World waggeth, he may be thought by his great Wisdom, and deep
reach in Divining, to have foreseen and presaged the Event: which he foreknew
as much as a Woodcocke.

So that being himself more variable then the Polyp, he is in twenty
several Minds in an hour, turning and winding, too and fro, like a
Tragedians Buskin, and uttering quite Contraryes.

Thus does this base and lewd Couzener mock God, and despise Man, for whose
cause the Eternal created the goodly and beautiful Frame of the World: and in
whose Body, whatsoever is more largely in that Spacious, and Gorgious Palace,
and Theater delineated, is more briefly comptised, and as it were Epitomized,
and represented a short Sum or View. Against this Noble Creature, the small
Counterfeit of the Great GOD, he does often times rage more sauagely, then any
wild Bear, or Tygar, refusing all good, safe, and wholesome Medicines, and
purposely making Choice of them which were invented by Satan or his Imps, for
the ruin, and Destruction of Mankind.

Now his Manners and Conditions (the lively Characters of the Mind) wherein
there is no one grain of Honesty, declare plainly what a sweet Companion this
is. For if a man consider his Person, he shall find him Lewd, Shameless, a
Hater mortal of all Good Men, well seen and practiced in all Couzening,
Legerdemaine, Coney-catching, and all other cunning Shifts, and Sleights, a
cracking Boaster, Proud, Insolent, a secret Back-biter, a cotentious Wrangler,
a common Iester, a Liar, a Busie-body, a Runnagate Wanderer, a Cogging
Sycophant, and Trencher-Chaplaine, a covetous Exactor, and Wringer of his
Patients: in a word, a Man, or rather Monster, made of a Mixture of all Vices.

For having spent all his Time in learning these Feats, and long Custom
having bred an Habit or second Nature, it cannot be but that in Virtues Place
there succeeds a whole Troop, and as it were a bottomless Whirlepoole of
all Vice, and odious Naughtiness and Filthiness.

Hereupon he neither Fearing God, nor Caring for the good Laws of Man, (I am
ashamed to speak that, which they shame not to commit) refuses not to give
Horrible and Detestable Counsel, for the murdering of Poor Infants in their
mothers bellyes, procuring them to fall from the Tree, like untimely Fruit.
And being as lascivious as a Sparrow in the Spring, he makes no bones to
corrupt and solicit to uncleanness, young beautiful Maidens (having a
special Faculty in Curing the Green Sickness) yea, and comely Matrons and
Wives, if he may handsomely come into their Chambers: blushing no whit to spend
many hours in Carowsing in Tauernes, and dallyance among Curtemans.

And according to the diverse Dispositions and Humors of Men, that he may fit
and Please all, he lays aside the Behavior and Gravity of a Physician, and
puts upon Him the Person of a Sycophant, and Parasite, making account as the
World goes, to thrive better thereby, then by his profession: refusing no
Servitude, or Drudgery, how base so ever, that he may creep into Favor with
his Good Masters, and Mistresses, and get into that Great Lord, or Rich Ladies
Books. One while he plays the Apothecarie, an other while the Cook, an
other while the Serving Man: other whiles serves in stead of Mother Midnight,
and sometime he is content to carry the Piss pot, abasing Himself to every
Servile and Slavish Office. Nay by your leave, Sometimes (which is of all other
most unworthy, and unbefitting) he plays the Fool and Iester, and now and
then (which is worst of all) the Bawd and Pandore.

And he is so far from being thought worse for all this, by the Vulgars, that
he is counted an Obsequious, Officious, Neat and Necessary Man, a Merry, and
good Fellow, and the Only Physician.

Among other things he labors to excel in Garrulitie, and much Babbling:
his Tongue being like a Lambs Tale, or Aspen leaf, which never lies still,
but is always wagging. And since he cannot come near others in sound
Learning, Judgment, and Skill in his Art, he will be sure to go far beyond
them in Childish, Foolish, Unsavory, Tedious, and Tiersome Loquacitie. So
that by a vain and fond boasting of Learning, and impudent promising, and
undertaking many and great Matters, he is accounted a great and profound Doctor
among the rude and ignorant Multitude, especially among simple and credulous
Women, (who through their weakness of Judgment, shallowness of Conceit, and
Leuitie of Mind, are of all other most ready to embrace old wives Tales,
Lies, and Forgeries) he keeps a foul Coil, playing the Champion, and
Warrior with his Tongue, vaunting above measure of his great and noble Acts,
in killing I know not how many Chymaeras; despising, and that with a Grace, all
the Learned Physicians of the Place, and sometimes Age wherein he lives,
barking and biting, reuiling, and calumniating them, at his Pleasure, as not
worthy to carry his Books, or once to be named, or compared with his sweet
Self, our great Magnifico, and all to the end that he might alienate Men's
Minds from Them, and by his shameless Cauils and Slanders, impair their
Reputation, and brand them with the black Coal of Infamy and Reproach.

Now if by these cunning sleights, unsavory Prattling, secret Calum^^ation, he
have scraped together a few Crowns, that he may trauel^ into some foreign
Country, he will make sure to fawn upon the Female kind, and to purchase
the Favor of honorable Ladies and Dianaes, with some rare, and precious
Gifts, suppose a piece of Counterfeit Vnicomes-horne, or a Bezoat-stone, made
of Powder of Post, or glassie Sand, the Only, and Sovereign Antidote, and
Medicine, (if you will believe my great Master) of all Malady, Treacle,
Diatessaron, or some Counterfeit Drugge closed hard with the Venetian Seal, or
a little white Clay: which he calls Terra Lemnia, or some such like precious
Jewel, not worth a button.

Now he impudently, with a whole stream of prittle prattle, sets out to the
uttermost his goodly Gifts, that they are worth twice their weight in Gold:
that they must be laid up in their Caskets, among their most costly Ornaments,
and kept as their Life.

Thus with these cunning sleights, fawnings, and flattering words, and Gifts
not worth a straw, (which notwithstanding silly Women have not the wit to
reject, but take them with both hands, and lock them up for Treasures,
extolling and praising them to the Skies among their Gossips) he wins the
Spurs among the Multitude: and being in high Admiration, Credit, and renown
with my Gossip Prittle Prattle, his Fame is by and by, spread through the whole
Town, as with Bell and Clapper, and he reckoned the only Learned and profound
Doctor.

For he cannot possibly make so loud and impudent a Lie, but it straight way
runs for current, among these credulous and poor Souls. For among Blind,
the Blinker easily rules the Roast.

So that by his lewd and loud Lies, and other pretty Shifts, and nimble
Sleights, he brings to pass, that he is applauded in every Corner, and
magnified by the common sort, as an other Apollo.

For they delighting altogether in Novelty, and loathing their old accustomed
Physicians, though never so learned, if there come any strange Beast, or
Monster, out of Barbary, or Jack an Apes from Cataia, they do gaze upon him
with Admiration, flock after him by whole Troops, and set him out, in highest
Degrees of Commendations.

And being compassed with this Crew of Idiots, and sitting in his Chair of
State with his Cap of Maintenance, by his silly Patient, it is a world to hear
how his Tongue rowleth and walks at random, (but not one wise word, or any
way appertaining to the matter, if he might gain thereby a Kingdom.) One
while with magnificall, bombasted, and ell-long words, he boasts of his
strange and admirable Cures, (you may take time to believe them) an other
while, he tells endless, long, and headless Stories, of his rare, and hard
Adventures, in Travails and Perigrinations, uttering often times, and that with
great arrogancy, and shameless Impudency, as many Lies, as words. Otherwhile
he takes up the Person of a leaster, and plays the Fool in the Play very
singularly. For that Part of all other (as it pleases himself and his fond
Favorites the best) so it becomes him right well.

But he has one property, which by the way is worthy of special
Commendation. If he see or hear any Thing in the House of his Patient, it were
as good to have been cried at the Cross. He cannot abide to keep Counsel.

For it is not possible that a Man of many words, should have any Truth or
Secrecy in him.

And as he is a Babbler, so is he likewise a good Trencher man, or Good fellow
as they call them, loving company and good cheer passing well: and the Chesse,
the Dice, a Cup of neat Wine, better a great deal then his Book.

For if you misle him at any Time, you may be sure to find him either in the
Tavern, or at Bowls, or at some Feast or Meeting of Good-fellowes.

For our Smell-feast, will be sure to haunt the Houses and Tables of Rich and
great Men, partly to fill his Paunch, and partly that he may be thought to know
all fashions, and that having won the favor of Grosse-headed and credulous
Rich Capen-caters, he may by their means be preferred and advanced.

And though he make glorious and vaunting Pollicitations of binding Bears, and
moving Mountains, yet if trusting to his big and Bugge words, upon some
urgent necessity you desire his Counsel in some sudden Symptom and headlong
Disease, by and by you shall find him falter at the first onset, as a Man
beside his wit, and not knowing which way to turn himself, or at what End to
begin.

Then not able any longer to cover his Ignorance, he gets into a Corner to
peruse his Note-booke, which he has patched from some Apothecaries File, or
else some English Pamphlet of Surgery, which he yet understands not without an
Interpreter, or else he flies to those old S^^esbies, and Trudge blew-coats
Antimony, and Mercury Precipitate, and if these good-fellowes chance to fail
him, then wanting all found Learning and Judgment, it is a Good sport to see
how he sumbleth and confounds himself, running into twenty Errors, and
Absurdities, every one greater then another.

So that by this means the Disease does oftimes sooner dispatch the Patient,
then our Pretty and Gay Doctor can resolve of a Course to be taken.

But that nothing may be wanting to our barred Cumanyst, he labors in his
Gate, Gesture, and Attire, to resemble the right Aesculapian: but so, that he
is like an Ape clad in Purple, with a whole table of Toys and Trinkets that by
Garish, Outlandish, and uncouth Apparel, his great Gold Chain, and glistering
Rings upon every Finger, he may draw to him the Concourse, and Admiration of
the People, and more readily utter his Cart-load of Leasings.

Now as this Stage like Bravery requires no small cost: so does it greatly
further our Magnifico in many Pretty and Cunning Shifts and Tricks of Gaining.

Among other Feats, if any of them is more Crafty, or has a little more broken
Latin in his Budget, then the Common Sort, he pryeth into the Practice of
other Physicians, and lays about diligently for those Medicines, which he
has heard or known to do good: and having once gotten a Transcript of them,
he uses them hand over head, without Art, or Reason.

Which notwithstanding if we give credit to Herophilus, unless they pass
through the Hand of Skillful and Iuditiall Physicians, do more hurt then Good.
That which is one Man's Bliss, is an other Man's Bane.

The greater Part of these Study, and that seriously, the Art of Sophistry,
Cousening, and plain Cony-catching, aduauncing, and setting to sale with Great
applause and Concourse, their witless Nostrums, which they have patched
together by the marring of two or three good Medicines, to make a third worst
of all, feeding the Common People with Toys, Trifles, Bables, Nut-shels,
plain Chafe in stead of Wheat, which notwithstanding they set out, to the
utmost, with more then Hyperbolicall, or rather Paracelficall Commendations.

Thus they inescate and circumuent poor silly Souls, leaving them as much
money in their Purses, as they have Wit in their Heads: especially if they
prepare their Medicines themselves, at home in their Selles, and hyre two or
three Brokers, to blaze their Commendations in every Corner of the City.

And if they can persuade them (according to the foolish opinion of Many) that
nothing is wholesome, effectual and Sovereign, but that which is far fetched
and dear bought (for they fill the Purse) they have half won the Goal. For
all ordinary and common Gifts of Nature, are despised and set at naught by
these Brave Magnificos, which have nothing but Unicorns horn, Bezoar stone,
Magistery of Pearls, and I know not what Precious, and Foreign Bugges and
Drugges in their Mouths.

These our Mounts-banke proclaims like a Daw upon a Perke, to be infallible
and sure Cards, approved and ratified by long and good Experience, laying often
times his Head to pawn, that they are such as whereof common and triuiall
Galenicall Doctors (for with that Style he brandeth all learned Physicians)
are altogether Ignorant.

Whereupon that he may by all means avoid to tread in the steps of the
ancient and modern Worthies, this blind, and sottish Impostor, carefully
shunneth all benign, safe, well-experienced, Judicial, and Rational
Medicines, and makes choice, of Churlish, Violent, Uncouth Drugges, invented
not to Purge, but to torment and excarnificat: not to save, but to Kill Men,
covering their strong Poison, in a small Dose, giving them sometimes in
Bozenges, sometime in Wine, that the poor Patient, looking upon the fair and
pleasant Bayte, may not deserye the Hook and Poison lurking within: and all
this he does with great Boldness and Impudency, not knowing the Danger and
Peril ensuing.

For they being (by all Classical and Rational Physicians) raunged in the
Rank of Poisons, do therefore violate Nature, not only by their Quantity,
but likewise by their Quality, be their Dose never so small.

Others as blind and bold Bayards as the former, bring out of their Budgets,
and dispearse abroad as Sovereign Salues, certain Powders, Alcola, Unguents,
Cerats, Oils, not worth a rotten thread, not knowing whereof they are
compounded, and often times being not able to Name them aright.

Other, under the Names and Tytles of Elixir of Life, Quin-Essence of Gold,
Pearl, Azoth, and Panacea, which they themselves have made, and account
Secrets of Secrets (whereby they have fetched back I know not how many Souls
embarked already in Charons boat) do sell certain Gimmalls, with great
applause, and for graet sums of money, and by their Factors dispearse them
abroad into foreign Countries.

Others, that they may colourably and cunningly hide their gross Ignorance,
when they know not the Cause of the Disease, refer it unto Charms,
Wichcrafts, Magnificall Incantations, and Sorcerie, vainly, and with a brazen
forehead, affirming that there is no way to help them, but by Characters,
Circles, Figure castings, Exercismes, Coniutarions, and other Impious, and
Godless Means.

Other set to sale at a great price, certain A mulets of Gold and Silver,
stamped under an appropriate and selected Constellation of the Planets, with
some Magical Character, Shamelesly boasting that they will cure all Diseases,
and work I know not what other wonders.

O grateful and delightful Comedy unto the Devil, whereat he is ready to
burst Himself with loud Laughter, to see how he leads by the Nose the Common
people, with these Iugling Illusions, and Sophistications, and thereby greatly
amplifieth and inlargeth his Kingdom.

Others swelling with a big conceit, and vain ostentation, of skill, and deep
insight in their Faculty, by the sole and bare Inspection of the stinking
Pispot, like an old Hag, or Sorceresse, showing great wonders in her Crystal
Glass, never once seeing the Patient, nor pondering with Judicial
consideration, the Indications Curatiue, do vnsauourly and Idly discourse of
the Nature, Causes, and Cure of Diseases, before silly Chare-women, and simple
Boys and Gyrles, that in whole troops flock to their Houses, with a Glass
Pisle-pot in their Hands: confidently auouching, or rather manifestly and
shamelesly Lying, contrary to the Part and Office of an Ingenuous and honest
Man, that they find out and discern all these Things by gazing upon the
Putrified and strong-sented Urine.

But these Men esteem Gain to be sweet, though it come by impudent Lying,
and dishonest Couzening: whereby they send whole Multitudes of silly Souls,
insnated in their Gins, unto Plutos Kingdom.

Others most impudently, and falsely affirm, that all Diseases and Maladies how
contrary in Nature so ever, may indifferently, and easily be cured with one
Medicine, or Panacea.

And that we need not so many Compositions, and Prescripts, as are now used:
but that our Apothecaries may spare their Labor, shut up their Shops, and
seek out some new Occupation, since it is a matter of small Difficulty, to
make one Cacolicke, (I should have said Catholic) which may serve for all
Turns.

But since Experience has never yet approved, this fantastical and
senseless Fiction, of some crazed and addle Brain, neither Any Man made
Demonstration thereof by good and sound Reason: it remains that these Idle
and bruised-headed fellows, are notable Impostores, Quack-saluers, and Such as
offer most dishonorable and intolerable violence to Physic, and all her
fair and beautiful Nymphs.

Yet the Poor and Silly Multitude admireth such, as Petite Chirons and
Apollos, not knowing that these Magical Arts, and cunning Sleights of
Legerdemaine, and plain Coney-catching, are grown into a great Mystery and
Occupation, and in a manner the only Way to thrive: being indeed no better
then plain Theeuing, or Robbing of men by the high way.

He therefore that has been trained up in Cunning, and nimble Shifts, and
Cousenings from his youth, and desires to fill his bag speedily, and withal
to have the ringing Name and Fame of a great and profound Physician, let him
take Order to make his Medicines at home in a Corner, or Seller, or at least
give it out, that they are so prepared by Himself, though he secretly buy them
abroad at the Apothecaries; or let him have always at Hand one, or at the most
two or three Medicines (if one of them be a Charm it is no matter, but all the
better, wherewith let him promise Boldly, confidently, and peremptorily,
without blushing any more then a black Dog, that he will Cure all Diseases
whatsoever.

For by this means he shall be sure to utter his Wares at a dearer and higher
rate, then Reason or Honesty would require, and to make a good round Market
when other stand still and cool their Heels.

And beside that, the Common people will flock to such a One in whole Thraues,
as unto an Oracle of Apollo, he shall gain this thereby, that neither the
Patient, nor his Friends, shall be able to know whether in stead of a Sovereign
Medicine, far fet, and dear bought, they receive rank poison, or at leest some
uncouth, unfitting, or counterfeit Dregge, or Drugge.

Neither need he to fear any sharp Censure, of his superabounding Skill,
and double Diligence, and least being in Consultation with other Learned
Physicians, he be compelled to bewray his Sottish and barred Ignorance, if (as
the fashion is of Men of his Cognizance and Coat, he can set a good Face on
the matter, and Clamor a loud, that these are hidden and abstruse Secrets, not
to be revealed to any, that they are no where to be had, either for Love or
Gold, but at his House, or from his Apothecarie, and that no Man in the World
knows how to turn his hand to the making of them, save Himself alone.

But it is one of the greatest Mischiefs and Miseries in the World, that such
should profess themselves Artists and Physicians, who know not how to perform
any one Part or Office of a true and worthy Physician.

For these are not the properties of any Ingenuous, Liberal, and Salutiferous
Science, or Qualities of a Learned, Sufficient, and Skillful Artist or
Professor, but rather evident Arguments, of a Perverse, Illiberall, and
monstrous Disposition, thus like an Owl, or Night-Rauen, to fly, and shun the
Light.

For it is appropriate only to crooked, and ill mannered Natures, and those
that are altogether unacquainted, with Humanity, and all good Letters, to
traduce and calumniate, among the rude and simple Idiots, the actions and
works of Cunning, and Learned Artists, most skilfully and artificially
accomplished: and withal magnifically to extol, and commend, with bombasted,
and transcendent Terms, their own False, Sophisticate, and Adulterate Wares,
and to invent these Sathanicall Delusions, and in inexpiable Crafts, and
subtle Devices, to ensnare and abuse the Simple and Common Sort.

So that by these Courses they both deceive themselves in the end, and deceive,
delude, and abuse others most Impiously, lewdly, and Nefariously.

We conclude therefore, and that as we Suppose, upon good and sufficient
Ground, that Incomparable, and Divine Hyppocrates, did most truly, and wisely
affirm, that there are many great Physicians, in Name and Estimation of Men:
but in Truth and Substance, but very few, rightly deserving that Reputation
and Style.

And that they who are Complete and accomplished Physicians, are by the Verdit
and Judgment of all the Sages, and Wise Men, that either have or do live in
the World, worthy of all Honor, Praise, and high Estimation.

And these alone, having passed through the Course of Learning, and given
sufficient Testimony and Proof of their sound Skill, Judgment, and Experience,
grounded upon Reason, Art, and Sense, are able and fitted to exercise the
Divine Art of Physic, to the Welfare and Health of Mankind.

And they alone do happily atchieue these three maine Scopes, of Curing
Speedily, without lingering Delays, which are worse then a short dispatch of
Death, Safely without hazarding, or running the Patients Life upon those
Rocks, whereupon the Quack-saluer (as an unskillful Pilot) does for the most
part most lamentably wrack them, pleasantly without that loathsomenesse and
Tediousness wherewith they are choked by the counterfeit Mounte-banke and
Slabtaker.

As for them who do more eagerly affect and hunt after the Name of Physicians,
then the substance and sufficiency, esteeming it enough for their purpose, if
they be created Doctors at Dawes Cross, by the rude, and unskillful
Multitude, and so be reputed, and pass Current Physicians, and great Clerks
among them, who are indeed disguised and counterfeit Impostors, Iuglers, and
Couzeners, they should be rightly served, and the Weale-publike, Prudently and
Religiously provided for, if they should be interdicted to practice that Art
which they never learned: or in imitalatio of Cato Censorininus, proscribed,
banished, and expelled by whole Troops out of those Cities and Provinces,
wherein they have nestled, or at the least should be punished for their
unbridled and intolerable Boldness, in Butchering, and Excusicating Men's
Bodies, according to the Nature and Quality of their Offense.

That by this means they might be restrained and reduced into their proper
Rank, and Order, and not through Polypragmony, which is the Companion of
Ignorance, Well spring of Disorder and Confusion, and common Pest of Mankind,
busily intrude themselves, and thrust in their Sickle into other Men's Harvest.

So it would come to pass, that Honest, Good, and Learned Physicians, should
not undergo a most Unjust, and Unworthy Condition: that is, in beholding daily
Knaves, Couzening Shifters, and rank Asses, preferred before them, or at least
equally valued, esteemed, and respected: and that Gate and Gap would be shut
and stopped, whereby these blind Buzzards, and bold Bayards, these butcherly
Impostores, do freely enter to excruciat their poor Patients, and kill Men
without controllment.

But a good Magistrate, to whom nothing is more dear and precious, then the
safeguard both of the Goods, and Persons of his Subjects, is always a Lover and
Favorer of Learning, and Liberal Arts, a Patron, and Mecaenas of Learned Men,
and therefore in his Wisdom, virtuous Disposition, and watchful Care for the
Common Good, provides by all means, that no Man be wronged or wracked in his
Estate or Person, and preuenteth all Occasions, of such Schythicall, or rather
Sathanicall torturing and massacring of Men.

But he that Winketh, and looks through the Fingers at these matters, and like
a sleeping and drowsy Shepherd, lets the Ravenous Wolf at his pleasure,
pray upon the poor Sheep, cannot possibly be excused among the virtuous. For
that evil and corrupt Custom, which has every where prevailed, redounding
greatly to the ruin and Confusion of Mankind, can by no means free the
Magistrate from blame. Nay it rather argues, and conuinceth both the
Practiser, Consenter, and Conniuer, at such horrible Crimes (for a small and
base Bribe) to be worthy of the same Punishment.

But they who are altogether Illiberall, Unlettered, and Slaves to absurd, and
erroneous Opinions, loathing, and prosecuting with Vatinian hatred, all True
and Learned Physicians, nay Truth and Learning it self, have this bred in the
Bones, and rooted in the Flesh, through the Crooked peruersitie of their
Dispositions, and Ruditie of their Wits, to bark against Learned Men, and
their wholesome Counsels, and honest Courses, and to be delighted with
monstrous, and vncouuth Conceits, or rather Deceits, and with such sottish and
foolish Quacksaluers; who are worthy to fall into the hands of these notorious
Impostors, so well fitting their Humors, that according to the Old Saying,
Like Lips may be served with like Lettuce.

But these grand Seniors should do far better if they employed their swelling
and high Conceit of deep Wisdom in their own Affairs, and contain
themselves within their Shops and Warehouses, and not arrogate to themselves,
to Judge of Matters whereof they are altogether ignorant, (it belonging to
Artist to Judge of Art) least they be compelled to hear against their Will,
That the Shoemaker must not meddle beyond his Shoe.

Now (thou blind Empericke, and vaine-vaunting Mountebanke, whosoever thou
art) let me in Conclusion, entreat thee, to learn by this short Discourse,
this short Lesson, To Know thy self, which though it be brief, yet is it the
Chief, and Choice of all other Documents.

Dwell with thy Self, and break not thy Rank, but keep within Compass, and
thou shall easily perceive thine own Poverty, Want, and Weakness.

I for my part, wish thee from my Heart, a more sound Head, and honest Heart,
that thou may either fundamentally learn the Noble and Excellent Art of
Physic, and proceed in thy Cures by a certain and right Line and Method,
without foolish Superstition, or wicked Imposture, or else that thou would
honestly give over that learned Profession, till Apollo have more clearly
enlightened thee, with his shyning and bright beams, least to thy indeleble
Ignominy, Shame, and Reproach, some wise Man pronounce against thee this
Sentence: That thou art either an Ass, a Fool, or a Cony-catcher.

Be Bold and Constant in well doing: for when all is done, Verity will in the
end, obtain the Victory.

FINIS.
A discovery of certain Stratagems, whereby our English Emperickes have been
observed strongly to oppugn, and often times to expugne their poor Patients
Purses.
IT cannot be sufficiently lamented, that the most ancient, worthy, and
honorable Profession of Physic, which has been in preceding Ages, a
College of learned, grave, and profound Philosophers, is now become the Common
Inn, Receptacle, and Sanctuary of Make-shifts, Bankerrupts, and Impostors.
Fuit Honos Medicinae apud Seclum prius. Time was, when that divine, and
excellent Science was had in high, and yet due Admiration, Honor, and
Reputation. Solomon the most wise, rich, and renowned Prince that the world
(from her Alpha to her Omega) has yielded, disdained not the Contemplation and
Study of this noble and divine Art. Nay which is more, did illustrate Physic
with his writings, and composed a great Volume of the Nature, of Byrds, Beasts,
Trees, and Herbs, describing them, from the Cedar in Libanus, to the Hyssope
that grows on the wall.

This excellent and incomparable Work, to the unspeakable grief, and
invaluable loss of all Aesculapians, is perished in the deep Sea-gulfe of
Antiquity, which has swallowed up, devoured, and consumed the Monuments of
many Worthies. Mythridates that puissant King of Pontus, who was for many
years terrible to the World-conquering Romans, amiddest his Martial and
Kingly affairs, spent no small time in Physical Meditations: erecting to
himself by the Composition of one Medicine, as noble, durable, and admirable a
Trophee, as Pompey the great did, by his Victory against him.

In this Kings Closet were found by that Noble Roman, many Books written
with his own hand, both of the virtues of Plants, and Constitution of Man's
Body, highly valued by that worthy Victor Euax a King of Arabia, wrote a Book
of Botanologye, which he dedicated to the Emperor Nero. It is reported by
Historians, that in ancient Times there was no King, either of Egypt,
Aethiopia, or Arabia, who did not himself either write somewhat concerning the
Art of Physic, or at least by his Kingly bounty, and large Pensions,
encouraged others to employ their Heads and Wits in that Study.

Zenophon brings in Cyrus, conferring and discoursing with a Physician, as a
fit Colloqunter for a Prince, about the hidden Secrets, and deep Mysteries of
Nature.

Julius Caesar, that matchless and invincible Roman Emperor, made a Decree,
that all Professors of Physic should be free Denizens, and Burgesses of Rome.
Democides the Physician was in such credit and authority with Darius the
Persian, that he had a place assigned at his Table, and was as it were
fellow-Commoner with him. Ataxerxes having sent for Hippocrates, and being
denied with grief and anger, threatened a revenge against all Greece.

Asclepiades rejected Mithridates Messengers, and refused all his liberal and
Princely Offers. Erasistratus the Physician, received for a reward at one Time,
of King Ptolomye, (ur as others write of Antiochus) an hundred Talents: which
amounts in our Money, to sixty thousand Crowns. Plin. 21. li. 1.


Stertinius complained of the Princes of his Days, because his stipend for
reading Physic, was but five hundred thousand Cesterties. This is esteemed
4150. pound and two shillings, four penee, whereas he gained more by his
practice in the City. The like stipend was given by Claudius Caesar to this
man's Brother. Trinas the Massilian left an hundred thousand Sestertyes by
Legacy, to build the walls of his City. I forbear to show their great
favor, credit, and authority with mighty Potentates and Princes, as Philip
with Alexander, Musa with Augustus. I omit the Aruncians, Albutians, Rubrians,
Lassians, and Carpentans, whose stipend in Rome was 205. Aureos. Thaddaeus the
Florentine when he rode abroad, received ordinarily for his Fee, 500. Crowns a
day: and for one Cure upon Honorius the Pope, ten thousand Crowns at a clap.
Comineus the French Thucydides, tells of a Physician of Ludouic the 11.
French King, who had from the King, admirable, and almost incredible Fees and
rewards. To pass by these, with many other famous Presidents of Antiquity,
clearly demonstrating to the Worlds view, the true and due worth and esteem,
of this excellent Profession, to the stain and blush of our present Age, it
makes infinitely for the commendation of Physic, that the Messiah and Savior
of the world, the Emmanuel, God, it is the Lord Jesus himself in the days of
his soiourning, and walking here upon the Earth, (refusing to intermeddle with
deciding of Controversies, and dividing of Lands and Goods, did notwithstanding
spend a good part of his Time (after the performance of his Prophetical office
in teaching and curing the Souls of Men) in healing the Diseases and Maladyes
of their Bodies: that is, in plain terms, in exercising the Office and
Function of the Physician. But here me thinks before I proceed further in this
Argument, one ioggeth me on the elbow with this item. A Sophister of Greece
made a long Oration in praise of Hercules.

One standing by, before he could pronounce the whole, cut him off thus. Quis
(quaeso) vnquam Herculem vituperauit? In like sort a man may demand of you,
who have begun a Panegyric of Physic. I pray you (Sir) who ever in his right
wits dispraised Physic? Well I could (if I were disposed) answer this
Quaere. But I will be content for this Time to take it for granted, that no
Man of Common Sense, Wit, Reason, Judgment, Discretion, Learning, or
Humanity, will ever open his Mouth in dispraise of a Profession so ancient,
honorable, beneficial, and necessary unto Mankind, (without which, neither
Theology can often prevail to reform the vicious Mind, unless Medicine
dispose the Body, and contemper the Humors: and Law should command in vain,
if Physic did not yield apt and able Bodies to obey) I will draw nearer to
my present Purpose: whereunto I hope this short Praelude in Phisickes Praise,
will prove nothing impertinent. For if Physic be of that worth, honor and
reputation (as has been in part touched, and might have been more amply
declared, but that with the Dog of Egypt, I am constrained to take a snatch
and away) then, intolerable are the Indignities, and exceeding great are the
Injuries, which these base Cullions, and Buzzardly Venturers, (for so I choose
rather to term them, with a Learned Man of our College, then Emperickes) who
leaping from their Shopboords, and leaving their Mechanical Trades, have, and
do daily offer to that fair, goodly, and gallant Lady. A Fardell and Pack of
the deceitful Wares, and subtle Sophistications of these Circumferaneous
luglers, has already been unfolded and laid open in the former Treatise,
written in Latin by a learned German. Now give me leave, to acquaint you
with some such cunning Sleights, and pretty tricks of Legerdemaine, which I
have observed to be put in use and practice by our London Interlopers, and
Quack-saluers, whereby diverse honest Men and Women, have been notoriously
abused, deluded, emunged of their Money, and plainly coney catched.

The cunning and slye Devises, subtle Policies, and Warre-like Stratagems,
whereby these valerous Thrasoes, and great Magnificoes do lay a straight
siege, and make many strong assaults upon their Patients Purses (for unto the
poor Purse is all the Quarrel) have partly respect unto Themselves, and partly
unto their Patient.

The first Project respecting Themselves, whereby they aim to win credit
with the Patient, and insinuate themselves into his favor, bringing him into a
Fooles-paradise, and causing him to have their persons in high admiration, is
to blow into his Ears, and that with a shameless impudent face, and a
tedious multitude of vain, lying, and vaunting words, that they have certain
hidden, deep, and precious Secrets, altogether unknown to the Galenists, and
Schoole-Doctors, whereby they are able to work wonders, and to quell Gargantua
himself. If the Patient demand how they came by this profound knowledge,
having never followed the course of Learning, or studied in any University:
then they either begin with a solemn grace, and set countenance, a long Story
of a written Book of most rare and admirable Medicines, invented by a certain
profound, and deep learned Friar or Monk, and hidden with great care, in the
Wall, or Sellar of a Monastery: Which Book by great Chance, and their happy
Fortune, having come to their hands, they would not part with it for Saint
Peter's Cope, or a Kings Ransom. Or else you shall have a Tale of Manardes
the^ great Physician of Spain, who keeping a secret Book of most tare and
excellent Observations, your brave and vaunting Quack-saluer, auouching
himself to have been his Man, will boldly (blushing as much as a black Dog)
affirm unto you, that being with him in his sickness, whereof he dyed, and
observing diligently the place, where Manardes laid up his Jewel, they
cunningly after his Death, seized on this Book, and conveyed it away with
them. Hereby they are made of unlettered Idiots, great and skillful
Aesculapians, and undertake the Cure of all strange, difficult, and deadly
Maladyes. Or if the Patient miss of these Poetical Fictions, he may well
stumble upon that good fellow, who (as it is said) has a long Discourse of
Seuerinus the Dane his son, who being in service in the Spanish Armado, Anno.
88. was wracked and cast on Shore. Hereupon, wandering as a poor harbourlesse,
and succourlesse Stranger, he arrived at the last at the house of our Iuppiter
Hospitalis, who receiving him into home and harbor, using him kindly, and at
his departure furnishing him with some supply of Pence, that thankful
Mercury, in recompense of this great Hospitality and Humanity, bestowed upon
him his Caducean Rod, or Book of rare Physical Mysteries, whereby in an
instant he was from a silly Sot, not able to speak one word of congruous
Latin, presently Metaphorphosed into a grave, demure, and grand Doctor, and
Master in Physic. A hundred to one, if he happen not on some one or other
of these stale Ieasts, or at the least, some other of the like Nature: Which
notwithstanding, a great Number of our Common Ones do as readily believe, as
if they should hear the Story of S. Francis out of Legenda Aurea. And here by
the way, it is worth our observation, that those graund Masters do utterly
renounce and disclaim Learning, and all Education in any University, wherein
it is like they never came (unless to set up their horse in an Inn, whilst
they break their fast) flying to a written Book, or some Medicines, received
from a Friend by Tradition. And would a Man imagine that any should be so void
of common Sense, Reason, or Judgment, as to think that a few scribled
Receipts in an old Moath-eaten paper should make a Physician? Why then every
one that has lying by him, a good Book of Law, as Rastalls Statutes, or
Littletons Tenures, is a Complete Lawyer. And he that has two or three Books
of Divinity in his House, is an absolute Divine, and may step up into the
Pulpit. If this were so, we might well say with that merry Physician, that it
had reigned Doctors in all Faculties.

Their second Engine, or Plausible perswasiue Motive, whereby they labor to
fasten the former Nail, to win Reputation of deep Skill to themselves, and
purchase credit to their Panaceas, and wonder-working Dregs, is a pretty
figment, or forgerie, not unlike the first. After they have laid the former
ground, and perceive the poor Patient to give a listening Ear to their forged
Fable, conceiving hope of luckie success, and by his nibling at the bait,
that he is like to swallow the hook, they proceed to Gull him thus. They
begin, to make their former matter good, with incredible boldness and
impudency, to auerie that their knowledge is so singular, their secret
Medicaments so sovereign, and of such admirable Efficacy, that diverse Learned
and Professed Physicians, of great Note and Account, have sought earnestly,
Wooed, and Solicited: nay offered good sums of money, to have them imparted
and communicated.

And because it is sin to belie the Devil, and some Men may think I wrong
them with so deep a charge, I assure you upon my credit, I speak no more then
I have heard Hisce Auribus. One base Thick-skin (whose Story it may be you
shall have hereafter more at large) taking upon him to cure an incurable
Disease, and being willed by a Physician, requested by the Patient to join
with him, to make known his Medicine. My Medicine (quoth he) with great
indignation, that I will not for any Man's pleasure. D. Dodcin, and D. Caso of
Oxford, have offered me forty pounds yearly during my life, if I would
acquaint them with that secret. This was as true as that the Sea was on Fire,
and this good fellow quenched it with a Bale of Flax. Nevertheless, by this
and such like pretty sleights, he carried away the Patient for that Time, and
got some Crowns: the other Physician, because he refused to hold the Candle to
so base and blind a Companion, being rejected.

An other Medicastra, a tatling Gossip, (for such likewise have learned their
Leripoope, and have as glib, smooth, and nimble Tongues as the best) having
commended a Drench she had for an old Cough, unto the Skies, auerred boldly in
the hearing of a Physician, that her Medicine was of such virtue, and had done
so great Acts, that D. Smyth and D. Turner, had taken her aside, and with many
fair words, putting likewise some Angels into her fist, had entreated her, to
impart to them her Secret. But (said she) with a grace I warrant you, Should I
teach the Doctors? nay I will never do it. They would make 20. or 30. pound
yearly of it, whereas I do good therewith, and take small recompense for my
pains. The Physician smyling, answered. I believe you (good woman) that you
will not teach the Doctors, I will be your warrant for that matter, you shall
need no further Bond or Surety. Was not this a goodly sweet Parrate trow
ye? Have not the Doctrs cause to lament that they shall want the instruction
of such a Lamia?

A third, as bold and blind an Empericke as London has yielded these many
years, being by the Coll. committed to prison for his notorious sottishness,
Impudency, and manifold Misdemeanors, (to give them the least and lowes term)
gave it out among his fellow prisoners, and such as celected vetrum, that his
commitment was, because he refused to disclose unto the Physicians, his hidden
secrets, whereby he performed such Cures, as they were not able to turn their
hands too. But suppose we should grant unto these Braggadocian Thessali, that
they had secret and good Medicines, yea such as diverse Physicians desired to
know; would it therefore follow that they were fit Men to take upon them the
Profession, and Practice of Physic? Nothing less. For Physic is a great
Lady or Princess, having subject unto her, many large, goodly, and spacious
Territories. Whereof the skill of inuenting, and making a Medicine, is one of
the last, and least in Estimation. So that a Man may be somewhat acquainted in
this Region, and yet altogether ignorant in the ample and rich Countries and
Fields of Physic.

Physic is defined by Galen in his Art Parua: The knowledge of things
wholesome, unwholesome, or neutrall. Or, the Science of Things Natural,
Preternaturall, and contrary to Nature. Physiologye the first Part of
Physic, chalengeth for her Patrimony, those seven Things whereof our Nature
consists: Elements, Temperaments, Humors, Spirits, Parts, Faculties, and
Functions. Here is a large walk for our silly Emperickes, as uncouth, and
unknown to them, as Terra-America, China, or Guiana, to our poor Plough men.
Anatomy being but one Shyre, Province, or County, in this Precinct or
Country, discoursing upon the Parts, whereof we consist, is of such
Nobleness, Amplitude, and Reputation, as that many worthy, and excellent Wits
have been content here to take up their Rest, and dwell therein their whole Time.

A number of our jolly Quack-saluers, are so ignorant of this Skill, that they
know not whether Anatomy be a Man or Woman, an Horse, or a Cow. And yet it is
as possible, for him to be a Phisitio^, that never knew or saw Dissection, as
for him to be a good Carpenter, that never saw an House, or a good Mariner,
that never set eye on a Ship, in his Life.

Hygicina the second part of Physic, trauelleth in preserving the health of
those who have obtained a sound Temperament, in their Similar parts, and right
Proportion in the Isntrumental, by the moderate and well ordered use of those
six Things, which we call Preternaturall. The knowledge of those Things, which
we call Unwholesome: or contrary to Nature, if you respect the Theorie, is
termed Pathologye, and entreats at large of the Causes, Signs, and Nature of
Diseases. If you regard the Praxis, it is termed Therapentice, who grapleth
with Natures Enemy, and opposes unto all Maladies, apt, Artificial, and
Rational Medicines, and that in three large Differences. The first is called
the Diet of the sick: the second, Chyrurgery: the third, Pharmacentice. So
that the Physician, as a great Commander, has as subordinate to him, the
Cooks for Diet, the Surgions for manual Operation, the Apothecaries for
confecting, and preparing Medicines. You see then, how goodly large, and ample
Patrimony Physic has, and that all her Store, and Skill, consists not in
compounding and mingling of a Medicine. If that were all, the^ all our skilful
Chirurgions, and Apothecaries (of whom we have many in this City) should be
absolute, and complete Physicians, who I dare boldly affirm know more and
better Medicines, then the brauest, and Crakingest Mounte-banke in the Land.
And yet how far the cunningest of them are, from being able to give counsel
in Physic, both themselves will ingeniously and freely acknowledge, and all
men of Judgment, may easily discern. But who so bold as blind Bayard, who
seeing not the Danger, and Diche before him, rusheth on without fear, and
plungeth himself over Head and Ears, ere he be aware. Herophilus calls
Medicines Manus Deorum, being prescribed and accommodated by the learned
Physician, but flat Poisons if they come through the hands of unlearned and
venterous Quack-saluers. Nullus Morbus idem omnibus: No Disease is of the same
Nature in all Constitutions. Nullum Remedium evndem vim habet in singulis. No
Remedy has the like Operation in every particular Patient. A good Remedy in
the Head or Closet of an unskillful, and venterous Periclitator, is as a Sword
in the hands of a Madman. Or as the blind Man's staff, which may so fall, as
it may kill the Hare. So their misapplyed and misshapen Remedies, may sometime
quell the Disease, but by as great chance and misfortune, as that good Fellow
had, who being drunk and on horseback, rid in the night safely over a
foote-bridge, crossing a broad and deep River, it being a thousand pound to
a Nutshell, that both he and his Horse should have come short Home. Natura est
Curatrix Morborum. Nature her self is the Curer of diverse Diseases, into whose
harvest these intruding Copes mates do thrust their Sickle, reaping often times
her due Praise and Commendations.

To conclude this Point, (wherein I have been content to dwell the longer,
because it is the strongest Castle and Hold, wherein our Maister-Emperickes do
most trust, and whereunto they have continual Resuge and Retreat in all
assaults) I dare boldly set down this Maxim, and Theorem, and maintain the
same against all Comers, that Morbi curantur magis Methodo, quam Medicina.

Diseases are rather cured by a Rational Method grounded upon Arts
Indications, then by force of any Remedy, though never so sovereign. The
Indications whereby Judicial and Rational Physicians are guided and directed
(as by Ariadnaees thread) in the Curation of Diseases, are many, (and not to be
stood upon at this Time) all of them neglected, and unknown to the poor
blind Emperickes. And yet the Poet could say, speaking but of one of them.

Temporibus medicina valet data Tempore prosunt,
Sed data non apto Tempore Vina nocent.
But having (as I hope) sufficiently battered this Fort, and ferrited these
Coney-catching Companions from their Sanctuary, or rather Fox-hole, I will
proceed, or rather post unto their third Topicall Place, or Latebra Sophistica,
whereby they seek to mount upon the Bank of Fame, and raise up Themselves in
the Conceit of their simple Patients.

When they perceive the Patient to have swallowed the two former Flies, then
they begin to stand upon their Typtoes, and with a composed Countenance, and
Stagge-like gesture, to relate such strange, uncouth, loud ringing, and
Paradoxicall Narrations, as a man would suppose they were solemnly set to lie
for the Whetstone. Vbi adbibit plus paulo sua mihi quae narrat Facinora. When
they are set upon their Ale-bench, (for it is worth noting by the way, that
either at the Alehouse or Tavern, where is their chief Haunt, their matches
for Cures are usually made) and are a little whitled, it is wonderful, what
fabulous Tales and Stories, what unsavory and odious Leasings they will tell
of their incredible, and admirable Curations, performed upon most desperate,
and deadly Sicknesses, and such Persons as were altogether given over and
forsaken, as forlorn and past help by the Physicians. There you shall hear
of Dropsies, dead Palsies, (as they term them, old and knottie Gouts,
Apoplexies, great and grown Stones in the Bladder, a great rabble more of
Churlish and Sturdie Companions, all bowing the knee, vayling the Bonnet, and
doing low obeisance to our grand Seignior, Magnifico, Mounsier Mountebanke.

And least you should call in Question the credit of those good old Gentlemen,
or doubt of the Truth of their Poetical, Hyberbolicall, and extrauagant
Discourses, you shall have them name the Cities and Towns, Parties, and Places
where their great myraculous Works and Wonders were acted and executed: Marry
they will be sure not to name any Parties or Places too near at hand (for that
might peradventure mar all) the fools are more wise then so. But if you
would find out the cettaintie of these Matters, you may perhaps ride your
horse out of breath Some of them will have for their Associate, an old
Weather-beaten Broking Co^panio^, somewhat known to the Patient, (as very a
etc. as themselves) who shall play Gnathos part, soothing them up in all their
loud Leasings. His manner is, to scratch and clawe our Magnifico by the Elbow,
and to toll on the silly Patient, in this sort. (Sir) upon my credit, this is
an honest and simple-meaning Gentleman, if he say the word, you may be bold to
build and write upon it. He would not tell you an untruth (I dare say and
swear too for a need) if he might gain thereby an hundred pounds. Though he
go but plain, yet his Reputation is good in the Town and Country where he
dwells. He is sought unto far and near. He is acquainted with diverse Noble
men, and great Personages, and has access unto them, and is admitted into
Ladies Chambers, when your gay Doctors with their velvet Ierkins are shut out
of Doors, to cool their heels. He has been a Traveler in his Days, and
has thereby attained such deep and profound skill in Physic, and such rare
and precious Medicines, that he puts down all the Doctors where ever he
comes. Upon my knowledge, he has cured them, which had been with all the
Doctors in London, and spent great sums of money, without receiving any good,
till they met with him. I may say to you, he is the oddest Man in a Land. If he
undertake you, I will be his warrant that he will cure you. I never knew him
yer to fail in any. He has the Luckyest hand in a Country. I never knew any
miscarrie under it. Does not this slye, and subtle Pricker tell a smooth Tale,
to cover and color this pack of cloaked Knavery? And no marvel. For he
speaks and pleads for his Fee, and Shareth with his Master Thraso Mounsier
Magnifico, having sometimes a Proctors, sometimes a Counselors Pay for his
labor. Thus these two Veterators, or Couzening Copsemates act their Parts, as
it were on a Stage, circumuenting and insnaring simple Men and Women,
altogether unacquainted with these quaint Devises, laughing them to come
behind their backs, ryding them for Asses, boasting of their fiye and cunning
conueyance of their matters, and each of them vaunting that he played his Part
best. In this sort do they solace themselves with their sweet stolen Bread,
and make merry with their Patients money. For you must understand, that usually
it purchases neither House, Goods, nor Lands, but a few Pots of the best Ale
or Wine in the Town. And yet they receive more Crowns often times for one of
their Couzenages, (for Cures I will never call them) then diverse learned and
honest Physicians, for two or three, iuditially, and happily performed
Curations.

Having now coursarily passed over the first Kind of the warre-like Engines,
whereby being raised upon the Mount of their own Praise and Fame, these brave
Pot-souldiers do make a fierce and strong battery upon the silly Patients
Purse: I will proceed to the second Rank, of military Statagems, and
Warre-like Policies, by which they do eft-soones, feale the Walls, enter the
Ramperts, and like valiant, and victorious Conquerors, possess them of the
Piece and Fort, holding out against their matchless Puissance.

As the former had respect unto themselves, and their own Fame and Reputation:
So these last have Reference and Relation wholly to their Patients Good.

First therefore (let the Disease be what it will or shall) (for if you will
have the Truth, for the most part they care not, nor know not) never so
dangerous, deadly, desperate, incurable, they will promise most co^fidently
and arrogantly, a perfect, absolute, and complete Cure. All is fish with them
that comes to Net. They make no bones at it. And yet the Poet could say thus
much.

Non est in Medico semper releuctur vt Aeger.
Interdum docta plus valet Art Malum.
Hyppocrates the Father of Physic, and Phoenix of the World, whose Writings
are by venerable Antiquity esteemed Oracles, and not words of Humane Tongue:
who (as Macrobius says) could neither deceive, nor be deceived, whose
Humanity and Benignity was such, that he knew nothing, but that he would
we should likewise know, whose deep reach, insight, and admirable Skill was
so great, that no Man after him, knew any thing, whereof he was ignorant, this
honorable Dictator of Physic affirms often, that there are many Diseases
incurable. This comes to pass, partly because some diseases are hereditary a
Semine Paterno, and being bred in the bone, as we say, will hardly be rooted
out of the flesh: partly by the Fury and Violence of some Malady and
Symptoms, far surmounting Natures strength. And that appears either by the
Nobility, and Necessity of the Part offended, or the Worthiness and
Excellency of the Action violated, or by the evil Nature, and secret
Malignitie of the Affect. Hereupon it is that Hyppocrates says: Soluere fortem
Apoplexiam impossible, leuem haud facile. And that in regard of the Dignity
of the Part affected, the necessary use and excellency of the Actions of Sense
and Motion, mightily oppugned, and the boisterous, and churlish Violence of
that most terrible and deadly Disease.

Hereupon likewise that honorable old man, the Mirror of Antiquity, in the
same Book of Aphorisms, which has merited the highest Place among humane
Writings. Aphor. 1. says. O portet non solum Medicum suum, officium facere,
sed etiam Aegrum, and Astantes, and externa esse rite comparata. The Physician
must not only perform his office, but the sick Man and his Ministers must do
their Parts, and outward Things must be well disposed. This golden Sentence set
in the Forefront of that Divine work, gives us plainly to understand, that
all the Keys of Curation hang not at the Physicians Gyrdle; it rests not
wholly and solely in him, to perform the Cure, but Patients and Nurses have
likewise their Offices and Charges to look unto, and external Accidents may
mar all the Market. Morbi sua Natura curabiles, saepe Patientium and
Clinicaram niscitia, incuria, inobedientia, aut morositate incurabiles
redduntur. This was the cause why Galen wishes Physicians never to meddle with
those who are intemperate, and wholly addicted to satisfy their Appetite, and
sensual Delights: for (says he) neither shall thou reap credit, not they any
good or benefit by Physic. A great Emperor bringing with him to a sick
Courtier, two of his Physicians, demanded of them what they Judged of the
sickness, whether it were cureable, or no? The first answered, that it was
cureable. The other that he Judged it incureable. I (says the Emperor) what
is the Reason of this Dissension and Difference betwixt you? No difference (my
Lord) answered the later Physician. Ille enim ad Rem respicit, Ego ad hominem.
He respected, in his answer, the Disease, and I the Patient, whom I know to
be so unruly and intemperate, that it is not possible to Cure him. How
ignorant, unruly, indiscreet, and intractable, that I say not peevish and
perverse many Patients are, it is too well known to Physicians, and Others
likewise who are not too too exceeding partial, and therefore needless and
tedious for me to stand upon it. The manifold Errors and Misdemeanors of the
friends of Patients, especially Women, Nurse-keepers, Servants, Cooks,
Surgions, and Apothecaries, would fill a several and great Volume. I will
only point at one vulgar and common Fault, greatly hindering the happy
proceeding, and succeeding of our Cures in London. And that is the fickleness,
and fugitive Inconstancy of our Patients, who being persuaded by every
prattling Gossip that comes in to see them, and silly Chare-woman that
attends them, will have for every Day they are sick almost, a new and
several Physician, and perhaps change every Day for the worse. Thus do they
deli^iari and play the Wantons because of their ease and plenty of water at
their Doors (I mean the variety of good and skillful Physicians) but chiefly
by the fond and witless motions, of these busy giddy headed women, who are
constant in nothing but Inconstancy, blown too and fro with every breath,
like a Feather. Sometimes they will dispraise and debase the former Physician,
for no other reason, but because he is known unto them: and magnify and
commend a stranger because he is unknown, as a man of deep learning and
Judgment. Otherwhile the Physician is too young, and wants Experience: and
then they will extol to the Patient, a blind Empericke, who has neither Wit,
Learning, nor Experience, and yet he must be the Man. Sometime again the
Physician is too old, and spent, his Memory and Judgment fails him, he is
now done, you must take an other that is more fresh and ready in his Matters.

With these and the like, idle, trifleling and childish Follyes they do often
inter^urbe and hinder our Curations: and the Physicians are blamed, traduced,
and disgraced, when the Patient himself, or his wise Counselors deserved
well, much rather to be whipped. Qui Plures consulit Medicoes in singulorum
Errorem cadit, ipse falsus maxim. He that runs after many Physicians, often
times deceives them all, and himself most and worst of all. That external
Events do interrupt the course of Curation, and dash all on the sudden. it is
most evident. A Physician in London had a Patient, who having been sick of a
burning Fever, and being in good way of recovery, a Creditor of his (to whom
he owed a round sum, hearing of his Sickness, and danger, pressed suddenly
into the Chamber where he lay, and expostulating with him, in many sharp, and
rigorous words and threats for security of his Debt, so disquieted, vexed, and
ouerheat the poor Man, that he relapsed into a Frenzy and Idleness of
Brain, crying out still upon his Creditor, that he would lay him up, that the
Sergeants were at his back, ready to seize upon him: that he must lie by it,
his Wise and Children should be (...): and thus rauing, within few days dyed.
This Man might have recovered in the Physicians Judgment, if this unhappy
Accident had not happened. Incomparable Galen, the storehouse of all good
learning, from whose reading, the best learned shall ever return more learned,
concurieth in this point, with his Master Hyppocrates, as has been already
by the way touched, and might be by many places of his works plainly proved,
if it were not altogether superfluous, to spend Time, and blot Paper, in a
matter so evident. Consider then, the intolerable and shameless Impudency of
our vaunting Pyrgopolynices, who will take upon him to set Hyppocrates and Galen
to School, as simple and rude fellows in respect of his graund-Maistership.
And herein that brain-sicke German, that notorious Sophister, and Impostor
of the World, Paracelsus, has plainly discovered himself to be a mere
Mounte-banke: (for if he had been a learned Man, he would never have done it)
barking every where in his rouing and rauing Discourses (for Method or Art they
have none in them) at Galen, one of the Springs of Physic, chalenging
himself for Ignorance, his Medicines for insufficiency, and inualiditie: all
his Successors and Followers in the Physic Schools and Universities, for
Dolts, Dunses, and Asses, in comparison of his goodly Self. Ebrius est nec
enim faceret haec sobrius Vnquam. The Wine was in, and the Wit was out, when
he did and spoke this, or else undoubtedly he would never have done it. But to
let him go, into whose gross, and palpable Absurdities, intolerable
Insolences, and incredible Sophistications, if a man should enter, he should
find Powles work, as we say: it is more then manifest, both by the Authorities,
and sound Reasons of these grave and learned Physicians, to whom, these base
Companions are not worthy to hold the Candle, or to be Named the same year
with them, that all Diseases are not Cureable; and that therefore they are
notorious, and not sufferable Impostors, who take upon them, more then the
greatest Masters of Art would ever arrogate to Themselves; and that which
indeed is not in their power to perform. The like may be said of Cures, which
was said of Martial affairs. In rebus bellicis, Militum virtus, locorum
opportunitas, Classes, Comeatus, Auxilia, multum tuuant, Qnin ipsa. Rerum
Domina Fortuna magnam partem suo sibi Iuro vindicat, etc. So in Curations, the
Skilfulnesse, and Carfulness of the Physician, the Discretion and
Tractabilitie of the Patient, and diligence of the Keepers and Attendants, the
faithfulness of the Apothecaries, Surgions, and other Ministers, the removing
of all external Impediments, do greatly further and forward Curations: but
above all, and when all is done, there is a great Commander who sits in
Heaven, and chalengeth to himself by good right, the chief sway and stroke in
all this Business. In him are the issues of Life, and of Death, he has
created both Physic and the Physician. Quo sine Diptamnus nil, Panacea iuuat.
Except the Lord build the House, the builders, etc. Except the Lord watch the
City, the Watchmen, etc. The Eternal who has given us these Souls and
Bodies, (of whom it should seem these jolly fellows, these boasting Thrasoes
do fildome, or never think) has reserved to himself a sovereign and
ouerruling Power: whereby he does often times cross the Means, and frustrate
the Hopes of the most skillful and exquisit Artists, much more, of our bold
Periclirators, who blindly, sottishly, and sencelesly, go to work. This caused
that Eternised old Man, whose Fame is like to last as long as the World
lasts, cry out, that there was Diuinum quid in morbis, a certain Mystery in
Diseases, which neither he, nor any humane Wit could ever sound.

Their next Topicall Place, or perswasiue Insinuation pretending the Patients
good, is this, that as they undertake without all peradventure, an absolute
Cure, be the Disease never so stubborn or pernicious; so they likewise promise
with no less Impudence and Vanity, a short and speedy Cure. This is
exceeding plausible to the poor Patient, bringing him a sleep, and causing
him to scratch where it itcheth not. He will (forsooth) leap over the hedge
before he come at it: he will not stand thrumming of Caps, or picking strawes
all the year, but with great Celeritie and Dexterity, dispatch that in a
week, which the Rational Physician, the Schoole-Doctor with his Cautelous
Caueats, will lie bungling and iumbling at a Month or two. Yet the wise Man
wills us to hasten slowly, and tells us that a soft fire makes sweet
Malt, that a Thing is done soon enough, if well enough: that hasty Bitches
bring forth blind Whelps: that rash Temeritie is the Daughter of Folly, and
Mother of Repentance. Diverse Diseases proceeding from Inanition and Exhaustion,
require necessarily, a convenient space of Time, that Natures loss and expense
may be by degrees repaired, restored, and (as it were) reedified. Others are of
a Churlish, Stubbborne, and Rebellious Disposition, and must be gently and
softly handled, and by little, and little, in some length of Time, tamed and
cicurated. They are like a sleeping Dog which must not sudenly be awaked,
least you do Irritare Crabronem, duplicare malum, and bring an old house upon
your own, (or at least) the Patients Head. Rome was not built in a Day, and no
Matter of weight or moment, can be negotiated and managed in a moment or trice,
unless we will huddle, and slubber them up in such sort, as we must do,
redoo, undo, and as good never a whit, as never the better.

Their last and surest Card, whereby as with a cunning and strong Engine, they
break open the Gates of the long assailed Fort, making themselves Lord, and
Owners thereof, so as the poor Patient does yield himself as altogether
vanquished and subdued, and not able, to hold out any longer, is this. They
will solemnly profess, that though their skill be singular, and supereminent,
yet their Desire is rather to do Good, then to heap up Gold: (for if they had
been of that humor, they might have been worth thousands, and ^umbled
themselves in silver before this time) and therefore for the good liking they
conceive of the Patient, and his gentle and courteous Nature and behavior,
they will require nothing, until they have performed, and perfited the Cure.
Hereupon the Patient is so well appayed, that he thinks he has gotten the
Popes holownesse by the Toe, and met with the plainest, kindest, honestest, and
friendlyest Gentleman in the World. But you must know, that though our crafty
Copsemate, and old beaten Veterator, gloze, and glauer thus, yet he means
nothing less. For having by this means entered into work with the Patient,
after three, or four Days, all which while, he will show himself double
Diligent, and tell him many a fair Tale, and loud Lesing, he will (spying his
opportunity) break with him thus.

(Sir) you discern (I hope) that I have a special care of you, you see what
continual pains I take, beside the expense and laying out of my money out of
my purse for your Medicines. I trust you will have some consideration hereof,
and allow me money for to pay the Apothecarie. The Patient (if he be of any
good, or kind Nature, being overcome with kindness) cannot but yield to this
equal Motion, and usually will out with his purse, and give him four or five
Angels, to buy Poticary Ware, as they use to speak. This our broking
Mounte-banke receives with a right good will, saying to himself, that he
shall not now loose all, but that he is reasonable well paid for five or
six, or at most ten shillings bestowed in Drugges And for the most part,
when they have gotten possession of this money, they have attained the end and
top of their drifts. For you must understand, that the greatest part of them
tarry not out the process of their Cures. But having made four or five such
like Markets in several places of the Town, whereunto they arrive, they
betake themselves fair and roundly to their heels, giving their Patients the
bag, and leaving them in the lurch, in the midst of their Foole-conceited
Hopes.

And although I might say, His facient exemola fidem, for Examples of these
notorious Couzenages do abound, and are too plentiful in all Places, yet
because I fear least I have tarried too long in this base Argument, and spent
too much time in stirring this filthy Dunghill, I will hasten to an end, and
exemplify my Discourse with one only Store.

That base, unlettered, and vnmannered Thick-skin, (of whom mention by the way
was formerly made, B. of H. by the Thames side) coming to London, and noysing
abroad by his Trumpettors, his singular and admirable Skill and Dexterity in
curing diverse dangerous, desperate, and in truth, incurable Diseases, was
brought by some of his Brokers, to a grave and honest Citizen, afflicted with
that Malady, wherein the learned Physicians fly to Solus Culter, Solus
Cultellus. This noble Swanne, this vain and vaunting Clown, bragging of
sundry great and wonderful Cures by him performed upon Gentlemen and others
in the Country, whom he blushed not to name, knowing that the Parties being
absent, he could not be controlled, professed to cure him absolutely (without
cutting) and that in three weeks space. The Citizen though he gave too
listening an ear to these goodly Tales of our cracking Mounte-banke, and was
somewhat tickled to hear of Health and Recovery, and that with such celeritie
and expedition, yet having a tolerable and good conceit of a Physician, whom
formerly he used, sent unto him, desiring him to confer with our deep and
profound Artist, and to join with him in the Curation. The Physician repayring
to the Patients house, and entering Parlee with our Mounsier Magnifico, Signior
Rusticus, requested him to know what Course he would take in the Cure. I (quoth
he) will give him no Physic. How will you then (replied the Physician) remove
the Disease. I will do it (says our Quack-saluer) by a certain Gift given
me, and by a rare and precious secret Medicine which I use.

No marvel (answered the Phisitio^) if your Medicine being no Physic, be
strange and rare indeed above all I ever heard. But will you declare and show
your Medicine, that we may discern and Judge of the fitness and efficacy
thereof, to perform this great and strange effect. Nay by your leave (said
he) you shall pardon me, the fool is wiser then so. If I would have
discovered my Secret, two great Doctors of Oxford would have assured me an
Annuitie of forty pound yearly, during my life. I am sufficiently known I
tell you (Sir) and that to no Babes, or base Persons, but to diverse of the
greatest Noblemen in the Land: and am admitted to their Speech and Presence,
when Velvet Coats dance attendance without. The Physician perceiving by this
small Conference, Mounsier Mounte-banke to be of the right stamp, taking the
Patient aside, and showing him the gross Ignorance, and intolerable
Arrogancy of the Sottish Ass, persuaded him in many words, to shake him off,
if he respected his Life, Health, or Credit, as a mere Couzener and Impostor.
But he (though otherwise of sufficient wisdom) was so inueigled, or rather
bewitched with the great bragges, and senseless Tales of this braggadocian
Quack-saluer, that he would admit of nothing sounding to his Disgrace, or
Disparagement: affirming that by dealing with him, he could receive no
detriment, since he required no money, until he had absolved and finished his
Cure. The Physician answered, that though he made that goodly pretense to
draw him on, and himself into the Cure, yet it was like, that by one means
or other he would get into possession, some piece of money (for sure he was,
that was the white and mark he aimed at) and then bid him farewell. This
proved afterward a very shrewd and perilous Prediction. For within few
Days, passing by the Citizens House, he called in, to see how the world went,
and was by him saluted thus. (Sir) I doubt you will prove a Prophet, my Cunning
Man, the last Day, complaining that he laid out his money at the Apothecaries,
to buy Simples to compound my Medicines, I thinking it no reason he should be
at such charge for me, opened my Purse, and gave him four Angels. But I have
wished them since twice in it again: for I fear he will make your words
good, he has cast me once or twice by his tamperings and Drugges, into the fit
of an Ague, so that I was ready (but for shame) to have sent for you. I
believe, when all is done, he will show himself a Couzening Companion. The
Physician smyling, answered: who then I perceive your deep Doctor will not
loose all his labor. He has now as much money as he will look for at your
hands, and you as much Good, as you must expect from his. He has cleared
three Angels at the least, (sheare gains) for three or four Visitations:
which if you had given the most learned Physician in the City, you would have
scratched your Elbow, and thought your self undone. Yet he failed in his first
conceit, which notwithstanding is commonly their Rest. For not long after the
shameless Companion feigned a necessary and urgent occasion of going into the
Country, and before he went down, desired to have so much of those Commodities
wherein his Patient dealt, as came to three Pound. The Citizen knowing that by
his means he had got in the City of diverse honest Men through his
Hyberbolicall Commendation, twenty Nobles at the least, was content to lay
them aside for him. But when he expected his present payment, he phopped him
thus. Sir, we agreeed for your Cure for five pound. I have received already
forty shilling: now this three pound makes up the just sum. Nay by your
leave (said the Merchant) I look for ready money for my Ware. You have had on
me already four Angels, and I am no whit better then I was, but rather in
worse State. Perform your undertaken Cure, and you shall be assured of your
money without fail. If it be so (said he) I must leave it behind me til I
return or send you up money: for I have sent down my money before me. But
neither Man nor Money returned in haste. This was an old-beaten Soldier, a good
Proficient, well trained up in this School of Couzenage, and Coney-catching,
he had learned his lesson perfectly, and was able to run it over upon his
fingers Ends. For if you compare his Story with our present Discourse, you
shall see that he neither failed nor faltered in any one Point of his Portuse.

Thus I have spent (as you see) some few successiue and Idle-vagant hours, in
unfolding and laying open the Pack and Fardle of these circumferanious
Iuglers, and pedling Pettifoggers in Physic, who by these Adulterate, and
Sophsticate Wares, deceive, abuse, pray, and feed upon the ruder and simpler
sort of People. Yea, and by your leave, sometimes ouerreach and circumue^t
those, who think themselves jolly fellows, and great wise Men, to the great
blemish and disgrace of that ancient, worthy, and honorable Profession of
Physic, discredit, obloquie, and contempt of learned and good Physicians, and
to the great damage and detriment of her Majesty's Subjects, both in their
Bodies, and outward Estates. My hope is, that this Cursorie, and Rapsodicall
Discourse (for to have ransacked every Corner and Creuise in this Budget, would
require a longer Tractat, and may hereafter be performed if this (Labor) prove
plausible and grateful may do good to some, and hurt none, except the intruding
and shifting Mounte-banke, whose prosequution, and persequution, both I, and
all the learned Gentlemen of our College, have in our Initiation and
Inanguratio^ solemnly vowed, and protested. It being the very ground and
Original, of all those large and bountiful Immunities and Privileges
granted first to our Society, by that puissant Prince of famous memory,
Henry the eight, and afterward ratified and confirmed by his Peerlesse
Daughter, Queen Elizabeth, the Mirror of all Heroical and Princely virtues,
the Assertor and Protector of true Relion, the Maule of Antichrist, the
Astonishment and Wonder of Christendom, and the whole World, that we should,
Videre and prospicere, ne quid in Rebus Med. Resp. Detrimenti caperet. That is,
that we should foresee and take order, that the Commonwealth be not wronged in
Matters appertaining to Physic. It is therefore an odious Calumny, and
slanderous untruth, which these base and outcast Companions give out, when
they are punished by the College, for their gross Sottishness, shameless
Intrusion, and insufferable, and pernicious Offenses and Disorders, that they
are therefore only pursued by us, because they take away our profit, (when as
in truth, they eft-soones make work for us) and do more good, then the
College of Physicians: whereas the great Acts they do, may appear partly by
this present Discourse, and yet more evidently by those lamentable Accidents,
and miserable Ends of many poor souls in London in a year, falling into
these Hucsters, or rather Hacksters hands. Our Consciences toward God, our
Duty toward our Prince, our Love to our Country, the honor of our
Profession, the Oath we have taken in our Admission, do all bind us, as by a
double or triple cord or band, Ad persequendum indoctos Empericos, and
Impostores. To pursue unlearned Emperickes, and Impostors.

In conclusion therefore, I desire them who have occasion to use Physic, to
remember always his saying, who affirms, that Plus mali a medico quam a
Morbo imminet, si aut audacia, aut Imperitia Poccet. There is more Danger to
be feared from the Physician, then from the Disease, if he offend either in
blockish Ignorance, or rash Temeritie; and think it safe for them, to be of
the same mind with a great Learned Clarke in our Land, who in a dangerous
sickness, being moved by some friends to use an unlettered Empericke. Nay
(quoth he) I have lived all my Life by the Book, and I will now (God-willing)
likewise dye by the Book. And so I wish from my heart to every one of them, in
Time of Health, a sound, faithful, and constant friend, who is called
Medicamentum vitae, and that they may avoid the Silken and Oylye Tongues of the
flattering Sycophant, and in Time of Sickness, an honest and learned
Physician: and that they may not fall into the butcherly hands of the
merciless Carnifex (I would but (because it is out, and not amiss, let it
go) have said) Quack-saluer.

Carpere vel noli Nostra, veledae Tua.
FINIS.
Diverse faults have escaped the Printer; which as they are easily discerned. so
I entreat thee (friendly Reader) to amend with thy Pen, as thou go along:
and to pardon me, who by occasion of some Business, have not looked so
narrowly to them, as I should, and (otherwise) would have done.


