BARNEVELS APOLOGY: OR HOLLAND MYSTERY.

WITH MARGINALL CASTIGATIONS.

NON PLUS Printed for Thomas Thorp. 1618.



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND WORTHY DAVID PAREVS, DOctor of Divinity, and
chief Professor of the same in the most famous and princely University of
Heidelberg, all tranquillity of life.
THIS, that I dedicate to your Worship (right reverend Doctor) is but small in
bulk and matter, but great in estimation and respect. And although the bulk
appears of it self, and of it own accord shows it self to each beholder:
neither is the labor any other, then a Translation out of the mother tongue
into Latin, and that almost word for word, without any ornament of style: yet
Respect and Estimation do add an honor and grace to the bulk and labor:
that even therefore I hope the work will be acceptable and pleasant when you
read it. Acceptable verily, because I offer it to you with all singular
affection, and bending submission to your gravity: Pleasant certainly, for
that thereby you shall know the profitable proceeding of the sincere Gospel in
Holland, as also the tottering and extreme ruin of the new vpstart Arminians.
For who among these was ever either a greater or bitterer enemy to our
natural Allies, then this same, not so truly Olden-Barneuelt, as Berneuelt?
Hitherto verily we feared, and trembled at him, as often as any mention came unto
us of that lamentable and noisome Schism to us, out of Gelderland, Holland,
Vtreicht, Ouer-Isle, Fries-land, and the other united Provinces: and we
understood him among many to be the only One, who durst audaciously oppose
himself unto the Ministers of the sincere Word: the only One, that, beyond
the rest, malepertly and maliciously affirmed the secular authority to be
above the Ecclesiastical, and all and any assembly whatsoever, or lawful
meeting together, at the least of Doctors end Divines: the only One, that
could and durst repress and keep under Prince Maurice his Excellency, now
Prince of Orange (whom God grant shortly to be Prince of all Holland also,)
that he should not restrain from their course those false brethren, false
teachers, even far worse then the Papists, and stop their pestilent
doctrine concerning Predestination and Justification: that he should not hinder
by strong-hand and warlike prowess all their conuenticles, nor compel them to
come to more wholesome Sermons, nor put to death those babblers and praters,
who seditiously often repeat, and cry out for liberty of conscience: Lastly,
the only One, whom no man durst offend, unless he himself would grievously
offend, and at once overthrow himself and all his fortune. And yet this
Champion is now driven to that straight by the secret underminings of some
Protestants of sincerer note, being disrobed of his accustomed authority and
desire of bearing rule, rather then any ability at all, that he has that way,
that he must become a suitor to the meaner sort, and crave their aid, whom
heretofore he domineered over. Rejoice, O worthy Doctor, and be glad O dear
Brother: and so much the rather, for that not he alone is thrown down, but
because he has also drawn down with him other of the chiefest followtrs and
heretics of that most desperate Arminian sect, whose condemnation long since
slacketh not, and their destruction sleeps not. For Maurice the Prince of
Orange his Excellency, who vouchsafes neither to see nor speak with him, and
most resolutely fights in defense of the Gospel which we profess, has this
year the first of January removed all the Arminians from the Senate at
Nimmeghen, and has put away the false Ministers of the Word, and from Zutphen
called forth Damman, a man not easily to be seduced, and most constant for our
true Doctrine; he has called forth others also from other places, appointing
them to their former rooms, these deeds of his he afterward approved in the
next Parliament of the Duchy of Gelderland: So with the like courage and
religious industry, he deprived from all honor and authority, wherein he
much excelled in the Council of the States, the noble Lord Henry a Brinen, who
had likewise opposed himself to the Court of the Hage, and favored the
Arminians: And so has he brought to order all them of Over Isle; who, except
Deuentrie, were already wholly bent to Arminianisme: and especially those of
Campen he has so daunted, who whilome since were utter heretics, making
merchandise of the word of God, that scarce any one dare so much as whisper
against the sound and sincere doctrine of the Gospel, as it has been taught
by that most learned and eloquent Doctor John Calvin. So that we hope assuredly
that those Innouators of Campen, and false Ministers of the Word, Thomas
Goswin, John Schotler, Euerhard Vosculinlus, Assuerus Matthisius, Satan's own
excrements, who in the month of October in our consecrated secular year 1617.
published their devilish Confession (that they might pollute and defile the
common joy, almost through the whole Empire, and thereby give occasion to the
Papists to write) against the Word of God, which endures for ever: in which
Confession beside other horrible matters, They have branded even the best and
religious men. To alter a little from the words of our excellent Poet (happily
as I suppose:) for I trust that thou, the Muses darling and the worlds delight,
art still of the same integrity, whereof thou were, when we reasoned so
pleasantly together of our mutual studies: and have not blemished thy fair
conditions with that same foul Goddess of Daniel Hensius: who by reason of
his inbred want of audacitie concealed his name, that published excellent
Epigrams against them out of a city in Holland; and set himself against a
certain shameless Libell of those or some other Arminians, called the Scales
or Balance. We hope (I say) that those servants of Hell shall shortly be
restrained, driven out, or by the help of God compelled by strong-hand to be
of our opinion, and to make a better Confession. The like we desire also with
our heart, to hear and understand concerning Greuenchouius, Bertius, Vorstius.
Grotius, Vtenbogartius, Slatius, Episcopius, Venator, John Arnoldi, and other
such like forerunners of Antichrist, whose dismal enterprises and horrid
blasphemies do too often trouble our ears and minds. Be glad and rejoice
(my Pareus) that those former ringleaders being subdued, without all doubt a
National Synod must be assembled: and happily by your advice declared in your
Irenicon. Will it not be an honor to thee? and a commodity verily to us all.
Especially if the warlike prince Maurice sit as President therein, who will be
able by his own power and presence so to terrify the adversaries, and above
all, if Sir Dudley Carleton Lidger for his Majesty of Great Britain, a most
heavy friend to the Arminian-asses, be his Assistant, that no man dare utter a
word, that he knows will displease them, and so will there be a most
excellent peace, and great quiet in our invisible Church. Rejoice at leastwise,
for that the first year of our New hundred after the year of Iubilee both
begin prosperously. For as in the former year we do of right solemnize a
Iubile, from the first revolt of the renowned Doctor Martin Luther out of his
irregular Cloister, and from the hard maiden-bed of the Augustines, to the
pleasing marriage of his chaste Catherine, and from his first disputation at
Wittenberg against Indulgences, which gave the Pope (whom we by our law term
Antichrist) the first wound: so our posterity may one hundred years hence
rejoice, for the vanquishing and subduing of Berneuelt, Brertius, Grotius, and
the rest, the first whereof was in a manner the very same among the Arminians,
which that Bishop of Rome was amongst the Papists. Oh good Lord! what an
occasion have we from hence to speak and fight against the Jesuits and hissing
Popelings (for so I had rather name them, then by any other counterfeit name
whatsoever, lest I also with that most learned Goclenius be commanded by I
know not whom, some new scoffing John Roberts by a marvelous Metamorphosis, to
metempsychize and turn my self into a Swine or Giezi: though that also will
not go scot-free, if I knew Raph aright?) What an occasion have thou (my
Pareus) against the Jesuit Adam Contzius, and Maximilian Sandy? Shake them up
roundly, I pray thee, and let them understand that we have cause to rejoice,
and to consecrate the hundred Year; but neither leisure nor heart to weep. For
else I shrewdly fear, lest many guess amiss of thee, (pardon the truth) and
of thy ability, and of our whole cause: and fall away to that side, where we
are assaulted with vnretorted weapons. Especially seeing many of our curious
Protestants so eagerly read prattling Contius his Iubile of Jubilees, and the
Thema seculare of saucie Sandy the Hollander, and confess themselves unable
to contradict them without one to instruct them: and moreover, that there is
small efficacy in the Chronology of the Evangelical Iubilee, not very
advisedly published under the name of the Students of Nuiss by our N. N. a man
very well beloved to thee and me: so that if it be sifted indeed by the
Jesuits (whom yet I trust are so busied about the overthrow in Bohemia, that
henceforth they neither list to write, nor speak any thing against us) we may
much blush thereat: yea even as much as we patiently did for your Syncretisme,
after it lighted into the hands and style of Moguntinus the Jesuit. Which
Jehovah the great God forbid, in whom I wish thee well to fare, and to take
this my small gift in good part. From my Study at Francfurt this 27. of June.
1618.

Yours most bounden and affectionate with all his very soul, Robert Houlderus,
Minister of the Word of God.

To the Reader of this Apology.
THis Berneueltius (gentle Reader) is absolutely the chief of the united
Factions in Holland. Now for that he has some friends, and many enemies, and
stands accused of many crimes, that he might assault his foes, and defend his
friends, has published in print some few days since this Apology in the
vulgar tongue. But while by all means he endeavors therein to avoid the
dangers of Charybdis, he is fallen into the barkings and unlucky jaws of
Scylla, being either too much moved with the hatred of his adversaries, or too
much blinded with the love of himself and of his friends: or certainly, that
being now an old man of 70. years of age, and doting before his death, might
fall as a more propice and fat sacrifice at the Altar of Proserpina. Farewell
Reader, and if thou desire to do well thy self, let this old Dotard have that
favor at thy hand, that he has deserved: yet I wish him in heaven, after he
has attained a sound opinion and faith, from either of which he is very far
wide.

BARNEVELTS APOLOGY: WITH MARGINALL CASTIGATIONS.
Honorable and mighty, my very good Lords:
HAVING heretofore employed my pen in writing for An insinuating and deceitful
exordium: What will the narration be?
the good of the Commonweal, so far forth as calamity suffered me: a
necessity seemed now to be imposed on me, yet little further to trouble you
in my private behalf And that so much the rather, because some there are who
attempt the weakening of the State, and welfare of the Country, by my Let it
be a part of the Readers care not to credit him. For how can his depression
any way endamage the State, whose destruction would have purchased peace and
security to it?
affliction and depression. It Is not long since a factious and seditious Book
came to light, which owes it birth and conception to Amsterdam; it trimming and
perfection to this place, full fraught with injuries and calumnies: which was
afterward printed and sent out to the world far and wide, and every where
publicly sold. This Book expressly and plainly without colors and
dissimulation depriues your Excellencies and Honors of their proper right,
Truth iustifies the contrary but his beginning witnesses in him a fear and
distrust of his cause.
and dismounts from their places and dignities the Governors of our
free-cities; among whom I am reckoned under the name of a Pensioner-greater.
And indeed fall who receive Pensions and maintenance from the Country are to
be ^alled Pensioners, I acknowledge such may be found in our Dominions; some
great, some greater, some You are that grand-Pensioner, and most pernicious,
whatsoever our dissimulation pretends.
grand-Pensioners: others little, less, and petty ones. Your own guilty
conscience suggests this.
But I think this manner of speaking may occasionally beget confusion, offense,
and sinister suspect both in the temporal, and Ecclesiastical state of what
condition soever. ^f despite and hatred term them Pensioners who stand for
the immunities and franchises of our Country and free-States; This is that
wherewith this ^orst of men seckes to hurt most.
It follows, that these slanderers (if they be invested in the government of
the free-Cities of our Country or otherwise tied to your Highnesses by
^llegeance) do oppugn their proper government, and bond of their oath.

In Holland and West- Frisland the same men are Pensioners and Counsai^ours,
and for the most part are either Burgomasters, or Aldermen, or
Common-counsailours. In a word, this order of stipendaries lived in good
account, and estimation among them. And all this while Your ambition manifests
in you greedy desire to ingrosse this commendation: but the world has taken
notice of your Foxes skin, and makes you fall short of it.
our Commonwealth was prosperously administered, both before, and after, as
also in the time of war, and is so still, the same Governors sitting at the
helm. So that it is not a little to be marvelled at, why these cauillers
seek to draw the government thereof into disgrace and envy, by their
libelling and carping books.

As for my particular place, and function, it was heretofore many years before
the war in good repute and credit with the Self-love makes you ouerprise
your self. You should rather have said, with drudges and Kitchin^oyes.
Gentry, Nobility, and free-Cities of Holland and West- Frisland: yea and the
very Princes of the Country, and the Governors thereof; always retained the
name of Could you challenge the name of Aduocate-general before the wars? You
are taken in the manner. For if this be so, you were Advocate in your ^adling
cloutes, or when you could not sit on a ^unch of Straw.
Advocate general, which it pleased the Gentry and Nobility, who appeared
personally in our Countries Parliaments, to use as a set Officer.

Open your mind briefly, and boldly say, I was a and o, the beginning, and
the ending, the first and the last, of honorable and mighty States, of all the
Councels, and Assemblies, of all Statutes and Decrees. Alter your style and we
will subscribe you were the original of all disasters an^ calamities,
especially such as happened upon the rent and schism in the renewed, and
reformed religion, whose sworn enemy we auow you.
The prerogative of my Office then consists chiefly in this: viz. to have a
prioritie in all matters, and to defend the Soueraignties and rights of your
Honors and Excellencies: and the immunities of our Country: to have the care
of calling your public Assemblies: in them to have a voice in all businesses,
to take charge of Remonstrances, and Petitions tendered unto you, and to
exhibit them at time convenient: to consult, and deliberate with the Nobles
concerning them, and all other things propounded in these meetings. That being
done, to pronounce the verdict passed either by joint consent, or at least
plurality of voices, to be your verdict: and to strengthen the same with
allegations and reasons as should be most fit. Afterward, to demand the
suffrages of free-Cities, to conclude by most voices: and, lastly to employ my
utmost ability, that what then was decreed, might be put in execution.

This Office was vacant both in Holland and West-Frisland, anno 1584 where my
Predecessor Paul Buys renounced and gave it over. Now as I with others of the
Nobility, and free-Cities of Holland and West-Frisland, first went Ambassador
to the Queen of England, anno 1585: So was the forenamed Master Paul Buys sent
Ambassador thither by the States of Vtrickes That very year after my return
out of England (two several Treaties being dispatched there with the Queens
Majesty's Commissaries) I Your persuasions shall not persuade us to believe you.
manifested my zeal and affection toward my best deserving Lord and Master,
the Prince of Orange of famous memory. Now your policy shroudes itself in a
gown, which afterward we shall see changed into a soldiers Iacket.
I dealt earnestly, that the Government of Holland and West-Frisland might be
delivered up to him by the worthy Lords the States of Holland, and
West-Frisland, before the coming of the Earl of Leicester: because my
thoughts told me, that he (by reason of a custom received in Brabant, and a
rumor, which I took notice of in England) would make claim to it. The matter
was determined of by the consent of the mayor part, though after a canuase and
much ado.

Toward the end of the year 1585. the Earl of Leicester entered into these
Regions, and was every where Whether do you command ^eere the person
entertained, or his entertainers?
entertained with great triumph, and at the Haighe about the beginning of the
year 1586. ordained general Governor with absolute power, and authority.
Now was Master Paul Buys admitted into the Coun^ell in behalf of the Province
of Vtricke. Hereupon it seemed good to the Gentlemen, Nobles, and free-Cities
of Holland, and West-Frisland, to revive the Office of Aduocate-generall of the
country. And Legates were sent by the Nobles and free-cities to the
Governors thereof, as also A matter of import no doubt, Which huff^puft lungs
thus belches out
privately to my self, to proffer that dignity to me, and exempt and acquit
me of my bounden service to the Governors of Rotterdam. I Now for a Momus: if
this man's breast had a Latice window in it.
urged then many reasons, that they would hold me excused. As first, want of
money, which was required in a man of that place: then my desire to eschew
aemulation: and diverse other causes: but no excuse might serve the turn. Thus
was I enforced to adventure my shoulder under a This the language of
dissimulation, with whom a escape passes for curra^t, under the name of coughing
burden unsought for. Nevertheless, I put in two cautions. First This
vnderhand-packing is then most treacherous, when it is covered with the cloak
of honesty. You sweat much in laboring to auert the suspicion of close league
and intelligence betwixt your self and the Spaniard: but credulity it self
will not credit you.
in case consultation were had of returning these Regions to the Spaniard
(which I feared for many weighty causes) that then I would be discharged of
this Office ipso facto. Secondly Herein I assent to you, though the reasons
which you allege, will not abide the trial. For put case none of the feared
inconveniences followed upon your absence; yet would not you be won to leave
the Country: unless you might hope to fill your pouch with pelf, and bribes,
and turn your absence to your private commodity.
that I might be sent no where out of the Province without my own free
consent; that by this means nothing might escape my knowledge, and I might in
person withstand those, who happily would embrace all advantages, which my
absence promised, in infringing our customarie proceedings: the rule whereof
was to be sought for at my hands.

I undertook this weight in the beginning of March Anno Then the war was not
afoot. How then durst you broach a lie before? But this is no uncouth matter
with you, who in these few sheets have transgressed the bounds, which truth
prescribed not fewer then a hundred times which every attentive Reader m^
observe, and consider the Dutc^ Proverb which says, Show m^ a lier, I Will show
you a Thief.
1586. and I found all former customs, and orders inuerted. All authority was
transferred upon the Earl of Leicester. Grave Maurice, and Count William
received instructions for their government of the foresaid Earl. At Zeland
they moved questions touching the extent of their borders and portions, to the
great annoiance of the Hollander, and West- Frislander. The Persist in your
lying, and exaggerate all things: that you man lay a sure foundation of your
braggarisme, and vainglory, for yo^ have the trick of it.
Companies of the Grand-Prouinciall Assemblies, the Masters of Accounts, and
Magistrates of the Haighe were so animated against the States of Holland, that
both by words and writing they called into doubt, whether the States of
Holland, and West-Frisland, had so much authority left them, as might warrant
them to enioine the performance of the tribute and contributions imposed. Many
also of the Governors of the free cities were sinisterly affected toward the
State, by reason of the detaining of certain goods, and some proceedings
intended against them. Hitherto you did but spatter now you begin to spue,
and a^ the poison which ^ay in your i^fected stomach, that with noiso^ belches
you disgorge upon the inn^cent Ministers of Gods Word whose shoo-latchets you
are v^worthy to tie. But look to you^selfe, you must swallow down on^ again
these stinking gobbets.
Many of the Preachers would no longer now acknowledge their fealty to the
States: and they demanded of the Earl of Leicester, without the priuitie of
the States, the indiction of a The Readers own observation may tell him, where
this Arminian Berneuell his sho^ wrings him. That he may m^lest and let the
future Synod ordained for the public good, h^ draws the name of a Synod, a^
the authors thereof, into envy. S^ it is a customarie thing for men (...) hate
the light, which work wi^kednesse: and they who covert disperse and scatter
abroad v^ truths, come in place where tru^ is unmasked against their will* But
the Arminians were now a good while since desperately incurable: concerni^
whom, that may be truly spoken, which is stamped in pieces of money, and other
coin^ used at the Haighe, What need spectacles when a man will not see?
Synod National, as they call it. The garrisons had bound themselves by oath
to the said Earl. The promiscuous multitude was an enemy most what to the
States. And not long after the cities of Graves, and Vendloe and others were
possessed by the Spaniard. Nimeghe^ was violently assaulted: there was great
hurly-burly, and disorder about contributions, and the procuring of money. For
moneys lent we were necessited yearly to pay twelve pound in the hundred for
use, and two pound more for brocage. The charges were greater by many degrees
then our revenues. The Earl of Leicester established many Edicts, in which he
used his own name and seal. The shipping not only of forrainers, but even of
neighbor Kingdoms and Provinces, was by public decrees subject to his
power: here I staggered in my purposes, and was, not without just cause,
doubtful what to do: but the Lord strengthened, and enabled me to attempt the
fittest means for the calming of these storms, whereinto these straites had
cast us.

Many enormities were observed by certain of the most principal men (in which
number was the Lord Governor Vander Mile, of famous memory, a man at that time
best seen in the Countries affairs) as also by some of the Nobles, and some of
the free-Cities: and it was found out, that whatsoever was done tended
hitherto, that This was that which you longed for, that you might fill your
bag, and with open violence oppress the innocent, and skulke in all these
mischiefs with impunitie.
war would suddenly ensue. Some few days after, an innovation began at
Vtricke. Many ancient and honest Patriots of eminent place were both thrust out
of their Offices and dignities, as also out of the City. The Government was
allotted to strangers. Bellencer of Flanders was created President; Agileus of
Brabant general Procurator: Praetors, Consuls, Questors were all Brabanders.

Master Paul Buys was cast into prison.

Let men of discretion, and such as are acquainted in the mystery of the
business, pause here awhile. For if these were to demand a reason of your
words: you would slip the collar.
The Reformation instituted in St. James his temple, which Was not the
description thereof worth your pains? But you purposely omit it, that you may
more securely pack, and shuffle in your untruth.
at first was accepted of by the most principal men, seemed now not sound and
sincere enough, and therefore was altered. And yet, this was not sufficient.
There was further in the said place an Act made by the Common-Counsellers,
wherein they delivered up the Province of Vtricke to be absolutely commanded by
the Queen Here I could wish, that that royal Prince lived: or if not so, yet
now haled you, hanging back, with her virgin hands, before Radamanthus his
judgment seat. As sure as what is most sure, if either the one, or other of
these two things were granted, you were utterly undone.
of England at her pleasure, without prefining any conditions. This mean while
the Do you not covertly accuse these noble orders to be faulty? Here now I
appeal from the Readers to the pronouncers of judgment: yet by way of
information, not accusation, least I ieopard his head: and thus much he shall
be beholding to me.
States of Holland and West-Frisland used their utmost endeavors for the
performance of those things, which they granted and promised the Earl. All
these things notwithstanding, they exhibited remonstrances, and complaints
about the redressing of misdemeanors: but they obtained nothing but promises
and fair words.

The Earl departing from the Haigh, pitched his camp about Doesburg and
Sutphen. The plots of James Reingout, and Stephen Paret, are here And let me
tell you, so are yours, least perhaps you flatter your self too much.
discovered, and it appeared by Reingouts papers, that Vtricke was delivered up
by his priuitie, and persuasion: and that it was therefore convenient, that
this old leaven should be purged out there. Decrees are published of an
intended National Synod.

That is, Advocate Berneuell, their mouth, and ears, an enemy to the ancient
reformed religion, who is not worthy to enjoy the light of the Sun, or tread
upon the earth.
The general States made a scruple to approve these without the consent of the
States of the Provinces, every one severally for their own parts, by whom they
were deputed Delegates. Which act of theirs offended very many, and made
themselves odious. Writings, assaults, and public sermons in Churches were
made against them. The What an indignity is this, that these famous Orders
should be thus slandered? that they should be ranked in the number of
double-harted baselings, which pretend one thing, and intend another.
States of Holland temporized here, and thought they might do well to accept
those decrees for a time: provided, the states, Nobles, and each free City
should retain in the Interim their power, and Buzzing whisperer, tell me
whence had they this power and right? Was your head or the three-headed
Cerberus the mint of it, or both? I know you allege Brentius here for
confirmation of your purpose: But I refer you to that light of our reformed
Church, Master Calvin, who in his Book of Instit. Chap. 12. s. 8. and so
forward, is of our side, and divinely teaches, that the Ecclesiastical
authority of a Pastor, and the power of the secular Magistrate are 2. things,
so disioyned, that they are incompatible in the same person or State: If you
reject Calvin, you are an Heretic, and worthy to be burned.
right in placing, and displacing the Ministers of the Church. The Earl of
Leicester, and Council of the States gave out acts approving this. The States
complained of Dare you yet again twitte our Preachers as factious persons? the
Ministers of Gods word? But you blabber out these things, either to sow
sedition in Holland, or to help the growth of it now already sown. But command
your tongue silence rather, for all Prea^hers, if indeed and truly Prea^hers,
are lovers of Peace. As ^or your Arminians, they are the Diu^ls instruments,
and the bel^owes to blow the fire of contention.
factious Sermons: it was coldely and doubtfully answered, that they were to
be constrained to use another manner of preaching. The States So will I, and
those of the ancient reformed Religion for your banishment; with this prouiso,
that you may be carried to the black-Islands, where you may not have the
benefit of the light, nor stuff more Papers with lies and slanders.
importuned Reingouts banishment. This was determined in the Earls presence:
wherefore Reingout at his parting, burst out into these words; I have made
shipwreck of my authority and power. Reingout then (who was so religious, that
he would not suffer man or maid in his house, that received not the communion)
We shall shortly hear the like news of you* For whatsoever you say, the
Spaniard is a great Man in your Books, and you are already half a Papist, and
more mischievous then a professed Papist.
revolted to the Spaniard, and died a Papist. The Earl of Leicester, after he
was resolved to go for England, dealt privately himself in Holland with Noble
Prince, can you hear these things and endure them? Perceive you not the
underminings of this subtle Fox? It Is a calumniation and a slander against
your Excellency, let him smart for it.
Graue-Morris, that he would depart with him. I let the success of this
intendment, which in a frequent and full Assembly was cast in my teeth: and the
Earl of Leicester, after the hearing of my allegations, said, he was not now
to learn, what these things aimed at. The Earl of Leicester at his departure,
left behind him two Acts concerning the proceedings of Prouincial affairs.
After this Earls death, Stanly and York (for not only ambitious, turbulent,
and beggarly fellows, but traitors also have their place in factions)
disloyally surrendered Deuenter, the hold of Sutphen to the Spaniard, as
afterward Gelderland was betrayed by Paton.

The Lords General of the States about the beginning of February by their
letters did represent their complaint to the Queen, and the Earl concerning
Leicester, of the Acts of both the said Earl and his followers, and retainers.
Then did you enlarge the authority of Graue-Maurice, and of the Count, making
the former Do you not envy his Excellence, this Title? The more judicious sort
des^ry your windings and contriuals: but your worth most excellent Prince
secures you. For howbeit most pages of this your adversaries Book level at
your person and authority, yet it is to no purpose.

Son dard, sans fair coup, il a lance en vain.
Vostre airain enroue le pousera soudain.
Against your woundless bres^ he bolts his dart in vain:
Your clattering Brigandine still beats it back again.

governor, and the other, general Lieutenant; allowing them 80 companies of
soldiers for the safeguard of the said Provinces. And whereas the said Earl
purposed himself to return hither unto us in person, he sent before him his
Secretary, whose wiles and instructions were discovered, and defeated by my
pains and industry.

The Earl returns, looses Sluse, the comminaltie of Middleborough, makes an
uproar in the Abbey. The Earl cherishes their sedition, and goes on forward
to Dorth: some were sent thither to him by the States, to crave other
ordinances. In the mean while I was certified, that he had a commission, to
propound a treaty to make peace with the Spaniard. That do I then publish to
the world: he had notice hereof: he Who can credit this? are you, with whom
lying is familiar and ordinary, a telle-truth, and the Earl of Leicester a
periurd lier? but by this time your voice has rung over all Hell. Aeacus
opens the gate to you, you are led to judgment, unless happily Great
Britains King seize on you by the way, and having first caused that hand and
tongue to be cut out (which so malapertly disgraces the Earl even after his
death, and privily seeks to gall Queen Elizabeth and King James) after, when
you are thus dressed turn you over to the other unrelenting Judge.
swears, forsweares, calls God and man to witness, and utterly denies that
he had any such charge. He hies him to the Haigh, and commands certain
troops of horsemen to go to Sluse upon Mose, and the port Delfe. The
Burgomasters, VVingarden (who was afterward President) and with him
Casenbroodt, came to me by night, and advertised me, that the Earl made a
search for me, with a purpose to convey me into England. I betook my self
to Delfe by night, and there I understood, that it was rumoured in Zeland, that
Graue-Maurice, my self, and some others of the States, should be certainly
sent into England.

Consultation was had concerning these matters at Delfe, and it was agreed
upon, that Prince Maurice should depart the next day from the Haigh, which was
accordingly performed. Master Valke, and Master Loosen came that self same day
about noone-tide to Delfe, to treat with me there about Prince Belike then
Grave Maurice was in his nonage, and you were his Guardian and ouerseer.
Maurice his return, but all in vain.

The Earl of Leicester, after he understood that Prince Maurice, and Count
Hohenlo mustered soldiers, departed to Vtrick, and hoped, after he had
dispatched all things there according to his wish, to bring unto his subjection
the Church, by which name he meant Amsterdam. But his purposes were detected,
and prevented by the fidelity of the true hearted Hollander, Consul and
Captain Peter Boom.

Therefore he went forward to Horn, in hope to seize upon Capell which had
confederated it self with Anchusen: but the good Patriots having ^ntelligence
of his intent, denied his entrance into the city.

While the Earl lingers in North-Holland, two heavy messages were brought to
him: first, that his plots thriued not in the good city of Leiden, and that the
remnant there had escaped by flight; and presently after, that Colonel Cosmo,
Captain Maud, and James Valmaer, Elders of the Church, were punished with death
for their attempted treason. A second thing which appald him, was this, because
his intercession, that treaty of Peace might not be offered the States, was
cried out on in England, and he was commanded the second time to propound the
matter either himself, or some English man for him. After he had received
these tidings, he said, It was now high time for him to Let his example be your
President: This counsel I give you unasked. Charity wishes to give counsel
where it is not asked.

Hasten your course, but beware you take Dort in your way. You may conveniently
exchange Roterdam for Antwerpe; or if you be pleased to visit Vtricke, and
your clients there, you ^y make a short cut to the ^ukes wood, being guarded
with the Arminian brethren: and that you may travel with more safety, and not
be intercepted by the spies and warders ( Leiden and Vtricke threaten no
danger, but their borders very much) send before you Bertius, and Vtenbogartie,
like two defensive dogs to scour the way, and forewarne such as lie in wait.
Afterward fly into Spain, and die a Papist. But hear, which I had well-nigh
forgotten, that way is dangerous too, and may tumble you into Purgatory: and
send before you even hither too those your two companions, that you may safely
pass, while the Porter of the Purgatory busies himself with them.


look to his head. Wherefore suddenly, yet not without suspicion, he iourneyed
first to Vtricke, from thence to Delfe, then to Flushing; and lastly from
Flushing he betook himself into England.

While the Earl stayed in North-Holland, your Highnesses and Honors assembled
at Harleme, that you might be in more readiness for all assayes. There then
the Magistracy of Vtricke, which consisted of If you were bound to prove this,
you would sweat for it.
strangers, were instant with many, both by writings, and by diverse of their
You would be clean spoiled if you should not make Preachers to have a finger
still in all mutinies: so that you were borne as it may seem, to check and
taunt them.
Preachers, as also by word of mouth, that they would persuade your Highnesses,
and Honors to enlarge the Earl of Leicesters authority: but their endeauours
were stoutly withstood. I cannot express in writing (my good Lords) in This is
Lord-like indeed. The God of war himself dare not open his mouth to
parallel his strength with yours.
how great dangers, menaces, and pain I passed those two years: with what
courage and alacrity most grievous distresses were vanquished, and the
country defended.

As What reckoning, trow we, do you make of your oath: who are forward to
discover secrets. Know you not the old Proverb, A servant must not utter all
he knows: but a desire to cover your self, and the hatred of your adversary
makes you forget your self.
concerning the Peace, (which was first propounded by the Earl, and afterward
desired of the Queen of England by Ambassadors extraordinary) it appeared,
the matter was commenced in an assembly of of the general States amongst
those, who were deputed thereto by the Provinces, and also amongst the
particular members, and Cities of Holland and West-Frisland: and likewise
amongst the You are always bitter against the Preachers: Le vent nourrit le
feu; and en soufflan l'allume. The same wind cherishes the fire while it is
young, and after kindles, and brings it to its strength and height.
Preachers, and societies, and brought to that pass, that the Queen of happy
memories demand should be satisfied. Wherefore it was necessary to use
singular dexterity, labor, and pains to reconcile the dissentions and
schisms of the Provinces (among whom the Frislanders were so You are an enemy
to Peace; are you not? But if you had endured, what even the chiefest and best
in Frisland have, you would be an enemy and hater of war.

Non sa quae val'la pace, and non l'estima,
Chi prouato non a la guerra prima.
They know not how peace to prefer,
Who never felt the extremity of war.

desirous of peace, that there Commissioners were not only inioined to assent
to, but further to repair to the place appointed for the making up thereof)
that this once effected, Ambassadors might be sent into England unto the
Queen, who might lay before her sundry difficulties and considerations of
import, which withstood this business, which she according to her excellent
wisdom should ponder of: and whose determination concerning the same, the
said Ambassadors should bring back unto us. By which Embassage the States
were excused from treating of the peace, without breach of their duty and
honor.

Shall we credit, whatsoever it pleases you to forge: Fie, what a deal of
froth have we here?
Moreover, what difficulties happened anno 1588. and 1589. about compounding the
seditions in Medenblick, Gertruydenbergh. Heusden and other cities, and forts:
What Prince What think you of this, most excellent Prince? You are acquainted
with the fellows wiles and deceits: know yet further that covered fire breaks
out violently.
Maurice writ to the Parliament, and Council of England, to demonstrate, that
the abouenamed Coronell Snoy impiously pretended the color of Religion, in his
plots and treacheries: What charges we were at against the Spanish Navy,
against the counsels and assaults of the Prince of Parma, against the city of
Birghen apsome and the fortresses thereof, together with the territory of
Vander-Tholen. How the Province, and City of Vtricke had liberty given to
depose illegitimate Governors, and restore legitimate. How the agreements of
peace betwixt Spain and England were Never was any man so shamelessely
confident in his doings, as is our Barneuelt.
intercepted by me: How an expedition was undertaken against the Town of
Breda. By what means the government of Gelderland, Vtricke, and Transysulania
was conferred upon Prince Excellent Prince do you think any of these Greeks
to be without fraud?
Maurice, was furthered and effected by me. What an expedition was made against
the Cities of Nymeghen and Graves: what a building of a fort there was without
Nymeghen; after what manner the fortress of Terheide, and Steinbergh was
taken, by what means all things were prepared, directed, and successefully
effected until the expedition of the year 91. when we won Zutphen
Deuenter, and Delfs-Ile, and other adjacent forts, and lands, when we
fortunately won Hulst and Nymeghen in the same year: and how the Prince of
Parma, to his great loss, and damage, was enforced to leave the fort beyond
Nimeghen it were too tedious to relate. I will only say thus much: How easily
would your modesty suffer you to hear that of the Po^t applied to your self;
Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.
One only man by grave and wise delay,
Preserved the country made to the fo a prey.
But your ambition is apparent: and your vaunts prove you to be as vain as
Vanity it self.


I had a principal hand in all these matters; as also in this that always
premised (Gods assistance) your Honors and Highnesses lawful authority was
on a sudden in more favor, credit, and respect, then it has ever been
heretofore.

Now after all affairs of the States, all matters concerning War,
Government, Justice, leuying of moneys was brought into some tolerable form
and order; I showed your Honors and Highnesses Anno 1592. as well face to
face, as by writing in my absence, that I had formerly complained more then
once o^ the weightinesse of the Office imposed upon me, and that I desired to
be freed from the burden thereof. But our affairs being then perplexed, I fell
short of my wish. Then afterward all things being happily finished and
dispatched, I renewed my suite to be discharged of the place, without
expectation of any further Quis veteres auias tibi de pulmone reuellet?

Who dares attempt to quite your bragging breast,
Of this proud devil, wherewith you are possessed?
Your bragges are unreasonable: and you then vent them, when you have least
cause.


recompense but this, to wit an immunitie ever after from the undertaking of
any other office and charge whatsoever.

But my Petition, though earnest and hearty, prevailed not: and I was with my
honor requested, and my pay A man may see you have read the Comedian, and
observed this out of him; All men are bound their selfe-good to procure,
And thereof in the first place themselves assure.



purposely increased, that I should not give over my Office, and it was
declared this was heartily desired of each member, and City of the whole
assembly. Thus I was compelled to persevere in my charge and Office.

From this time, viz: from the year ninty two, until the year 1608. I never
left, nor was any way wanting to my Office. From the year Now this base,
impudent, and vainglorious fellow, this perjured and adulterous naughty-packe
enters afresh into his bragarisme. Mais pourquoy to en croyra on, puis qu' en
un champ tu^n' ouys iamais la trompette? But who will believe him, who durst
never venture himself within the hearing of the sound of a trumpet? and ever
after he continues in his vanity, and tragical lofty style?
88. unto the year 1606. full out, I went thirty six several times to
Prince- Maurice in his Camp, either sent for by him, or otherwise deputed,
that I might unfold unto him the course and order of our proceedings, and
procure the establishing of your decrees; which I performed to my commendation
and praise, oftentimes Have patience a while and we will inroll you in the
number of the Gods: but it must be the infernal ones.
beyond the hope and expectation of all men. In this interim too I undertook,
and worthily performed four Wonder, reader, and give this mighty man the way.
For he was sent Ambassador from hence in the behalf of a potent Commonweal.
But why did you accept of those Embassages (as you call them) when in the
entrance to your office you provided, that you might be sent no where out of
the Province; but I know added some prouiso and exception: and I know moreover,
that your ambition gapes for great imploiment, and an impotent, and
unrestrained desire of praise makes you adventure your self blindfolded in
pursuit thereof.
Princely and royal Embassages, to the great good and benefit of the
Country. And when a treaty tending to Peace was labored in the Emperors
name, and the Prince of Parmaes, in the names of Erueste, and Albert
Archdukes, and the general States of the adverse and contrary faction; the
You are an enemy to Peace, and shall never enjoy peace. But I marvel you durst
be so impudent as to profess so much. Especially since the interest paid for
your debts (which were occasioned by breach of the Peace) surmounted your
imposts, contributions, and exactions. Your self alone were the original of
these inconveniences. But what became of all these moneys? Give up your
accounts, for you must be no longer Steward.
breaking of this Peace cost me a great deal of pains. Now since the King of
France made a league with the King of England, the King of Spain, and the
Archdukes, the money paid for our debts and other arrereages were so
excessive, that they amounted to more then the Subsidy and contributions
(though they were greatly raised) could satisfy, by the sum of twenty six
millions of Florens. Furthermore, the two last years were passed over with
much infamy and loss, and yet again greater danger was feared (two
expeditions prepared by the enemy being hardly removed out of the way) because
at the very instant time foreign aides were both less firm, and more
burdensome to the country, then heretofore they were wont to be: and because
the interest-money came to that height, that the State of the whole seemed
desperate, as our Counselors and Treasurers three years since had
forewarned. And now after this advertisement, the burdens imposed exceeded the
revenues of the Country, about six or seven millions of Florences, within
the compass of the said three years. Why do you extol this, as though it
had been effected by your industry? You are not Iwis, the preserver, but the
betrayer of your Country, and scatter-good thereof. You have not relieved her,
but thrust her into further debt: and the commendation, which you would
engrosse, is either no commendation; or if it be any, it belongs not to you.
And truly whereas the Spaniard made a composition on such easy terms, in so
desperate a time, that must be ascribed to the hidden counsel of God, who
turns all things to their good, whom he has predestined thereto. Otherwise,
I was my self an eye witness of such abashment, in the subjects of the
confederated Provinces, and an ear witness of such desperate counsels, as
were never heretofore heard of: and therefore you coined money (wherein there
was a mystery) with Peter's floating ship, and this inscription, O ye of
little faith, why do you fear? Which you divided amongst the Orders, and
heads of the State, as a present for honors sake, not of duty, according to a
received custom among you. Whereof I had a part, and do profess my self to
be a well-willer of the good of the Commonweal, not of your faction. But if
God had not helped in these extremities, those counsels had been to litttle
purpose, and certain others more to be abhorred (I speak the truth) which
proceeded from desperation.
Here no man ought to marvel, that is not destitute of reason, why (since it
appeared that the King of Spain, and the Archdukes yielded for their part
unto the Provinces their rights and liberty, and this granted, would end all
matters with the Lords of the States, not now as their vassals, and subjects,
but Governors of free-dominions, to which they made no claim: and since it
was hoped that by this means so long, bloody, and chargeable a war, might
sort to an honorable wished and secure end) why, I say, such a meeting was
intended. At my first entrance into this meeting (wherein the Common Council,
and Ambassadors of France, Great Britain, Denmark, and of the Electors
Palatine, and Brandeburge, and diverse Princes Euang: of Germany) I plainly
perceived the first attempts of my adversaries against my person and
proceedings, both in open assemblies, and in libels, which were cast out: which
was done by their directions, who were This is but your opinion and conjecture,
but others know there is no such matter.
offended at this treaty concerning Peace. I declared so much to your Honors
and Highnesses: and proffered nevertheless to resign my offices, and live a
private life: and therefore of set purpose I absented my self from the
Assembly.

But This was kindly done of them, howsoever the fear of a greater
inconvenience made them choose this: and you laughed in your sleeue, when you
perceived that the Foxes skin auailed there, where the Lions could not. You
are very politic, I wish you to continue so.
I understood both by word of mouth, by the commissaries of the Nobles and
free-cities, and also by letters, that the Assembly of your Honors and
Highnesses did with one accord approve of my offices, and services, and willed
me to persist therein, and again resort unto the Assembly, and that they would
furthermore esteem so of all inconveniences, which happened unto me, as if
they should happen to the general Assembly. I obeyed your Honors, and
Highnesses herein, perseuered in my office, brought the treaty to a desired
and You know what Menelaus says in Homer: -- (...). It is worth the wishing
for, to be without the compass of exception.


commendable issue, and with others subcribed thereto. Better and better still,
but you hunt after praise with too great earnestness: Was not the once
uttering of these things sufficient? But happily doting old age has deprived
you of your memory, so that you observe not, that in a short space you repeat
the same thing over and over: But the Reader must hold him excused, he was
sometime wise, new he dotes.

Nam quaecunque sedens modo legerat, haec eadem stans
Profert, atque eadem cantabit versibus ijsdem.
What sitting erst he read, that standing he rehearses;
And vents the self same things all in the self same verses.
-- Gaudent --

I was employed also in diverse Treaties, with the Ambassadors of the Queen
Mother in France, with Ambassadors in England, both as long as the foresaid
meeting held, and before: as also to continue the same. Moreover, I was made
governor of the forces, which were sent by the King of France, and put in
trust to make even the debts betwixt us and the King of England: all the
agreements whereof were sealed by me.

Afterward I was chief instrument, and procurer of uniting the Provinces,
which the King of England helped first of all more then 24 years one after
another: afterward with the countenance and authority thereof, and great store
of money, and now (by the care and direction of the Kings of the foresaid
Kingdom) things were brought to that pass, which I told you a little before,
that they could fully discharge the debtes, wherein they were engaged, and
redeem their cities, and places laid to pledge, and recover their bonds and
obligations.

Garrula securi narrare pericula nautae.
So Mariners when all is safe and well,
Their perils ouerblowne do joy to tell.
Yet you sooth your self too much, and make your self the Atlas, and
sustainer of the whole state of Holland: But let me tell you in your ear, for
I hope you will understand me; Si suelen algunos hombres subir tan alto, que
se pierden a se mismos de vista. Many have mounted so high, that have lost the
benefit of their sight. It is the language of a nation, with whom you are now
familiar, and well acquainted.


And I settled the money-matters of the Provinces in those terms, that the
companies of the Admiralties, which before in the year 1609 were burdened with
about two Millions, and eight hundredth thousand Florens, were so eased, that
whereas in the beginning of my office we paid yearly pensions of 12 in the
100, and 2 for brokeage, now instead thereof, our last borrowed money is at 16,
and three in the hundredth for brokeage, to be redeemed at 9 in the hundred, or
at use at sixteen.

Whereas Some Times have their opportunity, and some Oportunities their time:
and there will both time and opportunity be found, to put up complaints
against you: do you conceive me?
then after so many, so great, so singular and extraordinary offices, and
services for so long a time continually performed, the administration of the
Common wealth is now complained of: whereas it is pretended, that they know not
whence and what I am: whereas I am accounted a forreiner, a stranger, and that
other suchlike unseemly reports are noised abroad: these things must needs
trouble me, having sustained more then 32 years the office of the disposer of
the affairs of the country, in all your Honors and Highnesses Assemblies, and
being possessed in the said Assemblies of another place and office nine years
before. But I answer; I was borne at the city of Is it so? come you from
Amersfort? then you know how to brag and swagger, triumph, and joy in it: But
how do you prove your self to be of that noble Family, or to be legitimate?
If New-kerke in the Welue will give you a Testimony of your legitimatenesse, I
will easily believe it: they may justly make claim of a place in the meetings
of Gelderland, you unjustly. But I spare to speak of these things, and you
happily were borne in a place of no note, where you were not known to your
nearest friends.
Amersfort, where my predecessor in office was also borne. By my fathers side,
I derive my pedigree from the ancient and noble stock of the Olden-barneuells,
the line descending every way lawfully from our ancestors for many years: which
Olden-barneuells for some hundred years appeared alwaie upon warning in the
Prouincial assemblies, and other meetings, of the Gentry of Welue, as they do
yet even at this day. By my mothers side, a matrone of worthy memory, I desce^d
lawfully every way too from the worshipful family of I know nothing but good
concerning that Family: yet I add thus much, but not in scorn, Such once we
were, etc. And I further marvel, why you should so carefully search, and as
it were mendicate these things, for you have no reason at all to make mention
of the family of Lockehorst (which you do a little after). I know both that
Family and you, and therein Merchants also, at Amsterdam in the Warmestraet:
but you reply, he is an Anabaptist. So by the same reason Wynbergen of
Amersfort shall be no Gentleman, because he goes in black. It is not the
Garment, but the Place and Office which debases men. Winbergen is principal of
the Perfectists, and you of the Arminians, both your Religions are stark
naught.
Amersfort, which in progress of time, after the branching out (hereof, was
called Wede: and this was also of good account, and ancient ^oo, which now
some 300, or 400 years since, (in treaties of peace bewixt the Count of
Holland, the Bishop of Vtricke, and others, as also in affairs with the
governors of Amstel, and Woerden) was ranked in the order of gentlemen, and
was possessed with some thousands of acres of land, goodly Lordships, great
store of goods, and jurisdictions.

Neither can I be accounted for a stranger in Holland, since that is contrary
to the union made, heretofore more then 80 years, in the reign of the
emperor Charles, of happy memory, betwixt the Hollander, and the men of
Vpricke, the Lords of the States of Holland being earnest suitors therefore.
Since which time both the Hollanders in Vtricke, and those of Vtricke in
Holland, have been admitted promiscuously into all offices of both places, and
are so yet. My accuser will take order to have my life and acts written: but I
Your pains will be fruitless; for there will be nothing in the discourse
worth the hearing: but this your accuser whosoever he is, if he do undertake
the setting forth of your Acts, and life, I hope he will painte you in your
proper colors, and this fear already torments you.
will save him the labor, and do it my self briefly and shortly.

When I Who were your Schoolmasters? for it is of great import under what
teachers, and discipline, youth is brought up.
had made some progress, how mean soever in my studies, I went in the year
1564 to the Accursed was the Haighe to have Berneuell for an inhabitant.
Certainly you deserve to be used as the Bore is, which is yearly sent from
Vtricke to the Haighe, neither shall the reformed Church ever be at peace,
till this be done. You know wheter I will bring you.
Haigh; and there, that and the year following I practiced. The years 66 and
67, I followed my study at Louane and Rohines in France. Many other students,
and my self were constrained to leave France about the later time of the year
1567, by reason of civil war then arising: from thence therefore travailing
thorough Burgundy, the Arch-dukedome, and County of Bisantiu^ and
Mompeillart, I came thorough Switzerland to Busille, and from -thence along the
river Rhene to Colen. Being provided at Colen with a fresh supply for my
journey, I went to This was one of the chief reasons why I writ this
Apology (most learned Pareues and kind brother) unto you. He auerres he
sucked in this poison at Heydelberge, that he was made an Arminian at
Heydelberge, before Arminius his name was heard of: That he may disgrace your
University, traduce your Doctors of Divinity, and fraudulently scandalize the
ancient reformed Religion. Though the impostor fawn, yet he bites, privily
fastening in his poisoned teeth: but he shall not carry it away scot-free.
Wherefore I leave him to you (famous Pareus) and your judicious and learned
pen: canuase him according to his merits: so may you thrive, as you persist
to whippe him again and again, and cease not from the dawning of the day,
until the shutting up thereof.
Heidelbergs; where I followed the study of the law: and divinity
disputations being then frequently held concerning Predestination, I for my
part embraced this doctrine, as sound, and (b) Christian;

That a good Christian ought to believe, that he is predestined unto
salvation by the grace of God, and for the satisfaction which his Savior and
Redeemer made for his sins: and that by the same grace of God he has
received this faith, whereby he firmly believes, How sound and Christianlike
your Religion is, every Cobbler knows, and further that monstrous and wicked
impieties were hatched there, or in confederated Belgia by this your Religion.
that his salvation is only founded in the grace of God, and merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ: and that though he slip into grievous sins,
nevertheless he ought constantly to hope and believe, that God will not suffer
him to continue therein, but that he shall in mercy be converted, and brought
to repentance, that entreats for mercy; and lastly, that he shall persevere
in the faith unto his lives end. With which opinion that very year I
acquainted the two divinity professors, Bocquin, and Zanchius, and Oleuian
also their principal preacher, who said, that I might rest therein without any
further inquiry. I have continued in this mind through Gods grace now 50
years: and being welnie 71 years old at this present, I hope I shall from
henceforth live and die therein. Concerning a further search of my religion,
this was my verdict and profession, (which my great-grandfather Nicholas While
you strive to approve your Religion, you stick not to make your
great-Grandfather irreligious: But a word or two in your ear. You are an
Atheist, you neither believe in God nor care for him. And so much your verdict
and saying in the point of Faith, vnfalli^ly proves.
Olden-Berneuell (whose wife Adelheidis of Lockehorst, my great-grandmother
descended legitimately and directly from the ancient house of Lockehorst, which
is situate nie Amersford) left behind him) It is the surest faith to know
nothing. I travailed through Germany and Italy in the years 68, and 69: and
having finished my course of study, at my parents charges I came unto the Let
the Haigh dress this beast as he deserves: or if she be pleased first to
fat him with the mast of her Wood, let her do it quickly, lest he slip
away out of her, for the Town has no ward nor gates to prevent his flight.
Haigh, to dwell there, and was Advocate of the Court. See how the Fox holds
with the Hare, and runs with the Hounds.
I was one of the three Advocates, who in the year 1572 first acknowledged his
Excellency of famous memory to be the lawful governor of Holland: and the
same year I determined with my self to spend H^se velut stricto quoties
Lucilius ardens
Infremuit, tubet, ^uditor cui frigida men's est
Crimimbus, tanta sudant praecordia culpa.
When vexed Poets take their pens in hand,
Meaning therewith the faulty times to bra^d,
Guilt dies the fearful blushing Readers face:
Their troubled thoughts constrain them sweat apace.
But you are so earnest in diuerting all suspicion from you, that we cannot
easily believe you.


all my thoughts, and utmost power and ability herein, viz. that there might be
an irreco^cilable alienation betwixt me and the Spaniard, and his adherents:
which I also effected, both in causes What have you to do with Church Matters?
do you therefore prefer civil authority before the Churches, because you
would be Pope? I know both this and you, and that you are an eaues-dropper.
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and all others whatsoever. In the beginning of the
year 1573, fearing lest the Spaniard would I wish he had, for this might have
prevented many ensuing evils.
surprise me at the Haigh, I removed to Delfe. That year I was employed in
honest imploiments: your Honors and Highnesses used me as Advocate of the
Court of Holland, as did also most of the Lords and Nobles, and not a few of
the free-Cities, Colleges, and Officialls. The same year I went to war at my
own charges, amongst the number of the voluntary soldiers, to raise the
siege at How great punishment had you escaped (to which you are now reserved)
if you had either bin shot, or hanged at Harlem-siege, or kept the Gates at
Leyden with Peter Pau, or been otherwise humbled there, upon the blew stone in
the great Broad-streete; or been drowned at Soetnier in the River adjoining
thereto?
Harlem, from whence Un beau mourir c'est mourir dans ses Arms. Yet the
Proverb says, It is a fair death to die in Arms.
I freed my self very fairly. In the year 74. I was personally in many
expeditions, to break up the siege at Leiden: but while we lay before Soetnier
I fell sick, and was hindered from raising the siege. In the year 75. I
married a Of what house was she, noble, or ignoble? descended of a Merchant,
or a Country man? I marvel why you conceal this, who were so far ouerseen
by reason of vainglory, that you pulled, by the head and shoulders, the
Family of Lockhorst into your lineage, and confounded it therewith: you should
have gratified your sons thus far, that hereafter in public writings and
testimonies they might have showed their nobility, and have endeavored to
thrust themselves among the assemblies of Gelderland. This would not have stood
both with yours, and their honors. But she is some base woman, and of the
meaner sort: and (that he may not gull the Reader) shall I say any more? she is
a Papist, yea and perhaps worse. Every man thinks his own Crow white,
especially if it tend to profit.
wife: whom I loved for her person, but the more for that she brought with her
in present for her dowry, and the assured hope of increasing and mending
thereof. In the year 76. I was wooed to accept a Counselors and Pensioners
place in the city of If you had been tied to Erasmus his statue, and both it
and you flung headlong from the bridge, none now at Roterdam had been infected
with Arminius his frenzy, and opposed their lawful Magistrates.
Roterdam. I had good reasons which induced me to undertake that office; and
therein for the space of 9 years I performed I will relate the^ for you
hereafter: and now take this for one with you; viz. you accepted this place for
fear otherwise to have gone many times supperlesse to bed.
extraordinary services both to the said City, and the whole country in
general: in respect whereof the Consulls, and Governors of Roterdam did not
only honorably thank me, but conferred the office of Aduocate-Generall in
Holland upon me in the year 1586, my I remember the Man, you mean him with
the golden Armor.
brother being elected into my place, (that this might testify their gracious
acceptance of my service) who continued also in their service to his dying day.
What I personally performed in this office bestowed by your Honors, what To
your bed, and your belly.
Le paon love aussi tot fait la rue,
Et le recache alors, alors qu'on ne le love.
The Peacock when he is viewd dissheuels his fair train:
When Men draw back their eyes, he knits it up again.

others under me, I have Yes, we knew long ago.
briefly heretofore rehearsed. I can Look, the man swears: questionless he
desires to be a good man, without doubt to be counted so: But he is stark
naught, yea guilty of perjury, for swearing thus: for he cares not a straw,
either for this or that side so himself may be sure to be provided for.
truly avouch thus much for my self, that I from the year 72, to this
present, have always been as Impudent, thou art as changeable as the weather,
and dare thou speak thus?
unchangeably forward to defend the countries right, both with my goods, blood,
None will take your word, Parasite, and you have no proof: where are the
Wounds, where are the Skarres, where are the damages received in the common
wealths behalf? While you brag that you served as a voluntary soldier, you
ran away from Harlem in the expedition to Leyden, you counterfeited your self
to be sick, you never were in any battle: nay when you were a young man, you
never durst look a Soldier in the face; what will you do when you are old?
Le ferite, and la perditata dei membri sono le collare and le medaglie Dei
famigliari Morti: Wounds and lost limbs, are the golden chains, and brooches
of Mars his followers. You have womanish and dainty lims, fitter for sporting
and the Chamber, then the Camp: And certainly if you had but a sparkle of a
Soldiers courage in you, you would not so carefully have reckoned up your safe
iourneyes to Graue-Maurice his Camp.
and life even to the utmost, against the usurped claim of the Spaniard, and
his co^federats, as These are the leasings of a Coward, for there are
multitudes, which out strippe you herein. Even I for my part dare challenge
you, and have both gone through greater matters, and am more ready to part with
my life for the good of the Country, then you or any of your sect. I forbear
to say more at this time, least if I draw the curtain quite open, all should
be discovered.
any one whatsoever, (I except none) and will continue so for the time to come
by Gods Which lies in your boots, after the kitchin-wench has greased them.
grace. In like You are nothing but words.
manner that I have even to the utmost maintained with all alacrity,
sincerity, and resolution, the privileges, liberties, rights, and
jurisdictions of the Provinces, of the particular members and cities of Holland
and West-Frisland; and do presume, that I shall You are too troublesome with
your repetitions: You were ill taught in your minority at Louaine: my opinion
is, that either the Monks learned you to chant it in their quier, or old
beldames to use the Distaffe.
persist in this purpose by Gods leave to the end, without alteration or
change. I have always as much, if not more then any remembered and extolled the
deserts of my Lo. and Master, the Prince of Ore^ge, in procuring the liberty,
and rights of the Provinces, and the maintenance of the true Evangelical
religion. I doubt not, but these honorable personages following will give me
testimony But why do you not bring in these testimonies? especially the
testimonies of Graue-Maurice, and Prince Henry, and the rest of those which
survive? Do you take your self to be a man of so great credit, that your
word will serve the turn? I warrant you none believes you: not those Princes
whom you reckon up: yea you seek to bleare their eyes and put tricks upon
them: but your plottes speed not, God is on their side.
thereof. The Lady and Dutchesse-dowager his Excelle^cies, of happy
remembrance, his widow, my good Lords. The now Prince of Orange, and Prince
Henry his sons: the Countess ab Hohenlo, I, Yes, she owes the Papists a
good turn, especially since the tokens of Prince William his death are yet to
be seen in the Monastery where she lives. But if I be not much deceived in
her, she is a professor of the ancient reformed Religion, and an enemy to you,
and your followers.
the Duchess of Portingall, the Electoresse, and Countess What affection
those Dutchesses of Germany bear you and your Arminians, I know better then
your self. Yea, I know that you most freely cite them for witnesses, who are
further off: as though here were not some present, who respected the welfare
of low-Germany, and knew not your fetches and treacheries long ago. You deal
cunningly (Arminian) you do: and that you may supplant the true Gospellers,
you pretend your self to be a Gospeller, and one of the reformed ancient
religion. In the mean time, what our Dutchesses think of your report, what a
reward your presumptuous impudency deserves, if no body make you shortly
feel indeed, I will tell you by writing, unless you repent betimes.
Palatine, widow. The Duchess of Bouillon, Toars. The Countess of Hunno: and
Countess Palatine Bipout: daughters to the Princes wife, and all their
commissaries jointly. And I have yet in my custody many letters of
thankfulness, and writings of remembrances.

How The vaunting of a benefit is an vpbraiding thereof: but still to harp
upon this string (as you shamefully do) is a monstrous reproach. Then those
visitations, if necessary, were they not enioined you either by your place and
office, or by the command of the honorable, and mighty Lords of the States?
Why do you prate then, if you being a servant executed your masters behests?
Why do you brag of your mercenarie labor? But what say you to this (most
famous and gentle Prince of Orange?) I see he leuels at you with his weapons
point, and menaces close wounds, yet most noxious and pernicious to the author
thereof. And here those your divine words wonderfully affect and please me, as
also all the approuers of the ancient Reformation, which I must needs express
in a more lofty language.

-- Ben che trafitto
Io piango il feritor, non le ferite
Che l'error suo piu ch' el mio mal mi pesa.
That such a hand could wound, it grieves me more,
Then the anguish, which I suffer by my sore.
Yet, howsoever the speech chalengeth commendation, take heed, lest you too
confidently continue your enemies assaults: especially, since no treason is so
close and dangerous, as that which is cloked with the name of duty and
friendship.


much I have labored in furthering the government, and performance of of your
renowned Princes Mandates: how I have been with him in his Camp thirty If you
had, we should have seen them long before this time.
six several times, sometimes a whole month together, sometimes less. How
many thousand times I have gone up, and came down his chamber stairs, that
knowledge of your mutual affairs, and unity of your minds and consents might
be continued betwixt you, his honorable Excellency best knows. His
Excellencies honor and authority were always dear unto me, and my
endeauours were wholly bent to accomplish his desires, so far forth as was
lawful for me. And I verily persuade my self, that his Excellency had and
exercised more ample authority in Holland, and West-Frisland, then in any
other part of his Provinces and government. I assisted his Excellency in all
his wishes, neither was I ever wanting to my power to himself, or those whom
it pleased him to commend unto me, as far as my honor and oath would
warrant me. Thus If they had known your conditions, they would not have
bought your affinity. For you are one of them the Poet speaks of, Faciem cum
aspicias eorum, haud mali videntur, opera and fide fallunt.

Their faces promise truth and honesty.
Their deeds are full of guile and treachery.

his Excellency always thought: thus he spoke of me; and gave evidence
thereof many ways, both in respect of my self and my children, providing for
both my sons, out of those estates which were in his gift and disposing.
Which I desired his Excellency to do, to the intent that they might be tied
unto him in more strait bonds, and obliged to his faithful service. I married
all my children into those If they had known your conditions, they would not
have bought your affinity. For you are one of them the Poet speaks of, Faciem
cum aspicias eorum, haud mali videntur, opera and fide fallunt.

Their faces promise truth and honesty.
Their deeds are full of guile and treachery.

families, who were always reputed the greatest well-willers of the Country;
and both those, Princes: I mean, the Father and the Son. My eldest son to
the only daughter, and heir of the Lord of Brantwicke, whose Heree again you
bring in a Catalogue of yours, and your childrens Progenitors. But what does
this concern you? Was your Wife of the degree of a Gentlewoman? Was your
Grandmother so too? your son is not admitted into any of the Assemblies of
the Welue. No, not though his wife be an heir.
Grandfather, a Prince of famous memory respected, and used as the best
deserving Gentleman in Zeland. My younger son to the Your inquiry finds out
heirs for your sons, for no other reason, but because they are rich, this
was known long ago. One thing I marvel at: Why, since you requested Philip
Marnixius his daughter in marriage for your son, you did not rather praise
him for piety, and diligence in making books against the Papists and Monks,
amongst which his Bee-hiue, and translation of the Psalms into Verse are most
excellent: but you only mind high matters; and whatsoever concerns religion,
that you slightly pass over. You neither believe in God, nor fear him.
only daughter and heir of the Lord of Saint Aldegonde, whose father and
grandfather were great and notable Statesmen, and wished all good to his
Excellency. My If you were your son in law his own father, you might justly
triumph, and lawfully defend your cause. Now seeing you are more fearful then
a Heart, you trouble your self with the publishing of other men's actions to no
purpose.
eldest daughter, to a noble man's son, viz. Lancelot of Did not the true race
of the house of Brederode fail, and surcease, when the residue of that noble
family (within the compass of a few late years) viz. four male children,
perished altogether?
Brederode, while he lived Lord of Veenhuyse, who took part with the Lords,
and Nobles, when the first union was made amongst them for the liberty of that
Country, and also against the Spanish Inquisition; who was besieged at
Harlem, and there had his head cut off: my younger daughter to the Lord
Governor Vander Mile his son. Who always showed and approved himself to be
a faithful, and good friend to the Country, to the Yea, of the ancient
reformed religion: with which yours being compared is heretical, and false;
and your self the son of perdition.
true religion, and to both the Princes. I persisted constantly in a Here is a
lie with a witness. Our ancient religion is conformable with Gods word: yours
contrary thereto, and devilish: and your opinion concerning predestination was
suggested by hellish Furies. The grief, whereof he makes a show, is
counterfeited, and if one doite might purchase a rope to hang all the
professors of the ancient reformed religion, etc. Whatsoever his writing
speaks, I wish the reader to advise of. For my part I will not set a mark
upon every particular lie in this place. Hereafter I shall have fitter occasion
to do it.
religion agreeable to Gods holy word, and sincere doctrine, and in my
fore-vttered opinion concerning predestination. I was heartily sorry for the
dissensions growing betwixt the Remonstrancers, and Contra-remonstrancers. I
always used my utmost endeauours, that they might not break forth, and be
published abroad: and obtained first, that Arminius his cause might be examined
in private, sundry Ecclesiastical persons having the oversight and hearing
thereof. And for this purpose the matter was reasoned in the Lord of Noortwicke
of famous memory, his house, as the more ancient ouerseer of the University of
Leiden. Afterward it was commenced in a great convocation betwixt Gomar and
Arminius, Ministers of diverse Churches of both parties being vmpires. I neither
simply accepted, nor rejected either parties opinion, since I Yet let me tell
you, that he neither thought so, neither was it possible he should. And how can
truth, and apparent falsehood be joined, or agree together? The one is
inconstant, and variable, the other firm and stable.

La Verite d'un Cube droit se form,
Cube contraire au ledger mouuement,
Son plan carre iamais ne sedement,
Et en tous sens a tousiours meme form.
The truth resembles, right, the right Cubes figure;
The Cube contrary to light instabilitie,
Whose quadrant flatness never does disfigure,
Whose solid form admits no mutabilitie.

understood by a second writing, and learned instruction of the King of
England, that both of them might be tolerated, without prejudice to the truth
in Christian union and charity. And I will beware For all your wariness we
will convince you to be the ringleader, and original of them all.
of judging the authors of these Tragedies, and hurliburlies. But I What an age
is this, what fashions are therein! you perceive, reader, (for I cannot choose
but interrupt you) that the Megarians counterfaite tears deserve more credit
then his. Heaven stands still, and the earth shakes in admiration of this
impudence: He makes the Synod, the Divines and Ministers of your Excellencies,
the raisers of the troubles in Holland, that he may banish them from thence. O
monstrous impiety!
suppose the greatest evil proceeded from a certain decree of a Synod, which
inioined the divinity Professors of Leiden and all the Preachers thereof, that
in the fear of God they should attend to those things, which were contained in
the Confession of Holland, and a Catechism of Heidelberge: and if they doubted
of any thing, that they take note of it and send it to their Classes. Which
Decree was caused by all those former Church-differences and controversies,
which took their original from Gasper Coolchaes, H. Harbarts, Taco Sybrandts,
Cornelius Wiggers, and many more about the understanding, meaning, and
different interpretation of certain points contained in the two forenamed
writings, and chiefly about the point of Gods Predestination. And that
therefore your Honors, and Highnesses, in the year 1597. understood that the
Confession was to be reuised and corrected by a Synodall Congregation. For
after your Commissioners had certified you concerning the forementioned Decree
of the Synod, you judged that it was not convenient that the doubts of the
Professors, and Preachers, should be delivered to their several Classes,
fearing least by this means an unquenchable fire of dissension might be
kindled amongst the Divines. Wherefore you determined that those doubts should
be kept in private, either by your selves, or your Deputies, until a Synod
should be assembled, and that then they should be discreetly laid open, and
unfolded for the use and benefit of the Church, and Country.

To Let the Reader, whosoever he is, tread warily, and circumspectly here.
Estamos a tiempo, que merecer la cosa, es principal part para no alancarla.
We live in such times, as to deserve a good turn is the next way to lose it.
overthrow this Synodall Decree, and your determination, certain Acts were
exhibited by some of the Almarick Classis, which were read over in a
Classical meeting (in which some Preachers, not of the meaner sort, of that
order then appeared) and it was known that all Preachers ought to have
subscribed thereto. Five Preachers showed themselves very backward in
subscribing, as though the matter had been strange and new. They were
threatened with the Churches censure, then they complained unto you: you
appointed that such like proceedings and censures should be differred for a
time; as contrary to the foresaid Decree of a Synod, and your determination.
They which were of the Classis maintained they were not bound to obey your
Decrees. You perseuered in your determination. They which were of the Synod of
North-Holland joined themselves to the Classis and made a great complaint of
the prohibition beforementioned. By these and such like manners of proceeding
by the sect of the Remonstrancers, the Preachers were Dissimulation suites well
here, lest happily you should discover your affection to your brethren, whom you
stirred up to sedition.
moved (fearing lest this might be their chance) to exhibit their Remonstrance.

I Which you suppressed lest the states should be offended, and oppress your
fellows in their birth and rising, which then might have easily been done.
But you deal like an old beaten Fox.
suppressed that a long time, hoping an agreement might be obtained by the
convocation of a lawful Provincial Your cause, and the cause of your
followers was so desperate, that you hated a Synodal meeting, as much as the
Devil does the Papists Cross.
Synod. To which end the means of a convocation began to be used, but there
was variance and iarring herein: when as therefore this hope Le vous croyrai,
quan ie le verrai. I will believe you when I see it.
deceived me, I presented the Remonstrance spoken of. After the reading
whereof, none seemed to make any question concerning the Articles of the
remonstrancers opinion: and some Do you not (most respected) perceive what this
crafty Fox intends? The nets are spread, and snares laid, look to him, most
excellent Prince of Orange, and you great Advocate and Ambassador, Lord Arsem,
and my other good Lords, and famous defenders of the ancient reformed faith.
Will you let things ^asse with silence, and suffer a public calumny to be
fastened on you, who stand in defense of Gods honor, and true Religion, and
the good of the commonwealth? Remember, I beseech you, that the stone is to be
fitted to the square, not the square to the stone; and this must be done while
the mortar is new, before it wax hard, least the ruin of a fair building
ensue.
plainly and expressly (which now maintain the opinion of the
Contra-remonstrancers with tooth and nail) said, that such a doctrine, as the
Contra-remonstrancers was then auerred to be, was You are the same man still.
But we know what you aim at. Namely, that you may open a gappe to the
Arminians for the committing of all impieties, lusts, rapes, etc. and hinder
the progress and peace of the Contra-remonstrancers who are the founders and
furtherers of the true Reformation.
never before this time heard off. We Observe the cunning and wiles of
Antichrist (for why should I not call this Pope and Priest of the Antichristian
Arminians so?) how stily he steals in, that he may murder, wrecke, and
destroy. We reioiced says he, because he himself was ioifull, and could not
hold for laughter.
seemed to rejoice, that there was no greater difficulty and trouble in the
matter. The Remonstrancers desired a Copy, that their chief men might upon
consideration confer thereof: and a conclusion of all things might be made in
a few days. After This was effected by this Machiuels leigerdemaine and
cunning: and whilst others less intended the business, he most desirous to
establish his opinion, obtained what he wished, and restrained in our men, the
liberty of conscience, which he would not have burdened. O father of mischief!
these things it was determined, that none should be troubled in conscience
about the foresaid opinion, but that it be free Most dissolute libertine, and
corrupt Atheist! How could this be possible in a matter of greatest import, in
a matter of faith, and a point necessary unto salvation? But yet too few know
that you are most expert in pro and contra, that you may overthrow both parts,
and your self gain by the mutiny.
for every one both to think and teach further in the matter. Forbear for
shame to thrust now this third time on us the repitition of falsehoods, and
untruths.
Wherein nothing else was done, but that which the Ecclesiastical persons
themselves from the beginning of the Reformation both approved and agreed too,
as well in the University of Leiden before the Professors of Divinity there,
as also before many Preachers of Cities and towns, who were left in their
places and office, though it was evident, they were of the same opinion, and
did teach the same. The Queens Majesty also of Great Britain in two several
Letters liked and counseled the said toleration: so that your Honors and
Highnesses forenamed determination might by no means give any just cause of
the lamentable schism of the present times: which tended to nothing else, but
that the gospellers (who were the greater part of the country) might be divided
among themselves, and so weakened. As Here are Coleworts twice sodden: yet they
agree well with this old dotards stomach and palate.
concerning your authority in and over causes and persons Ecclesiastical, I
protest, (as a thing necessary both for the services, and safety of your state,
as also for the preservation of religion it self, and matters akinne thereto)
I protest I say, that I have always defended it as the singular and most
necessary prerogative, and superiority of the country: whose profit and
government to procure, I am bound both by Pol qua opera iurato credam tibi, vna
opera adligem fugitivum canem agninis lactibus.

Trust you? yes so I will, a straggling Dog,
Haltred with tender Lambsguttes to a clogge.

oath and duty. Which The Prince knows what Basil says; (...).

The respect due unto Churchmen proceeds from God, and is to be referred to
him.


opinion from the beginning of the war, the Prince of Orange and the States
always avouched, and defended for good against the Ecclesiastical persons,
who defended the contrary. I always labored to preserve the authority of the
L'euento e spesso giudice non imperito delle cose. Things are many times well
judged of, by the event.
company of Civil judges, as it did become me, and according to the
instruction of the said Prince and States, and conformed the Churchmen to the
rule of your determination, as it was both fitting and most necessary for them
to do, for the peace and good of the Country and free-Cities. The I would I
might once see that performed indeed, which you profess in words.
only end of all things which were done by me either in your meetings, or
with the deputed Magistrates and Generall-States, was the countries, and your
honor, service, and good, and the enlarging of the laudable estimation of the
same: wherein I always used discretion and moderation: so that I desire, and
from the bottom of my heart unfeignedly wish, that my successor may for so many,
or more years do you as much good, and (if it be possible) greater services,
and with your better approbation, and liking then I have done. And I refer my
self in as much as concerns my forementioned actions and proceedings both in
your meetings, and in the meetings of your deputies and the general States, to
your own The time will come, when you will wish you had eaten that word.
inquiry and judgment, and the judgment of your Commissaries, both those who
in general, and those who in particular have had to do in your companies and
meetings for these 32. years last past: seven or eight whereof do yet
survive in the alone city of Take heed how you call honest men to witness in
your cracked cause: they are of the true and reformed Religion, you never were
so.
Amsterdam, and either are, or have been Burgomasters of the same city, who
have bin acquainted with my actions and proceeding these 25. years.

If being slandered against reason, and set upon with apparent lies (which by
reason of a consciousnesse of my daily and faithful services I could not
digest) I therefore sometimes reproved this impudence and slander a little too
bitterly; I entreat, that humane Behold and laugh to see the old dotard become
supplia^t and brought on his knees: so a burnt childdreads the sire. But what
if he being a shameless and lying fellow be too sharp in his reprehensions,
and therein exceed the limits of truth and modesty? May we not then apply
that in sacred writ unto him; Let him that is unjust be unjust still, and he
that is filthy be filthy still? This is my opinion. For he is now grown old
in his sins and impieties.
infirmity and my old age may herein excuse me. Now if any thing, though
What have we here? Is your bleating so soon changed into bellowing? Beware of
him Reader, he purposes slaughter under a Lambs-skinne: yet seeing he prouokes
us, let us make a public inquiry. Berneuell, why do you make no conscience
so often to lie? Why do you so maliciously oppose the reformed Religion? Why
are you an enemy to the Ministers of your Country? why do you extenuate their
authority? Why are you a hater and hinderer of a future Synod? Why are you a
traitor to your country? A private friend to the Spaniard? A hunter after
glory and wealth? A foe to the house of Nassaue and Orange? A spend-thrift of
the common Treasure? A persecutor of all good men, and favorer of evil? Will
you answer me? Do; but publicly: otherwise you shall be held as guilty of
all these crimes.
never so small in businesses either public or private managed by me, seem
liable to the reproof of any, let that man openly speak it, whosoever he is,
I crave no favor. I presume I shall convince him, and in reasonable terms
show him his error. It is true, that (according to a custom received in
transactions of leagues and peace) I received gifts, more then the Lords
condeputed with me, though they were of great estimation: and of this,
public notice was taken. But that either He that has not learned to lie
notably, fayles in confirming his own cause. Swear, forswear: do any thing
sooner then bewray your secrets.
before, or after the Treaty, either directly or indirectly, either by my
self or any proxy, I either did take, or purposed to take any thing
whatsoever more of the Spaniard or his accomplices, or had the least dealing,
communication, or treaty by my self, or by another with the Spaniard, or his
confederates, without public knowledge: that I solemnly auow to be devised,
fained, and most contrary to the truth. Furthermore, it is known unto you,
that I my self motioned, and thought fit, that the gratuities before spoken
of, which were bestowed on me, should be kept for the public good and
benefit: and some others there were, who approved not hereof.

For the space How often have you sung this song? your repetition of the same
things argues your memory lies in your heels.
of 32. years (in which as Advocate of the Country I bestowed my pains in
your service) I was thus much honored, that I was often entreated by the What
do you mean man? here is another gross absurdity, you leave out your great
friend, the King of Spain, whose right challenges the first place in your
Catalogue: But you will say, it is conditioned bewtixt us, that I should not
name him but upon the rack. Excuse me, I was not privy to your crafty dealing.
King of France, by Eliz. Queen of England, both of famous and immortal
memory: That I was often entreated by the King of great Britain, and the K.
of Sueland, the Elector Palatine of Bradenburg, It is suspected you had too
great dealings with him, and afterward through his means with the Spaniard.
the Elector of Colen, in diverse occurrences and businesses concerning them, to
do unto them acceptable Offices, and services. This I did being so desired,
either by their Letters, or Ambassadors, or Commissaries, in such matters as
might be done with the benefit of the Country, or at least without the loss
and hindrance thereof. Namely and for example, I labored in the Elector of
Colens behalf, that agreement might be made betwixt him and the
Arch-Dutchesse of Arschot, the Countess of Neeuweuaer, the Count and Countess
of Solmes: even to the finishing and co^pounding of matters controuerted among
them; and finally with the Count of Benthem for restitution of special Offices
of the Archbishopric of Colen. For which services he both thanked me by
Letters, and presented me with gifts: In like manner I helped other Princes,
Counts, and forain Cities earnestly requesting me thereto, by my good
counsel. And thus much also was performed by me to Domestic Provinces,
Commanders, Counts, Lords, and moreover to great societies, and also to many
private, and particular persons, who willingly and of their own accord
acknowledged these my services, although I never asked or demanded any of them
any thing, directly or indirectly by my self, or by another.

The Now he swells: Reader give him the hearing. Now a stiff gale filles his
sails: lend him your best observance. Here are great, maine matters of
greatest consequence and import. Brag is a good Dog still.
chief matters which I did perform for the united Provinces are these: He
harpes again upon the same string, you see he dotes: but he is old, we must
pardon him, for he was a great bragger from his infancy, shortly he will leave
it.
First, five times I performed a Regal Embassage, and in four Embassages, the
managing and How the commonwealth was adminished by his words, guidance,
government, and success; behold now he meditates.
direction of all things was committed unto me, and I my self spoke to Kings,
face to face. The first was in the year 85, wherein we first obtained of the
Queen of England, the aid of four thousand armed men, to raise the siege
from Antwerpe: and afterward a promise of 5000. foote-men, and a thousand
horsemen (the Garrison at Brill, and the Forts of Flushing and Rammekens not
reckoned herein, because they were places, and cities delivered up to her
Majesty, as pledges, and for securities sake) to be maintained in the time of
war.

The second Embassage was in the year 1598, to the King of France: a promise
was made by his Ma: of paying two millions, and nine hundredth thousand Florens
to the States, within the space of 4. years: and furthermore, a security
concerning his Majesty's full and sincere purpose to preserve the good of these
Dominions.

In my third Embassage, performed the year premised, unto the Queen of
England, I Paice vol figlio di padre crudele. We have a sweet son of so
cruella Father.
effected, that (howsoever the King of France had couenanted a league of peace
with the K. of Spain, and the Archduke at Veruyns) nevertheless his Majesty was
moved to defer and suspend the like Treaty.

In my fourth Embassage into England, a remission of the third part of the
exacted debts, esteemed one and twenty hundred thousand Florens was obtained of
the Queens Majesty. So that it was agreed (much labor and difficulty
praeceding) concerning the payment of fourscore thousand pounds Flemish, and
the term of payment appointed for the half part (viz.) forty hundred
thousand pound, was about twenty year, when in the compact made in the year
1585, we couenanted to pay the whole debt within the space of four years:
and the term, when we should pay the other half, was delaied and put off
till another time.

In my Embassage to the King of England at this day, I obtained, that the King
gave us liberty to muster two or three thousand soldiers in Scotland for the
benefit of the Provinces, and also consented that the King of France, for that
year should lend unto the Lords of the States-Generall a thousand, three
hundred, and fifty pound: two thirds in his own name, and one in the King of
Great Britains name, to strike off some of the debt, wherein the King of
France was engaged to the King of Great-Brittaine: upon sight of which
agreement, the King of France, in the year 1603, for the King of
Great-Brittaines third, gave the sum of three Millions of pounds, five
hundred, and fifty thousand, and so much for himself: so that the total
sum, was ten millions of pounds, 350000.

By reason of these five Regal Embassages, and tractates, it happened, that
the forenamed Kings afforded to the States more then two hundred, and five
hundred thousand pounds, from the payment whereof the confederated Provinces (I
having a principal hand therein) were discharged, and their Obligations
surrended, as also their Cities and strong holds laid to pledge.

Another thing yet is this, that I for the most part, was a special ouerseer
in our resolutions, expeditions and warlike attempts, as well secret, as all
others whatsoever, from the year 1558, until this time: and to further these
things, as also to provide all our purposes might be effected, approved, and
put in execution, Dare you only here brag of your self, and your doings?
where were the orders? where the states? where Grave Maurice?
I thirty How often will you hitte a most Martial Prince in the teeth with
this? Do you think he could not have managed the affairs without your
help? Yea it is to be wished that sometimes you had been absent when you
were not.
several times, either accompanied his Excellence, or met him in his Camp,
and there I continued sometimes a month, sometimes more, or That was when you
were afraid, for it is most certain, Sempree longiunto ne un medesimo soggetto
l'insolentia con la timidita.
less according to different necessity of businesses then in hand.

A third thing is, that I was a chief instrument and hinderance (with policy,
with pains, and weight of Reason) now more then thirty years Would you
persuade this also unto me? but be it, that you were such an one then: Quantum
mutatus ab illo: You are now strangely altered.
that the propositions, concerning peacemaking with the Spanyard and his
confederats, might not take effect, so long as they perseuered to insist in
their pretended courses Especially because they avouched that the inhabitants
of these Provinces were their subjects. But after they renounced this claim,
and pronounced that they accounted the Provinces free, to which neither in
their own behalfes, nor in the behalf of their heirs, they made no challenge,
and were content to determine of matters with the States upon these terms:
and a meeting begun upon these terms might seem to promise a divine,
honorable, and secure dispatch of all things (by the intercession of the
Ambassadors of the Kings of France, Great Britain, Denmark, and diverse of
the Electors and Princes of Germany, special friends and confederates to these
Dominions,) with singular difficulty, labor, danger, and constancy I
bestirred my self to obtain the fore-spoken end of matters, until the time
all things were quite finished: whereupon that (...). These are sure truths,
which we may build upon. But why did you change the war against a foraine
enemy into civil war, against the followers of true Religion? for this was
no less difficult, chargeable, and I would not bloody too, then the other.
difficult, bloody and chargeable Belgicke war was ceased now and appeased
for ten years.

A fourth thing is, that I was one of the principal, by whose means the
dangerous and pernicious plots of the The same thing now ten times repeated.
Earl of Leicester, and his accomplices plottes were avoided and defeated, and
of those who provided that the confederated Provinces might not be ruined by
his two years unfortunate government, and come into the Spaniards power.

A fifth thing is, that about the Nothing but the same song still, Parret?
Repeat it a thousand times, but to your self alone.
beginning of my forenamed Office, to wit of my being Advocate of the
Country, when all things were in great confusion, and the very name of the
Lords of the States was hated: within the compass of a few years, matters
were brought in better case, so far forth that there was correspondence,
agreement, and love betwixt the Lords of the States, his Excellency as
Governor, the Companies of the grand and Provincial Council, the treasurers,
and accountants, and the Officialls and Magistrates of cities, and
commonweals.

A sixth thing is, Still he stirs a stinking puddle.
That all the heads, Admiralls, Commanders, Administers of the principal
Offices of war, Governors of horsemen, Captains, Officers, soldiers, which
earned pay either by sea, or by land, all these, I say, acknowledged the Lords
the States of Holland and West-Frisland, as pay-masters of their stipends,
swore faith and obedience unto them, and honored his Excellence as Captain
General in commanding the execution of such things, as the Lords the States
determined: that every one intended his Office and place he was called unto.
And moreover, that for many years the Was not this always opposed? You cannot
show any prescription to the contrary: Fret if you please, yet will we have
what we wish.
Ecclesiastical persons acknowledged your Honors, for their lawful and
chief Governor. So that for the space of well-nigh thirty years, in which
the Lords the States had sometimes threescore troops of horsemen, seven hundred
companies of footmen, and more then an hundred Captains making war by sea,
there was never any And now how great mutinies are there among brethren? If
you then made peace among others, why are you now your self seditious? Happily
this comes into your head for defense of your Arminians. Great tranquillity,
is not procured, with great hurly-burly. (...), etc. God knows who is author
of all these stirs and evils.
dissension, rebellion, or treachery among them. And the Comminaltie was kept
in rest and quietness, and due obedience to their lawful Governors. The matter
certainly was strange and singular, worthy our observation, and
consideration, especially in nations so different. For, besides strangers, we
used at those times (either as entire companies, or otherwise divided and
bestowed) Germans, Frenchmen, English, Scots, Switzers, Wallons. Whosoever
shall certainly weigh these things, and has read the ancient times, and shall
consider what things have been done under us for these fourteen years, and
so onward, (while the war continued) under the Spaniard, they shall find
that we have just occasion to render Almighty God praise and thanksgiving
therefore. Many men famous for their power, dignity and learning, have highly
commended this matter: And thereby the Lords the States, and his Excellence
have won much credit, praise and authority not only with the inhabitants of
the confederated Provinces, all neighbor Nations, Kings, Electors, Princes
Commonwealths, and people far removed, but even with the Spaniards
themselves, and their accomplices and fellows.

A These things were forgotten by this time. Therefore your repetition is
seasonable.
seventh thing is, and which must not be accounted for the least benefit, that
I have always been a principal and daily instrument so far to increase and
augment the credit of the Lords of the States, that whereas for many years,
before I took upon me this Office, the States had no credit with men, whereby
moneys might be taken up in their names, and by their consents, and upon the
morgaging of their revenues, and pensions: and therefore great store of money
was to be taken up in the Receivers and Treasurers own names, and upon their
own credit: for which moneys for the space of ten or twelve year there was a
yearly pension of twelve in the hundredth to be paid: and moreover two for the
procuring thereof. The Latin Castigator has observed, that the Dutch copy is
corrupted and faulty here, and in diverse places elsewhere, and it shall be
sufficient once to have showed so much. Whether the Author or the Printer is to
be blamed therefore he does not determine.


That year in which I undertook the Advocates Office, the general Treasurers
every fifth or sixth year gave up their accounts. Some of the Exactors of the
Commons goods and riches, theirs in the fourth year: and some of the
Treasurers of the Church-goods and others, theirs in a longer time, and many
more years. Which fashion was thus far amended, that afterward accounts of
the Commons good were given up every half year, and of other goods every
year at the furthest.

When I entered into my office, fourscore hundred thousand Florens could scarce
be raised in the generality for maintaining the charges of war, by reason of
the penury and want of the States of Holland and West-Frisland: but at this
present they pay more at the least then Tell me, I pray, whose purse is filled
with these thousands? upon what use are they bestowed? That you and yours may
be enriched thereby, the subjects beggered? O Holland. Where is thy liberty?
For what purpose did thou suffer so many grieuances and annoiances in that
most lamentable war? O Holland, who bestowed fatherly direction upon thee,
and used a motherly care and compassion toward thee? Thou were reserved to a
Step-mothers brawles, devoted to pillage and spoil, left desolate by the lust
and rapines af miscreants: were thou therefore pulled out of the Spaniards
claw, that thou might be trampled under the feet of the Arminian Goats and
Hogs? and now should perish more lamentably in dirt and mudde, then thou
could at that time in the air. Pluck up a good heart, resume thy strength,
acquit thy self of these enemies. Let them perish, who seek thy destruction.
two and forty hundred thousand pounds. But here it is to be observed, that
the costs of the war for these thirty two years, wherein I continued in
Office, were so great and extreme, that you cannot choose for the present, but
get more by the charges of Holland alone and West-Frisland, then in the year
1586. could be gathered both for the charges of the generality, as also for
the particular charges of Holland and West-Frisland; namely, more then two
millions of Florens, every year. Which nevertheless, besides the
forementioned forty two hundredth thousand pounds do accrue and are paid out
of the Countries yearly rents. And howsoever it is more fitting to burden the
Country, then quite to lose it: yet wisdom and providence wills us to
observe (as the Assemblies of the grand and provincial Council, and the
Masters of accounts showed by writing in the year 1604.) while the burdens and
grieuances exceed the revenues, the Provinces must necessarily at last be
undone and ruined: and if these last ten years we had been charged with so
great costs, as we were these ten foregoing years; the burdens of Holland
and West-Frisland only would have amounted by this time toward the sum of
four millions of Florens. Which evil (that I may let pass in silence other
dangers and troubles as well foreseen and known) the Which was the beginning
of Civil war, accidentally at least.
truce lately made, salued, and helped.

And my good Lords: I had almost He acknowledges his memory fails him. It is
well yet that he will once confess his fault. And if her in he had not forgot
himself, he would have amplified and extolled his wealth till he had been
hoarse again.
forgotten, that some ill-willers both to you and me, envy and repine at my
estate, and fortune. I would have you think that it is neither so great, nor
so subject to envy, as their words and speeches make it. I profess that I had
by This is good, that this old Beldame is brought upon the stage now the second
time. Bless the Papist, save you goody-Mistris, save your Ladies hippe.
my wife (whom I married Therefore you were married in your twenty seventh
year: and the commonwealth lost nothing thereby.
forty three years since) so much goods and lands, as might honestly have
maintained me. And my stipend and practice at that time (for I was an Advocate
of the Court) so great, that without controversy they yearly were worth This
is a large reckoning, but you are afraid lest somebody call you to account:
for if you yield you then got four thousand, you will now willingly grant, you
have forty thousand yearly by your office; your Advocates office I mean: and
so much by the Seal, twice as much by being of the Council, four times as
much by your practice, and ten times as much by nimming and iuggling. It is no
marvel if these tricks made you as rich as Croesus. Especially if we reckon
herein the gifts of Kings and Princes bestowed upon you: and namely of your
special friend the King of Spain.
four thousand Florenes. For I was not one of the least You would rather then
your life have called your self the greatest, but your writing erred for
modesties sake.
practisers among the Advocates, and we were but eight in all. In the beginning
of the year seventy seven Repetition is a Rhetorical figure, wherein you are
very cunning.
my first imploiment was in Rotterdam. Out of the wages allowed by the city
with other veiles I could wel-nigh maintain my family, being now made richer
by two children only.

Furthermore, I can truly demonstrate, that from the said seventy seventh
year, unto the 1616. year full out, both I and my Your lovely Helena shows
her self now the third time. And take heed lest too often: for if women keep
not their houses, and dwell apart by themselves, they are quickly corrupted.
Yea, even old ones too, lest you happily should deceive your self.
wife for our Merchants, Factors, Usurers are oftentimes rich men.
parts, as also for our kinsfolks and acquaintance parts, for our selves, and
for our children have possessed by inheritance, and attained by lawful
succession and title, more then eight hundred measured acres, or according to
the computation of Holland, four In the higher or lower Welue, or in the
Duinen, or Maestbrooke, or in Waterland, of which side will you turn it?
hundred acres of ground; and for goods morgaged, more then two thousand
Florens yearly: a fair house in the City of Delfe, and in the open fields
some houses besides, and some thousands of Florens in hand, and presently
tendered. The nearest of kindred to your wife were Brewers, and had fair
houses.
Haec and Pylaea nouit and tu Hygias. Your self and your wife know this, let
others speak of it.
Moreover, that I won out of the water and mudde more acres of ground (then
the forenamed) longer ago then forty years past, and enclosed them with
banks and hedges round about. That Here was strange practice: learn of him,
Reader, how thou may grow rich? Yet I do not give thee such counsel. For
you see the old proverb is verefied in this Miser; La conuoitise croist si les
richesses croissent.
Et de nouueaux acquests nouueaux desirs surnaissent.
But let the Advocate remember what Christ thunders out in the Evangelist. It
is more easy for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


at the same time I bought and sold, as well out of the goods I had by
inheritance, as those which I bought at a price, about eight hundred thousand
Florens. I It is possible, your self did not, but others for you by whose
merchandise you gre^^more wealthy.
never dealt in merchandise: but according to the custom of my ancestors, I
employed all my stock in husbandry and tillage. And for all this, I brought
into the great and general East-Indian Company (in executing whereof I
bestowed foure-yeeres pains purposely to extenuate the Ah, spare your friends.
F^^ by their means those crosse-bea^ring pieces of gold do shine i^ your
chest: I say both those great pieces, and those little ones, which are neither
round nor broad, bu^^ponderous, and weighty.
Spaniards, and Portugals wealth) above the number of five hundred thousand
Florens, by which sum fourteen ships might be set out: that by this
means I might not only be thought a counsailer, but an A helper to your
self, an^ the filling of your own purse, yo^ were always.
helper, and succourer in some measure, in all those straites and difficulties,
which I did foresee. Although my estate then were great and rich, yet in my
opinion, none of you ought to repine at it: and yet further, I have already
professed in an open congregation before you all, and now here again repeat
it, in this my I my self suffer with you and pity you: but I wish you t^
comfort your self with the remembrance of that in the Poet: Rara antecedentem
scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
We seldom vice so nimble-footed find,
That her best speed, leaves punishment behind.
Or this in Synesius; (...). The justice of God goes slow and orderly: but
for the most part it recompenceth the slacknesse of judgment with the
heaviness thereof.


distress (which has continued more now then eight Endure it stoutly and
courageously, shortly you shall be cooped up, and suffer under a hand that
shall take vengeance for all your offenses.
months) I took an account of my goods, and I found, that I must be
constrained to sell so much goods, as are worth sixty, or seventy thousand
Florens, that I may That you may leave them free from charge, you will purchase
damnation to your self.
leave no charge upon my children and heirs. And this I had rather my self
see done in my life time, then my children should be enforced thereto after my
death. Yet think not, I pray you, that I am grown weaker in my estate by any
ill husbandry of my own: but by Why do you complain then? Why like an
Hypocrite do you deceive the mighty States and Orders? You pretend affliction
was added to affliction, and presently forgetting your self, you confess you
became richer then before you were. What horrible lies are these? Durst you
speak such incongruities in the Assembly, and sight of the States! but your
covetousness privileges you in all things.

A quel effect, a quel enorme vice,
Ne pousses tu o inaudite avarice?
To what effect, to what enormous vice,
Pusheth thee not unheard of Avarice?

succeeding four several persons, (whose sole heir I was) and certain
others, where I had both coheires, and underwent some costs also: further, I
bought out more goods with costs and appurtenances thereto belonging: moreover,
some things I compassed in with sea-walles, others I mended with money took
upon trust. Now, if it stand with your pleasure to make an inquiry into your
subjects goods, and tax them; I for my part easily How would it terrify you,
if the States should say so much unto you?
assent thereto: for I am certain, that those, who in the general subsidy in
the year 1599. esteemed not all the goods they possessed, worth fifty, or at
most sixty thousand Florens, now boast, that they are twofould richer then I
am: and yet the same Worshipful friends, will you silently hear this
defamation? Behold, that he may clear himself, he accuses you, and sawcily
insults over you. Yea he intimates that you got your goods unjustly, that
unrighteously you taxed others, that for hatred and grudges, you subverted the
laws of Aequity, and Justice: are not these manifest slanders? the imputations
of a Sycophant? have a care I pray you of your good name. For if he weaken or
overthrow you, who stand stoutly by your selves for the ancient reformation,
what can we hope for? LL. civiles pro vobis. L. vlt. C. de Accusationibus, etc.
parties the said year upon a spleen numbered me among those, who paid most,
and were taxed at two hundred thousand Florens. The makers of seditions, and
infamous libels and books, two whereof, (the one being called A necessary
discourse, the other The practice of the Spanish Council) are fraught with
manifest and notorious lies, falsehoods and calumnies, You cannot so easily
acquitte your self, trust me: and many things which those books speak of,
may be proved by records and sufficient witnesses: but this care I leave unto
others, and therefore will not reply unto your new and trifling allegations. And
I persuade my self I shall do so with your good leave.
so far forth, as they speak of my actions; and say, that I have fat
offices. I answer, this is usually compassed by long and trusty service, to
the whole Kingdom, the Province, and the common wealth. My Predecessor in the
first year of his office, was made keeper of the great Seal; under which
Seal, at that time the bestowing of places in the wars (which was a very
gainefull matter) passed: which in my time was not so, neither was the custody
thereof wholly committed unto me sooner then after the fifteenth year of my
Aduocateships place. But since the keeping of the Seal fell unto me, some ten
conueiances in all businesses thereunto belonging passed under the said Seal,
by which I Nevertheless, your servants were enriched thereby.
made no gain, not a Doit, which might benefit me. The Vice-maisters place of
the fees has not allowed one half penny for stipend: and thus far I could
gain but a little. In the year 1586. you named me for keeper of the
Registers, and ouerseer of the Rolls: and when afterward the Lord of
Nortwick, and President Nicholas were dead, you bestowed upon me (as the only
suruiuer) the same state with joint consent. And I persuade my self, that I
have done good service therein, both to the And in the first place, to your
self and your own purse.
country and the parties which had ought to do there. The set stipend thereof
amounted to an hundred and eight Florens yearly. And although the stipends of
others the like, were now grown threefold greater, then they were before the
war, yet would not I You needed not: for you paid your self.
entreat you for any of the^: moreover, the profits are uncertain. In place of
this condition my Predecessor was ouerseer of the University of Leiden, and of
the privy Council of Rhineland. For my He is already worthy to be sainted,
the Pope will shortly canonize him.
appearances in the meetings of Assemblies deputed by you, for these 32. years
and upwards, and for all the businesses wherein I dealt with his Excellence, I
received no stipend: neither received I any for my appearances in the Council
of the general States in your name, all the time forementioned: although I had
more then He counts very accurately: it seems he noted it in his table books.
twenty five several times a Yea and rich performance too.
promise of recompense from you. How falsely and shamelessely then these
libellers dare speak, and write that which you know to be a tale, I think it
worth my pains here briefly to show. That questions were They did not then
indeed begin to be first moved, but to be first published; to stir up the
people, and subvert the Country. Confess your fault and mend it.
first moved touching Religion after the truce, is without question false;
forasmuch as in the doctrine concerning Predestination, and the appendices
thereto, there was a diversity of questions and opinions too amongst the
reformed Doctors, not only in the time of war, but before the beginning
thereof. And they were always commended, who taught the same, unto Provided
that the truth, which is immutable, and to which we claue, might not be
prejudiced. The Arminians were deceivers from the beginning, and your self the
forge of all lies.
sobriety and edification. Now from the year 74. questions were moved
accordingly as order required, in these Provinces; my good Lord and Master,
the Prince of Orange, of pious memory, and the Lords and States auerring that
it was a You affirm this so often, that it is loathsome and odious, but you
do not prove it: Who sees not then your preposterous dealing?
part of their office and power to make Ecclesiastical laws and orders; as
those, in whom the lawful supremacy resided, according to a received custom in
all Kingdoms, Provinces, Commonwealths, and Cities, which have entertained a
reformation against the Idolatry, This you said well; for the Arminians
haeresie is the most dangerous haeresie: and so you confound your self.
heresy, and You are the most usurping Tyrant, worse then the Pope: and if you
will, I will straight way prove what I say, Priest.
tyranny of the Papacy: as appears by his Either you understand them not, or
have corrupted them; for the words express not so much, as you of your own
head devise: consider better of them.
Ordinances and decrees then made, and afterward sent from place to place to
the Nobles and free-Cities in the year 1610. which is also gathered out of the
If you had cited the text, you had brought a testimony against your self:
for, somewhat lies under the rind of the words.
Ordinances made in Holland and West-Frisland in the year 1582. and 1591. In
Zeland the same year 1591. In Vtricke in the year 1590. Lastly, in Gronland,
and the neighboring places in the year.1595.

Your Honors and Excellencies know very well, that I, not only before the
treaty concerning peace, but while the treaty lasted, and always afterward,
Hear what I will say, but in a hidden language and known to your self alone
amongst the Hollanders. Paga de muchos seruicios puede un hombre hazer, mas
para un buen conscio pagar todos los Dios son menester.

Do you speak these things from your heart? or without fayning, cunning
fraud and treachery?


seriously labored both publicly and otherwise, that the Spaniard, and his
allies might in no sort be credited: and that I openly professed, that it was
incredible, that the Spaniard should ever forget those injuries, which they
conceived we did unto them: and that This it is to be a man of note and
famous: let the patriots mark it.
we therefore should take the like course. Wherefore I always Your diligence
is commendable, if love and affection caused it: now seeing it is clean
contrary, it must be scorned and hissed at.
solicited, that the value of the Have you not forgotten what befell unto
Sixtus 5. your friend? He, when he had imposed new contributions at Rome,
received this answer, Mi asciguo inanzi che il sole si venda. May not the
Hollanders justly make the same reply unto you, Qui a oreilles, oye et entende.
contributions should not only be continued, but increased; and that of the
profits thereof by better husbanding might be made the uttermost: so that the
truce being either broken or finished, we might proceed to war better Notre
anon est bien oreilie, mais il n' entendra pas cela.
provided, then when the truce begun to be made.

They allege in their book a certain answer given by the generall-States to
the Archduke Erneste in the year 1594: but they add not that I was the
author thereof, as likewise of six at least of the same kind, which were
directed to the Lord of Reydt, the Count Mandescheyt, Charles Nursell, and many
more, and afterward in progress of time sent over to them.

By these things the libellers may seem only to expect this, viz. that we
should have continued the war, either till Brabant, Flanders, and the residue
of the Provinces had been conquered, and so have come to us as a refuge: or
till the Spaniard had overcome our Provinces, and brought them in the same
case, wherein others then were. Which And provision was necessary, that you
fainted not before you had done.
business requires many words, much speech: as also, that we have made sundry
chargeable expeditions into Brabant and Flanders: and howsoever the
inhabitants, and cities there were warned and entreated to give a peremptory
answer concerning a mutual union with us: yet not any one city, nay not any
one man of note, showed or declared that he would be on our party. And they
are compelled, who belong unto the other Provinces, whether they dwell here or
else where, to believe and acknowledge, that the Yours especially in sowing
discord: you can make nothing else good, whatsoever you boast of.
honesty, courage and constancy of our men (especially those of Holland and
West-Frisland) has been, and is yet at this day very commodious unto them.

He speaks truly here concerning you, (great and mighty States) you were
always indifferent in the matter, if I except the Advocate and one or two
more-He is the troubler hereof.
You never denied a lawful (but not partial and divided) and equal
Provincial Synod unto Holland and West-Frisland, but rather employed your
pains to procure one. But a Who made that Question? Or who used those
arguments by way of opposing it? was it not your self, and your Arminians? Out
ye Popish knaves, sons of darkness, and night shadows, you fly the light,
and dare not show your selves in public, and defend your fopperies in an
Ecclesiastical Assembly. Hence it is that you seek starting holes, and by
passages, and devise things contrary to truth. But the time is near wherein
all Arminians shall be repressed, and restrained. Bestirre your self and act
your part (most excellent Prince Maurice) I most humbly pray you: and you my
Lords the mighty States, bestirre your selves: buckle to it, Master Plancius,
most decre and near, both by reason of one common and natural language, and
also daily acquaintance and familiarity: and you Francis Gomar, whose care
of, and for us, still shows it self: you Anthony Smoutius, Vrsine,
Salignacus, Dammannus, de Lauignus Ellerus, and all the remainder of the
Ministers of Gods word, bestirre your selves I say, and defend our ancient
Reformation, convince these Innouators, bannish and root them out from among
you, appoint and publish a National Synod at Dort, or any where else, which
the Arminians do more hate, then the Owl the light of the Sun. I for my
part, if it be fitting, will strengthen and prepare my self therein against
them with reasons, observations, histories, and testimonies of Scripture, to my
utmost power.
question was made, by what means this might be ordained in so great
dissension and disagreement: so that it might tend (which was the principal
matter) to the benefit of the Church and Country, and quietness of the
Comminaltie. And certainly there is a maine difference betwixt the meetings of
particular parts of one Province, or four parts thereof, and a Synod of a
whole and entire Province; betwixt the times of schism and dissension, and the
times of Peace and Concord.

Men talk much of the Commissions, and Oaths as well of the Chiefetaines, as
of the military route: but it is evident, that such either have not seen, or
at least understand not these things; seeing both the words and meaning thereof
are much different from that which they undiscreetly coin. They judge of
others according to their own false, perverse, and lying hearts. They do
manifestly contradict the truth (I contest your knowledge) when they say Master
Francis Francken of pious memory was Advocate of the Country. For you know
that he had no public office in your Assembly, but that he was a Counselor
and Pensioner of Goud: afterward, leaving that office he supplied the
Advocates place for some years and interceded for both Councels, and afterward
he was made a Counsailor himself.

It is conspicuous that they forbear to speak the truth, when they report
that I said to his Excellency, and also to some Preachers, that I had made Your
exception against the matter controuerted gives not full satisfaction; or the
original, which is writ in Dutch is false. Nevertheless, when he strives
most to excuse it, he plurges himself into more errors. I will briefly
therefore, since it is a matter of moment, lay down, what is here spoken. The
Labellers say and prove by Barneuelts own words, that Vtenbogart was made an
Arminian by him. Barneuelt denies he did any such thing, because forsooth, he
learned nothing concerning the point of Praedestination either of Arminius or
Vtenbogarte. Now I demand, if he have satisfied the objection, and approved
himself to be as clear, as if he were washed with milk. He that has any
brain, sees he is not well in his wits, if he thinks as he writes; or
else foolish altogether, if he think one thing and write another: especially,
since the matter in question is the crime of Heresy, and the villainy of
seducing in a cause concerning salvation. But what lettes, why the Advocate may
not be said to have made the Preacher Vtenbogart an Arminian? Because he
affirms that he learned nothing of the said party: yea, this is rather a
solid confirmation of the matter, especially since it is used for an excuse. To
speak more plainly, Barneuelt is an Arminian: Vtenbogart is an Arminian too:
the one made the other an Arminian. Now the question is who was the seducer? I,
that I may end the controversy, will frame an hypotheticall Syllogism, such
an one as Cicero concerning Milo and Clodius. Either Vtenbogart seduced
Barneuelt, or Barneuelt Vtenbogart.

But Vtenbogart did not seduce Barneuelt, therefore Barneuelt seduced
Vtenbogart. The hypothesis makes the proposition of an vngainsayable truth: the
assumption is affirmed by Berneuelt himself. The conclusion then is, Berneuelt
was the seducer.


Vtenbogart an Arminian. This I said, that I, when Herma^nus Herbartes cause
about 26 years since was handled before me at the Haigh, and amongst other
things it was declared that he would not profess the Almighty God to be the
Author of sin, that I, as I said, warned Vtenbogarte returning to his house,
that this business of praedestination, condemning, or reprobating, would
stir up great troubles, as a matter that became not Christians, and was
repugnant to my mind and thousands more: in which mind and opinion, I
professed I had persisted from the year 1568. and therefore that I had learned
nothing either of Arminius or Vtenbogarte concerning this point.

It Is false also, that I made them Burgomasters, Aldermen, and common
Counselors in free-cities-who fitted my humor: seeing these things were the
least part of my care. In fine, that being entreated thereto by some few
cities, I mentioned the matter to his Excellence. But his Excellence herein
chiefly used the counsel of the Presidents, Vander Mile, Wingaerd, Iniossa and
the Senators.

It Is a mere cogge, that the King of France offered by his Ambassadors the
relief of an hundred thousand crowns monthly. As this also was feigned that
the charges of the war surpassed the sum of seven millions of crowns. In
like manner, that three millions of crowns were requested of the King of
France. It is also a plain lie, that I gave unto President Ianyn, and Busanual
some thousands of Florenes. As ye likewise know it to be a fained tale, that I
had power of disposing an hundred twenty thousand Florenes yearly. I had only
in lieu of my extraordinary expenses, and the trouble of making correspondence
within, and without the Country and the adjacent places, five hundred Florenes
yearly. Which difference how great it is, let any man judge.

They do sensibly, manifestly, and palpably lie, when they say that our
treasure was lessened by excessive, and extraordinary charges since the truce;
seeing (beside the payment of many thousands to the Frenchmen, which were
neither reckoned nor accounted, and concerning which three years before and
always after diverse demonstrances were tendered in the Assembly of your
Honors and Highnesses) in the fines or mony-matters of Holland, and
West-Frisland, there was no disorder, and no loss happened since the truce,
but rather a great ease, and notable increase of things succeeded, as before I
have showed. So that it was diligently provided, that the debts and charges
might not exceed the revenues.

It is an apparent lie too, that I promised President Ianyn, that in the while
the truce last I would bring in the practice of the Romish religion: I always
labored for the contrary, so that the propounding thereof hitherto has been
debarred, and kept here in private.

For these many years I have labored with tooth and nail, privately and
publicly, to unite all the companies of the East Indies, and make one general
one of them all, to procure the approbation, and assistance thereof. Which many
of the companies thereof can witness.

And as soon as we may hope for a success of making a company for the
West Indies, I will bestow my pains herein too, and confute those that
withstand it. If these forgering fellows would manifest and discover
themselves, and maintain what they have written; I will undertake to make good
and prove that in all other Articles, wherein they have deposed against me, they
have done me notable injury: and that in many things they have trespassed
against the authority, liberties, and privileges of the Country, and of
Holland, and West-Frisland; and that therefore both themselves, as also they
which had a hand in this business, If they deserve to be punished, you
deserve death, by whose instigations these courses were taken.
deserve to be severely punished.

When I would have ended these matters, I thought with my self, and also
desired your Honors, and Highnesses in general, and the Nobles and Governors
of free-Cities in particular, to consider, by The assertions following are
mere impostures, devised for Barneuelts protection, the overthrow of
Graue-Maurice, and the utter destruction of Religion. Therefore, reader,
credit nothing therein. For my part, I will not make any stay in declaring so
much; but show it in a word, where need requires.
what means these tempests might be allayed. In fine, I say (with reverence
and under your correction be it spoken) that all This crafts-master fears lest
he should be called to an account for his doings, or rather constrained
thereto. Wherefore for his own saueguard he persuades that violence may be
used upon no man: the proofs he uses, are only for fashion sake, and that
with great words and titles he may deter us from a further searching into
the truth.
violent courses (whereto the forenamed practices inclined) would be hurtful,
and pernicious to the state of the Provinces and free Cities, to his
Excellence, and his whole house, and every member thereof, to all good Patriots
of what condition soever, but especially to the true and reformed Religion, and
all those, who embrace it. And that that this was a mere plot devised by the
Spaniard to the perturbation, and utter overthrow and destruction, of these
famous Provinces. Wherefore Mark how this bloud-sucker here makes way for
future tragedies: but his poison lies in his tail, take heed therefore of his
venomous, and deadly sting.
that ought to be approved of, which the King of Frances Ambassador very
discreetly, and with good reason commended, and the King of England again and
again counseled and persuaded both to the generall-States, and unto you too
in the year 1613. Whereto his Majesty's admonitions, and advice given within
this years compass may also be referred, and applied: as also the counsel
and admonitions of the King of Switzerlands Ambassador extraordinary, and
diverse warnings given to the same purpose, in sundry assemblies both publicly,
and privately. Namely, that all guile and dissimulation, all sinister suspect,
and ambition, all conceived gall, hatred, and revenge might be laid aside, and
the former grudges being forgotten, and not thought of (as far as was
possible without notable prejudice to any) a new unity of minds might be made
in charity, peace and concord. For this is the only remedy, whereby the
counsels, hostility, and treachery of the Spaniard might be resisted.

These things being done, special care is to be taken, that such, as are
deputed for the Assembly of the general States, and those, which consult in
common without any instructions, should persuade themselves that the last
Vtricke union is the very foundation of their Assembly; well and advisedly
providing, that the Yea, the thirteenth Article too? Ah! IN ay souuent ouy dire
qu' on cognouit l'animant au parler, and le pot au sonner.

So guess we at the metal by the sound:
So by the voice, the beast in chase is found.

Articles concluded of therein, as their providence and pleasure thought fit,
may be observed, and enacted; the defects of the former years contributions
may be excused and supplied; Consents may be maturely and well obtained for
the contributions of the year present, and satisfaction may be made unto
Holland and West-Frisland, by the contributions of the other several Provinces
proportionably for the money dispended upon two companies of footmen of the
French, and two troops of horsemen: That How stately does he here like the
principal commonwealthes man prescribe laws unto the General States, and
limit their power! and yet they are chief Lords, and Administrators of all
things. But if this Foxes cunning be happily unknown to the Reader, I will
briefly lay it open. Et a fin que ie ne te voye plus en sinistre opinion de la
chose, Regard, car des yeux ie to osteray la nue,
Qui des yeux des humains rend moins clare Iauene.


And that you may no longer misconceiue the matter: Attend, I mean the
curtain to unfold,
Which yet the minds clear sight in doubt does hold.
The provincial States beyond Holland, and West-Frisland, and Vtricke (those
beyond the Islands now also are conformed by the most excellent Prince of
Orange his means) are of the ancient Reformation, and these are the
Gelderlanders, the Zutfeniens, the Zelanders, and Groenlanders: some belonging
to these Provinces are deputed to the Haighe, which make up the General
States. Who being, as I said, of the ancient reformation for the most part, if
they should judge Barneuelts cause, he were sure to be hanged. That this
therefore may not come to pass, and to secure himself, he always highly
praises, commends, extols, exhorts, counsels the Provincial States of Holland
and West-Frisland, to whom this whole Apology is directed, viz. that they may
countenance and defend his person, and not cause (for this is the mark he
shootes at) nay, not suffer him to be drawn to a higher Tribunal; since all the
Hollanders generally are Arminians: The Reader understands me. And to this
purpose is that, which he adds concerning religion.


the same Deputies take not causes in the foresaid union into their
examination, and determination, either not committed unto them, or expressly
reserved for particular Provinces by name; unless this be permitted unto them
by the free consent of the Provinces jointly, all exacting of suffrages
removed: since this is to be accounted the usurpation, and violating of the
power and jurisdiction of the several Provinces; whereof no profit, but rather
disprofit and destruction may hereafter arise. That this That you may not
please your self a whit herein; Mark me: There the point in question is not
concerning the Arminian Religion, but Romish Popery: which if you would bring
into request again; you go against your oath, and that which you formerly
auerred touching the Governor Iauyn. And truly if the Vtricke Union be to be
kept, as you urge, then all Papists will triumph, who may freely then say all
their Masses. Yea, if the thirteenth Article ought to be observed, all Monks
are to be called back again into the confederated Provinces, all
Ecclesiastical goods and Monasteries are to be restored. Let my Lords the
States mark, whither he and his Arminianisme comes. Are these Spanish
Counsels, and the stirrings up of sleeping Wolves?
is most fitting in causes concerning Religion, is manifest by the express
text of the aforesaid Union, and also by diverse other Treaties; namely, that
the determining concerning Religion, and causes thereto appertaining, is
reserved to each several Province: I will speak plainly, you lie.
and the custom observed for these thirty years last past in the foresaid
assemblies, was agreeable hereto, so that herein nothing at all was done
without the ioynt-consent of all the Provinces.

That his Mauritius knows what the Anagram of his name imports. Mars viuit.
Noble Prince, let him feel and have experiment of your power and valor:
clear your self, and your honor.
Excellency, and the Council of the State in ordering the affairs of the
State, and of the war belonging to the Provinces in common, do follow the
Instructions, which the Lords the general States upon mature deliberation
shall give concerning the same: and which they themselves interchangeably have
confirmed by oath, that they will follow, and observe. And that it should be so
provided that the Provinces might purge, and supply and make good their former
defaults in giving their consents; and each of them, for their particular,
keep Holland, and West-Frisland scot-free and harmless concerning the
expenses which the French horsemen and soldiers with their Officers put them
to: and further that good order might be taken for the yearly contributions
and payment thereof, and that the charges may not far exceed the received
contributions: and that care be taken, that nothing be done in matters of
greater importance without the priuitie, and knowledge of the general States:
that nothing be attempted contrary to the liberties, rights, privileges, and
customs of the Provinces, free-cities and members thereof: and particularly
that there be no let, and hinderance, concerning the performance of the two and
thirtith Article of the foresaid instruction, for very weighty causes therein
contained. That his Excellence, and the Companies of the Admiraltie, order the
affairs, and proceedings of the war by Sea, according to the means with
their appurtenances, prescribed by the said instruction, which also they
promised by oath: and that in businesses extraordinary, and of more moment,
they proceed not without the notice and consent of the States general,
foreseeing withal that the charges surpass not too much the revenues and
Incomes.

The Gentry, Nobles, and Deputies of Holland, and West-Frisland, argue not
about any instruction, but consent unto the Articles proposed, or refused, and
are bound to speak their opinion in all chances for the benefit and security
as well of the Provinces in general, as also of the members and cities thereof
in particular. Wherein chiefly must be regarded the union made betwixt the
members and cities first of all, and then betwixt every particular Province,
considering for what end the members and cities were interchangeably conioined,
and therein showing the ancient truth and honesty, with their sincere
agreement, and assured confidence in the one and other: A forgetfulness cast
over things past for the good of the Provinces, members, and cities thereof. In
the cause of Religion a toleration would be granted for a How long shall this
time be? as long as Barneuelt lives? or till Temothah. I speak unto my
brethren in a dialect, which they only understand: rascag, raga, resoneet
saddic iescamu? It were too long. Some speedier course must be taken; because
chone malach, Adonai sauif lireau vai halletsem; and because pene lehouah
begoserag, lehachrith meerets zicram. Only let them perform it courageously.
time, and an agreement made with those, who are otherwise minded concerning
the point of Predestination, and the appendices thereof: all other in
conueniences in the mean time prevented, and in other matters a continuance in
the reformed doctrine granted. Furthermore, an Ecclesiastical Decree must be
made, and the Ecclesiastical society, and discipline restored according to
the tenor thereof: From henceforth How fearful he is of himself? but his
punishment now draws near.
keeping their promises and decrees, that no man be demanded, sifted, or
troubled for his Religion, or opinion concerning the same: that every one may
securely live in peace and quietness under the lawful government of these
Provinces and Cities. And in case the foresaid opinions must needs be decided,
then without partakings, and according to reason it be enquired, and by what
way, order, and meeting, that may best be done by the common consent.

That his Excellence, and the Senators deputed by you deal in all affairs of
the State, in Ecclesiastical and Noble Gentleman, and excellent Prince, give
this coward the hearing, but follow not his counsel.

Labori eux Athlete, and poudreux d'exercice,
Qui ne trembla iamais pour un petit novice.
And howsoever you have differred to cope with your enemy, dessous un fer
rouille n' est moins preux un Achille.


secular government, in the wars belonging unto the Provinces of Holland and
West-Frisland, the members and Cities thereof, specially according to their
several commissions, instructions, resolutions, and Acts; and that in great
and weighty matters your consent be sought for, and that in all things your
decrees be observed. Noble Gentleman, and excellent Prince, give this coward
the hearing, but follow not his counsel.

Labori eux Athlete, and poudreux d'exercice,
Qui ne trembla iamais pour un petit novice.
And howsoever you have differred to cope with your enemy, dessous un fer
rouille n' est moins preux un Achille.


That his Excellence and the Judges in cases judicial, and other differences
may equally administer Justice, and be assisted for the better performance
thereof.

That the Exchequer in guiding the Dominions, and other matters left to the
disposal thereof, duly execute it office, and be encouraged in execution
thereof.

That the Officers both in general and particular, and all governors of City:
and Towns behave themselves decently in promoting a good and civil
government, in the Administration of Justice, the increase of the public
good; and in a word, in procuring the peace and unity of Cities, Boroughs,
strangers, and towne-dwellers, that they wisely use their authority, and be
assisted and confirmed in the same.

Now if these things be thus ordered, and every one have their own right, if
every ones How gladly would he be a great Lord and Master over all? but
(...). But there is a God that sees and surely punishes such things.
authority, office, honor, and possessions be reserved to themselves safe and
sound, without doubt within a short time al things will go better with us.

My good Lords, I have been more So have my castigations: therefore if you
obtain pardon, I have no reason to despair of it, for in tediousness and
prolixitie we iu^pe: only your cause us worse then mine, for the truth is
strong above al things, and conquereth for evermore.
tedious, then I was aware of: I entreat you all to look to marters as well
generally as particularly concerning your prerogatives, rights, privileges and
safety. For And here thus agained.

Souvent i'ay beu, encor qu' a contre oeur,
Quand in auoy mal, de tres amers breuvages.
O Socij, neque enim ignari sumus ante malorum;
O passi grauiora: dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Those are not the first evils (Iwis) we have endured: and we hope, brave
mates, to be rid of these.


my part, such were my troubles (yet God delivered me out of them) in the
years 1586, and 1587, under the Earl of Leicester, and in the years 1588,
1589 under the Lord Willoughby, his successor in the government of the English
garrisons (under whose name these impudent forgers seek to shelter and
patronage themselves) then in the year 1600 after the battle of Flanders,
afterward in the year 1608. in the treaty concerning the league: For these 32.
years the truth has triumphed in her conquest over falsehood. I presume, Amen,
Amen, may God ass^yle the the truth and her followers: but you and your wicked
adherents, your Arminians, slaves to Antichrist, shall perish together. For
thus much I presume except you repent, and conform yourselfe to Antiquity.
God in his good time will assoile the truth, destroy falsehood, and confound
the authors thereof: and others also there are (and those great ones and of
good deserts too) not only in our Provinces, but in the neighbor kingdoms
also and dominions, as well heretofore, as in this present age, who could not
acquit and free themselves from such and greater calumnies and false
accusations. I And I most mighty God, earnestly beseech thee, from the supreme
Throne of thy Majesty, that thou would be pleased to look upon thy holy
People, and the faithful Ministers of thy Church: and so fortify, protect,
and defend them against their insulting enemies wheresoever, the false brethren
and Prophets, and especially the maintayners of the Arminian wicked sect, who
seek to trouble and break that union which thou have confirmed; That they
whom thou have praedestinated to salvation, may always have the upper hand,
and triumph in the certainty of their salvation: but they, whom thou have
created unto confusion, and as vessels of thy most just wrath, may tumble and
be thrust headlong thither, whereto from all eternity thou did predestinate
them, even before they had done any good or evil. Even so Father, because it
seemed good unto thee: thy word is truth, thy word endures for ever, Amen.
beseech Almighty God in mercy to open your eyes, (my good Lords) and with
the blessing of his heavenly grace to strengthen and confirm you in your
prosperous and happy government.

From the Haigh, April 20. 1618.

