Especial Observations, AND APPROVED PHYSICAL RVLES; which have (heretofore)
been well Tried and Experienced, in the last heavy and grievous time of the
Pestilence.

AND, Upon the Good and Benefit then ensuing by it: thought meet to be now
Published, in this dangerous Contagion of the Plague.

SERVING As sovereign Antidotes, for preservation of all such as are not
Infected; as also for them that be already Visited.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet, by the assigns of R.B. and are to
be sold at their House in Grubstreet, near unto the lower Pumpe, 1625.

THE READERS DIRECTION.
COncerning this small Treatise (gentle Reader) it has been entertained and
allowed by very good Judgments, both such as have been deeply read in
Physic and Chyrurgerie, and have made perfect experience, both in the Receipts
and Applications. Former times (of like fearful Visitation) have found them
sollidly approved, even upon their best friends and familiars, whose welfare
they tendered as their own. Yet I am not so rash or indiscreet, as to affirm
these aduises of more security, then either GODS assisting Grace, or Men's best
Practice may give a blessing to. Only this time of urgent necessity,
occasioneth the publishing for general benefit: Paul may plant, Apollo may
water; but GOD only is the ground, that gives Grace and success.

Farewell.
ESPECIAL OBSERVATONS, FIT TO BE USED IN THE TIME OF PLAGVE AND PEST^LENCE.
With certain Rules and good instructions, to be observed against the Plague,
etc.
FOR as much as the force and infection of the disease called the Plague or
Pestilence, has heretofore been too well known, and now at this time is too
fiercely felt in diverse and sundry places of this Kingdom, and for that diverse
Cities, Towns, and other places of this Realm, have been so grievously vexed
therewith: therefore (according to my simple skill and knowledge therein) I
have thought good to publish and make known unto all, as well such
Preservatives as are good to be used, observed and kept by all sorts of people
for the avoiding of the same disease, being greatly infectious, and easily
taken diverse and sundry ways: as also for the better preservation of those
that are in health, from the infection of the disease, and to cure and order
those that are any way infected or grieved with the same: and therefore these
things following, ought chiefly to be regarded, and fully observed in all
respects. (Viz.)

1. To keep your Houses, Yardes, Backsides, Streets, and Channells clean
from all standing puddles, dunghils, and co, rupt moistures, which engender
stinking and (...) savors that be noisome, or may breed infection.

2 To suffer no Dogs nor Cats to come into your houses, nor to keep any your
selves, (except you dwell in some open place of the Air) for they be very
dangerous, and most (...) (of any kind of thing) to take infection of
sickness, and to bring it home to their masters house; by reason that they
run from place to place, and from one house to another, continually feeding
upon the vncleanest things that are cast forth into the streets.

3 To air your rooms (severally) with Char cole fire, made in stone pans, or
Chasing dishes, and not in Chimneys; but as you can set your pans in the midst
of the Rome, a^^ be sure to air every r^^^e twice a week at the least, and
put into your fire, a little Frankenscence, Juniper, dried Rosemary or
Bay-leaues, Sage and Lauender.

4 To wash your linen often, and to air your (...) in the Sun, or over pans
of fire; or over a Chasing dish of Coals, and to fume the some either with
Frankenscence, dried Rosemary, Juniper, and Bay-leaues.

5 To smell to the Ro^te of Enula Campana, steeped to White Wind Vinegar, and
wrapped in a handkerche^, or else to Herb grace, and Wormwood steeped in
Vinega^, and carried either in the Mind of a Lemmon, or in some thing (made for
that purpose close stopped: Also powder of Enula-Campana roots is drink, or
hanged about your neck, or (...) chewed in your mouth is good. To eat or chew
in your mouth either the roots of Angelica, Setwall, Gentian, Valerian,
Cinnamon, or the roots of Aras, and to use every Morning fasting to eat
Sorrel steeped in Vinegar, with a little bread and butter; or if vinegar be
scarce, then with Sorrel sauce. Also to eat a kernel of a Walnut mixed with 5.
or 6. loaves of Herbegrace, and a corn or two of Salt, put altogether into a
Fig warmed, and eaten fasting twice or thrice a week, and to fast three hours
after it.

6 To comfort the stomach, often with an Alebery made of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs,
Saunders, Genny Greines, and such like.

7 To drink Rue, Wormwood and Scabious, steep't in Ale a whole night, in the
morning fasting: (also to take the ^^^es of Enula Campana beaten together and
drink fasting) or to drink the powder of Turmentill in Sortell or Scabious
Water fasting: or else to take the water of Cardus Benedictus, or Angelica mixed
with Methridatum. Also Bay Berries huskt before they be dry beaten to powder,
and drink it either in stale Beer or Ale, or in Wine, and to swe^t upon it
and to f^r^eare sleep.

8 To procure sweat being in your naked bed, by drinking of Posset Ale, sodden
with Sorrel and Burrage and mixed with Triacle, but if any feel themselves
infected, let them take Angelica water mixed with Methridatum, and after it,
sweat in bed upon it.

9 To preserve your selves by correcting the air in your houses, It is
necessary that you take Rosemary, dry Juniper, Bay-leaues, or Frankenscence,
and cast the same upon a Chasing dish of coals, and receive the smoke or fume
thereof into your head, if you have it, you may put a little Lauender as Sage
that is dried into the fire with the rest, and it will be the better.

10 Also to preserve your selves otherwise by perfuming or correcting the Air
in your houses and Chambers: Take a good quantity of Wine Vinegar, and put
thereto a little Rosewater, and 10. or 12. branches of Rosemary, and put them
all into the Basin: then take 5. or 6. Flintstones, and heat them red hot in
the fire, and cast them into the said Vineg^^, and so perf^^e your Chambers or
other R^^es therewith as often as you shall think meet, and let them be so
done one after another.

11 Likewise to preserve your self by perfuming of your Apparel: take the
same apparel that you do usually wear and let the same be kept sweet and
clean, and perfume it often, either with r^d Saunders burnt, or else with
Juniper: And if you happen to be with any that are in^r^e^, as soon as ever you
come home, shift your self immediately, and air your clothes as aforesaid,
or otherwise air them well in some open Air.

12 Lastly, if the patient be costiue, and hard bound in his belly, then let
him take a Suppo^^tarie made with a little boiled Hunny, and a little fine
powder of Salt, and so take it in at the Fundament, and so let it be kept
therein till it m^^^ a stool or two.

PRESERVATIVES (Corporal) against the Plague and Pestilence.
A most singular good preservative to be taken against all manner of bad and
corrupt Airs, in places infected.
TAke a handful of Sage. and seethe it in a gallon of fair running Water, and
let it seethe until the one half be consumed, then cover it close and set it
over the fire again, and put into it a good quantity of Hunny, and as much
Treacle, and then so^^ it tl^^^^, and put it into a glass, and stop it close,
and when you will use it, drink 5. or 6. spoonefulls of it fasting, and it
will preserve you from taking of any evil Airs all the day after wheresoever
you go.

Another good preservative to be used against the Plague when you go into an
open air, or else where common assemblies are.
TAke a sponge and dip it in Vinegar and Rose-wate mingled, or else in Vinegar
wherein Wormwood or Rue have been boiled in, and use to smell often thereto.

An excellent Pomander to be used against the ill sauoured sent of the Plague.
TAke the quantity of 4. pound of Olibanum Labeanum, and put to it a pound
weight of the strongest Vinegar that may be gotten, and set them to seethe in
an earthen pot for a good space, then take the quantity of a pound of pure
yellow Wax, and a little Turpentine, and let them be mingled and bruised
together in a brass Mortar, and then put therein 3. or 4. ounces of Storax
Liquida, and let it be made thick like unto paste, and so make thy pomanders,
and if thou will have the same sweeter, then put therein half an ounce of
Spikenard, and of Cloves beaten to powder and Musk Roses, of each of them 2.
ounces, and of Camphire a dram, and so make it up at pleasure.

Another of the same.
TAke fine Cinnamon, Cloves, Amber, Nutmeg, Sto^^* Camomill, Juniper and Red
Roses, and beat them all together, and make a powder thereof, and then mingle
the same with Rose water and so make a pomander thereof.

A special good d^inke to be v^ed of all such as are g^i^u^d with the Plague
or Pestilence, during all the time of their sickness.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of great Valerian, a handful of So^^ell, and an
ounce of the Roots o^ Butter-burie, otherwise called Pestilent-wort) and bo^le
them in fair Running Water and White-win^ of either like much from a quart to
a pint, and strain it and put th^reto two spoonfulls of Vinegar, and two
ounces of fine Su^er, and then boil them again, and then let the party
grieves drink a good draught thereof as hot as possibly he may abide it, and
if he hap to cast it up again, then let him drink the like draught
immediately upon it, and provoke himself to sweat.

A special good Preservative against the Plague.
TAke an Egg and make a hole in the top of it, then take out both the Yolke
and White, and ^^ll the shell with the weight of 2. French Crowns of English
Saffron, and then roast the Shell and Saffron together in the Embers of
Charcoles, until the shell were yellow, then beat them together in a mortar
with half a spoonful of Mustard Seed, and as soon as any suspicion is had of
iustation, dissolve the weight of a French crown in 10. spoonfulls of
Posset-ale, and let the patient drink it luke warm, and sweat upon it in
naked bed.

Another of the same.
TAke a handful of Herbe-grace (otherwise called Rue and Sorrel of either a
handful, of Elder leaves, a handful of Red Sage, and a handful of Red
Bramble leaves, and stamp them well together, and strain them through a fine
cloth, with a quart of White Wind, then take a good quantity of Case-Ginger and
mingle it well with them, and drink a good draught thereof both Morning and
Evening, for the space of 9. days together, and by Gods grace it will preserve
you.

Another for the same.
TAke a good quantity of Garlic, and pill it, and mince it small, and boil
it in new milk, and eat it every Morning fasting. This has been truly
proved.

Another for the same.
TAke 2. Figs, 2. Walnuts, 20. Leaves of Rue, and a dram of Salt, and stamp
them all very well together, and eat them fasting, and it will preserve you
all the day after: as well against the Plague, as also against any other poison.

Another for the same.
TAke Alloes Hepatica, pure Cinnamon and Mirrh, of each of them three drams, of
Cloves, Mace, wood of Alloes, (commonly call Lignum Alloes, Masticke and Bole
Oriental, of each of them one ounce, mix them together, and make them into a
fine powder, and drink the same fasting every Morning, either in white Wine
delayed with water, or else with Ale, (but if it be with Wine, mingle it with a
little water, but mingle nothing with the Ale, and by Gods help this will
preserve you.

Another good Preservative used by Methridates.
TAke Figs which are not worme-eaten, and wash them clean, and of the
kernels of Walnuts clean picked, of each of them an 100. the weight of four
pence of Salt, and of the leaves of Hearb-Grace the weight of 2. shillings.
Then take the Figs and the kernels of the Walnuts, and cut them in pieces, and
stamp them well, and then put the Leaves unto them, and stir them very well
together, and then straint the Salt with the rest, and stir it until it be
incorporated, and made of one substance, then put it into some Earthen pot or
Gallipot, wherein it may be kept both sweet and clean, and when occasion
serves for use thereof: take the quantity of 2. or 3. Figs thereof, and eat
it every morning fasting, and by Gods help it will* preserve you. If you give
it to young children, the one half of the same will serve.

Another for the same. An excellent good Medicine against the Plague.
TAke an ounce of the leaves of Hearb-grace, half an ounce of good Figs, an
ounce of Juniper berries, 2. ounces of Walnuts clean picked, 4, ounces of Wine
Vinegar, and a good quantity of Saffron, and stamp them all together, and then
put them into a glass or Earthen pot that is clean, and stop it close that no
air may issue forth of it, and when you have occasion to use it, then take it
out either upon a knives point (or some other instrument fit for that purpose)
the quantity of a Bean or somewhat more, and eat the same in the morning
fasting, and by Gods help you shall be sure not to be infected with the
Plague, for the space of 24. hours, after the taking thereof, and you shall
find that it will do the Patient exceeding much good.

A sovereign Drink (if it be taken in time) to preserve one against the
Plague or Pestilence.
TAke the quantity of a dram and a^ half of Powder Imperial, a dram of
Triacle and of Dragon Water, and Sorrel water, of each of them an oz. and
drink it with Ale in the Morning fasting, (and if one have taken the infection
within 24. hours before, yet by Gods grace he shall escape it. This has be^ne
tru^ly proved in the last great visitation, and has done much good.

Another for the same.
TAke Hearbegrace, Sage of virtue, red Bramble Leaves, and Elder leaves, of
each of them a good handful, stamp the^ altogether and strain them through a
fine linen cloth with a quart of the best old white Wine that may be gotten
and put therein 3. penyworth of pure good Ginger finely beaten to powder, and
let any one (fearing or misdoubting the Plague) drink every Morning fasting a
good spoonful of it, and let him or her use it for the space of 10. or 12.
days together, and it will do (by Gods grace) exceeding much good, for this
has been holden an excellent good preservative against the infection of the
Plague.

Another good preservative against the Plague or Pestilence.
TAke Scabious and Morsis Diaboli, of each of them such a quantity as to your
own judgment shall be thought meet, stamp them very well, and then strain
them, and then take the juice of them, and set it upon the fire, and then you
shall perceive a green curde to arise upon the top of it, but scumme that off
as clean as you can then take the clear liquor, and put into it thre^
quarters of a pound of the finest white Sugar that may be had, and so let it
seethe until the (...) half of the liquor be consumed, then take it off, and
so keep it safe, and when occasion serves, let the party take the quantity of
three spoonefulls thereof at a time, both Morning and Evening (luke warm) and
this will preserve one greatly. Probatum est.

Another for the same.
TAke Butter-milke and eat thereof every day during the time of sickness, and
it will do you much good.

Another for the same.
TAke 5. spoonfulls of Wine-Vinegar 3. spoonefulls of fair Running water. di.
a spoonful of Triacle of Iene and of Bole Armoniacke, as much as a small Nut
(it being beaten to small powder) and drink it every Morning and Evening.
Proved by M. K. of An.

Another for the same.
TAke 7. or 8. leaves of Sorrel, and wash them in fair Water and Vinegar, and
steep them in the said Water, and Vinegar a good while and eat them fasting.

Another for the same.
TAke the finest and purest Alloes that may be gotten, and of Cinnamon and Mirh,
of each of them the weight of 3. French Crowns (or the weight of 2. pence in
silver) and of Lignum Aloes, Cloves, Mace, Masticke, and Bole Oriental, of
each of them di. an oz. mingle them together, and beat them into fine powder:
then take the weight of 4. pence thereof, and delay it into white Wine and
fair Water, and so drink it every Morning fasting.

An excellent good Drink to be taken every morning for a preservative against
the Plague.
TAke a good handful of Winter-Sauery, and boil it in a quart of good Wine
Vinegar, with a spoonful of Greines (being beaten and put into it:) and put
thereto a good quantity of fine Sugar, and take a good draught thereof every
morning fasting. Also if you must of necessary came into any place where any
infectious persons are, then it is good for you to smell to the Root of
Angelica, Gentian, or Valerian, and to chew any of these in your mouth, and you
shall find much virtue in them. Probatum est.

A marvelous good Medicine for the Plague.
TAke 3. or 4. slips of Herbe-grace, and 6. spoonfulls of Vinega^, and beat
them both together in a Mortar, then strain out the juice of it cloane, and
put thereto an ounce of pure Triacle, and an ounce of fine Sugar, and set it on
the fire, and stir it well t^^ether, and make thereof a Sirop, and then put
it into a close (...), and when you will use it, take a Sage leaf and spread
as m^^h as a Bean of the same upon the leaf, and so eat it every Morning and
Evening, and it will do you much good. Also if any one be infected and use
this often, it will quite expel the Plague from his heart: but if he be not
infected, it will preserve him within the space of 24. hours after the receipt
thereof.

Another for the same.
TAke every Morning fasting, a dry Fig, a Walnut, and 4. or 5. leaves of
Hearbe-grace* and chop them altogether very s^all and eat them, and afterward
drink a good draught of White or Claret Wine: but if it be a woman with
Child, leave out the Hearbe-grace.

Another for the same.
TAke a pint of Honey, a quarter of a pound of Bole Armoniacke, and as much
^anguis Draconis, and as much of Terra sigillata, half an ounce of Cloves and
a pint of Aq^a vitae and seethe them all together, until they be all as th
cke as pap, and when you will use it, take the quantity of a spoonful thereof
first and last, but take heed that you do neither walk nor drink, for the
space of an hour after the taking thereof, and this will do you marvelous
much good.

A good Preservative for a Woman with Child, or such as are delicate or tender,
that cannot away with taking of Medicines.
TAke a tossed of White or Wheat^n B^ead, and sprinkle thereat a little powder of
Cinnamon, and eat it in the Morning fasting. But if Cinnamon or Vinegar be not
to be had: then you may eat B^ead and Butter alone, for ^utter is not only a
preservative against the Plague: but also against all other venom and poisons.

An excellent good Medicine to be drunk, suspecting your self to be
Infected.
TAke a great Onion and take forth the Core, then fill it full again with
Triacle of Iene, and wrap the same in a piece of paper, and toast it until it
be soft, and then strain it with a little White Wine Vinegar, and temper it
with a pretty quantity of Sugar, and give the patient two spoonefuls thereof
to drink fasting, and if he be infected with the Plague, it will be
perceived within six hours after the receipt of the same drink.

Another good preservative against the Plague.
TAke Roots of Bays, May-weede (both leaves and roots) of each of them a
like quantity, a good quantity of Triacle of Iene, and a small quantity of
Dragon Roots and Leaves, and mingle them well together with Ale and make a
Posset thereof, and so use to drink daily thereof, and you shall find great
comfort thereby.

Another preservative against the Plague.
TAke a Fig, and put therein a little Hea b-Grace bruised, and mingled with a
little Bay Salt beaten small, and the Kernel of a Walnut clean picked, and
let the patient use every Morning to eat three or four of these Figs thus
ordered fasting, and let him drink a good draught of Wine or Beer afterward,
and then walk an hour after it, before ^e eat any meat, and so by using of
this every Morning as aforesaid, by Gods help he shall be safe from any
infection.

Another for the same purpose.
TAke Wormwood and Rue, of each of them a handful, and bruise them a little,
and put them into an Earthen or pewter pot, with as much white Wine Vinegar as
will cover the herbs, and keep it close stopped, and when you fear any
infection, dip a little piece of a sponge into the Vinegar, and then put it
either into a round Ball made of Iuory or Juniper, with little hol^s on the
top, or else the Rind of a Lemmon, being opened on the top, and all the
substance taken f^rth and carry it in your hand as you go in the streets, and
so use to smell often unto it, and this will preserve you greatly.

Another excellent good p^eseruatiue against the Plague.
TAke half an hundred of Green Walnuts, (being new taken off, as they hang
green on the Tree) a pound of the inner Bark of an Ash-tree, and of
P^ttymorrell, Housleeke, Scabious, and Veruaine, of each of them a handful and
half an oz. of Saffron, and mince them altogether, and put a pottle of the
strongest Vinegar to them that may be gotten, and boil them over the fire in a
pot close stopped, and afterward distill them in a Lymbecke: then take the same
water, and keep it in a Glass, and when occasion serves for use thereof,
drink 4. or 5. ounces thereof at a time, and so use to take it 4. times in 24.
hours space, and when you do take it, be sure to be in your naked bed, and
provoke your body to sweat, and in so doing you shall sustain great comfort
both to heart and body. Probatum est.

Another good Preservative for the same purpose.
TAke ten grains of powder of Saff on* twenty Greines of the Kernels of
Walnuts clean picked, two or three Greines of Figs, three Greines of
Meth^datum, one oz. of Pimpernell Water, and six Sage leaves: stamp all these
together, and put it into a close glass, and eat thereof every morning
fasting the quantiti. of 12, Grains, and this by Gods help will preserve you.

Another for the same.
TAke a good quantity of Rue, otherwise called Hearbgrace) or Wormwood (or
both if you please) and put it into a pot of usual drink, and let it steep
for the space of a whole night, close stopped, and drink thereof in the
Morning fasting, and by often using of it, it will both purge the blood and
preserve you from the disease: Also if you take 7. or 8. Berries of Juniper
dried, and made into fine powder, and put the same into your drink, wherein
the Rue and Wormwood has been steeped as aforesaid, it will be much the
better, and of a far greater virtue: but if you cannot get any Juniper
Berries then take a little powder of Wormewo^d, and powder of Valerian, and use
it in your drink as aforesaid.

Another for the same.
TAke powder of Turmentill the weight of 6. pence either in Water of Scabious
or in Sorrel water in the Summer, but if it be in the Winter: then take it
with Water of Valerian, (if it may be gotten) or else with some other ordinary
drink, and i^ will do^ (...) a p^ece of A^^ Root, kept in your mouth, as you
walk in the streets, is marvelous good and Cordial.

Another for the same.
TAke Rue, Mandrago is, Fetherfew, Burnet, and Sorrel, of each of them half a
handful, and a good quantity of crops and roots of Dragons, wash them all
very clean, and seethe them on a soft fire in fair running Water, from a
pottle to a quart: then strain them through a fine linen cloth, and if it be
bitter, put thereto as much Sugar Candy* as will make it sweet, or else some
other fine Sugar, and if this Medicine he ministered before the Purples do
arise, it will help, but it must be taken every morning fasting.

An exceeding good Medicine to be taken against the Plague.
TAke an oz. of the leaves of Herb Grace, half on oz. of good Figs an oz.
of uniper berries, 2. ounces of Walnuts clean picked, 4. ounces of Wine
Vineg^^, and a good quantity of Saffron, and stamp them altoge^her, and put
them in^o an Earthen Pot or Glass, and stop it close that no ^yre may issue
out, then take some of it forth upon a knives point, or else with some other
instrument to the quantity of a Bean or more ^and ea^e it in the Morning
fasting, and by Gods grace, it w^ll preserve you from infection for 24. hours
after the taking of it.

Another for the same
TAke Betony water, and white Wine Vineg^r, of each ^f them 3. spoonefuls, and
the quantity of a N t^eg of ^^a^^e of Iene, or else the quantity of a haste
Nut of M^th^id^tum, and mingle them altogether, and let the sick person take
it in the beginning of his sickness, and this will do him exceeding much good.

Another for the same.
TAke H^a b Grace, Southernwood, Mugwoo^t, and Wormwood, of each of them a
handful, and 3. or 4. handfuls of Juniper Be^rie which are black, and then
cut and shred the herbs very s^all, and put them into an Earthen Pot or
^^pkin, and put to them a gallon of white W^n^ Vinegar, and let the (...) ^h^re
f^^ the (...) of (...) they be green, then let them not soke above 14. hours)
then take a handful or two of the same herbs forth, and put them into a
Still, and then put therein a quart of the same Vinegar, and so distill them
with a soft fire, (for overmuch fire will waste it, and when it is distilled,
put as much more as aforesaid into the Still, and so do until you have
distilled all. That being d^^e, put it into a Pipkin or earthen vessel again,
and then put ^^erein as many of the same herbs fresh now again as you did
before, and then let them soke for the space of 7. or 8. days and nights more,
and then distill them again (as you did before) and so use the herbs and
Berries, the third time again as you did twi^e before: and th^^ put into the
Pipkin 4. ounces of pure and good Methridatum, amonst the herbs, or if it
cannot be had, take 6. or 7. ounces of good Triacle, and put therein: and when
it is well distilled, put it into a double Glass, and stop it close, and bind
a piece of clean Leather about the top of it, and so keep it close, and when
occasion serves for use thereof, and that you perceive any one to be infected
with the Plague; then give him that is grieved 4. ounces t^ereof at a time, but
if it be a woman, give her not above 3. ounces, and to a child according to
the age, and as the child is able to bear it, and let him or her that so
takes it, sweat upon it for the space of 3. or 4. hours after the taking
thereof, but if the patient be able to endure it, let him sweat longer, and let
some body stand always by the sick person, to dry the sweat from his face,
least that by putting of his or her hands out of the bed, cold be taken, and
more danger of death ensue thereby, and with all doubt* by Gods help, this
will yield him comfort and help in a short space. This is a marvelous good
Medicine, and has been often times of late experienced: this is also good
against the Leprosy, being much used as aforesaid.

An excellent good drink, generally to be used for all sorts of people, that
are infected with the Plague, and to be made with small cost.
TAke Burrage Burnet, and Marigolds (which are of a brown col^ur) of each of
them a good handful: then take 9. or 10. crops of the youngest Rosemari^, and
boil all these together in a quart of stale Ale clarified: then put therein a
little whole Mace, and a pretty quantity of fine ^ug^r, and a crust of White or
Wheaten Bread, and let the sick person drink of this during all the time of
his or her sickness, and this will be most comfortable and good.

Also use to put P^^pernell in the sick persons broth, that you do commonly
make for him either to sup or eat, and it will be the better.

Another good Drink to be used to those that are infected with the Plague.
TAke Ber^ies of Iu^ (that are ripe) (gathered on the North side of the tree,
and dry them in the shadow: and then stamp them to powder: then take d^. a dram
of the same powder, and temper it well with 2. ounces of ^l^ntine Water, and
w^ea the sick person is desirous to drink, let him take a good drang^^
thereof: and let him remain in his bed, and swe^t as much and as of^^n as he
can, after he has taken it, then warm a clean shirt for him and put it on,
and if his shirts may be shif^ed of^e^, it will be the better after his
sweating and likewise his shi^tes and clothes, and in using of this for the
space of 3. days together, he will either dye or mend without all doubt (by
Gods help.) This has been truly prou d.

Another precious Drink for one infected with the Plague.
TAke Fetherfew, Matfellen, Mugwoo^t, Sols^q^^, S^ab^ ^s, and Mallows, of each
of them alike quantity, wash (...) cleave, and stamp them, and temper them
well with stale (...), and give it the sick person to drink, (the quanti^y of
^. spoo^efulls thereof at a time) and if it be taken in time, it will both
destroy the corruption: and also keep the sick person from all danger of
death. Probatum est.

Another for the same.
TAke a good quantity of Scabious water and Betony water, and mingle them
together with a good quantite of Triacl^ ^f lean, and give it the Patient to
drink immediately after that he suspecteth himself to be infected. And if
it happen that the sick person find himse^fe greatly grieved, and that any
swelling begin in any place to grow sore, then take Elder-leaues, Red Bramble
leaves, and Mustardseed, and stamp them altogether, and make a Plaster
thereof, and lay the same to the sore, and this will both draw and heal.

Another good drink to be made and used for the same purpose, or otherwise,
etc.
TAke 3. ounces of Aqua vitae, and an oz. and an half of Rose Water, and put
3. drams of perfect good Cinnamon, and a dram of Yellow Saunders to steep
therein, and when it is well steeped, then strain it through a hair Strainer,
and sweeten it well with the conserues of Rose^ and when occasion serves for
use thereof, take the quantity of an oz. thereof at a time, and give it the
sick person in the Morning fasting, or else make a tossed of fine Manchet, or
Wheaten bread, and soke the tossed therein, and it will do him much good.

Another good Drink to be used in the time of Visitation.
TAke 5. spoonefulls of Dragon water, ^. spoonefulls of the strongest white
Wine Vinegar that may be gotten, d^. a spoonefull of T^iacle of Iene, a
quarter of a spoonful of Bole Armoniacke, beaten into fine powder, and as much
or somewhat more of the root of ^etwall of Venice likewise beaten to powder,
and when any one is infected (or else not) and when he takes it, let him fast
from both meat^ and drink for the space of 12. hours after, unless he think
good to take of the same drink again, and he shall receive great comfort
thereby. But if you can get any powder Imperial, put in a like quantity as of
the rest, and it will be the better, this must be taken always blood warm,
and as often as you shall think convenient your self.

Another for the same.
TAke an Onion, and make a hole in it, and take out the inner Core, then take
Dragon Water, Triacle and Pepper, (bruised) and put them altogether into the
Onion, and roast them in the embers, and then bruise it and strain it with
purt Malmsie, and give it the Patient to drink. This is a present remedy, if
it be taken before the heart be infected. Probatum est.

A good Medicine to provoke sleep to the sick person.
TAke a good quan^ity of Woman's breast Milk, and put thereto a like quantity of
Aquavitae, stir them well together, and moisten the temples of the head of
the patient, and the nosthrils well t^erewith, and let it be laid on with some
feather, or with some fine linen cloth, and this will do much good. Probatum
est.

A Marvelous good drink for them that are infected with the Plague or
Pestilence.
TAke 2. handfulls of ^o^rell and a handful of Violet leaves, and a bunch of
sower Grap^s, and beat all these together, (stalks and all) then strain them
with Buttermilke, and make a Poss^t of the same, and let the sick person
drink as much thereof as you shall think good.

Another good drink for the same purpose.
TAke Leafe-Gold, and mingle it with the juice of Lemmons, and a little Sug^
candie, Cloves M^ce, and a little quantity of Liquor ce finely pared, and
^liced, and let all these be steeped in White wine, or else in good Cl^^^
wine, and put there in a good quantity of the powder of Angell^, or e se of the
D^co^tion of the same root, and let the party grieved drink this warm, and
it will do him marvelous much good. Probatum est.

Another excellent good drink for the sick person.
TAke Cardus Benedictus, Red Sage, Hear^ g^ (...), and Red B^a^ble leaves, of
each of th^^ a like qua^^i^ie, and stamp them altogether in a Mortar, and
strai^e the^ through a fine linen cloth, with a quart of White w n^, and let
the sick person drink 5. or 6. spoonefulls every day; but if it be taken, and
used often before infection, it will preserve one from the Plague a long space
after, Probatum est.

A sovereign Drink for any infected person.
TAke a piece of fine Gold, or the leaves of pure beaten G^ld, and put it into
the juice of Lemmons and let it (...) therein for the space of 24. hours, then
take the same juice, and put to it a little powder of Angelica Roots, and then
mingle them with white Wine, and let the patient drink a good draught thereof.

This is a most precious drink, and it is greatly to be wondered at, what help
and remedy some that have used this drink have had thereby, although it has
been supposed by many learned Physicians, that the sick persons were past all
hope of remedy: yet by Gods providence they have recovered again.

Another good drink to be taken, either before or after Infection.
TAke Betony water and Scabious water, of each of them a good quantity, and a
good quantity of fine Triacle, and temper them well together, and let the
patient drink it, and it will expel the venom or poison cleave forth.
Probatum est.

Another good drink for one being infected.
TAke Cardus Benedictus and distill it, and Centorie, and distill it likewise,
and mingle the two waters together, and let the sick person drink a good
draught thereof with Triacle^ and it will do him marvelous much good.

An excellent good drink for the Plague, if it be taken in time.
TAke a dram of Methridatum, and give it the patient with Dragon water, White
Wine, or other liquor, to drink when he supposes himself infected first.

An excellent good Poultesse to ripen and bring forth the sore.
TAke a white Onion, and cut it in pieces, and three ounces of Butter that is
clean without salt, and the weight of 20. pence of ^eauen, and a little
Otemeale small beaten, then boil these together with a little new Milk, or
else Water, and make a Poultesse thereof, and lay it very warm to the sore,
and it will ripen it suddenly. Probatum est.

Another for the same.
IF the Botch happen to appear, then take a good quantity of Elder leaves,
Red Bramble leaves, and Musta^dseed* an^ stamp them well together, and make a
Plaster thereof and apply it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the venom
and corruption.

Another of the same.
TAke a handful of Smalladge, or Louage, if you can get it, and two handfulls
of Valerian, and two or three roots of Dane-wo^t and seethe them all in fair
running Water, and fresh ^ut^er, and put thereto a few crumbs of wheaten B^ead,
and make a Poultesse thereof, and lay it warm to the sore, and so let it
remain there until it break.

Anothe experienced Medicine for the Plague.
TAke a Cock, a Chicken, or a ^ull^t, and pull all the Feathers clea^^ of the
tail, so that the Rumpe may be bare, and then hold the Rumpe or bare place to
the sore, and immediately you shall see the Cock, Chicken or Pullet gape, and
labor for life, and in the end it will dye: Then take another Cock, Chicken,
or Pullet again and do the like, and if the same die likewise, then take
another, and so do as aforesaid, and let the party grieved be applied
therewith as aforesaid, as long as any of them do die.

Another excellent good Plaster to draw the sore.
TAke Camomill flowers and Mallow leaves, of each of them an handful, and cut
the Mallow leaves and the Camomill Flowers very small and boyl^ them in fair
running Water (but let the water be more then an inch above the herbs) and
let them boil until the water be almost consumed: Then put therein 2. ounces
of Lynseede, beaten t^ fine powder d^. an handful of Wheaten How, 2. ounces
of Oil of Roses, and 3. or 4. ounces of Swines Grease, (the scum being taken
away) and temper them well together, and then set them over a soft fire,
without any smoke,, and stir them very well with a stick, and so let them
boil together, until you perceive the water be quite consumed: Then take them
off the fire and beat them well together in a Mortar, until you see them well
incorporated together, and in feeling to be smoothe and not rough: Then take a
parsell thereof, and heat it either in a Porrenger, or else in some Earthen
dish upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, and then spread it thick upon a fine
linen cloth, or else upon a piece of Leather, and so apply it to the sore, and
this will draw it according to your own desire. Probatum est.

Another of the same.
TAke a new Loaf of Bread, and lay it to the fore as (...) may possibly be
suffered, as it comes forth of the O^^ and afterward let it be bur^t or else
buried in the Earth, (...) else take leaves of Scabious or So^rell roasted, or
else 2. or 3. Lill^ roots roasted under the embers, and applied to the (...)
all these are good to ripen the sore.

A very good Plaster to draw the Plague sore to a head* and to break it.
TAke 2. handfuls of Mallows, 1. handful of Lins^ed, a h^^^full of sour Dow,
and 2. or 3. Lilly roots, and stamp^^ these together very small, and boil
them in a quart of W^^ Lees, until it be thick, then lay it on inch thick or
more ^^on a piece of Leather, that is somewhat broader then the (...) and let
the borders of the Leather be plaistred with sh^^kers wax, and that will cause
it to clean fast, and this (...) bring forth the Botch, and break it in a
very short space. This has been truly proved.

Another Plaster to draw the sore.
TAke a spoonefull of Hunny, 2. or 3. spoonfu^ls of the i^yce of Spurge, a
spoonefull of Turpentine, and a good quantity of wheaten Hour, and temper
them well together without (...) fire, and make thereof a Plaster, and lay it
to the sore, and (...) the end of every 14. hours renew the Plaster, and this
(...) draw it wonderful much.

Another for the same.
TAke 2. handfulls of Scabious, and stamp it in a Mor^^^ then temper it well
with two ounces of Swines g^ease, (...) is salted, and the Yolke of an Egg,
then stamp them al^^^^ther, and it will draw it exceeding well.

FINIS.

