CERTAIN GODLY and very profitable Sermons, of Faith, Hope, and Charity.

First set forth by Master Barnardine Occhine, of Siena in Italy, and now
lately collected, and translated out of the Italian tongue, into the English,
by William Phiston of London Student.

Published for the profit of such as desire to understand the truth of the
Gospel.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR E^ VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE printer's device of Thomas
East

Jmprinted at London by Thomas East. 1580.

TO THE FAMOVS and most reverend Father in God, Edmond by the permission of
God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate, and Metropolitan of all England.
ARTAXERXES king of Persia, (right reverend and worthy) as Plutarch writing of
the ancient and notable sayings of kings, Princes, and Capitaines, does
witness, esteemed so highly the good will of those that did freely offer him
presents in token of their obedience and duetifull love, that at a certain
time, when a poor man, who lived by the sweat of his brows, and had nothing
otherwise to present him withal, offered him water which he took up out of
the river with his hands, he received the same of him ioyously, and with a
smiling countenance, measuring the gift according to the zealous intent of the
giver, and not after the value of the gift or present offered. Even so I with
the said poor man, which am neither endued with any of Croesus riches, Platoes
skill, nor Tullies eloquence, am bold (yet presuming upon your good graces like
cleme^cie) who deem it, I doubt not, no less part of magnanimity and
heroical virtue, to accept lovingly small presents, then to give great, to
offer unto you this simple present: craving, that albeit on my part I deserve
none or very small praise, who have but only collected out of other the Sermons
of Barnardine Occhine, these certain of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and
translated them out of the Italian, into our maternall tongue: yet that for the
works sake, both because that of the said argument, there is none other, or
those very rare works extant before this, and also because that in these said
Sermons, is very largely, excellently, and learnedly entreated of the three
special points of true Christianity, which is the very sum of pure and
perfect godliness, your L. would not deny to take on you the Patronage
thereoff. Concerning the foresaid author of these said Sermons, I will say
little: Only this is reported of him, that in his latter years (how so ever it
fell so out I wot not) but he by his fall declared manifestly what and how
vehement the frailty of human nature is, and how prone we be to decline
from God and his truth, and to fall headlong into the snares of Satan, if we
be left unto our selves never so little: but yet certain it is, that once he
was zealous, both in preaching and writing, and many of the works by him
written, do declare that he was nothing inferior in learning, yea, I might
say, in perfect judgment, unto the best in his time, I pray God, that his
fall may serve for a spur to all such as shall read or hear of him, to
warn them, that they neglect not the grace of GOD being offered. As for the
translating heereoff, I did not rashly enterprise the same, without the advice
and instigation of such as be both learned and wise, who judged it as well as
I, a work worthy the publishing, and to be requisite and necessary. Thus
trusting that your gracious Lordships will vouchsafe the reading of these said
Sermons, with patience if therein chance to be any faults escaped either by
the Printer, or by me the Translator, and will accept the same friendly,
according to your notable and mild vertuousnesse, I wish unto your worthiness
condign beatitude, and eternal glory in the life to come.

Your Graces most humble and obedient, to command, William Phiston.

That as of the light which men have of God grows all their goodness, so of
being blind of his so great goodness, comes all their infelicitie and
evil. Sermon. 1.
THere is no body that sins in that he respects the evil. And this,
inasmuch as sin is so filthy that it can-not entise, move, nor draw unto it
the will which has objected unto it goodness, and is moved only thereby.
Therefore like as if virtue were showed us in his proper being, the beauty of
it would draw us to the love thereof, and of necessity we should go unto
it, so if vice were discovered unto us naked in his filthiness, we would fly
from it: but as virtue, by being possessed of the unworthy, albeit it is in it
self rich, merry, happy, glorious and worthy, yet putting on a visar or
masking garment ^t appears unto carnal eyes altogether contrary, so vice by
being received of the world, although in it self is foul, poor, abiected
and miserable, yet unto carnal eyes it appears all the contrary: And that
because it puts on a visar and merry Mas king garment, being clothed with
delycate and precious apparel, and with a rich Crown upon the head,
adorning it self wholly with beautiful joy: in such sort that the carnal
people, not pearcing with their sight into the foul panch thereof, are moved
to go unto wickedness, by the outward light, and glistering of those his
exterior and dissimuled goodness. Therefore every one that goes unto
wickedness, goes under a shadow, a covering, a form and image of goodness. As
is seen by experyence, in the purpose of thieves, which be moved to rob, not
because of the hurt that they desire to do unto their neighbor, but for their
own proper gain, which seems to them to be good. Also if they kill men,
after that they have robbed them, it is not, but because they fear to be by
them bewrayed and so to loose their life, and therefore they are moved to kill,
chiefelye for the sauegard of their own life, which shows unto them a form
of goodness, and not for a desire of the others death.

Also if one kill himself, he does it, for that he thinks, by dying to
be no more so miserable: death then seems unto him to be easyer then life,
there-fore he chooses it under an image of goodness: But if he saw the
heart of the devil, in seeking our dampnation, he should see that he
deceives him, by procuring him under a form of goodness.

All errors there-fore and vices, even the venomous hatreds which are found
in the wicked, do grow of that pestilent spring the cause of all evil, (that
is) of the disordinate love which men bear toward themselves, to their
kinsfolks, to worldly honor, to apparel and other benefits of this present
life, through the loss and damage whereof they are moved to hate those which
have done them injury.

The will therefore can-not be moved to work but thorough a true and
substantial good thing, as in those which be Godly, or else by a false and
outward apparent goodness, as it is in the wicked.

And there-fore we must of necessity say, that there is none so ungodly
which is moved to sin except sin does show it self to him under a
visarre or image of goodness. If then the wicked do sin, it is not because
they absolutely will do evil, but as those in whom self love does reign,
they are moved to sin, not by that wickedness which is in them selves, but
by some their proper vtilytie, profit, satisfaction, contentation, pleasure,
honor, or Glory. All those there-fore which go unto vice, go being drawn,
not by any other their own wickedness, but for their own commodity.
Moreover it is to wit, that the way of virtue is rich, joyful, delectable,
merry, quiet, restfull, safe, fair, honest, and happy, and the way of vice is
poor, miserable, unquiet, dangerous, foul and unfortunate, full of pr^^kes,
suspicyous, doubtefull, grieved with torme^^es and pains of hell, so that if
men had judgment i^ themselves, they would forsake the way of wickedness,
and choose the way of virtue, if they had the lig^^ of the truth, and did see
at least but only the sensual pleasures and displeasures which are found in
the way of vices and the way of virtue. As if the Epi^^^^ saw this, which
esteem the end and chiefest of h^^ felycitie to consist in voluptuous
pleasure, yet bicau^^ he might taste his meat with more sensuality, he would
not eat but as much as should suffice, and when he were hungry, and that for
because in eating so sparinglye he should find greater taste and pleasure:
which thing would force him also to be likewise temperate in all other his
actions, because he might live in the greater delight. Now if an Epicure
moved by a sensual pleasure of virtue and displeasure of vice, as that he
being most carnal seeks to leave the extremity of vices, and to walk by a
mediocritie of virtues, what think thou will be done? If a man, and that a
Christian, should be drawn, not only by sensual pleasures and health of
body, but by the beauty and comeliness of Virtue, by contentacion of the
mind, by traunquillitie of the soul, and by the chiefest felicity both of
this present life and of the life to come, yea and by that very truth,
infinite and eternal bountifulness of GOD, and by his glory: and on the
other part they have been blind and ignorant, not only by their sensual
sorrows which do accompany vice, but also by their fowlenesse, by their
doubtful cares, insatiable desires, vain hopes, griefs, fears suspicions,
displeasures, infamyes, dishonours, reproves, losses, prickings, torments,
vexations, and infernal miseries, the which be found in the ways of
wickedness, and much more in the end, but especially if they have had in
horror the dishonor of God. Seeing then, that only the ways of true virtues
are profitable for the chiefest felycitie, and are in themselves most blessed,
yea and the ways of false, human, and carnal virtues are less miserable
then the ways of vices, we must needs say that all vices do grow of
ignorance, the spring and root of all errors and euilles. So that of a truth
so much miserable a man is, as he is gluttonous, lecherous, covetous, envious,
ambitious, proud, partial, or a servant of other vices: and so much is a man
happy, as he is adorned with true virtues, neither can the saints of God, in
what state soever they be found, be rightly called miserable, as neither the
wicked can be called happy, although the blind, foolish, frantike, false,
lying, and miserable world says, and judges the contrary. As also in judging
the wise naught, and fools good, it is deceived, for it must needs be, that
a man in as much as he is good, in so much he must in deed be wise, and as he
is naught, so much he is a fool, blind, and full of pernicyous ignorance. As
there-fore felicity can-not be without virtue, nor virtue without light and
wisdom, for that the one depends upon the other, and they are lynked
together in such sort, that the one cannot spring, grow, nor decrease without
the other, so also miserye cannot be without vice, nor vice without
ignorance. Then seeing that man is not moved to do any thing, by evil, but
by good only, the which good is not found but only of those which walk by
the ways of virtues, as also the evil is only found of those which walk
by the paths of vices, we must needs say, that they which leave virtue for
vice, sin through ignorance: whereof grow all sins, errors, miseryes, and
evils. And forasmuch as all ignoraunces hurtful unto the soul do spring of
the ignorance or want of the knowledge of God, as of their chief and
principal head, like as all our true and wholesome light does grow and has the
first beginning of the light which we have of God, therefore we must of
necessity say, that of the ignorance of God, grows all our evil, and all
our goodness comes of that clear light, which we have of his bounty.
Inasmuch as yt it is not possible, for us to have a lively and clear knowledge
of God, and to dishonor him, yea it must of necessity be, that we honor him
by all means that we possiblye can do, when we have a spiritual taste,
feelyng and light of this his goodness. Therefore as good fathers, above all
other things, desire and are delyghted, that their children do acknowledge the
great love that their fathers have borne unto them: even so the contrary does
highly displease them, knowing yt it is impossible, that their children should
perceive and taste the great bountifulness and love of their parents toward
them, and showed unto them by diverse means, and yet to offend them: yea, in
such a case it forces them to love them, obey them, trust in them, and honor
them by all means that they can; and so if the children of God have not the
light of their fathers bountifulness, they can not honor him, yea they shall
offend him without having due respect unto him. Now seeing God, above all
other things, requires of us that we know him, and is greatly displeased, when
we are blind of his so great goodness and love, showed to us by so many, and
exceeding means, and this, because that as of the knowledge of God grows all
our virtue, felycitie and goodness, so of the ignorance of that his so great
bounty grows all our viciousness, error, misery and evil. It is true
then, that as faith (inasmuch as it includes in it the knowledge of God) is
the cause of all goodness, so infidelity (inasmuch as it includes the
ignorance of God in it) is the cause of all evil. Let us therefore pray
dilygently unto God, that he would give us of his light, that we may render
unto him, all praise, honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

What Faith is and of the excellency thereof. Sermon. 2.
TO speak of Faith, forasmuch as it imports not only that confidence which
we have in God, but inasmuch as it includes also with that confidence the
very knowledge of God, Heb. 11.
whereon depends Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other Christian virtues. I
say that Faith (according to the judgment of Saint Paul) is a substance (that
is) a certain substanciall and sure possession of things promised which are
hoped for, and an evidence of things invisible, which cannot of us be
comprehnded, except we be exalted up above all that which our blind, and
human reason can do. Therefore, Faith is not (as many do think) a certain
obscure light of God, and a certain triflyng and frivolous opinion, but it is
an evident light, a certeintie and assurance of the mind, and a clear
shining, which being thy guide, thou see that God is so mighty, wise and
good, that he can, that he knows how, and that he will save thee. Therefore,
with a sure and steadfast confidence, thou do trust in him, repose and cast
thy self wholly upon him. Faith is a clear and effectual persuasion,
wrought, not in the bodilye ears, but in the ears of the heart, not by men,
but by the holy Ghost, where-by we are made certain and sure to be the sons
of God. It is a firm, Romans 8.
constant and perseuering trust in the bountifulness of God. It is not an
agreement brought to pass by humane reason, but a certainty more clear,
lofty, and high, then all other things of this present life. It is a light,
which lifts up, and rauisheth above all sensible things, and beyond that any
man is able to make discourse, to comprehend the breadthe, length, Ephesians. 3.
height and depth of those things which are to us incomprehensible with
natural eyes. It is a heavenly Ladder, with which men ascend to the knowledge
of the truth supernatural, whereunto no man can attain with the Ladder of
human reason. It is a clear eye of the mind, wherewith, pearcing thorough
the Heavens, we do see the divine secrets of God. Act. 5.
It is a quickening, clear and fierye light, which purges our hearts and
delyuereth us from the dark and inextricable Laborynthes of the vain shadows
of this world, by which we guide our blind reason, and are lyfted up to an
high estate, so that by the tasting of heavenly things we despise human
things. It is a spiritual wedding and matrimony between Christ and the Soul,
which being our Mediator, the soul is united and transformed in Christ, in
such perfect manner, that all that which it has becomes to be of Christ,
and so Christ with all his virtues, treasures and graces become to be of the
soul. It is a light so clear and high, that darkening others, it makes us
see riches in poverty, glory in confusion, safety in danger, peace in
persecution, rest in travail, felicity in miserye, and life in death.

He that believes, has a spiritual tasting of God, by means whereoff he
feels his divine goodness, in such sort, that it breeds in him a fervent
desire to honor GOD: and seeing that we can-not speak of him in such manner
as we ought, and as is convenient for him, we desire at least, with our own
blood to testify unto the world how great the goodness of God is. Faith
makes us conceive Christ spiritually, and by force of the spirit to be borne
again, with lifting us up unto God, Romans 4. Romans 5. Jacob. 1. 1. Pet. 1. Romans
5. Abac. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Cor. 1. Ephe. 6. 1. Joan. 3 Joan. 1. Joan. 17. Mat.
16. Genesis 4. Gen, 6. Genesis 21. Luc. 1. Luc. 2. 1. Joan. 3 Gal. 5.
it makes us put of the old Adam and his concupiscences, and to put on Christ
with his virtues, and to become of ungodly, just, temples of God, and his
children, brothers and members of Christ. Faith justifies, pacifieth the mind
and conscience, makes merry, causes to rejoice and in such sort, that we glory
even in shame This is such that it renueth us, regenerateth us, quickens,
makes noble, enricheth, saves sanctifies, preserves defends, obteineth
that which it demands. Faith knitteth us to God, makes us his heirs and
children, the brothers of Christ, and his members, yea, it makes us divine and
happy. Faith is that, which in Abel made him offer sacrifices acceptable to
God, in Noe, caused him to frame the Arc, for the sauegard of the world, made
Sara to conceive, and that Abraham offered his own son to God, caused Moises
to work so many wonders in Egypt, and in the Wilderness. Faith made the
Prophets to speak, loosed the tongue of Zacharias, and saved men in dangers,
made Simeon not to fear death, also made Paul to wish for it. This in the
Saints caused them (ouercomming the world) that they have wrought wonderful
things thorough love. But what need I speak any more, Faith is a virtue so
noble, excellent and worthy, that how much the more a man consider of it, so
much more will it discover the perfection, therefore he which has tasted it,
will never be satisfied with speaking in praise thereoff: Whereas those which
never have felt, nor tried it in themselves, can as much speak theroff, as one
that is blind can discern of colors, Cor. 2.
yea if those speak of it, as those which be carnal and brutish, they do not
understand it, nor know the excellency there-off.

Therefore they do not only pervert good works, whereoff this is the true
mother, but they persecute it, with speeches, which idle and lycentious persons
do use. But let us pray unto the Lord yt he would deliver them from those most
thick and palpable darkness, that having the true and lively light of God,
they may yield him all praise, honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Of the light of Faith. Sermon. 3.
THere be many which have never experienced in themselves, to have any other
but a purchased faith: the which, because it is bleare-eyed and blind from the
truth supernatural and revealed, and therefore they think, that the light of
Faith is small, and inferior to the light of humane and natural reason, and
moreover to the light of the Sun, and kindeled as of a little candle, so yt
according to their fantasy, not only the understanding does see better the
truth of the first natural principles of things, which be of themselves
evident, and with reason made manifest; but also that corporal eyes do better
see those things which are laid before them, then we do see (according to
their opinion) the things supernatural: with the light of Faith. It should of
necessity be therefore (as they do judge) that Faith is always suspicious
and doubtful, never clear, certain and evident, seeing that the light is so
imperfect. But they would not say so, if they had proved to have that Faith
inspired into them, which is supernatural, divine, full of light and clear,
which doubts not, but is sure, certain and firm: And of this therefore the
light is so great, that it overcomes all other lights in this present life.
Neither is any other light greater then this, saving the light of the blessed.
And that this is true is most evident: First, that the light of a true and
unfeigned Faith is above all the lights of worldly opinions, for that whereas
they have the authority of humane Historyes, this has authority of divine
Scriptures, whereas humane Faith has the testimony of men, and of their
universities of learning, divine Faith has the Prophets, the Apostles, Joan.
4. and. 8.
the Evangelists, the Martirs, the Saints, the Angels, the holy Church,
Christ, the holy Ghost, and God himself, for their testimony: the witness of
which is greater then of all others, and therefore whereas that Faith always
doubts, this is steadfast, clear and certain.

The light of a true Faith also is so clear, that it overcomes all natural
light of understanding, so that the wise of this world do not see with so great
clearenesse ye truth declared in the chief principles of their Sciences, as
the illuminate Christians do: the truth therefore revealed, and the articles
of faith, which humane reason can have, thorough the sin of their first
parents, is weak, feeble and blind, and the spirit in the regenerated, is
sound, strong, full of light and clear. Seeing then that, whereas the light of
humane reason is but natural and purchased, and therefore it is obscure,
blind and gross, insomuch that it tosseth about like a wallet about ones
neck. But the light of Faith, as that which is supernatural, inspired,
heavenly, most pure, clear, perfect and divine, lighteneth and pearceth
thorough the whole soul: They are therefore blind and in a very dark night,
to whom the clearenesse of the Gospel does not shine, 2. Pet. 1. Romans 13. 2.
Cor. 4 1. Pet. 2. Math. 1.
and we are (...) to yield God most high thanks, for that of his m^^re grace
we be called unto so wonderful light, which exceeds all yt any man is able to
express. As we see in Joseph, in whom natural reason persuaded yt Mary was
great with child by the force and power of man, and yet Faith prevailed in him
so with a greater light, that he believed that she had conceived by the holy
Ghost.

And further I say, that the light of Faith is so much greater then the light
natural, that as the Sun with the greatness of his light, when it is in our
Hemispherye darkeneth the light of the Stars, so does Faith darken all the
light of humane wisdom. The light of Faith is so high, and so supreme, that
it is comprehended with it self. And the same is so clear and mighty, that
wicked reason, and humane wisdom cannot contain it; but even as in the
morning when thou openest the windows of thine house, thou put out all the
candells, because that the Sun being then risen above our Horizon pearceth
with his bright beams and shines every where, so when Christ the Sun of
righteousness, with the beams of a clear Faith shall enter into our souls,
he shall quench in us and diminish, the light of humane wisdom: and then we
shall see, 1. Cor. 3.
that our knowledge is ignorance, and our wisdom foolishness. And that we
must needs say more: humane reason (as a thing that is blind) like unto a Bat
or Flinder-mouse, lies hidden in the dark crauyes of the creatures, whereas a
clear Faith is lifted up, pearceth thorough, and flies above all the heavens.

Humane reason sees but a very few things, Faith sees all things that be
necessary and profitable to salvation. Humane reason sees not, Joan. 15. and.
14.
but as it were thorough a thick glass window, and therefore vnperfectlye,
and Faith lifts up it self above all vain shadows of sensible things, and
sees the sincere, pure, and everlasting truth most perfectly.

Humane reason sees the out-warde accident^^ of things created, and storye of
the holy Scriptures, albeit imperfectly: and if it enter into the bowels
thereof, it is with a very obscure knowledge: that it may be easelye judged
how weak, feeble, dark and imperfecte, the opinion which it has conceived
of the material, sincere, and eternal truth is, whereas Faith with his clear
light, does not only pearce in to the very marrow of the holy Scriptures, Luc.
24.
but sees God and his secrets. Humane reason sees not, but only the things
that be of this present life, where-as Faith, having a far greater light
sees those things which be of the other life and a great way further off.
Humane reason has not the light of things passed, nor of things to come, but
by way of a feeble conjecture, where-as unto a divine Faith the things passed
and the things to come, be as certain as the things that be present.

And finally, where Faith shows us God with so clear a light, then for his
honor we leave gladlye all riches, plesures, dignity, glory, our own life,
and our selves, with yielding our selves to all vexations and torments for the
love of him, as we see in the Martirs. Humane reason, as a thing that has but
a little light of God, makes thee not to leave the world for the love of him:
well may it cause thee to leave one part of the world, for another, but not to
forsake it wholly for God. The Saints would not so had forsaken all things,
if they had not had a greater light and feeling of God, then of themselves and
all creatures. All the knowledge which worldly wise men have, depend upon
their thoughts: and for that love follows knowledge, therefore it does
necessarily follow also, that all their love depends on sensible things.

Being then that the foundation of humane creatures of all their love and
knowledge is of necessity such that forsaking the world, they forsake in
themselves al light love, judgment, reason, virtue and strength, whereas
invincible Faith, forasmuch as it is grounded only in God: in condempnations
and in torments, shows it self most clear, most constant and strong.

Likewise the things which we have objected before our eyes, we do not see with
such clearenesse, as with the eyes of faith we do see things, which are in the
other life. Also how much more the spirit that believes is noble and more
perfect of the bodily eye which sees, and how much the more God (to whom faith
has regard) is objected more perfect, mighty, steadfast, a present and dear
friend to the soul, which are things that can-not be seen with corporal
eyes. And further, how much the light of faith, Joan. 8.
and of Christ (the light of the world and the son of righteousness) is
more clear then the light of the sun: so much with more clearenesse and
certeintie is seen the truth revealed to them that have perfect faith, not
according as we see those things which are before our eyes, for the corporal
eye may be deceived, but so cannot the spiritual, in the faith be deceived, for
by the death of Christ all shadows and figures are taken away, with all vailes
and couerings, so that in Christ crucified we may plainly behold God, albeit
not with such a great clearenesse as his blessed Angels do. And what need I
speak any more: although the light of the Church triumphant is more clear
then the light of the Church Militant, 2. Cor. 3. Ephesians. 3.
yet (as Paul affirms) the Angels have had in some part light from the
Church Militant. There is nothing therefore seen in this present life, of so
great certainty and clearenesse, as the truth which God has revealed unto
us, by the which we have a lively, true and perfect faith. Thou will say, as
Paul says, faith is of things not appearing, things that are seen are not
believed, and so also not hoped for, therefore it cannot be seen with such
clearenesse and certainty, as the things which be present before our eyes.

I answer and say that it is true which is written: that is to say, that
Faith and likewise Hope, are of things not appearing, and of things which
are not seen with corporal eyes, nor with human reason, nor yet in such
sort as they are seen of the blessed: nevertheless Faith and also Hope, are
of things appearing to the spiritual eyes of Faith whereby the truth
revealed is seen with greater light, and with a greater certainty is hoped
for, then the things of this world. Therefore Paul, albeit he was in fruition
of this present life, yet as being certain of his salvation and of the
salvation of all the elect, and already thorough Hope in possession of heaven,
said not, we shall be saved, but we are made safe thorough Hope. Romans 8.
The light there-fore of Faith dimmeth all other lights of this present life,
Faith doubts not, if it be perfect, yea it is firm, steadfast, safe and sure.
Thou will say, but we see in some respects the contrary by experience, that
where as spiritual men do often doubt of things supernatural, the carnal
doubt not, but are clear, sure and certain of things natural: as to know
the Eclipse of the Moon and likewise the Sun, and how the Rubarbe does
purge his choler, and the truth of other such like things, also they are
sure without doubting of those things which they have before their eyes. It
might therefore be said, that the light of Faith is lesser, and therefore
wavering, or that it is true that in this world we have no true Faith.

I answer and say, that as the light of the Sun dimmeth the light of a
little canndle when it burns, so the light of Faith does by other lights of
this present life: and yet notwithstanding as if one were in a dark prison,
where as the Sun does not enter with his light, but only by one little loope
hoole he should better see with a candle being lightened, the things that
were in the prison, then they could see those things that be abroad with so
little a light of the Sun: even so the soul which is enclosed in the body,
and in this world is as in a prison, although it often times sees better with
the light of the Sun and of carnal reason the things of this present life,
then those things of the other life with the light of Faith, it is not for
because that the light of Faith is not far greater then other lights, but it
is because we have but a little light of Faith and great stoare of worldly
light: but if we had as much light of Faith, as we have of the light of the
Sun and of humane wisdom, we would not doubt.

Therefore, when we do make judgment of natural things, and of those things
which we have before our eyes, we doubt not, because we have nothing to
gainsay us: but when we be lifted up to secreat things supernatural, by and by
human wisdom exalts it self in us, where unto, for as much as it is
connaturall together with us, we do give great credit, and then it begins
with reasons to gainesay Faith, wherefore it is no great marvel if we
oftentimes doubt.

But to conclude, as Charity is in it self more perfect, then all worldly
loves, so the light of Faith is more clear then all the lights of this
present life.

It is also true, that, as to that blind man, Mark. 8.
to whom Christ gave sight, at the first, men seemed to him like trees: and
that not for defecte of light, but thorough the ill disposition of the member:
So when GOD does begin to give us of his light, and to open the treasures of
his divine secreates unto us, yet oftentimes we do not see plainlye the
truth, not for defecte of the light of Faith, but because the eye of the mind
being turmoyled also with worldly things, is not in order to see the sincere
and pure truth of God. The light then of Faith is greater then all other
lights of this present life, yea without it we be in darkness, and when we
begin to believe, then God opens unto us the Heavens, with revealing to us
his divine secreates (as it appears by Christ when he was baptized) and
shows us the truth with this so clear light, Matthew. 3
that they that have a true and perfect faith do not care for any other human
reason, nor miracles. Gal. 1.
Also with Paul they seek not to be better clarified, to compare their Faith
with the Saints, and all is thorough the great inward light which they have.
Seeing then that the light of Faith is so clear and great, let us pray unto the
Lord that he would give it us, so that seeing his goodness, we may give him
al praise honor and glory, thorough Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

What things a Christian is bound to believe. Sermon. 4.
THe first and chiefest sum of things necessary for a Christian man to
believe, consists first in that he believes in God. It is not needful for
thy salvation that thou comprehend God as he comprehends himself. Neither
need thou so to see him in thy self in this present life, as the Angels
do. Mat. 13.
But it is needful that thou believe in God. Therefore it is not sufficient
for thee to say the Creed as if it were an Oration, nor yet does it suffice
for thy justification, that without Faith thou make confession of all that is
contained in the said Creed: but thou must believe. Neither suffices it to
have a certain human, barren, Romans 10.
idle, cold, dead and purchased opinion of those things which be of God: but
we must have a Faith inspired, and a supernatural light, and therefore we must
first, believe in God. Here we may see how that Faith is most full of light,
for where as human reason begins below at sensible things, and thereby
is forced to lift up it self unto those things that may be understood,
Faith, contrariwise, begins on high, at God, and then descends to things
below. But understand, that it is not enough to have a certain dead opinion
of God, that he is, and that he is God, as every body has: but thou must
believe lively, not only that he is God in himself, but that he is thy God.
Which will cause, that with the spirit thou shall at all times feel him, and
that he does thee so great a goodness with his continual benefits, as cannot
be done but of God, whereof it grows, that thou trust in him, love him, and
give him thanks, committest thy self to his government and order, al thy life
to his honor and glory, and as of him thou feel al ye good things thou
have, to come, so to him alone thou do render all thanks, thou accountest
him to be the first beginning and the last end, and therefore to be God. Thou
must also lively believe, not only that he is the father of Christ, and of the
elect, which thorough Jesus Christ are adopted for to be the sons of God,
but that he is thy father: Ephesians. 1 Romans 8 Gal. 4.
and that thou art one of the elect and sons of God, and an heir, a brother
of Christ and coheire with him. Thou must feel with the spirit that God is thy
best father, and that as a most dear father he loves thee most perfectly, and
has a great care of thee. Consider now a little, how much thou love him,
and with what safety thou go unto him for favor, with Hope to obtain it,
and with how great quietness, peace and reast of mind, soul and conscience,
thou live under his protection, if with a lively Faith thou believe that in
truth he is thy father, and that all the creatures together that be, cannot
pluck of one hair from thy head without his will. It is necessary also to
believe yt he is almighty, so that not only the world depends upon him, but
that he has all creatures in his power, and can dispose of them according to
his pleasure, that he can bring the world to nothing, and prolong it into
everlasting, if he will, neither is there any that can withstand his will: we
must also believe that this omnipotency of God is not idle, but that he uses
it, and that every day, so that it never sleeps, but always works, as
Christ said. Joan. ^.
We must believe that it is ever watching, strong and laborious. It works in all creatures, and without it nothing is done.

And further it is needful that lively, and with thy spirit thou believe
that this almightines belongs to thee, and that thou feel that God does
use the same every day with thee, in giving thee all the good things that thou
have. Wherefore they be greatly deceived which do not acknowledge al to be of
God, but to come by chance, Fortune, Nature, of the Heavens, of Men, Angels,
or Devils.

Moreover we ought to believe that he is ye creator of heaven and of earth
(that is) of all creatures both celestial and terrestrial, those that he has
created, them he preserves, governs, orders and guydeth to the end, and
all with his high and infinite wisdom. It is not sufficient that of
necessity thou lively beleeuest, how that God not only has given thee thy
being and so to all other creatures, but that he preserves, guydeth governs
and orders all to thy benefit, with great wisdom.

Thou must also lively believe, not only that GOD is God in himself and
therefore most perfect, but that he is thy God, and such a father, that he will
do to thee all good things which be possible and convenient to be done, Mat.
1.
that he is thy best father, because he is omnipotent, and that he knows how,
because he is infinitely wise, as we see in his creation and governance of the
world.

Thou must also believe in Jesus. Jesus is the proper name of Christ, Romans 14
given unto him thorough the will of God by the Angel, and does signify a
Savior. Therefore thou shall then believe truly in Jesus, when with thy
spirit thou shall feel that he has saved thee.

1. Tim. 2 Heb. 9.
It is also necessary, not only to believe in Jesus, but in Jesus Christ.
Christ is to say anointed. And for because in old time they anointed high
Priests, Kings and Prophets, therefore Christ being sent into the world from
the father, to do the office of a high Prophet, Priest, and King, has also
been ordained and anointed with a spiritual unction, filling a tun full of
his gifts and graces, for as much as he was the chiefest Prophet, Priest and
King, and has done the office of every of them most perfectlye, there-fore
he is called Christ.

We must then believe in Christ, Heb. 9.
that is in Jesus Christ, that he is the high Priest, undefiled and holy, and
that he has done the office of the chief and most perfect Priest. Moreover
that as an only mediator betwixt God and us, has offered up himself upon
the cross to the father for the elect, 1. Tim. 2. Heb. 9.
and that he is accepted of GOD for such a divine sacrifice, that he pacifyeth
his anger, and reconcyleth him unto them. That he stands also for their sakes
before the father, and having compassion, prays for them, and obtains them
all grace and favor: Hier. 47 Romans 8. Joan. 11.
and that he offers them unto GOD unspotted and holy, by being washed with
his precious blood, and that he enrycheth thee with his gifts and graces.

Thou must also believe, that in as much as he is Christ the chief Prophet.
Therefore he came into the world, sent from the father, to make manifest unto
his elect all the will of God, for to teach, Isaiae. 45 Joan. 15. Heb. 8.
and to imprint in their hearts all things profitable and necessary to their
salvation. Wherefore as the only master and light of the world which making
all things manifest, he has fulfilled the Prophets. Thou must also believe
that he is a King, Mat. 23. Joan. 8. Mat. 11.
because that with his spirit he moves, reigns over and governs the
elect, which be given him of God, there-fore he is a King, in the spiritual
kingdom of GOD, which is righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

It is not sufficyent that thou believe that Jesus is Christ, the chief
Prophet, Priest and king of the elect, Romans 14
but also thou must lively believe that he is thy Christ, that is, the chiefest
Prophet Priest and king over thee.

And so if with thy spirit thou shall feel that he has lightened thy mind
with divine things, he shall be thy Prophet.

Also if thou shall feel that for thy sake he has offered himself upon the
Cross, that he has pacyfied the father, that he prays for thee, that he is
heard, that he presents thee unto God, and that thorough him God does accept
thee for his son, then he shall be thy high Priest. And likewise if with a
lively Faith thou shall believe that he has taken charge of thee, and that he
inspireth thee, moves and governs thee, thou shall have him for thy king.

Thou shall there-fore truly believe in Christ, when with thy spirit thou
shall feel, that he illuminateth thee as a prophet, governs thee as a King,
and as an high Priest pacyfieth the wrath of God for thee, and reconcyleth him,
offers thee to the father acceptable, holy and unspotted. Thou must also
believe, that Jesus Christ is the only son of God, we also be other sons
of God, but it is by adoption: for that God by the means of Christ, of
strangers, yea of his enemies, has thorough grace adopted and taken us for
his sons. But Christ was never any enemy to God nor stranger, but was
always full of light, Joan. 1. Coll. 1. Coll. 2. Joan. 1.
of perfection, virtue, treasures, gifts and graces, full of the spirit and
of divinity, he is a spring that ever flows, and all the graces which the
elect have, they receive of his fullness, therefore in the holy Scriptures he
is not only called the first begotten son, Romans 8. Joan. 13. 1. Joan. 4.
but also the only begotten son of God: for because that GOD has
communicated unto him all graces, all virtues, gifts and treasures, as though
he had no other sons but him: he has also communicated with him all his
divinity, with his divine prefection.

Therefore thou must not only believe, that he is the only son of God, but
that he is God. Coll. 2.
Thou shall then even lively believe, that he is the only son of God, when
thou shall feel that thou by his means and not by any other, have received
all those graces and good things that thou have. It is also needful to
believe, that he is our Lord, for that, as it is written, Joan. 17.
God has given us unto Christ, all the elect are his flock, he may order
them, as him lists. Mat. 28.
The Father has given him all power in heaven and in earth. Then he which
truly believes that Christ is his Lord and head, which feeling with his
spirit, his most full and total dominion, which renouncing to lean to his
own carnal wisdom, to his own strength, and all other virtues that be in
any creature, is wholly committed to the governance of Christ, as of his
lawful and best Lord. And moreover we must believe, that he was conceived in
the Virgin Mary, by a wonderful operation of the holy Ghost. First that he
was conceived of the substance of the Virgin Mary, and therefore that he was
very man of the seed of David and of Abraham, as had been prophesied before
time: Psalm. 131. Genesis 22. Heb. 2.
also according to Saint Paul it was convenient, that taking in hand to
sanctify his brethren, he should become man like unto them, and of the same
first father descended, and so might suffer, and for obedience of his father,
might be offered upon the Cross for their sins: to the intent that as by
the disobedience of one man, we be made sinners, Philip. 2
so by the obedience of one man we should be made righteous.

But forasmuch as he which sanctifies others, must of necessity be without
spot: therefore, to the intent he might not be subject to the universal
corruption of humane generation, but full of purity and holiness, it must
needs be, that he was conceived, not naturally and by humane means, but
meruaylously, and by the operation of the holy Ghost.

Thou must also believe, that he was borne of the Virgin Mary, for except thou
believe this, thou can not believe the miracles which he did in this life,
nor that he dyed upon the cross. Thou must furthermore necessarily believe,
that he suffered under Pontius Pilate.

If thou here demand why there is no mention made of the life of Christ, and
wherefore it is not said in the Creed, that we must believe, that the wise men
came to worship him, that he was circumcised, that he fled into Egypt, that he
was lost and found again in the Temple, that he was baptized of Saint Ihon,
that he fasted forty days and forty nights, that he called the Apostles,
that he preached, wrought miracles, and likewise of all his other wonderful
works. I will answer that in the Creed, there is no mention made, but only
of those principal things which belong properly to the substance of our
salvation, the faith of the which is substantial and sufficient to a true
Christian.

It also thou would know wherefore Pontius Pilate is so named: I will say
that this was not only to confirm the history of the passion of Christ, but
much more that we should believe lively, that albeit he was innocent, yet he
with our sins, thorough the will of his father being attributed unto him,
appeared before the judgment seat of man, whereas, like a wicked doer, he was
willing to be condemned, that we thorough Christ as innocent, might appear
safe before the Tribunal seat of God, in whose sight we were blame worthy.

It is also necessary to believe yt he was crucified and dead. It is not enough
to say, dead, but neede-full to declare the manner of his death, because we
might believe that he dyed upon the Cross, and this (as Saint Paul judges)
was, for that he was accursed which hanged on the Cross, and Christ for to
deliver us from curses, wherein we were thorough sin incorporated, chose that
cursed death, and for our sakes overcame it, and so delyuereth us from his
curse, yea and from death it self, inasmuch as to the Elect, thorough Christ
there is no more death, but life.

There be many wicked or false Christians which have a certain dead opinion
of all these things, yea and the Devils believe that he suffered, that he was
crucified and dead. But that suffices not, for thou must believe lively, and
feel with thy spirit that he suffered for thee, that he was crucified and
dyed for thee, to thy benifite, and for thy salvation. Thou must feel with the
spirit his passion and death, his great love, and the fruit of his death,
that is, that thou art saved there-by, and then his death has effect in thee.

It is needful also, that as thou believe truly that he dyed, so that thou
believe that he was buried. It follows immediately, that he descended into
Hell, and for because these words be not found in the Creed written by the old
Doctors, therefore some have thought, that they were afterward added to declare
and make more manifest the words that go before.

And because in the holy Scriptures, Genesis 43. Number. 16
this name Inferno is taken for a Pit or Sepulcher, and this name Geenna for
the place of the dampened, they have expounded thus, Descese a gl' inferi, that
is, he was laid in in the grave: but the matter it self does make replye,
here against. Seeing that both Paul and also Peter willing to prove the
resurrection of Christ, brought a saying out of the Psalm.

Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, Act. 2. and. 13. Psalm. 15.
neither shall thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Where David makes
mention of the soul and of the body, and therefore the soul of Christ was
never in the grave in those three days the which he continued dead, wherefore
by this word Inferno cannot be understood the grave.

Others say, that Christ upon the Cross did not only suffer the pains of
death, the which consist in separation of the soul from the body, but also
that he suffered in his mind, the tormenting of the dampened, because that for
to satisfy for our sins, it was needeful that he should suffer all punishment,
that was due unto us, and being in these torments, he felt that horrible
anguish and sorrow, which he should have felt, if being upon the cross in all
those torments of the dampened, he had been utterly abandoned from his father.
Mat. 16. Act. 2
And therefore he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? not because
he despayred, but he overcame desperation with all the sins, and likewise death
with all sorrows: but he felt the pain of the desperate, without having in
him any fault.

They do thus expound it, He descended into Hell, that is into the
bottomless pit of the torments of Hell. And although this was before that he
was buried and dead, and therefore should be said by order thus, He suffered
under Pontius Pilate, he was crucified, descended into Hell, dyed and was
buried, yet there is oftentimes used in the holy Scriptures to speak first of
that which was done afterward. It cannot be said that the soul of Christ
separated from the body descended into hell, that is, suffered torments there
those three days: for that Christ said contrariwise unto the good Thief. Luc.
25.
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Other say, that he descended into Hell, inasmuch as he showed his Soul unto
the Spirits of his Elect, already departed out of this present life, unto whom
(as Saint Peter says) he preached the Gospel, 1. Pet. 4.
inasmuch as he made them see, in a most clear sort, that which he had wrought
and suffered for their salvation. He preached also unto the dampened the
Gospel, with rebuking their incredulytie and that they were altogether
inexcusable, and so their condempnation should appear unto the world to be
just.

It is needful also to believe lively, that he rose again the third day,
which when with thy spirit thou shall feel, Romans 4. and. 6.
thou shall not fear death, seeing that in Christ, and thorough Christ death
is overcome, yea if thou be grafted in Christ thorough Faith, Col. 3.
thou shall in the spirit be raised again from sin, and being righteous,
shall walk in newness of life, seeking and tasting only the things which are
above.

We must also believe that he ascended into Heaven, having on earth wrought and
suffered all that his father appointed him, and that was expedient for our
salvation: it was convenient that he should ascend into heaven, for our
profit, to give us hope of our heavenly country, seeing that he is entered in
possession for us, Heb. 9. 1. Joan. 2.
for to stand also before the father for his Elect, and to be their Advocate
and Intercessour, remaining therefore with them in spirit upon earth. Mat. 28
But understand it is needful that thou lively believe that he is ascended
into heaven for thy benefit: which when thou feel with the spirit lifting
thee up to things on high, Philip. 3
thou will say with Paul: My conversation is in Heaven.

Moreover thou must believe, that he sits on the right hand of his father,
Mat. 28.
in-asmuch as he has given him all dominion and lordship over all, and has
ordained him to be above all princedome, power, virtue and domination, and has
given him a name above all other names, has made him the head of the Church,
and has subdued all things under him.

Thou must also believe lively, Ephesians. 1.
that as he was seen ascend into heaven, so he shall come visibly from heaven,
to judge the quick and the dead: And if it be said (according to Saint Paul)
it is decreed that men must dye, Act 2. 1. The. 4 Heb. 9. 1. Cor. 15.
how then shall he come to judge the quick? Paul himself does answer, that
those which then shall be alive, shall sodeinely be changed, being made of
corruptible incorruptible, and that change shall be unto them as a death.

If then thou shall lively believe, that Christ which loved thee so much that
he dyed for thee on the Cross, and has all power, which must also be thy
Judge, thou shall be sure and safe thorough Faith, that his Judgment shall be
favorable unto thee. Chiefly learn, that Christ shall be our Judge, he is not
only our Advocate, but has taken upon him our cause.

We must more-ouer believe in the Holy Ghost, and this because, albeit Christ
dyed for us, rose again, ascended into Heaven, was our Advocate and prayed for
us, yet we could not be saved, if God with his holy Spirit did not open our
hearts, made us to understand and be partakers of these so great benefits
thorough Christ done to us. So that as thorough Christ all gifts and graces
be offered us from GOD, so the Holy Ghost being our guide, we do receceiue
them.

It is therefore needful that thou feel lively in thee this spirit of God,
which renueth thee, lighteneth, moves, inspireth, imprinteth, and makes thee
feel God in Christ and that thou art safe. It is not possible that thou
should be a true Christian, if thou have not the Holy Ghost in thee.

And therefore he which believes that Christ dyed, and that not vainly,
believes also that there be fruits of his passion and death which is the
salvation of the Elect: Wherefore we must also believe, that there is a holy
Catholic Church, that is the universal Congregation of the faithful and
Elect of God.

It is not enough to believe that there is found a Church which is holy and
sanctified thorough Christ, that, Ephesians. 5.
is a mystical body of the Elect: but it is needful that thou do lively
believe and feel, that thou art a portion and member of the same, and that
thou art one of the Elect.

Thou must also believe the Communion of Saints, that is, thou must lively
feel that thou art pertaker, together with thy brethren of all the gifts and
graces of Christ the head of the Church: Ephesians. 1.
therefore more or less according to the measure of Faith, rejoice thy self in
their prosperity, and be sorry in their mishappe as members and good brothers
do together, and forasmuch as the benefits which Christ does to his Church,
is not that they should be proper to one man alone, but for the commodity of
them all, therefore thou ought not to seek for to possess or use any
thing for thine own lucre, but for the honor of God and safegarde of thy
neighbor, and so thou ought to this same end or purpose procure the
safety of thy brethren, and with Faith to embrace, not only them and all
that they possess, but also Christ with all his divine treasures: because Love
makes all things common. Now if with thy spirit thou shall feel this, thou
shall then believe the communion of Saints.

Thou must believe the remission of sins, that is, not only that God, of his
mere lyberalytie and gracious goodness, thorough Christ crucified, which has
made satisfaction for us, pardons the sins of his Elect, but it is
needful for thee to believe, and with the spirit lively to feel, that he
has pardoned thee.

Then will the Gospel laugh upon thee; and show it self amiable, and thou
shall feel in Christ the great goodness of God.

It is needful also to believe liuelye the resurrection of the flesh, which
if it were so, we would not account this world for our country, we would not
set our love upon it, we would not fear death, and with hope of the other
life, without grounding our selves in prosperity, and without retyring, or
tourning back in adversity, we would joyfully run to our heavenly country.

And lastly, it is needful for us to believe everlasting life, that is, that
the Elect shall be happy and shall live for ever, and it is needful for thee
with the spirit to feel that thou art one of them, and if thou will say unto
me, why is it not said that we should also believe the everlasting death of the
dampened? I answer that here is not spoken but only of those things which
must with a lively Faith be believed, and felt with the spirit, and this lively
Faith and feeling is not but in the Elect, and the Elect can-not lively believe
nor feel in themselves any thing, but those benefits which God has promised
them, whereof the holy Ghost speaks unto them, and witnesses in their
hearts. Therefore in the Creed is nothing declared, but only those things
which apperteine to the comforting of the consciences of the Elect, and that
move them to love.

Now these be the Articles which we are bound to believe, and they be so knit
and lynked together, that a man cannot believe one of them lively without the
other, and he that believes the one with a lively Faith, believes all. As for
example, no body can believe lively in God, no, nor yet know him sufficiently
without the light of Christ, which is supernatural, as Paul says, and
likewise Christ, and he that believes lively in Christ, and thorough Faith and
the holy Ghost feels and accepts his great benefit, Gal. 4. Ephesians. 2. Mat.
11.
believes that God is the Father almighty, Creator of all things: believes
also the resurrection of Christ, his ascension, his sending of the holy Ghost,
and that he shall come to judge us, and the effects of his death, that there is
a holy Church, the remission of sins, the resurrection, and everlasting
life.

There be many which of their own fantasy have added other Articles, and such
as be no other but their own doctrines, the which it is but lost time to
consider off.

They would prophecy and understand more then the Apostles, exceeding the
lymits of Faith, and all is because they have not a lively Faith in the light
supernatural, which if they had they should see wonderful things revealed
by God, which would content them and cause them to seek, not to understand
new things, but to grow in greater light of things revealed, that they
might be able to render thanks more largely unto God, to whom be always all
praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

If it be possible to be confirmed and stablished in Faith. Sermon. 5.
THose which do never see the truth supernatural and revealed with a light
inspired and clear of Faith, but only have had in them a certain opinion,
and a human and purchased Faith, for their light being very obscure and
imperfect, they never have been clear, sure and certain of those things
which they believe. And therefore they think that there is no other manner of
Faith but of that sort which they have, wherefore they suppose that of divine
things there can no Faith be had, which is clear, certain, sure, steadfast,
yea they do imagine, that doubting is inward and a thing substancial to
Faith, in such sort that they think there can be no belief without doubting
And to maintain this their opinion with all, they bring this reason. The
things which they believe, Heb. 11.
they do not see with corporal eyes, no, not if it has also a clear and
evident understanding, as there is of the first natural princyples of things,
this they may prove by reasons demonstratiue which do bind fast and stablish
the understanding: but in such a case it should not be Faith, but a science.
The truth which such men believe, is only persuaded the^ by probable reasons,
ye which because they make not any necessary conclusion, be very weak, so
that only they move us to thinck that it is so, but they do not force us,
forasmuch as they show not clearly and plainly ye truth, this therefore their
Faith being bleareyed, it must of necessity be always suspecting and in doubt,
for ye nothing in them is clear and evident but ever totering and wavering
like those which have ye Palsy. But they would not say so if they had
experienced to have a true Faith, for yt the light thereof is so great, yt every
one which has Faith, if it be perfect, is safe, sure and clearly certified of
the truth, and in it is steadfast and firm. So that as ye light of a true Faith
dymmeth in clearenes all other lights of this present ^^fe, so spiritual men
and those which by Faith be regenerated, if they be perfect in the same Faith,
are more firm, sure, clear and certain of the truth supernatural and
revealed, then ye carnal be of things which they have before their eyes. The
light of a true Faith is so clear, that as love cannot hate, so cannot a
perfect Faith distrust, stutter or doubt. That therefore is not a true Faith
which douteth, but those are carnal men which being without Faith, do waver. And
although spiritual men also do sometimes doubt, this is because of their
little Faith, and for yt, they giving ear to carnal wisdom do lock the eyes
of Faith against the truth revealed, which resisting against the holy ghost,
and do follow the instigation of the Devil: wherefore if we doubt, it is not
so much for the little light which we have of Faith, as for that we do not
always and continually behold the truth supernatural with the clear light
of a true Faith: yea, we would oftentimes see and discern it with our blind
natural light: and understand that it does not by and by appear true which we
see already with the light of Faith. And if those which have but once seen with
a clear light of Faith ye truth, do prove afterward of infidelity, if they by
chance do rise again, Genesis 15. Romans 4.
they themselves will then say, we ought not to doubt, seeing that we have
seen so clearly the truth, we be assured that it is so, Luc. 1. Jacob. 1.
as God with the clear light of Faith does plainly show us. Faith then being
perfect with Abraham doubts not, and if that with Mary the virgin it
maruaileth, yet it doubts not, it wauereth not to and fro like young
children, it stutteth not nor stackereth as a thing that is weak, neither does
it toss one while this way, another, that way, whereof Helias reproved certain
Prophets, but it is pure, 3. Reg. 8.
steadfast and firm, having respect to the goodness of God, and his promises
without doubting to obtain that which it demands. And therefore it is that
which confirms and stablisheth us in God: Heb. 6. and. 11.
wherefore saint Paul calls it the substance of things which be hoped for, a
making manifest of things invisible, and also a sure ship in God of our
soul. Whereupon David says trusting in ye Lord, Psalm. 25.
I shall not go astray. It is possible then to be stablished in Faith, to be
lyghtened and come into a certain persuasion of the truth, wrought in us by
the holy Ghost, yea it is not possible to believe lively and in truth, without
clearenes, Col. 2.
assurance, certainty and stedfastnes, wherefore more or less, according as thy
Faith is more or less perfect. Let us therefore pray unto ye Lord yt he would
give us of his lively and clear light, so that we being strong and steadfast
wholly in him, may yield him al praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

If it be good or evil, that every one should seek to be lightened with
Faith, if that be the true way or no. Sermon 6.
THere be many and especially they of the kingdom of Antichrist, which believe
yt it is evil yt every one indifferently, especially women, unlearned folk,
idiotes and simple persons, if they would seek to be lightened in Faith whether
it be ye right way or not. But they say ye every such one ought to believe
simply, that is to say grossly and blindly, without any discussing or
consideration, that which has been taught them by their parents, and by their
Prelates, because that (as they say) those cannot err, yea they persuade, that
every one must fly all thoughts and desires, which should happen, willing
them to be lightened thorough Faith as a temptation and instigation of Satan.
They also condemn that the holy scriptures should be translated into any
vulgar tongue, because the unlearned should not study thereon, yea they will
that the Psalms, their Masses, the prayers, even those things which Christ
taught, the Godly precepts or commandments, the Articles of the Faith and all
other things necessary to salvation, should be learned and taught in the
Latin tongue, as though the virtue of Faith, of prayer and of the holy
scriptures did consist in this Latinytie, and were not needful for a
Christian, to know how he ought to live, what he ought to demand of God, and
what he says when he makes his prayer: and to understand what he believes,
when in making confession of his Faith, he says: Credo in deum Patiem etc. I
marvel greatly, that as they have ordained that the holy scriptures and their
divinity is not read but in the Latin, so that their sermons or preachings
be not also in Latin that they might not be understood. It is very true that
they bring all their authorities in Latin and many times in Greek and Hebrew,
to show that they be learned in the tongues. They think that in the end,
their Bulls, Briefes, indulge^ces, absolutions, blessings, excommunications,
yea and their contractes made of things of this world, will be the better kept
close, and deceive the simple, that they shall sell them the dearer for the
majesty of this Latinytie, and therefore they write and pronounce them in Latin.

And I say against them, first that those which have not a true and lively
Faith, are bound to seek it by all means that they possible can, and to be
lightened that they may be in a true Faith: for as much as they ought not to
refuse the inspiration which comes to lighten them, for in so doing they
should forsake the grace of the holy ghost. It is very true that those which be
already in a true Faith and thereby certain that they be in the truth, ought
to refuse all other fantasies contrary as the instigation of the devil: and to
continue steadfast in the Faith wherein they are, with seeking by all means
possible to grow therein, and to be lightened every day more and more, for the
glory of God.

Seeing then that true Faith is ever joined with clearness, it must needs be
said, that as it is not evil but good, to seek for to have Faith, and to gro^
therein, so it is not evil but good, to seek to be lighten^^ and to grow in
light, certainetie and clearenesse: for if you proceed by due order, there can
be no danger unto you, for look how much more the truth is discussed of, so
much more it shines.

Let us suffer the false doctrine of Turks to lie hidden, and likewise of the
heretics and Antichristians, and all such as be in error, Mat. 10.
but the doctrine of Christ and his Gospel, it is most true that it ought not
to be hidden in darkness, but ought to be preached and taught in the light,
above the houses, plainly and openly: Joan. 12.
as Christ appointed the Apostles, and himself observed. But note, that
forasmuch as we can-not with our own strength purchase nor deserve Faith,
because it is a gift of God, Ephesians. 2.
given to whom it pleases him, therefore we ought to seek it princypally of
God, by way of prayer and humility.

But for that also serves the learning of the word of God and studying of the
holy scriptures, because we ought to study wholly thereon, and therefore to
have it in every language. And that which is contained in the holy scriptures
is it any thing else, but the benefits which God has done for us, the riches
which he has promised us, and that which he requires of us? Then tell me, is
not every one bound to understand and know al those things aforesaid? Has
Christ paraduenture spoken only to the learned? or such things that the
unlearned can not understand? Was Christ so proud upon earth, that he (...) to
teach, or would let none understand but (...) the learned and wise of this
world, yet Paul said, (...) humbled and debased himself, (...) Math. 11.
even to the death of the Cross, and that God has chosen the weak and
ignoble things of the world to confound the things that be strong and noble.
Christ himself gave thanks unto the father, for that he had hidden his divine
secreates from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them to babes. Is it
peradventure necessary by Aristotle to know Christ? Or be not men capable of
the things of God, except they be learned? The holy scriptures, and chiefelye
ye Gospel, ought to be had in every language, to be preached, read, and taught
to all men, and likewise to be heard of every one, studied, and learned as
they did before time in the primitive Church of Christ.

To this end was given to the Apostles the gift of tongues, and they were
enjoined that they should go preaching the Gospel thorough all the world.
Christ would that it should be understood of all men, and likewise would the
Apostles.

Before time the holy Scriptures were translated out of Hebrewe, and also out
of Greek into Latin, because the Latin tongue, especially in Italy was
common to all men: there-fore they said the Creed, the Gospel, the Psalms,
the Lords prayer, and other prayers in Latin: but now seeing that the common
Italian tongue is no more Latin, we ought to have those things which be
necessary to be known brought into a tongue which may be understood, which
thing I say were also convenient in all other nations. I say not now, that the
ministers of the word of God are not bound, to study and understand better
the holy scriptures, then the simple people, yt they may be able (as Paul
writes) to instruct others, and moreover to resist and overcome those which
shall gainsay the truth.

But to others concerning the things which be of God, it is sufficient for
them to know as much as is needful for their salvation. They do not evil
but well if they study the holy scriptures, so that they study them in such
sort as they ought. But I think that the heads of the kingdom of Antichrist
with their subtle and deuilish craftiness, are forced so to hide these
things, because they might be so worshipped like divine creatures and as
though they among all others, had the light of divine secreates. They also have
devised so to keep close the truth, that it should not be declared, because
if men should have the light of the holy scriptures, they should see the
doctrine of Antichrist to be not only unprofitable and vain, but false, wicked,
contrary and repugning against Christ and his Gospel. They will say, that if
the unlearned should study the scriptures, they should easilye fall into many
errors and heresies, and there-fore it is not good. And I say, 1. Cor. ^
that the wise of this world do so much more easily fall, as that by their
greater prudence and human wisdom (which being compared to God is but
foolishness) they are further of from God, adversaries and enemies of Christ,
of grace, of Faith, and of the Gospel, and in as much as with greater force
they do withstand the holy Ghost. As it has been seen by experience, that
where as the simple people have received the Gospel and believed in Christ,
Joan. 7.
the worldly wise men have not believed, but have persecuted him. And the
errors and heresies are grown of their learned doctors: as is to be seen by
heretical doctrine and theology of Antichrist.

And albeit that the unlearned by studying the holy scriptures do sometimes
fall into errors, it is not thorough defect of the scriptures, nor yet because
it is not good that every body should study it but thorough their own
defect, for that they do not study it with humilytie, pureness, and a right
purpose, as they ought.

They crave not at Gods hand the true understanding thereof, with such zeal
and Faith, as of duetye they should, wherefore they need not withdraw
themselves from studying it, but apply themselves to study it as is
convenient. Otherwise, forasmuch as many good things are used to the dishonor
of God, men had need even to withdraw themselves from all companyes, and to
hear the word of God. But they will say, if the ignorant would study the word
of God, they cannot understand it. Then (according to that opinion) they
understand it by force of the letter and human wisdom, and not by divine
revelation, contrary to saint Paul, which would, that the interpretation and
understanding of the holy scriptures, should be the gift of God.

1. Cor. 12 Luc. 24.
It must needs be for that Christ opened the minds of the Apostles, to the
intent that they should understand the holy scriptures, and for that they
thorough their simplicity, made smaller resistance against the holy ghost then
the wise men of the world, therefore that they understood it better,
forasmuch as they studied it with reverence, and for the glory of God, and in
such sort as they ought. And if they will say, they cannot understand the
hard places. I will say that God is able to give them light, as well as to
thee, and more too, which be so much the apter to understand then the worldly
learned, as yt not having their so much dead learning, they have occasion to be
more humble, to which sort of people God reuealeth his secrets. Math. 11.
And if by and by they do not understand, thinking that they please not God,
he immediately gives them light, so that with yelding thanks unto God, they
pass away to the understanding of the other places, and do not as you that be
proud, which not seeking to have light from God, nor having patience to tarry
with humbleness, until the Lord give you the right understanding, ye have
expounded them falselye and ungodly, according to your own fantasy, and so
you be fallen into a thousand errors. They will say that in studying the
scriptures they would be contented to have us only, which can-not err, for
their Masters, and to understand them according as we have expounded, we would
not say that it were evil that they should study them, but forasmuch as there
be many Wolves, and especially in these our times: which being clothed in the
manner of Sheep, do preach new doctrines, and do not expound the holy
scriptures in many places after our fashion, therefore we do not only
excommunicate, persecute and burn, whosoever stick unto their opinions, but
who so do read those books. And if we feared not that it would be accounted
unto us for a great impiety, we would not only forbid unto the unlearned the
study of holy Scriptures, but we would burn the Epistles of Saint Paul and
the Gospel, because we would not suffer men to have any further knowledge,
seeing of studying them, do grow every day new Heretics.

To this I first say, that if that be true which Christ said, that by the
fruits, by the life, and by the works, Mat. 7.
false Prophets shall be known, we may make a sure judgment that you be no
true shepherds nor Pastors of souls, but most ravening Wolves, inasmuch as ye
feed not the souls with the word of God, but persecute even to the death
those which preach it, being with your wicked living an offense to all the
world. Is it possible that you should be so blind, perverse and obstinate,
that you see not how in the questions of your school Doctors, there is but a
little Divinity, and that most intricate, full of erroures and Heresies, and
you will needs have them for your Masters.

Who does not see the obscure, thick and palpable darkness in which we were,
and the great light which God has given us of himself, within these few
years? Not with any new doctrine but with the very same which Christ
preached, the Apostles, the Prophets, and those which were true Saints,
therefore old, although new to those which had been blind, for that it was a
long while buried.

Know you not that the light of the Gospel is so great, that it discovers all
deceipts, errors, and falsehood?

And that all the false persuasions of the world can do no hurt to such as be
lyghtened with the truth, that is, to them which be illuminated? Whereof are
you then afraid, if you with your people be in the truth together with the
Gospel? If you were in ye light, you would not fly it, as ye do, but would
desire and seek for it, not fainedly, but in truth to come unto the top. But
you, as those which know, yt your doctrine consists in deceipts and
falshoode, fearing least you should be discovered, with making your selves
suspected, do not only fly as hastily as you can all counsel, but do
persecute those which preach Christ and his Gospel. And it is manifest, that in
persecuting so grieuouslye the true Christians, they are not moved by zeal of
the honor of God, seeing that in other things they show no such sparkle of
zeal. They are moved, for yt they doubt their kingdom will be brought to
nothing, as a most vain shadow, thorough the light of the Gospel.

And forasmuch as they say that they cannot err, I say that they should say
true, if they were God himself, or that they had his spirit: but it is seen
by their life, that they be carnal men, whose property is to be liars. And
suppose it could be, that they did not fall into so great errors, as not being
defiled any more, they could not err. Read with the spirit their decretalls
and ordinances say they, and thou shall be pure enough. And withal this they
would, that the people leaving Christ, should ground their faith upon them,
having for their rule, not the holy scriptures but their words. They would also
that men should have, in steed of Christ and of the Apostles (albeit they have
not their spirit) their zeal, their doctrine, their virtues, their life, yea
and their ceremonies as sufficient. But seeing that God does let them alone,
being in such great blindness, we have to wonder of his so excessive divine
goodness and bounty, and to force our selves with humble and fervent prayer,
with hearing the word of God, and with study of the holy scriptures, to grow
every day more and more in a greater light of God, so that being lightened with
the truth, we may render to our heavenly and divine Father, all praise, honor
and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

How every one may be tried whether he be in a true Faith, or no. Sermon. 7.
THere be some, which for to try themselves to be in a true Faith, do say to
themselves, We believe in such sort as our forefathers have taught us: and
therefore it is not lykely, yt being their children they should have deceived
us, wherefore we may be sure to be in a true Faith. But tell me, might it not
be possible, that your fathers and mothers would willingly deceive you? And
much the rather unwillingly they being deceived, and in error themselves,
might deceive you? Such manner of Faithes be all humane Faithes, grounded upon
the love and wisdom of parents, therefore upon probable reasons, but they be
not firm and steadfast: and they have so feeble a foundation, yt they do not
only always waver, but will fail in the children, at all times, when the
parents do deny Christ. After that, if when they would be tried to be in a
true Faith, it should suffice them to know those things, which were taught them
of their parents, they should follow yt, which ye heritikes, ye Turks, the
Idolaters, and all those, which believe according as their parents have taught
the^ (whether their faith be true or false) thinking not only to be excused
before God, but to be pure in the true Faith: forasmuch as there-in they have
been instructed of their fathers and moth^rs, which opinion is most false.

Therefore some others going another way to work, to be tried that they be in
true Faith, do always call to mind that they were borne, nourished, and by
their parents instructed in that Faith: and moreover that they see a great
multitude of people that believe as they do, especially those with whom they
be conversant. Now this Faith also is altogether humane, blind, full of
darkness and weak, grounded so feebly, that if the multitude fail, the Faith
also will fail. And if such as these be had been in that time when the
Apostles were, when there were but a few that believed in Christ, they would
not had believed, they will not believe that which they see gainsaid of
others: if also they had been borne amongst the Turks, or had been conversant
amongst them, they would believe as they do, and so the Turks should be
excused, seeing they are such, and lyke-wise all other Heretics and
Infidells, which be a great multitude: they also should be proved to be in a
true Faith. And so it should of necessity be said, that every Faith where there
is a multitude, were true. Now see if this be not a great error.

Many other there be which for trial of Faith do regard miracles, and they
think that because their Religion has been confirmed by many miracles,
therefore they suppose that it is manifest that their Faith is true. But this
their Faith is very weak, feeble and imperfect, inasmuch as there be but a very
few Christians which have seen miracles, the true Christians have perceived
that it is but men's talk the which do easelye beguyle them and be lies,
Psalm. 15.
and for that their Faith is grounded upon men's words, it has a feeble
foundation.

But let us grant that they had seen such miracles, they had not knowledge to
discern whether they were effects natural, devilish illusions, or things
wrought supernaturally by God. Seeing that, Christ and also Saint Paul, have
showed before, that in the kingdom of Antichrist, false Christians and
preachers shall arise, and shall deceive the world, showing signs and
wonders. Mat. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Even to the Romans when they worshipped idols, have been miracles showed,
therefore they should then be excused before God, likewise with the
Antichristians, if these miracles were the foundation of Faith, and that it
sufficed to have a certain human opinion, that in their religion have been
wrought miracles. For that it is manifest that the Scribes and Pharisees saw
the miracles of Christ, and yet believed not: therefore we must believe some
other thing then miracles, if we would be tried to be of a true Faith.

There be also some which believe as their Church believes, and think that
so they are tried to be in a true Faith: and this, because they believe that
their Church that is their Prelates, be ye successors of Christ and of the
Apostles, and that they have in them the holy Ghost, therefore that they cannot
err.

And I say, that the true successors of Christ and of the Apostles, and the
true Pastors, be those which with the spirit of God in preaching the Gospel
do feed the hungry souls, with the sincere, and pure word of God, and with
good examples and living: and the church of Christ be not they alone, but also
all those which have a lively Faith in Christ. Now these cannot err in
things appertaining to salvation, among which are the lively members of
Christ, and those which have the spirit of God.

But here stands the matter, how we should know which Church this is,
and who be the true successors of the Apostles.

All the heretykes even the very Antichristians, have their Church, and every
of them do think that their Church is the Church of Christ, they all have
their Prelates, and them they account in steed of the Apostles, yea, their
Pope or Patriarch they hold to be in ye room of Christ. If then it were
sufficient to believe as their Church believes, it might of necessity be
said that the Faith of Heretics and of Antichristians were true.

It is needful therefore first to understand, that our Church is the Church
of Christ: and that our Prelates be no Mummers or Masking Apostles, but their
true successors. Which are known not by the Coapes and Myters, by their
solemn Titles, by Riches, by Power, Dignity, Ceremonies, Hypocrysies,
human devises, nor other outward glystering show of the world, but we must
see if they have the spirit, a lyuelye Faith, Hope and Charity, Math. 7.
and this may be known by their fruits and by their works, and by seeing
that amongst them the Gospel is preached, and if the sacraments be
admynistred according to the institution of Christ. I know not how it is
possible, that any one of those which are practiced in the kingdom of
Antichrist, can persuade themselves, that theirs is the Church of Christ, and
their Prelates the successors of the Apostles, seeing with them are such great
wickedness, public Idolatries, superstitions, heresies, and abominations,
and that there is in them no sparkle of the spirit, nor any sign of true
Christian Religion, that they cannot preach the Gospel, and that the true
Christians be by them more grievously persecuted and put to death, then ever the
Martyrs were by any tyrants: I cannot tell how their Prelates dare say that
they be the Pastors and successors of the Apostles, being ravening Wolves and
the Ministers of Satan.

If we were bound to order our selves according to them, and to believe as
they believe, we should of necessity be without Faith, as they are. It is true
which Christ said, that he will be with the Apostles, Mat. 28.
and with their true successors: yea with his elect: and this in not
suffering them to perish: and moreover in having such a care over them, that
all things shall serve for their safety. Joan. 10. Romans 8. Joan. 1.8
But it is not so meant now yt God does not sometimes suffer (for their
benefit) them to fall and to err: the which we read even of saint Peter.
Thou can not therefore be tried, that thine is the true Faith, Gal. 2.
which believing that which thy Church believes, except thou first know that
thy Church is the Church of Christ, and that in it dwells ye holy Ghost.
Which thing thou can not understand without the spirit and light
supernatural. Thou will say, will it not be sufficient that I have a purpose to
be willing for to believe that which the true Church of God believes? I
answer no, for as much as it is needful for thee to believe all that which
is necessary to salvation, and the purpose of being willing to believe ye
truth suffices not, for if it did every one would be saved. Some others there
be which think themselves tried to be in a true Faith, for yt they believe
according as they find it written in the holy scriptures. But first, if they
have not the spirit and light supernatural, they shall never be sure and
certain, that that which is written in the old and new Testament, is of God:
but shall ever go on doubting, wavering and suspecting, whether they be all
human inventions, or whether they have been corrupted by heretykes. They
shall not also understand, what is their true interpretation and meaning. For
if that the trial of our Faith depended upon the holy scriptures, the simple
which do not understand them could not be tried of their Faith. Those also
which were before Moses time, and therefore before the holy Scriptures were
written, could not have been tried of their Faith. If also the books were
lost, it must of necessity be that all true and perfect Faith should
decay. I deny not now but that the Holy scriptures do serve for Faith being
studied in such sort as they ought, but they are not sufficient: yea a man may
study them by force of human wit, and as the Saints have expounded them,
and yet be without the Spirit: Wherefore many think that they are pure in
Faith, if they do not believe, but holding a pledge of human reason, and
only such things as be conformable there-to, as though human reason were
the rule of Faith, and the judge of things that be divine and supernatural.

These would not say so, if they understood that thorough the sin of our
first Parents, our human reason (if by Faith it be not healed) is weak,
blind, frantic and foolish, and so stiffenecked, that it allows nothing
but that which likes the blind judgment thereof, yea it makes a mock at
(...) supernatural things, because it is not capable of those things that be
divine, whereunto no man can ascend, but only by the Ladder of Faith.

If the trial of Faith depended upon human reasons, the Philosophers
should have been the best Christians of all men. There have been also which
have thought and said that when a man by his industry does all that he can to
have Faith, that is, that he studyeth the holy Scriptures, and disposes
himself to hear the word of God, and frames himself by all the means he
can to the truth, with praying to God that he would lighten him, that in such
a case having done that is possible for him to do, he may be sure and certain
that he is in the truth, for that it cannot be thought that God forsakes
those which do as much as they know and as is possible, for their salvation.
If in such a case they continue in darkness, their ignorance should be
inuincyble, therefore excusable. But I would first know of such who it is that
being lightened does all that he came, so that his ignorance may be called
invincible: yea those which have not Faith, can not (as Saint Paul says) call
upon, Romans 10.
nor heartely request or crave any thing at Gods hand.

But let us grant that an Infidel should do by his endeavor all that he
can, do we not see that all his works, his thoughts, affections, force and
desires, shall be not only vain, unprofitable, and unfruitful, but naught,
unclean and wicked: Luc. 8.
inasmuch as he is unclean himself, a badde Tree, without the spirit, and
without Faith.

And thou imaginest in some part at least, that thou deseruest that God should
give thee Faith: Ephesians. 2.
which is ye gift of God, given merely by grace, and not by desert by any
ways, of our works. It is very true, Math. 21
that the Lord has promised that he will hear us, and give us his grace,
therefore to them which ask it with Faith, and not to them which ask it
without Faith. We cannot therefore by such means be tried that our Faith is
true, which if we could, we might partly glory in our selves, Romans 4. 1. Tim.
1. 1. Cor. 4.
contrary to the doctrine of Saint Paul. And I say that to be tried, that our
Faith is the true Faith, we had need to have a true and lively Faith: because
that in such a case, there is in us a supernatural light, so clear, that we
do not only see the truth revealed, which of necessity we must believe, but
also there is seen what light is true, divine and supernatural: and moreover,
that the holy Ghost does testify in our hearts, that we be in the truth: Then
is known what true miracles have been done in confirmation of the truth, and
what otherwise: which is the true Church of Christ, and which be the holy and
sacred Scriptures. Then also is known that we be imperfect and stubborn, that
thorough our selves, we can neither in all, nor in part, deserve any so rich
and precious a gift, as Faith is: and lastly then we shall be tried to be in
the truth.

But without this clear, inward and spiritual light, no trial can suffice us,
nor miracles, nor Saints, nor the Church, nor the Scriptures, nor reasons, nor
all other lyghts of the world. Let us pray therefore unto ye Lord that for his
mere goodness, and for the death of his dear son, he would give us his
true and supernatural light, so that we may yield unto him all due praise,
honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The mean to prove the truth of a Christian Faith. Sermon. 8.
THere have been many, which not having experienced ever an inspyred and
supernatural Faith, believing that there is not found in the world any other
but a humane and purchased Faith, like unto theirs, and that men were tried
sufficiently of the truth of a Christian Faith, if they be thoroughly weried in
assaying to prove with reasons, and if it had been possible; to show the truth
of our Faith. But those that be such, deceive themselves: forasmuch as the true
Faith of Christ, Ephesians. 2.
being a gift of God, is not purchased, but revealed: depends not upon
learning, yea, a very unlearned man may have perfect Faith, and the most learned
may want it.

The Faith of Christ is altogether divine and spiritual, and has not for the
foundation science, prudence, or worldly wisdom, 1. Cor. 3.
which being compared to God is foolishness, yea he kills it, as his enemy.
These men have also deceived the world: inasmuch as many do think by their
reasons, that a purchased Faith is sufficient, and that they are so much the
more perfect, as they have the more of it, and busying themselves so in the
considering of this, they have left that which was necessary, that is, to
humble themselves before God, and to crave of him grace, and thorough Jesus
Christ, the true and supernatural Faith. And furthermore many wise men of the
world, because their reasons do not show it them, have despised the Faith of
Christ, as untrue. You must therefore understand, that the truth supernatural
and revealed cannot be showed or made manifest wc humane reasons, nor seen
clearly with natural light, but must be tried by a light supernatural. It
is true, that albeit all worldly reasons be not sufficient for Faith, yet they
be some help unto such men as use them as they ought: and this is when such
men that have not yet a lively Faith, by such reasons coming into some opinion
of ye things of Christ, do humble themselves to pray unto God, that he would
give them a clear light of the truth: And also do seem unto those, which
have Faith to be confirmed there-in the more.

They also serve to convince those which be contentious and stubborn. Thou will say, seeing that we cannot serve to the glory of God in such sort, as thou
say, I would thou would declare unto me those reasons which might move me
to the persuasion of the truth of the Faith of Christ.

I answer and say that there be many, amongst which, this is one, forasmuch
as there can be no lie so artificial that it consists on every part, and
every thing answers there-to, yea as to the truth every thing does agree,
so to falsehood every thing does disagree: but is manifest that in Christ all
the Prophecies be verified, all shadows and figures made clear and perfect,
and all the promises of the old Testament fulfilled.

So that seeing that all is verified in Christ, we should have just occasion to
accept none other Messiah. Moreover it is seen by experience, that a
Christian, if he be a perfect Christian, in Christ and thorough Christ sees
himself free, as he is in deed, from all evils both of this present life and
of the life to come, because that God has such a singular care of him, that
all things do serve to his salvation, so that adversities are to him
prosperities, yea he finds in peace war, health in sickness, and life in
death: yea thorough Christ he sees himself, as he is, safe, the son of God
and his heir, wherefore he is most happy, most noble, rich of all divine
treasures and graces. If then a Christian by being a perfect Christian be free
from all evils, and is quiet, restfull, and peaceable, he possesses already
all good things that be possible and can be desired: and he is no perfect
Christian if thorough Christ he be not forced to say, that seeing that Christ
has delivered the world from all euilles and given us all good things, Romans
7.
that he is the true Messiah: and this because we cannot have any goodness by
any other, forasmuch as we have all by Christ.

It is manifest also that none is saved by the obseruaunce of the law divine
or natural: because that there is no body which can do toward God and his
neighbor all that he ought to do. Therefore it must of necessity be said
either that none can be saved, or else they that be saved are saved thorough
grace. But it were greatly amiss to say that none can be saved: for that God in
such a case should in vain have created and preserved the world, if there
should not be reaped some fruit thereof. Wherefore we must needs say that
some men are saved, and that by grace, and for that none can tell us this but
Christ, in as much as all other sects and opinyons say that men are saved
wholly, or else in part, by the works of men, therefore only the Faith of
Christ is true.

There is not found also any Relygion which does not in some part exalt man
with diminishing of the grace of God, except that relygion which is of Christ,
and that only does debase a carnal man to be altogether earth, giving all
glory unto God, and for-bicause this Religion cannot err, therefore it must of
necessity be said, that only this is the true Religion of God. Also that God
has so loved sinners, that for their salvation, he has appointed his own
Son to suffer death on the Cross, Joan. 3.
which is an act of so high and exceeding love, that if such a secret thing,
God, as a truth, had not himself revealed, there is no understanding that were
able to believe it: and therefore needs we must conclude, that this was the
truth. And grant, that albeit men of themselves had been able to have imagined
so incomprehensible a love of god, yet they could not in any wise have
believed, that in one who was crucified consisted all their salvation, and that
he was both God and man, especially with so steadfast a Faith, that for this
Truth they would spend and venture their own lives, if God had not persuaded
this in their hearts: we must then needs say, that it is so in very deed.

If Christ had not been the Son of God, seeing he would be so accounted, he
should have been very proud, and it is seen that all his life was full of
humility: It could not be hidden when men would have crowned him if he had not
fled away, Joan. 6.
but had sought the friendship of great men, and the means how to have been
exalted. It is manifest that Christ never sought any commodity to himself
alone, as it appears by his life and by his words, but only the glory of
God, wherefore of necessity must be said, that he was no carnal man, but
altogether divine and spiritual, and so was his life and doctrine.

It is also manifest, that Christ willyngly took upon him a shameful and
bitter death, and he saw that in dying so he should loose both his life and all
that he had, even that worldly credit which he had, so that his own disciples
would be offended, Mat. 26.
as his proper commodity fore-tolde him. Yea he should have seemed to have
lost his soul, if he were not the son of God, because he named himself so.
No worldly thing then could move him to dye so, wherefore we must needs say,
that he was moved, not for his own pleasure, but for the truth, for the glory
of the Father, and for our salvation.

Consider all the life of Christ, and thou shall find that albeit it was
wholly a Cross, yet he never showed any sign of impatience, yea upon the
Cross, without any trouble of the flesh, he showed himself divine altogether
even till he gave up the ghost, and pronounced still words of great charity.

Is it not manifest, seeing that Christ upon the cross being naked, spoiled,
and deprived of al riches, pleasures, honors, dignities, friends favors,
strength and help of the world, Philip. 2
humbled, brought to nothing, as if he had not been: yea being opprobrious and
accursed of al men: has vanquished and overcome death, the world, the flesh,
sins, the Devils, and all the enimyes of God? which he could not possibly
have done without the favor of God.

If also in like sort his Church had not been altogether spiritual, when the
favor of the world decayed, it must also have waxed feeble, whereas when the
world, strove against it, it became always more mighty, forcible, and
tryumphant.

Christ also where-as in the flesh he seemed weak, arising again, and
ascending into Heaven to the right hand of his Father, showed himself so
strong in Spirit, that twelve unlearned and simple Disciples, without
eloquence, without learning, with out humane industry and subtlety, without
strength, and without any promise of worldly things, only with preaching
that one who was crucified has saved them, converted the world:
notwithstanding that all the armed men with their whole force resisted them,
and with learning, wisdom, treasures, honors, dignityes, and all other
means which the world possible could devise. Yea, and in our time, only
with the word of GOD, such a mighty kingdom of Antechrist has been already
decayed.

There is not found nor can be found in the world any life so truly holy,
pure and spiritual, as the life of good Christians, which is so divine, that
it works more then miracles, and they are made such thorough Christ crucified.

An innumerable sort of Christians have forsaken riches, pleasures, friends,
parents, their country, favors, honors, dignities, the world, themselves
and all, and by way of poverty, of infamye, dispossessed of their own,
tormented and put to death, are willyngly and joyfully gone to Christ
crucified: not being by any worldly thing drawn there-to, which is most
manifest, inasmuch as, they were wholly naked there-off, then it must needs be
said, that their divinity drew them to it.

Which thing also does appear, not only because that how much the more
they be joined and united together, so much the more changing their life they
be renewed and do become more humble, lyberall, holy, divine and in all
virtues most perfect, but also for that where-as in pleasures, riches,
honors, and benefits of this present life, they never find rest, being
naked of worldly things, only in Christ crucified they find the greatest
felycitye that can be, and this should be impossible, if that Christ were
not the Son of the living God.

I do let pass the miracles which declare all the virtuous acts done by
Christ and his Saints, for a Testimonye of the truth of the Gospel. And the
long, continual, cruel, irksome, hateful, dolorous, irremediable, bitter
and shameful captivity of the Hebrews or Jews, for the sin which they
committed in crucifying the Son of God.

Let us pray then to our heavenly and divine Father, that of his clear and
manifest truth, he would give us an inward light, so that we may render unto
him all praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the mean how to be delivered from all superstition. Sermon. 9.
ALbeit that men by the sin of their first parents, be fallen into great
ignorance, yet notwithstanding there is left in them a little light of God, and
of his Justice: and therefore do feel themselves accused, as guilty in the
sight of God by their own consciences: wherefore all they which be not in
desperation with Cain, as those that fear the judgment of God, for to avoid
his wrath and the tormenting of their own consciences, have gone seeking
remedies to reconcile them to God: the good men (according to the word of God)
have known and lively embraced Christ, for their only refuge and Mediator,
ready before the Father to pacify his anger: but those which have been blind
of these so great benefits of Christ, and have not known the Justice of God,
the perverseness of their sins, with their unableness to arise out of them,
presuming of themselves have gone imagining after their own fantasy, diverse
ways to pacify the wrath of God: and this with afflicting their bodies with
abstinence, nakedness, fastings, watching, silence keeping, sackecloth,
beatings, pilgrimages and other pains with solytarines, with changing of
garments, with diverse Idolatryes, Sacrifices, words and works. And forasmuch
as such being without Christ, could not turn themselves to God, with
sincerity, pureness and rightnesse of heart, therefore all their changing was
in outward things, in the which being singular, and coming by them in
admiration of the world, as those which were proud, and desired the glory and
praise of men, they beautified continually seeking new extremities of living:
so that in deed they have been more superstitious, which being in love of
themselves and more proud, have sought by one mean to fly the wrath of God,
and by an other mean to live under a certain false Image and masking show of
humilytie, poverty, straightness, with honor, credit, and estimation of the
world, yea in greater riches and sensuality. Now from hence be all
superstitions grown.

And for because superstition is in it self most evil: inasmuch as it
crucifieth again Christ a new, labors to subuerte his great benefit, his
grace and his Gospel: And more-ouer is a pestilence very contagious, which
thing is seen by experience, for that it has corrupted all the world,
therefore I have judged it good to show how we may be delivered from it.

It is very true that those men which have been nourished up in superstition,
whereunto they be most enclyned, and therefore superstition seems unto them
very good, so that not only they do not abhor it, as a pestilent thing and
devilish, worthy of all reproof and shame, but they embrace it as a holy and
divine thing, worthy all praise, honor and glory, wherefore it is a very hard
matter for those which be plunged in superstition to depart from it.

But forasmuch as it is possible with God which is impossible with men,
therefore I would that we might see by what way we might be delivered.

To heal men of this pestiferous disease, it is needful to know the first
cause where-off superstition proceeds, and by what way it comes: and to
have knowledge of the first spring and beginning, we must understand that
there is but one only God, Jacob. 1.
from whom proceeds all our goodness, so that there is not, neither was, nor
shall ever be any person that had, or could have any good thing, but only
from GOD, therefore of him alone they must desire graces, 1. Tim. 1
in him only they must trust, of him alone they ought to meditate, him only
to thank, and to him alone to give all praise, 1. Tim. 2
honor and glory: Lyke-wise betwixt God and us there is but one Mediator
Christ Jesus, by whose means come down to us all gifts, benefits, and
graces, so that by no means in the world God ever had given, will give, or
does give any grace unto men, but by his means of Christ: wherefore only by
his mean we ought to demand of God, and only by his mean we must look to
obtain, and they that have obtained, must acknowledge it to come from God,
only by the mean of Christ: And lyke-wyse by him alone they must render unto
God all thanks and all praise, honor and glory.

Christ therefore and not the Angels or men, is he who alone, and not with
the help of any creature, in the whole and also in part, has made
satisfaction for our sins, reconciled us to the Father, with pacifying his
anger, he alone has whollye opened Heaven to us, has made us to be adopted
the Sons of God, and made us his heirs, with meriting for us not only
heaven, but graces, gifts and spiritual benefits, things corporal and
temporal whatsoever we had, have, and shall have.

So that as from the head, only by means of the neck descends nourishment
and strength into the members, lyke-wise only from God thorough Christ
descend into the world all graces. And he only does know Christ aright,
which knows that all goodness comes of God, only by Christ, and thorough
him alone does seek it.

This alone is the true, pure, clean, and sincere way, by the which a good
Christian ought to walk: and all the other ways be full of superstitions.
Those then be superstitious not only, which falling from confidence in God,
do crave and seek their happiness from some other creatures, but also those
that do seek and desire of God, and not thorough Christ, but either wholly or
partly by means of some other virtue besides Christ.

As those which desire the graces of God by the mean of Angels, of this
Saint, or of that Saint, and believe that they shall obtain that which they
ask, either in part or in all, for the worthiness of them, and for the
excellency of their virtues, or for the preciousnesse of their own works.

All those in like manner be superstitious which do believe that they are
heard and shall obtain any grace or good thing by virtue of words, and more
with these words then with them: in as much as graces be not obtained but
only by the mere mercy of GOD, and thorough Christ, embraced of us with a
lively Faith.

The word of God has no other virtue, but to expound unto us, make manifest,
and give light of the divine willl of GOD, with exhortinge us to obeys him,
especially if it be pronounced with the spirit.

Wherefore those which carry about their necks certain Briefes, albeit in them
are written holy words, they be altogether superstitious, for that they think
to have some grace by virtue of those words. God has not given us his word,
and made his name known, for that we should bear it about, nor that we should
painte the writings upon doors, but that we might by means of his word know
him, call upon him, give him thanks, obey him, praise him, and honor him in
such sort as in his said word he has taught us: The word of God ought not to
serve us, but in that manner and to that end, which God has ordained and
revealed to us, and then the word of God does work according to the virtue
which God has given it: and in every other manner that it is used, or to any
other end, it is but superstition. Wherefore all they are superstitious which
believing that prayers, ye psalms of David, or other words of the holy
Scriptures, except the virtue which they have to teach us to live, to declare
unto us the will of God, and to move us to praise him, have any other singular
virtues to deliver him which caryeth them about his neck, or says these or
those words, from this or that evil, or to make us have some particular grace.
And if they would say unto me, it is seen yet sometimes by experience, that
they have a singular virtue. I answer, that these are altogether illusions,
and devilish works for to nourish men in superstition withal.

Likewise also albeit, when one baptiseth an other, he is bound to say, I
baptize thee in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost, because that Christ has so ordained, nevertheless it is a great
superstition to believe that in these words is such a singular virtue, that he
which is baptized with them, is in any part saved thereby: in as much as he is
saved only thorough Christ, on whom alone depends all our salvation. In like
manner it is most wicked superstition to believe, that in these words, Hoc est
corpus meum, that is, this is my body, is any particular virtue, so that the
Priest or Minister by virtue of consecration, should as it were, inchaunt it.

Forasmuch as Sacraments be Sacraments by the virtue of Christ: and the
consecrating, like as the institution of Sacraments is the office of Christ:
the high Priest: and our office is manifested in this, that we do yt which
Christ has ordained, and that we administer and use the Sacraments according
to that which Christ has appointed.

Christ has not ordained that we should consecrate with saying these words,
yea, he himself has not consecrated with saying, Hoc est corpus meum, but
having consecrated already, he expressed with those words, what we ought to
take and eat. Likewise those be superstitious which believe, that in the
Letanie, in the Procession, in the ringing of the Bell, in ye exorcisme, in the
water of Baptism, in the holy Water, in the holy Oil, or in any other mere
creature, is any singular virtue supernatural.

The like I say of those, who to the same end, do gather herbs on Saint
John's night: do make for Venus holy rings, do put confidence in relics and
bodies of the Saints, wherefore they go to visit them, do worship their
Images, and have more devotion to one then to an other They be also
superstitious which pray or make supplications for the dead, and much more if
they believe that the torches and candells which are burned do help them, and
so be also those superstitious which have confidence in Indulgences, Pardons,
remissions, absolutions, and blessings of the Pope and of his members. The like
also I say of all them which think at the least in some part, to be companions
of Christ in purchasing their salvation, or do attribute unto creatures more
then the natural virtue that they have from God, some singular virtue imagined
of their own heads, without having witness of God and his word, therefore
all observation of place, time, number, or creature, is superstitious, if it
be with confidence to obtain by some supernatural grace which is of man: for as
much as God in our acts whether we be in this or that place or time, if we
have said these or those words, done these or those works, has respect only
to Christ, and to our faith, with which we embrace him, according to the
measure that we be more or less happy. Now he that opens well his eyes,
shall see yt the world is altogether full of superstition, chiefly the
kingdom of Antechrist, albeit they say yt theirs is the church of Christ.

The first and chiefest cause then whereoff grows all superstition, is the
ignorance or want of the the knowledge of Christ, him we cannot know by any our
righteousness, health, treasures, or goodness, as he is. Wherefore to deliver
us from all superstition, we must have a true and lively light of Christ, so yt
at the presence of Christ (as was aforesaid) we despise as earth all Idols
and superstititions: Ezech. 30. Zach. 13
for that it is impossible that Christ should be exalted in any soul and
known of it by any his righteousness, as long as Idolatrye or superstition
abides therein. Let us pray God therefore, that he would open our minds and
give us the clear light of Christ, so that thorough him we may render to him
all honor and glory, Amen.

Of the mean how to have all virtues. Sermon.x.
THere have been some which have said, that god has powered into man ye seed
of virtues: so that as in a Medowe the flowers do grow of themselves, if they
be not hindered: and as the feathers do grow upon Birds, 1. Cor. 5.
so do virtues in men, if they be not hindered by naughty examples, and wicked
words, the which corrupt good manners: Mat, 13.
for look as the tares being sown while the master of the house slept by
that his enemy ceased not to grow above the good corn, so by wicked words
and evil examples, being sown and imprinted by the wicked, in the clean and
tender minds of young children, whilst that their parents having no care, do
sleep, so that they be let, and virtues in them choked, in such sort that
they cannot become perfect.

Therefore according to the opinion of these, it should be needful most
chiefly to beware of children, that they keep no company with the wicked,
least they should apply themselves to their naughtiness. Other say that
although all this is good, Genesis 3.
yet that suffices not to have virtues: for as much, as since the sin of our
first parents, the earth of it self brings forth nothing but thorns,
briars, and naughty weeds, and the good herbs and plants must be sown: so
that vices do grow in us by themselves, like as a sedge or rush grows in
the Brook, they be nourished without ever having any evil example, neither
in word nor in deed, by any means, for that they have in them the root of
sin by their nature being corrupt in Adam, there will spring and grow up in
them unbridled lusts, and immoderate affections, bringing forth the fruits
of sin: wherefore man of himself will be wicked.

It is very true yet that he will not work so much lewdenesse otherwise, as if
he were practiced with the ungodly and have had time and occasion to do evil
as much he would. Wickedness therefore do grow of themselves, and virtues
must be sown, for oeher-wise we shall deserve no praise by them. Wherefore to
have virtuous children (as they say) it shall be needful, not only to
beware of evil examples, but also to till continually their souls and
spirits, with sowing virtues, and this in showing them the beauty and
comeliness of virtues: yea and the riches and pleasures thereoff, and the mean
how it should be gotten. It is needful also to water them with good examples,
and to draw them forward with gifts, with praises, with honor, and with
glory.

And moreover it is needful to stop or hinder, that their vicious
concupicenses do not bud and bring forth any venomous fruits of sins:
which thing they shall do with showing them the filthiness of vice, the
hurtes, reproaches, dishonours, infamies, tormentinges, miseries, and hell,
which vice will bring them too, if it be necessary also, with threatninges and
beatings, to withdraw them. Then seeing that in Adam we be corrupt, Ephesians. 2.
the sons of weath, as Paul writes, it is natural for us to do wickedly,
therefore not needful that wickedness should be taught us, as it is
necessary that we should be instructed in virtue, which for that as it is not
natural, must be sought with great pains. For as much as it is not
sufficient to fly the company of the wicked, but also that we be instructed
with doctrine, moved forward with good examples, provoked with praise, with
honor and dignities, and with rewards, and that we put it in use also. For
like as if one learned the science or art of Music, without ever singing or
sounding upon Instrument, he could not be a good Musician: so a man cannot be
virtuous only by learning virtues, without putting them in use and doing
virtuously. Deeds be unto a virtuous man more necessary then words. But I say
first, that in the world we have no other true virtues, but Christian virtues,
inasmuch as they alone have for their end God and his glory, all other be
wicked, because they have for their end the vain praises and false honors of
the world, wheroff they be nourished, and so they are puffed up and become
proud, or else they have for their end worldly treasures, and be couetouse: or
pleasures, and be lascivious: or at the most a certain shadow and Image of the
beauty and honesty of the true virtues which be in God, and so they be
vain, false, painted, and without spirit. And whereas morrall virtues, for
that they are poor, miserable, weak, abiected and base, yea, no true virtues
be gotten, and therefore with so great pains yt to possess them perfectly all
the whole travail of our life time is not sufficient, the true Christian
virtues, be so high, rich, precious, happy, glorious and excellent, that they
cannot by us be purchased and gotten, but are given by God to his elect,
thorough his mere goodness and grace, and his liberality is so great, that
he does not at any time give us one, but all good gifts. They be sisters, and
in such sort bound together, that where one is, the others also must needs
be. Wherefore the soul of a Christian is like unto a fair garden, (whereas
being the garden of God) are all flourishing and sweet smelling virtues. It is
also like unto the heaven full of stars, adorned with all the stars, and a
most perfect harmony, where be the agreementes of all virtues, which be
clear, shining, honest, unspotted, and holy, which cannot abide where is any
vice. Deuteronomy. 32
God whose works are perfect armeth his elect, not partly, but with all the
virtues that be. Wherefore if a perfect Musition be in such admiration, think
then what a perfect Christian will be, in whom is the harmony of all virtue.
Vices be not joined together, and their virtues are morrall, but the Christian
virtues, be linked and united together, neither can they be possessed without
Christ, and he that has Christ in his heart, has them all, Romans 8.
forasmuch as God in Christ gives al things, even himself, that is, all his
perfection and divine virtues. But for because in the world we have none other
true goodness then that which is divine (as Christ said) neither is there any
other true love, truth, wisdom, righteousness, strength, Luc. 8. 1. Joan. 4
Romans 3.
perfection, or virtue, then yt which is divine, therefore we be so much
virtuous, as we do participate of God, which co^municateth himself to his
children, with all his virtues, and makes himself so to be within them, that
they are strong with his strenth, righteous, with his righteousness, Psalm. 17
and. 5 Joan. 4.
wise with his wisdom, good with his goodness, and lastly perfect in all
divine vertus, by being pertakers of him, therefore David called God his
fortitude, his mercy and virtue. And for that God being a spirit is not
communicated to us in part, but wholely, therefore it is necessary that he
which possesses one divine virtue, possesses all, and he that is ignorant
of one is ignorant of all: chiefly, for that they be in God, I will not say
indissolubly united, but together, and with God made one. So that as much as a
man is wise, (to speak of the true wisdom) so much he is strong, righteous,
godly, good, lowly, and adorned with all divine virtues.

And so likewise, how much a man is pertaker of divine love, godlynes,
righteousness, or of any other perfection of GOD, so much it must needs be that
he is partaker of all the rest. The true virtues then do begin to be in
the elect of GOD altogether, neither can the one of them grow without all the
other, although many times when the occasion does decay, they are not
discovered and made manifest. And forasmuch as GOD does not communicate them
with us, but only by mean of Christ, the which is not laid hold on, nor
embraced of us but only by faith, therefore faith only is that which sets
us in possession of Christ, of God, and of all his virtues. So that, as where
there is no light, must of necessity be darkness, so he that has no faith,
must needs be without virtues, and full of all vices: and like as where the
Sun shines cannot be darkness, Romans 14 Act. 15 Gal. 5 1. Cor. 13 Ionae. 3.
1. John. 2 Romans 5 and. 15. Mar. 16 Joan. 6. Romans 4. Joan. 20
yea, of necessity there must be the light, brightness and beams of the
Sun, with the heat and virtue thereoff: so whereas faith is, and GOD
possessed by faith, cannot be sin, yea, there must needs be all virtues.
Where there is no faith, altogether is sin, and where faith is, of necessity
the hearts must be purified.

A true and lively faith works thorough love, therefore always with
charity, and charity is ever patient, gentle, lowly, and accompanied with all
other virtues. He that has faith offends neither God nor his nighbour, but
repenting his sins with the Nyniuites, he observes the preseptes of God. Of
faith grows the peace of the mind, and of the consience, of it does grow
the contentation of the mind, health life, our righteousness, 1. Cor. 3
felicity, and all our goodness. Of faith grows true prayer, humility,
patience, godliness and all other Christian virtues, of which this is the
Mother. The which we must begin and build upon Christ, other steedefast
foundation we can find none. Faith gives all honor to God. 1. These. 3
Wherefore Paul and likewise Christ required faith, and exalted it most highly.
Therefore to have all virtues, we must needs labor to have faith, and to be
most perfect in all virtues and goodness, we must grow and become perfect in
faith inasmuch as all other virtues do grow in us, 1. Pet. 5.
according to the measure of faith.

Let us labor therefore to behold GOD, and his perfection with a clear and
lively light, in Christ crucified, in whom he discovers himself in a high
degree, so that we beeinge taught of him by faith, and of his divine virtues,
we may render to him all honor and glory through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Amen.

How we may honor God most highly. Sermon. xi
UNTO God alone (as Paul wrote) is due all honor and glory. 1. Tim. 1
And this because he only is substauncially good, righteous, godly, wise,
Luc. 18. Mat. 19.
and adorned with all other virtues and perfection: but we on the other side,
have insomuch any virtue or goodness, as we be pertakers of that which is
his.

Seeing that as all the goodness which we have had, have, 1. Cor. 4
and shall have, is from him only, as from yt which is, the first beginning of
all things, so to him alone as to the last end, ought to be yielded all
honor and glory, yea, and to this end he has placed us in this world. But
forasmuch as, although God has been toward us so liberal, that he has given
us Christ upon the Cross, and in him all things, Romans 8
yet one thing, he has reserved for himself, that is his glory: which he
never gave to any other, Esaias, 41.
nor at any time will give, as by Esaias is declared, wherefore seeing by all
duty we ought to give him the glory and honor. I would that we might see in
what sort we might honor him most highly.

And first, there have been some which have thought that God is honored most
highly with prayer: because that he which prays heartily for grace at the
hands of God, Romans 10
believes that God can, knows how, and will hear him, although he be
unworthy: It is needful then to have a great light and feeling of God: and
how much the more he which makes prayers, by having committed many sins, is
not only more unworthy to be heard, but should deserve ye greater punishment,
and by this mean craves for the greater grace and favor, that he might so
much the better be able to serve to the honor of God, and also that God
bestowing so great gifts upon one which was so froward an enemy to him, does
declare unto the world, his so large mercy, liberality, and charity, so much
the more as he craves with faith, so much he honors God. In Prayer
therefore God is wonderfully honored: chiefly for that in prayer all virtues
be followed and exercised. Others say that patience honors god above all
other virtues: for because that when a man accounts that his adversities be
sent from God, for his benefit, he feels in them not so much the justice, as
the goodness and mercy of God, therefore by their means he estmeeing God as
his singular Benefactor and Father, does not only praise and give him thanks
for all things, but also living in them contented, does testify unto the whole
world the good providence of God, so that, the world seeing him so merry in
troubles and miseries, does yield hearty thanks unto God, and is constrained
to think and say, surely God dwells in this his creature: he could not so
joyfully bear such great tribulations, if the Lord did not comfort him with
his divine grace: it is seen yet that God works and has a singular care of
his elect? Patience then does meruailously honor God by diverse means. There
have been some also which have believed that there is no virtue which does so
much honor God, as humility, and their reason is this: because that only the
humble person does acknowledge all his goodness to come from God, therefore he
alone of all men, does render unto God all thanks and glory: and if he be
praised of any body, that praise he does not attribute unto himself, but
gives it over to God, remaining in his own reputation miserable. There is none
also that truly does know the great benefit of Christ, and the exceeding
mercy, and charity of the Father, if he feel not in truth his miseries, and
his own dishabilitie, to arise out of them, and because none but the humble
man does this, therefore he alone can render unto God due thanks, and honor
him in such sort as is convenient. It appears also to many that love does
most highly honor God, inasmuch as when a man has set his love upon God, he
holds ever the eye of his mind open, steadfast and fixed upon his glory,
according to which with a right intent, he orders all his life. And further
he is forced by the love that he bears him, not only for his honor to do
wonderful things, but also to procure others to do the like.

Wherefore he honors him by all means that he possibly can. There have been
also some which have said that Faith does greatly honor God, because yt he
which believes in a thing of so great importance, as is the salvation of the
soul, does put his trust in God, with forsaking all his own wisdom and
himself, and does wholly commit himself to the governance of God. And I say
that it must be marked and considered that every virtue does honor God,
otherwise it should not be truly a virtue, and so much the more they hoonour
God as they are in themselves more perfect. Every one that desires to honor
God most highly, ought to seek it not by having one only virtue, but all:
inasmuch as they be all spiritual sisters, indissolubly united and knit
together, it is impossible that one of them should be possessed without all the
other. Every person therefore, which desires to honor God perfectly, ought to
labor diligently, not only to have all, but to have in the highest degree
perfect virtues and to put them in exercise. And for that the knowledge of God
is the mother of all virtues, whereoff of necessity they do grow, and in such
sort depend, that in us can not be any virtue, without ye knowledge of God:
and where that is, must needs be al virtues, more or less perfect, according
to the measure of the knowledge which they have of God. Therefore all those
which desire to honor God most highly, and thereby to have al virtues, in the
chiefest degree perfect, ought to labor to have a supreme light and spiritual
feeling of God: forasmuch as it is not possible, that any should have a
lively knowledge of the goodness of God, except he love him, put his trust and
confidence in him, ascribe to him all goodness, commends him, give him
thanks, humbl^th himself vnt him, is ready to suffer for his honor and glory,
and lastly does not praise and honor him by all means yt he possibly can: yea
it is needful, that according as he has of God more or less light, he be in
all virtues more or less perfect. Seeing then yt to honor God highly, we must
have of his supreme light, with hu^bling our selves unto God, let us beseech
him yt he would grant it us, so that we may render to him al praise, honor and
glory thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

What thing we ought to do for to have Faith, and to grow, assure our selves,
and stablish our selves, and continue therein even to the end. Sermon. 12.
THere have been some which being deceived have thought that believing was an
act virtuous and meritorious, therefore voluntary: and that Faith in us
depe^ded in a good part upon our wills: So yt according to their fantasy, for
to have Faith, to grow and be stablished therein, the determination of a man
and the resolving of himself, to be willing to believe avails much, which
(according to the^) is in our power, and those which with greater vyole^ce and
force of their own wills do endeavor themselves to believe ye truth which God
has revealed unto us, have the greater Faith (as they say) and are ye more
steadfast and firm therein. But such as these be do deceive themselves, inasmuch
as Faith is ye gift of god, Ephesians. 2.
and depends not in any sort upon our own will, neither can it be gotfe^ with
humane strength or force. It is very true, yt the understanding is subject and
obedient to the will, in consideration of this or that thing, but it is not so
in agreeing, disagreeing or doubting: yea for natural power, if a matter be
showed it for true, it is driven of necessity to agree thereunto, and that
more or less, after as it is made manifest unto it: but if ye matter show it
self to be false, it cannot but disagree unto it. And (...) y^ will commands
ye contrary, it cannot obey it: and likewise if a matter be showed not
perfectly for true or false, it must needs doubt. The understanding therefore
agrees, disagreeth, and doubts, according as is ye evidence of ye matter,
and not after ye governance of the will: forasmuch as by governance it has no
greater light of matters then it had before in ye beginning, neither does it
appear in any other manner. Yea there be many which living wickedly, and
desiring to be eased from their heart of the torments they feel, for ye fear
which they have of Hell, they are forced to believe verilye that there is none
other life but this, and they have no power to the contrary. If the
understanding agreed according to the governance of the will, we might believe
that which we would, and say without lying that which pleased us, believing to
will that which we spoke, and yet we prove the contrary in our selves: Seeing
that either ye will should be moved without reason, in commanding the
understanding when it believed and agreed unto a matter, and in such case the
governance or Empire should be tyrannical, therefore not virtuous, and
likewise should be the agreement: or else if it should be moved with reason,
and then the understanding should believe it, in such case the governance is
not of will, but by means of those reasons, which moved it to believe so. And
if the agreement or following of things natural and of this present life
depends not on the will, much less does the allowing of things supernatural
and of the other life, as is ye allowing of Faith. Any person might at his own
will, resolve or dispose with himself to confess his faith and moreover to
dye for it: which a very Turk might do, but man has not power to believe at
his own will. It might also be possible that a man were baptized, and not having
a true and lively faith in Christ, yea not believing in him, might dispose
himself for the honor of the world and confession of Christ, even to dye
rather then to deny him: yet in such a case he should be damned, Romans 10 Heb.
11.
for that it is not sufficient to confess Christ with the mouth, but it is
needful that we be righteous, that we believe lively with our heart: neither
can we without Faith please God. Man of himself may easily be stubborn of
his will, but not redily have a true Faith. The having then of Faith is not in
our wills. Wherefore there were certain, which seeing that Faith depended not
immediately upon the will, said that it was in our power, only inasmuch as it
might command the understanding, which went on pondering all those reasons
which serve to declare the true Faith of Christ, the which they believe grows
of humane reasons, and that no man believes but it is with some pledge, as if
our reason were the rule of Faith, and therefore the Queen and Judge of the
secrets of God. It might be that a man were one of the chiefest wise men in the
world (his wisdom likened unto God, yet is foolishness) yea and the most
learned in the holy Scriptures, 1. Cor. 3.
being without spirit and a lively Faith, which does not grow or depend upon
humane reasons, but comes down from heaven, Ephesians, 2.
for that it is a free gift of God. We be of our selves so proud, ready to
distrust in God, and to put confidence in our selves, so blind concerning
divine matters, and so feeble of strength yt we can not by any means be lifted
up of our selves, to so great a light as the light of a true and lively Faith
is, which should not be a light inspired and supernatural, if we could purchase
it by our own strength. All our strength then suffices not to have Faith. The
natural light, nor the light purchased is not sufficient. It is not sufficient
to be borne among the faithful, nor to be baptized, nor yet to be instructed
of Christian things. The Law, the Prophets, nor the having of the holy
scriptures be not sufficient: It is not sufficient to be learned in them, to
have heard the Gospel preached, neither miracles: for if that all those things
were sufficient, the Philosophers, the Scribes and Phariseyes, the^ had more
faith then all others. Yea the testimony of Saints is not sufficient, as
appears in John Baptist, Joan. 1. Joan. 3. Mat. 11.
who albeit for the most part testified unto his disciples that Jesus (and not
he) was Christ, yet they believed him not, wherefore he was constrained to send
them to Christ. Yea the outward testimony of Christ is not sufficient, as it
appears in the Scribes and Phariseyes, which did not believe although Christ
himself bare witness. We must therefore have the testimony of the holy
Ghost, he must open our minds, touch our hearts, lighten us inwardly and
stablish us. For which cause Christ did not only preach and work miracles, but
also prayed, and not only dyed, rose again and ascended into heaven, but sent
ye holy Ghost, as was necessary to ye end yt we might have Faith. It is seen
by ye Apostles, yt they never did believe perfectly until they were filled with
ye holy Ghost. We must with Mary conceive Christ, not with humane reason, but with
ye holy Ghost. Then ye divine and supernatural Faith, does not depend upon our
own strength, nor on our own will, neither on our own study, good wit, wisdom,
knowledge, or humane prudence. And this, because there is no certain imprinting
made in our fa^tasie, by seeing, hearing, or feeling: nor yet is it an act of
humane reason, neither an allowing of ye understanding wrought by the
governance of yt will, but it is an imprinting of matters revealed and
supernatural wrought in ye spirit: an act of divine reason, and an agreement
made by ye inward inspiratio^ and persuasion of ye holy Ghost: wherefore it
depends not upon any outward and sensible matter. Thou will (peradventure)
say, seeing yt it depends not on me, I may and ought to despair of ever
having it. I answer, thou ought so much to hope yt thou shall obtain it,
as God of his great liberality, on who^ Faith depends without any
proportion, does love thee more then thou love thy self. And woe unto us, if
it were our parts to purchase it, with our own strength or if it should
depend in any part upon us: it is better so that it be wholly in the hand of
God. If thou will say, this is manifest, that seeing it depends not on me, I
ought not dispose my self to have it, nor yet to prepare me, nor take any
pain thereabout: if yt doing what I could all should be in vain. It must
needs be that God gives it to whom it pleases him. We on the other side may
stand waiting with a courteous hand till God gives Manna from heaven. And I
say that although it be ye gift of God, yet ye wicked who have not Faith,
ought to do all things they possibly can, to have it, and to assay even things
which seem to the^ impossible. And the like ought ye godly to do, that they
might be preserved in Faith and grow therein. Joan. 15. Mat. 7 Romans 14
Not yt the wicked while they are in their impiety, can do any deed
meritorious, or worthy in any sort of it self, yt God should give him Faith:
Inasmuch as being without Christ, no man can do any good work, yea for yt
being evil plants, they can bring forth none other but evil fruits: sins then
be al their fruits: wherefore they be in no wise meritorious of so rich a gift
and present at the hands of God, as Faith is. Yea ye works of Saints, when they
have not ben or shall not be in this present life, were not, neither shall be
worthy of such merit in any wise, yt God should increase or preserve their
Faith. And further I say yt if God were willing to enter into judgment with
them, and without Christ to examine their life and to weigh their works with
thy ballaunce of his Justice, it should be sound that they were worthy of
great punishment, for yt they have sinned, at least in leaving things undone,
inasmuch as in all their actions and deeds, in all their life, through every
estate, place, and time, they have ceased to honor God most highly, as was
convenient for his infinite and divine goodness, and as was due unto him
according to ye vndispe^sable divine and natural law. Romans 3.
It is very true yt being ye members of Christ their sins not only were not
imputed unto the^, but they with al their works done in faith, were grateful and
accepted before god, not for yt they were in any wise worthy, but thorough
Christ and thorough ye mere mercy of God. Psalm. 31
There is the^ for ye world offered unto god, no other merits, but ye merits of
Christ. And it is a most wicked matter to attribute unto ye Saints, yt which is
fit for none but for ye son of god, he alone it is who has purchased for ye
elect, heaven, and all good things, and al men be saved in no wise thorough
their works, but through Christ and through grace, Ephesians, 2.
as Paul declared. Faith the^ is the gift of God, which because no man should
glory of himself, is given thorough Christ, and is by no means purchased
thorough works.

Nevertheless, God will that we should do, whatsoever we could to have it,
with accounting our selves always unworthy. So that our trauayling to have
Faith, must not be for that we should think, that we could merit it, but
because without it we cannot honor God; therefore it is our duty to desire
it, to crave it of God by grace, and to assaye all means possible to obtain
it.

Thou will say, and what can we do to have it? I answer and say, that first
we ought to labor to have a certain fervent desire and longing for Faith,
without which we cannot heartely seek for it, nor crave it of God. And to have
this, we must consider how noble a thing Faith is, how rich, fortunate,
mighty, and needful to salvation: forasmuch as without it, not only we can not
please God, but we be most damnable. It should also be needful for the wicked
to know that they be ignorant thereoff, for that they appearing to have it, as
it chances with the Hipocrites, superstitious people, and false Christians,
do not seek nor desire it, yea they do not humble themselves to crave it of
God, and so the godly ought to consider, that their faith is small, for that a
man does not breathe toward grace, inasmuch as he does not come to the
knowledge of his miseries, and of his weakness to ease him self. And to this
end serves this consideration, that all our strength is not sufficient to
obtain Faith, nor yet our wit, our studies, nor the learning, knowledge, and
wisdom of the world, yea a carnal man by his corrupt nature is most ready to
distrust in God, and is so blind, proud, and affected to himself, that with
his foolish reason of an envious Faith, not only he does not go unto Faith,
but makes a bulwark against it. Iam. 1.
Thou ought therefore believe, that only God who is the Father of light,
can give and will give it thee most largely. And to this end serves the
consideration of his great goodness and large liberality, which is showed us
in his creatures. Then if God cease not to administer unto the most vile
worms continually that which is necessary, so that they go forth and serve
to that end which he has created them it must needs be believed that he
will not forsake the soul for which he created and conserueth al things, yea
for the salvation thereoff be dyed upon the Cross, and he with the material
Sun lighteneth the carnal eyes of those which were his enemies, how should
they not believe then yt he will also lighten the eyes of their minds: Thou
must also stir up thy self with saying thus, if I trust the earth, and
therefore do sow and plant, the Sea and winds, and therefore do sail, men
and that most evil, therefore do make bargains and couenaunts with them, why
should I not much more put my trust in God, the most good, and my best Father?
And because that God does more often make himself known with his goodness in
the holy Scriptures, then in his creatures, therefore we ought to be diligent,
industrious, and careful in the study of them, inasmuch as they do avail
greatly unto faith, especially, if a man considerth, that God who is true, Romans
3.
is he that speaks in them, and the large and great promises which he does
make unto us, for that as by reading a writing, wherein a creadible and honest
man is become thy debtor of a thousand Crowns, gives thee his promise and
faith that he will pay thee them, so in reading in the holy Scriptures the
promises of God, there become to thee in faith, a warrant that God will observe
them. The reading of holy Scriptures also does cause a man much the better to
understand how with a lively faith, Romans 10
the word of God may be preached: for (as Paul said) faith is by hearing,
hearing by the word of Christ. Act. 9.10. and. 8.
God could immediately lighten his, yet to the intent that love might be
exercised amongst us orderly in giving it, the Ministers of his word be
appointed: as is seen in Paul, when he was sent to Annanias in Cornelius,
being sent to Peter, and in Philips coming to the Chamberlain. It is
profitable also for faith to meditate upon the life of Christ. He said to
Thomas, John. 20 Luc. 5
because thou have seen me thou have believed. And the consideration of his
miracles is necessary. Peter because of one only miracle, that he saw of the
fishes, believed, and left all that he had. He saw that which we ought to
do: but perticulerly the consideration of Christ upon the the Cross is
profitable, wherefore Saint John having briefly written the passion of Christ,
John. 20
said. These things are written, that we might believe. And because we cannot
have trust in any person whom we despise, as is seen with the fellow
Countrymen and natural brothers of Christ, Joan. 17.
which believed not in him, therefore we must needs constrain our selves to
have (...) ^^^^rence, and also be affectionated to the truth, to the end we
may not perish. We had need also to endeavor our selves, as much as in us
lies, to forsake sin, especially arrogancy, Joan. 5
stubburnnesse, and pride, for because that as Christ said, he could not
trust in, and seek the glory of the world, Mar. 1
yea, we ought to repent us of yt which is past. Wherefore Christ preaching
said, repent and believe the Gospel. We ought to remove all lettes and
obstracts from the light of God, 2. Pet. 1. Psalm. 33.
yea, and with good woorks let us draw near unto him, so that we being
lightened, may certefie our selves every day more and more of our vocation, and
so grow in faith. But understand, that whereas to have worldly things, is
needful to have strength, diligence, science, wisdom, prudence, towardness,
subtlety, craft, actiuitie, sleightes, and humane arts: to have Faith is
needeful to have a simple mind, sincere, humble and pure: and these be those
little ones and clean to whom be revealed the divine secrets of God, Mat. 11
which do receive the Gospel and which by faith do see God. Mat. 6
And although the foresaid things cannot of us be done without the grace of
God, yet it is our duty not only to know that we are bound to do them,
yea and most diligently to force our selves to do them, Mar. 9 Luc. 17.
and to assay even things which be to us impossible. But besides all this, we
had need to make fervent and continual prayer: we ought to make our petition
unto Christ, with the blind: that he would give us light: and to beseech with
the Father of him that was possessed with an evil spirit, that he would help
our unbelief: Deuteronomy. 23 Mar. 7. 2. Cor. 2. Mat, 13
and with the Apostles entreat that he would increase our Faith, yea, with a
new heart and understanding, so that with the word of his virtue, he would
open the ears of our hearts, as he did to the deaf, and would give us ears
to hear his word inwardlye. If then we would have light, let us go to Christ
the light of the world and our only Master, inasmuch as, without that his
spirit, without his favor, grace and inward word, the which is never without
fruits, we cannot do any thing that is acceptable before God. The reading
also of the word of God is profitable for the commendations of our brethren in
their prayers, so that praying for us, as Christ healed the man sick of the
palsy, when he saw the Faith of them which carried him, so likewise he would
save us, not for the worthynesse of our works, or of our Faith, but by his
mere grace, so ye we may, as we ought, yield unto God al honor and glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the true Caball. Sermon. xiii.
GOD upon ye mount Synai gave by Moses a law unto the world, Exodus 20
and that so perfect a one, yt to the perfection theroff could nothing be
added, inasmuch as it is contained all things profitable and necessary to
salvation. And all be it that Moses wrote the same law by the will of God, yet
the Hebaewes say, that he was forbidden to express with letters, the great
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD, the which were hidden under a
coueringe of the letter revealed to Moses himself.

Mat. 7
And this, because that holy things should not be given to dogs, nor pearls
should be cast before swine, wherefore until the time of Esdras, the Caball,
that is the revealed and secrat understanding of the holy Scriptures, was (as
they say) only in the custody of certain old men, whereoff when one dyed,
they chose an other in his place, and revealed the laws to him. But
afterward being captives and dispearsed, and that many of them dyed, fearing
least the law should be utterly lost, they began to write it out: and after to
corrupt and alter it in such sort, that the Hebrews be now ignorant of the
true Caball, and ye which they have, is altogether a vain, superstitious,
mischievous, and devilish Caball. The true Caball is a divine knowledge
revealed: and is so perfect, that he which has it, has the light of all
divine secreats, can do merueylous things, and whatsoever he will, obteineth
that which he demands, has that he desires, satisfies his will and is
most happy. And forasmuch as it has pleased God of his grace to reveal it to
me, I have determined to give light thereoff, to his honor and glory, unto
those who be ignorant and blind. There is found in the five books of Moses
a name of such and so great virtue, that who so knows it, and bears it upon
his back, may know how and does obstaine whatsoever he desires. And this is
that name to which every knee must bow and do reverence, Philip. 2 Mar. 16.
Act. 3 John. 16. Romans 10 Act. 2.4 1. John. 2
because it is above all other names, and contains in it Princedome, that is
to say, JESUS. Of this name had Moses knowledge, likewise the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, the Apostles, and all ye Saints both of the old and new Testament.
By virtue of this name they had their so great light, wrought all their
miracles, and obtained all that they desired and craved, as afterward Christ
promised to his Apostles. Act. 10 and. 4
He that calls upon the name of Jesus is safe, we have no other name under
heaven, in which we can be saved, or have any good thing, but only Jesus. By
which name alone our sins be forgiven us, and we receive of God all gifts,
benefits, and graces. But note that in the holy Scriptures, by the name is
signified the person named. So that whereas it is written, that by the name of
Jesus, we have remission of sins, and salvation, power to become the sons
of God, to work miracles, Ion. 1 Mat. 6 Ion. 14
and to obtain all things, by that name of Jesus, it is understood of Jesus
himself. For the virtue consists not in the letter nor in the name, as the
superstitious Antechristians do say and believe: it consists not in voice,
in writing, no nor in conceit, but in Christ himself. If thou shall read the
holy Scriptures, thou can not find any observations of words in the
Apostles, when they wrought miracles, and likewise in Moses and the other
Saints. They therefore did not receive grace by virtue of words, but by virtue
of Christ. Wherefore we had need to do otherwise, then to pronounce or carye
the name of Jesus about our necks. We must carye Jesus thorough faith and
spirit in our hearts: And they that do so possess him, be great
Caballistes, Romans 16. Ion. 14.
and so much ye greater as with a greater Faith they embrace him as their own:
as were the Apostles, Moses, the Prophets, and other great Saints. In Christ
himself consists al virtue of ye true Caball, hidden from us before time, and
thorough Christ clearly and manifestly revealed, and there is found no other
true Caball besides this, for if there were any other, Christ who made known
to his Apostles all that he had heard from the Father would have revealed it,
and so would the Holy Ghost, seeing that it does teach all truth (as Christ
has promised) and the Apostles have preached unto others: but we see
manifestly that they never taught any other Caball then Christ.

The true Cabal therefore consists not in charecters, in Images or letters,
wherefore Moses could not write it, nor yet Christ, but it consists in
possessinge thorough faith and in spirit Jesus. Whereof because the Hebrews
are ignorant, therefore they be without the true Caball. And only those which
have Jesus in their hearts, be the true Cabalistes, for that they first by
knowing Christ, do know all shinges, inasmuch as in him be hidden al ye
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Christ reueleath unto his
friends al ye which he heard from the Father, Col. 2 Ion. 15.
that is all things needful and profitable for their salvation. Those
things which do not appertain unto them to know (as for ye day when ye son
of god shall come to judge the world) Christ himself confesses that ye Father
has not revealed to him. Luc. 13.
The holy ghost instructs the elect of God, and them yt have Christ in their
hearts of all ye which is expedient for their salvation, 1. Cor. 2.
and we ought to desire no more. The spirit of Christ goes seeking thorough
all, even to the profound things of God, as Paul did write, 1. Cor. 1.
therefore they which by faith do possess him, do know all the divine secrets
of God, profitable therefore and needful to serve to ye glory of God, and for
the health of the soul. This is the true Cabal revealed to Moses, to the
Prophets, to ye Apostles and Saints. 1. Cor. 2.
This wisdom did Paul preach among those which were perfect, yt is, Christ,
wisdom, righteousness, our sanctification and redemption, and so did all the
Apostles, as they yt were great Cabalistes. Likewise Christ forasmuch as,
albeit he was crucified thorough infirmity, yet he is risen again most
mighty in virtue, 2. Cor. 13 Mat. 28.
yea, all power has been given him both in heaven and in earth, therefore
those which by faith have Christ in their hearts, have an high abundance of
virtue and power, so yt not only in ye name of Christ they work miracles,
Ephesians. 1. Mar. 16.
such as be fit and equal with the miracles of Christ, but greater, as he
himself promised, Other virtues have their limits, but unto faith all things
are possible, Ion. 14.
and to him that believes and has Christ in his heart: all enterprises are
small, and this because he does not take them in hand, but to the glory of
GOD, and being moved by force of the spirit, Ion. 18.
whereunto every thing gives place, as the whole multitude fell down before
Christ. He is safe that has Christ in his heart, there is none yt can hurt
him, yea, Romans 8.
every thing serves to his salvation. He also which has Christ in his heart,
obtayneth whatsoever he desires, being thereto moved by the spirit of Christ,
which is always heard. He himself who is most faithful, has promised us,
Ion. 10.
that if we ask any thing in his name we shall be always heard, and further
have whatsoever we desire: John. 16.
for that Christ the son of God and his heir has promised us so, unto whom
the father has put all things in power, and he that has Christ has all, and
that for because he is ordered according to the good will of God, and is
contented with that which he has, John. 13.
and which it pleases God to bestow upon him, without desiring any more, and
for as much as God gives not his own son to any, but that with him he
gives all good things: therefore he which has Christ by faith in his heart,
as his brother, the son of GOD, heir and Lord of all, it is profitable
enough for him in all things, both in his salvation, and to the glory of God.
Faith sets us in possession of all, satisfies our will, and makes us most
happy. Let us pray therefore God that he would give us faith, so that we may
yield unto him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Of the triumph of Faith. Sermon. xiiii.
THere is not found in the world a more weak creature then man when he is
without faith: for that not only a seely woman will make him her prisoner, so
that he cannot be master of himself, but being a slave also of his immoderate
affectitions and passsions, shall ever be turmoyled, offended, disquieted and
tumnbled on the waueringe wheel of vain shadows of the world. So that as a
feeble and unarmed stranger, who trauayleth alone thorough a thick and dark
wood, full of most cruel wild beasts and thieves, if he does but perceive a
bough wagge, he trembles for fear. Even so a man whilst that he makes his
course in this present life, if he be without faith, he is afraid of every thing,
he cannot be safe by any means, he has all the devils for his enemies, the
world, the flesh, and himself. He is ready to distrust in God, and in men he
ought not trust, yea, he is afraid even of himself, and this because not
having God by him, he has the contrary, and he to whom God is an enemy,
Luc. 11.
to him every thing is hurtful: like as every creature is profitable to them
who have God* for their friend. I would not now thou should think, that God
had in the beginning created man so feeble and imperfect as he is now. Romans 8.
Forasmuch as like as in all other perfections, he made him superior to every
creature, likewise also in power, so that bearing rule over all other, nothing
could hurt him, he was full of God and of his virtue. Genesis 1
But after that by sin man was separated from God, he lost that perfect
virtue. And albeit that God assisteth every creature, yet he leaves him the
bridle upon his neck, after that, distrusting him, he presumes of himself,
wherefore he remains feeble and impotent, and so much the more as that falling
from that high divine liberty, he remains bound with the iron cheynes of
human affections, and is plunged in the myrie puddle of this world, in which
he should still ever have been, if the son of God putting upon him our
frail flesh, had not united himself to us, with communicating that his divine
virtue. It is needful therefore for to be strong, Luc. 24.
that we be lifted up thorough faith, and being united to God by the means
of Christ, we do embrace him as our own: and further with receiving his
spirit, to be clothed with his virtue. And then being exalted above the vain
shadows of this world, having GOD for our God, we need not fear, saying
with Paul if God be with us, who shall be against us: The faithful have God in
them, and therefore they be feared of all the unfaithful, although they were
armed with all the force of the world: Joan. 8. Genesis 21. Genesis 26. 1. Reg. 19
Mar. 6. Act. 5 1. Reg. 17 Luc. 4. Joan. 18. Luc. 10.
as is manifest in Abraham and Isaac of whom Abimelech was afraid, although
concerning humane strength he was far mightier. And likewise Saul feared David:
and Herod John Baptist. At ye presence also of the Apostles the Princes and
chief men of the Jews were amassed. He that is strong thorough Faith in God,
with David cares not for worldly weapons, and with Christ passing safely
thorough the midst of his enemies, every thing gives him place, as the
multitude of Jews fell down before Christ. Faith is so mighty, that he which
is armed therewith, throws to ground the great Devil and brings his
kingdom to nothing; 1. Pet. 1.
wherefore Peter exhorts us to be strong in Faith. Those which have a lively
Faith in God, if they were in the midst of all the adversities of the world,
yet they should be altogether happy: and this because, Act. 7.
as Stephen did the Heavens being open and seeing Christ in their favor, they
know that God is their father, who has so singular a care of them, Romans 8.
that every thing shall serve to their salvation. Wherefore they live without
any servile fear, without suspicion, anguish, vexation and worldly misery,
free from all disdain, troubles adversities and evils, with Christ walking
safe, Joan. 6. Dan. 5.
upon the raging waves of the sea of this present life, can not be hurt. But
we be like unto Peter, because that when we be in a small ship of worldly
prosperity, we seek sometimes to go unto him upon the waves of adversities:
and afterward when we be there, for that we faint in Faith and distrust in our
selves of divine grace, fearing not to deny him in persecutions, we begin to
be drowned therein. 1. Joan. 5.
There is nothing that can overcome the world but only Faith. God does
communicate his strength to those which believe, yea he gives them Christ with
all his virtues, graces, victories, triumphs and felicities, he which believes
is found always and in every estate happy, so that in poverty, he is found
rich, in persecution, quiet, in dangers, safe, in necessity, liberal, in
sickness, hayle, in infamy and dishonor of the world, glorious, and in
miseries, happy. He ^^^weth that God is ever merciful unto him, and so much
the ^^re merciful, as he has the more need. When a man has Faith he fears
not death, yea seeing that to dye is none other but to pass into a more happy
estate, accounting death for life, he seeks and desires for it, with Paul.
Unto him that believes every thing is possible: Philip. 1 Mar. 11.
inasmuch as, he that walks by Faith, is moved with the spirit of God, which
brings to good success every enterprise that he takes in hand, yea to him
that believes, every thing is easy, forasmuch as Faith eases all labor and
pain, makes light every heavy thing, and makes sweet all things that be
sour, as appears in the Martyrs unto whom even death was pleasant. With the
shield of Faith we may defend our selves from the poisoned arrows of the
Devils, and make us able to disdain all their power, and this because that
such as have Faith, know that the Devils can-not do any thing, but what God
will, and so much the more, as they see that God keeps them and uses them
for instruments to his glory, and the felicity of the elect. Mat. 16. Romans 5,
Sins do not reign in them, do not prevail against them, which by Faith be
ingrafted in Christ, there is none that can remain without pricks of
conscience but he that has a lively Faith, whose sins be pardoned thorough
Christ. Faith then resists and vanquisheth all, Joan. 19.
where an ignorant body although he used all his strength, and were armed with
all moral virtues, he could not resist against the assaults and force of the
world, of the flesh, and of the Devil: which appears in Pilate to whom being
said, that if he let go Christ, he should not be Caesar's friend, he being
overcome with fear of the world (as one that depended not upon God, but on
Caesar) gave judgment that he should be crucified: which he would not had
done, if he had had a true Faith in God. Faith, as that which is the mother of
all virtues, Mar. 28.
includes in it the strength of them all, wherefore he that is armed with
Faith, is most mighty. I will say moreover, that as Christ, to whom the Father
has given al power in heaven and in earth, can not be overcome, but
overcomes and triumphs over all: so those who by Faith be united, are his
members, and have the self same spirit, Heb. 11.
are not only invincible, but do triumph over all. Faith as a thing that is
above nature and custom, does overcome the concupiscences, beats down to
the ground unbridled passions, confounds carnal wisdom and mortifieth
wholly the carnal man, so that being borne again, we do change our
companyes, friendships, thoughts, Mat. 2.
desires wills, manners and life. It appears by ye wise men who came from the
East, how much Faith is able to do, seeing that when they having understanding
that Christ was borne, immediately and without any difficulty, leaving their
pleasant country, and all that they had, they were moved to make so long a
voyage. And albeit not finding by the way, but in dark Jerusalem, that they
were moved to seek Jesus, wisdom moved them yt they should not follow ye way
any further, yet Faith preuayling in the^ they ceased not, yea knowing how much
it would displease Herod, to understand yt the King of the Jews was born,
they ceased not to confess and say openly, with zeal and liberty, that
Christ was borne, with enquiring of the place: and lastly, understanding with he
ought to be borne in Bethlem, although no body will led them, yet they ceased
not to go thither with the same zeal. And their Faith was so perfect, that
albeit he was found in a rude and simple place, and wrapped in simple clowtes,
their Faith did not therefore fail them, but they worshipped him for the
Son of GOD. Faith is so constant, might ye and in^^^^ble, that if it saw
Christ dead upon the Cross in the midst of two Thieves, forsaken of all
men, denied, scourged and wronged, it would in no wise be offended at him, it
would not faint, but with the good Thief it would confess him to be the Son
of God. oan. 19.
The virtue of Faith, appears in Joseph and Nicodemus, seeing that at such
time as he could not without great danger and shame, show himself a friend
of Jesus, being known for one of his loving Disciples, craved of Pilate the
body of Jesus, and buried it honorably, trusting to have life by him who had
seen death. And that I must needs more say, Faith is so mighty, that it
overcomes even God, inasmuch as, he is forced to do unto us those graces,
which with a lively Faith we are promised to have of him, otherwise it must
needs be said, ye the goodness of God were limited and bounded out, and so
little that it could not answer to our hope. Seeing then that without Faith we
be most feeble, although we were young, hayle and armed with all worldly force,
and on the other side, albeit we were without strength, weak, forsaken of al
ye world, and further if all creatures were our enemies, having true Faith in
God we should be in every respect so mighty ye we should triumph over all the
enemies of God. Let us pray him therefore that he would give us this Faith, so
that we my render to him, all praise honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Of the triumph of the Truth. Sermon. 15.
THe Truth is so mighty, that not only it cannot be extinguished nor
overcome, but preuayleth always against the enimyes thereoff and triumphs
above all things. First it is so full of force and strength, that not only it
cannot be extinguished: it may well behidden for a time, but it is never
brought to confusion. If it might be yt in the world were no Faith, that
Charity were quenched, Justice diminished, Hope quyte dead, and all other
virtues brought to naught, yet it were not possible that truth should fail,
inasmuch as, if a matter has been once true, it must needs be that it be ever
after true, for that it has been a certain time truth, it is needful and
necessary that it be truth ever after, neither can it be contrary by any
means. If thou have committed an offense, it will always be that thou have
committed it, and it will never be possible, that it shall be by thee undone:
and so likewise, if thou have done a virtuous deed, (it must be considered yt
we take heed of vicious deeds) and exercise our selves in works of virtue.
Truth then is without defect, Romans 1.
it cannot be extinguished, it well may for a time be hidden, oppressed, and
buried by the wicked. But whereas other virtues, when they are oppressed be
feeble, and many times do faint: Truth, when it is impugned, or fought against,
awaketh it self, takes strength again, Esdr. 3.4
and shows it self more manifest, mighty and glorious. Truth then as that
which is invincible, not only continues safe and without any fear in the
midst of all the enemies, and as being most mighty confounds and
overcomes them all, but also comfort, gives a mind and strength, to al
those which love it and will draw near unto it, so that ye innocent fears not
to appear before the tribunal seat of Justice, yea he that has truth on his
side, Psalm. 90.
shall appear safe before the Judgment seat of God. Truth always keeps
company with those that suffer thorough love, and gives them Hope, comfort
them, brings them consolation, it is a shield, with which they may be
defended from all the strikings and wounds of the world: and moreover, it
makes persecutions pleasant, causes that in miseries they be happy, and
lastly with discovering it self, it does not only deliver from false
miseries, but makes men more glorious then ever they were. Peradventure thou will say, that I might the better know the victories and triumphs of the truth,
I would know what thing truth is: To this I say, that as if thou did make a
print on a little piece of wax with a seal, and afterward having put this
seal amongst many others, within a while after would seek it out and know
which it was, the way should be to prove all, with the print made in that wax,
for in so doing, no other seal would fit the print in all respects as ye right
seal which printed it that alone would fit it, wherefore thou would say, I
have found the right feale which I sought. So likewise that thing is truth,
which fitteth the understanding, or true according to the very perfect
property (after some men's opinion) which we have of that thing: and it is
seen by experience that when a man goes on seeking to understand the truth,
his understanding is never perfectly satisfied, but when he has found it, then
it remains satisfied, quiet and contented. And forasmuch as in the world
there is in truth nothing, which wholly does fill, satisfy, make quiet and at
rest, and is fit to our understanding, 1. Tim. 6
but God, therefore he alone is truth. But for ye God in his majesty, dwells
in a light which we cannot come unto and that only in Christ in whom dwells
all the fullness of his divinity, Col. 2.
is showed us by Ged, and may of us be comprehended, Joan. 14
therefore Christ is said to be truth it self: as he said of himself. Christ
alone therefore is he, who being the very truth does satisfy and content us,
neither ought we to marvel any thing heereoff, seeing that in him alone be
hidden all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Col. 2.
So that in Christ, as in him who is the end of the Law, not only be verified
and fulfilled all shadows, figures, sacrifices, oracles, prophecies and
scriptures of the old Testament, yea in him as in an abridgement, Romans 10 1.
Cor. 1. Joan. 15.
God having put all virtues profitable and necessary for our salvation, and
being his own son, he has revealed him to us most plainly. He himself said
that he had made known to us all that which he had heard from the Father, in
such sort that in him is verified that, which Esaye had prophesied before,
Esaias. 10 1. Co. 1.
that is, that the end being shortened righteousness should flow. It is
therefore no marvel, if Paul preached Christ crucified, the virtue of God,
and wisdom, and among the Corinthians, he adjudged not good to understand
any other thing but Christ, him alone he preached, tasted, 1. Cor. 2.
and had before the eyes of his mind, him only he studied, knew, and he was
Truth, so that Christ was to him all things, and without Christ he saw no
things but shadows, vanities and falshoode. All truths therefore profitable
and necessary to salvation, be in Christ, and in him alone men ought to seek
them as in their proper spring, there can be in us no very truth, except Christ
living in us, Gal. 2. Joan. 14. Psalm. 15.
we be pertakers of him, who is truth it self. Forasmuch as man of himself
and without Christ, is a liar and vanity it self. Now like as, albeit the
truth is always persecuted of the wicked and fought against, yet as that which
is invincible, resists against all, yea how much the more it is oppressed, so
much the more it appears manifest, mighty and glorious, so that in the end
it vanquisheth and tryumpheth over all his enemies: so Christ who is Truth it
self, although he has been always persecuted, like as he shall be also even
till the day of the last Judgment, yet he overcomes, Psalm. 8. Heb. 2.
vanquisheth and tryumpheth over all, so that at length every thing shall
continue subject unto him. And his Virtue shall be such and so great, that
how much the more his enimyes seek to oppress him, to subdue him, to hyde
or keep him close, and to darken his glory, so much the more, he will show
himself mighty, pure and glorious, which thing is seen always by
experyence, even from the beginning of the world, until this our time. In
that, first, like as the Jews killed Christ, so also (as Christ expressed) the
Devil their Father was likewise a man^^ear from the beginning, Joan. 8. Romans 5.
and this inasmuch as seeing that for the sins of the first parents, he was
come to seduce the whole world thinking that in such a case, God would not
vouchsafe to send his own son by tempting man, he thought to hinder the
coming of Christ, and to darken his glory. This also (as some think) was the
sin of the Dragon and of his company, when they fought in heaven with Michael
and with the good Angels, Apoc. 12 Ephesians. 1.
that is, for that they would not acknowledge their salvation to be thorough
Christ, they would not accept him for their Lord and head, they strove against
him, and willingly slew him, in seeking as much as they could, not only to
darken his glory, but to stop that he should not come into the world. But like
as then the Devils being chased out of Heaven by the virtue of Christ, Apoc. 12
Christ showed himself in spirit mighty and glorious: so also, after that
the Serpent had deceived Eve, he supposed that he should have had victory
against Christ, but God said unto him, of this woman, by whose means thou
think to have triumph over Christ, Genesis 3
shall spring seed, that is Christ, who with tearing down all thy force,
shall break thy head, and shall declare unto the world the great virtue,
power and glory of Christ. Also the great Devil sought afterward means, that
in the world were multiplied so many, and such great sins, that the world
being altogether corrupted and full of malice, Genesis 6.
God was so angrye, that he vouchsafed not to send Christ, yea it even
repented him that he had made man. But God in saving ye Arc, framed by ye
means of Noe, figuring and showing, yt he would likewise save his church and
his elect by the means of Christ, declared unto ye world more manifestly the
glory of Christ. To the very same end the great Devil had at the time of
Abraham, Genesis 22.
Isaac, and Jacob, inclyned all the world to Idolatry, and God making them
refrain, did by them make manifest and discover the remembrance of Christ and
his glory every day more and more. The Devil also having afterward understood,
that Christ must descend of Abraham, thorough Isaac and Jacob, with intent to
extinguish and root out all his stock, and so to let the Nativity of Christ,
procured Pharao to oppress in Egypt all the people of Israel.

But GOD so much the more increasing them, made also more famous the glory of
Christ: And forbicause he could not by this mean obtain his intent, be
sought yet to hinder the incarnation of the word, by causing all the male
children of the Hebrews to be slain, but GOD in saving Moses who delivered
the people from Pharaos bondage with so great signs, Exodus 1
figured the true delyueraunce of the people of God, from the tyranny of the
Devil, which is wrought by Christ, and partly declared, what and how great the
power and glory of Christ should be. Satan also ceased not, after that the
Hebrews had passed the red sea, still to hinder that Christ should not come
into the world, to assay by diverse means for to bring the^ to death, even
with stirring up so many heathen people against him, but always he remained
with confusion, and Christ showed himself in spirit and virtue, evermore
manifest and famous. Also when as afterward in the land of promise they had
with their sins and unfaithfulness, (as it were) cancelled and raced out
quite the remembrance of Christ. God by means of his Prophets refreshed it
again. And lastly when the Scribes and Phareses with all their human
traditions and Ceremonies, concerning the face of Moses, had darkend the glory
of Christ, then the son of God appearing upon the earth, ye Angels, the
shepheardes, the star, the wise men, Anna, Symion, discovered him to be the
Savior of the world. Herod persecuted him even to the death, and he then in
giving spiritual life to the innocent, showed himself to be the life of the
world. Satan devised that John Baptyst should be in great reputation and
reverence with the Hebrews for to darken the glory of Christ, and then it came
to pass, that not only Saint John magnified Christ, with saying, Joan. 1
behold the Lamb of GOD which takes away the sins of the world: and
said. He is Christ, Mat. 3
not I, neither am I worthy to unbuckle his shoes, but also his Father from
heaven declared unto all the world, that he was his beloved son. The Devil
sought in the wilderness to make him fall, but he remained with confusion and
vanquished. The Scribes and Pharesies labored with false reports and
slanders to spotte his innocence, and Christ with his pure doctrine and holy
life, showed himself every day more clear, bright and pure: The Scribes and
Pharesies labored to persuade the people, that Christ not only was not the
true Messiah, but that he was contrary to the law, and the Prophets, and
Christ with verifiyng in himself all the prophecies, and with having in the
mount Thabor, the testemonie of Helyas and Moses, showed all the contrary.
How much the more they sought to keep close the divinity of Christ, so much
the more with miracles he showed forth the same.

Also how much the more they sought to put down his miracles, so much the
more they came to light. At last they devised with murmurings, backbitinges,
infamyes, with slanders, false accusations, and witnesses, with wicked
judgments, with abuses, beatinges, with settinge him at naught, as rybalde,
and with hanginge him upon the Cross between two thieves, as the principal
and last they thought with so shameful a death to extinguishe all his fame,
Joan. 8.
name, creadite, and reputation, and then did he most singulerlye show
himself the light of the world, and more full of force and power then ever
before.

They buried him with sealing up the Sepulcher, and watchinge it, but thereby
they made his resurrection so much the more meruaylous, and glorious. They
corrupted the Souldyers with money, to the intent they might say that he was
not risen again, but that his Disciples had taken away his body, and CHRIT
showed himself to his Disciples risen again.

And lastly, when they had sought with all their power to subdue him, then was
he glorious ascended into Heaven.

And for that they could not persecute him any more in the flesh, therefore
they began to persecute him in his elect, with whom he was still abidinge
with his spirit, Mat. 28
but on the day which we call Pentecoste he so filled them with light,
zeal, strength, and grace, that without any fear they began to preach
openly: they were forbidden with many threats by the Princes of the Jews, to
preach Christ any more, Act. 2.
but they could not refrain from it, Act. 4.
they said that they could not hold their peace of that which they had
heard and seen, and it was more meet they should obey GOD then men. They
were oftentimes imprisoned with many injuries, beaten and scourged, and they
with rejoicing suffered all, and gave thanks to GOD, Act. 5
that they were made worthy to suffer for CHRIST, they went forth preachinge
more vehementlye then ever they did before.

And lastly, when the Jews, because they would hide the truth of the Gospel,
chased the Apostles out of Iewrye, then was it that they began to preach
thorough out all the world.

And albeit in every place they were gaynesayde and forbidden, yet the world
could not withstand the wisdom given by God to his Apostles.

And lastly, how much the more Tyrauntes did seek to extinguish and deface
the truth of the Gospel, Act. 28
with sheddinge the blood of Martyrs, so much the more it showed it self
clear, brighte, glysteringe, famous, mighty, and glorious. So that not only
the godly do serve to the glory of Christ, but also the wicked against their
wills.

Finally, the Antechristians, as those which be above all others the greatest
enemies of Christ, have devised with all possible craft, subtlety,
perverseness, malice, deceit, and strength, to hide and quench out the clear
light of the Evangelical truth, and this with their such false doctrines,
humayne inventions, and devilish, approved with wonders (wrought therefore as
Paul says) by Satan, 2. The. 2
with wicked Ceremonies and religions, with hipocrisies, and feigned holiness,
with superstitions, and Idolatryes, dissemblinges, flatteryes, promises,
gifts, and not sufficiency, false reports, infamies, threateninges,
persecutions, tyrannies, and great cruelties, and all under a show of goodness.

And furthermore they have labored to bring to naught the faith of Christ,
with all dishonestie, simonie, extortion, treasons, hatreds, partiality,
wars, and sins of the world. So that not many years since, there was none
upon earth that had a true faith in Christ. Notwithstanding, Luc. 10.
for as much as truth is so mighty and pure, that how much the more it is
fought against and withstoode, it shines the more, therefore it must needs be
said, and believed, that like as the persecution against Christ made by
Antechrist and by his members, has been the most wicked, cruel, and devilish
of all others: Even so the truth of the Gospel, is made manifest with greater
virtue, brightness, cleerenesse, and light, as now in this our time is seen
such a beginning, that every one ought to take courage in confessing Christ,
without fear openly: and so much the more as by faith we know that Christ who
is truth, is ever present with his virtue, and grace, to all them which suffer
for his love. He strengthens their minds, comfort them, ayedeth and
gives them strength: he makes their persecutions pleasant, and making them
safe at last, they do triumph over all the enemies of God.

Seeing then that Christ who is truth, not only is inuinsible in himself and
in his elect, but vanquisheth, overcomes, and triumphs over all: Let us
endeavor our selves to embrace him with a supreme faith for our own, and to
have him continually in our hearts, so that preuaylinge against all the
enimyes of GOD, we may render to our eternal Father all honor, and glory,
thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the mean how to bring to a unity all Faithes, Religions, and Sects, and
chiefly the Papists with the Protestants. Sermon. xvi.
LIke as there is not found in the world any thing, which is in it self more
honest, rich, merry, and fortunate, to God more acceptable, and to us more
profitable, then true concord, unity and peace: so also there is not found any
thing which is in it self more blameworthy, miserable, and unhappy, which
more does displease God, and is to us more hurtful then discord, disunion,
discention, and war, all which albeit be wicked, yet those which be of faith,
be so much the more wicked, as that they be matters of the more importance,
and as the persecutions which by them are made, by being made under a form or
color of goodness, be more cruel and durable. It is true that those things
which the false Christians, and especially the Papists do to the true
brethren and members of Christ, be more cruel, inasmuch as they be more
repugning against the truth, Mat. 2
and inasmuch as they be most carnal, with Herod they would not lose their
kingdom, their glory, dignity, treasures, pleasures, and other worldly
benefits, by the which they are moved to persecute Christ, his members and his
Doctrine, although under a pretense of honoring God.

They be also, not only enemies and that civil enemies, but familyar and
inward enemies, therefore the worst.

Which thing considering with my self and seeing that in the world, especially
in this our age, there be so many faithes, opinions, sects, heresies,
religions, diverse rights, laws, rules and sorts of living, wherefore so great
dissentions, discordes, enmities, hatreds, infamies and persecutions, I went on
thinking how there might be any mean to unity all men together, in a uniform
true Faith and Religion. And although some have proved and sought to do the
self same thing and could not, I did not therefore despair, knowing that God
with his grace can do this and a greater matter: and so much the rather for
that I know, yt like as it is necessary yt those which come to an agreement
about ye principles of a science, do agree also about all conclusions whereon
the first principle do depend: so it must needs be that they who agree about
ye principles of Faith, do agree also in all other things necessary to
salvation. And for yt I see that all persons in the world, not only
Christians, but Jews, Turks, Pagans, and all the sects that be found, do
agree in the first and chief point of true Religion, whereon depends all our
salvation that is in believing in God, as if any of them were asked he would so
say: Wherefore I am of opinion not only that it were possible, but easy to
unity all persons in a true Faith, and I marvel greatly how it were possible,
that they should all believe in the self same God, and were notwitstanding so
much differing and contrary in believing other things necessary to salvation:
and so much the more I marvel of false Christians, inasmuch as I see, that
(as they say) they not only believe in God, but in Christ. And moreover
allowing the self same holy Scriptures, they all confess to believe that,
which is contained in the Apostles Creed. But going further in waighing well
the matter, I have seen clearly and manifestly, yt not only the Jews,
Turks, and Infidels, but the Papists do not believe in truth any of ye
Articles of the Faith, do not believe in Christ, nor in God, and further also I
say, that they know not God, in such sort as is necessary to know him. They
have in deed a certain idle barreine and dead opinion of God, and a certain
obscure knowledge, but it is none such as suffices to salvation. A body may
have some light of God, Romans 1.
as the Philosophers had, and likewise of the Scriptures as the Jews had: but
without Christ we can have no sufficient light of god, Col. 2
for that Christ alone is the lively Image of God, his countenance, in the
which is discovered to us sufficiently, the light of the world, the way and
mean to go unto God: and only those which see and know Christ, John. 8. and.
14
do see and know the Father. Wherefore Paul writing to the Galathians, said
unto them that they could not know God, when they were without Christ. This
is the chief and principal sin of the Turks, of the Jews, of the
Infidelles, and of the false Christians, not to know God, and for this they
shall be punished. Ephesians. 2
He then that is without Christ, is without God, as Paul did write, he has not
God for his God, nor for the latter end: The world can do more in such a one
then God, and he is moved always to work, not for the glory of God, but for
his own gain.

In Christ therefore alone is God revealed, with his so great goodness and
grace, that he draws us unto him more effectuallye then the world, so that
despising our selves, with all our earthlye things and pleasures, we go to
the glory of God.

And then we know and feel God, not only for his respecting us, as our
benefactour, and one who is good unto us, but much rather absolutelye, as
being good in himself, and so also we love him with a sincere and pure love.

Now forasmuch as Christ is he who has made manifest unto the world the
unspeakable name of God, Joan. 17.
Iehoua, Joan. 17.
which only signifies God himself, without any respect unto creatures: that
is, Christ alone has given us light, and made us know, feel, and love very
GOD in himself, therefore without Christ we cannot know God truly. And
forbicause the Turks, the Jews the Infidells, and likewise the Papists do
not know Christ in truth, therefore it must be of necessity said, that they
know not GOD. And that these do not know Christ in truth, is manifest, for
that Christ is not know truly, but of them which see him by all his
righteousness, sanctification, wisdom, and salvation, as the Evangelists,
1. Cor. 1
and true Christians, only do see him. Inasmuch as, the Turks, the Jews,
and the Infidells, believe not in any wise to be saved thorough Christ.

The Papists also, although they say that they believe, to be saved thorough
CHRIST, yet the believe not wholely to be saved thorough him, but in part,
and partly by their own works. Not having or accounting therefore Christ for
any their righteousness and salvation, they know him not so as they ought to
know him to be their Savior. It must therefore needs be said, forasmuch
as they know not Christ, that they know not God. And for that they know neither
God nor Christ, it must needs be concluded that they believe not in truth,
neither in the one nor in the other: whereoff does necessarily follow, that
they believe not any article necessary to salvation. All those therefore be
deceived, who willing to unite and knitte in one accord all sects in one true
faith, do cease to draw men unto the true knowledge and Faith of Christ and
of GOD, and do labor to unite and join them together in outward works
and Ceremonies, in as much as the true knowledge and faith in Christ, imports
all. So that he which has that, of necessity is a good Christian, and he that
is ignorant thereoff, albeit he did al good works possible to be done, he
could not be any other, but an ungodly hipocrit. If we desire then that people
might be united together in the true Faith, let us labor to draw them to ye
knowledge of Christ, and let us pray God, to give them light, so that by him we
may altogether, render to the Father all praise, honor and glory, Amen.

How that the greater part of those that think themselves Christians, in truth
are none. Sermon. 17.
IT is seen by experience, that the desire to do a thing helps much to the
doing thereoff. When a scholemaster has made a willingness to learn to come
unto his scholar, he has done that which is most necessary and hard. And
because I am desirous that every one should be a good Christian, and I know
that it were greatly profitable that men were willing: inasmuch as if one
desire to become good, he commends himself to God, and goes on seeking by
all means and ways that he possibly can for to be good. But for because he
can not heartily desire to be a good Christian, if he knows not how to
discern of a Christian, yea this is one of the causes why there be so few good
Christians, for that every body thinks himself to be one, therefore they be
not changed, so they do interpret after their own fashion. The not desiring
it therefore grows of this, that we seem to our selves Christians, although
we be not: Wherefore I have thought it expedient to show that good Christians
are few, because that he which is none, does yet acknowledge himself to be.
Mine enterprise is great and difficult, that I should go about to persuade
that Christians are but very few: not for because I have not on my side most
lively and strong reasons, but for that a matter is hardly persuaded which is
displeasaunt unto me^. If I would prove that every one who is baptized is a good
man, it should be an easy matter for me to do, for every body would conclude
my reasons, although they were without any foundation: forasmuch as he that
speaks a grateful and pleasant thing, is readily allowed. But to prove that
they be no Christians, I know that I shall have a great resistaunce. Many there
be which confess Christ with their mouths, but few with their heart, so that
very fitly their evil works will confirm and further mine indissoluble
reasons.

There be found two sorts of faith, one purchased, an other inspired. A
purchased faith is that which is found in all those that were baptized in
their youth, which believe in Christ, because they have been so taught by their
parents, and because they see others believe so, and especially those that have been accounted learned, wise, and holy, yea, the Church the which they think
cannot err, and that it is guyded by the holy Ghost. They have also an opinion
yt the holy Scriptures be given by God for a confirmation of their faith, and
likewise the miracles, and because it has been so persuaded them with many
probable reasons, therefore they be come into an opinion of faith of the matters
of Christ, and this, the sooner because they have been ready to believe, or
rather there have been some which knew how easily to persuade the^. But now
this is no faith inspired, but a purchased faith, albeit it be of things
supernatural, for because they have theroff but only an humane opinion: so much
they believe, as has been persuaded them with probable reasons, and as much as
their weak and blind reason is capable off. And their faith (forasmuch as it
is purchased) is like unto that which the Turks have of Mahumet: their
beleeuinge, is of like sort, for yt they likewise have been so taught of their
parents: they see those also which they account learned, wise and holy, to
believe so: they think that their heads or chief men and their Church cannot
err, and that they be governed and inspired by God. And that their Alcorane is
a divine thing and confirmed with many miracles, they see as great men believe
it as they be, and likewise by other apparaunt reasons, they be come into that
opinion and faith. So that if they had been borne and brought up among
Christians, they would believe as we do: likewise Christians who have none
other but a puhchased faith, if they had been borne and brought up among
Turks, they would believe as they believe. Wherefore both the one and also the
other, in this respect, is a humane opinion, although theirs be of false
things, and ours of true. Now therefore this opinion is not sufficient to be a
good Christian, and to come to salvation, inasmuch as, this is an obscure
faith, full of darkness, vnsteedfast, which always wauereth, stackereth, and
doubts, it sees not the truth with a clear and supernatural light, it is a
barren faith, unfruitful, cold, idle, earthly, carnal, human, purchased
and dead, which stands with every great sin, wherefore is not sufficient to
save us. And if it were, then every wicked Christian would be saved, yea, even
the Devils, inasmuch as they believe that God is Almighty, that he has made
the world, that Christ is his son conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Mary, crucified, dead and the rest of the Articles. Yea, to speak of a
purchased faith, they have more then we. Wherefore this faith is not ye which
makes any person a Christian in truth, but makes him only a masking
Christian.

But there is found an other faith, which comes down from heaven,
altogether divine, supernatural, clear, full of light, burning, zealous,
lively, and working, which is the gift of GOD, and dwells not idle in any, as
many have said: it is a clear light and supernatural, which shows the
divine and revealed truth, Ephesians. 2
in an other fashion, then humane reason can do. This was in Peter, when
having had revealed to him that CHRIST was the son of GOD, and confessing
him to be so, Christ said. Mat. 6
It is not flesh and blood that has revealed to thee this truth, but my
father which is in heaven. And this is ye Faith which makes men in truth
Christians. To know therefore whether thou be a Christian or not, thou must
needs mark whether thy Faith be inspired or purchased: which thou shall first
know, for that he which has a purchased Faith, conte^teth himself with that,
chiefly the learned, he thinks to have enough by them, and this because he
feels not with that Faith, the goodness of God, wherefore they abide so
cold, without having any certain fervent desire to have more light of Faith.
But an inspired Faith, is a fiery light, which therefore makes thee to feel
the goodness of God, 1. Cor. 1.
causes that in thee is ever raised up more desire to taste it, thou think
that thou have an infinite Sea, when thou have tasted but one drop thereoff. 2.
Cor. 4
Seeing then that humane Faith grows or diminishes, according to ye reasons
which do persuade it, whereon it depends. But divine Faith grows by the
mere grace of God, by a man's humbling himself unto him, and asking with
fervent prayer. Purchased Faith desires and asks signs and miracles,
forasmuch as a great part thereoff depends therevppon, and also for that he
which has no inspired Faith, is not perfect, and yet he would be tried so. But
the inspired Faith is certainly sure, Gal. 1.
and cares not any more for miracles. Wherefore Paul said, that signs and
wonders be given to the Infidells, Act. 19
and that the faithful have no need thereoff. Faith also that is purchased, as
that which doubts, goes on seeking now this way and then that way by reasons
to be tried, where against also many times they resist, strive and gain say.
But divine Faith forasmuch as it is certain, goes to none other for counsel.
Act. 10.
Wherefore Paul being lightened by Christ was so sure in the truth, that he
neded not to go to the Apostles for conference to certify his Faith: and
lyke-wise when Christ lyghtened him, he stood not to dispute with him, but
being resolved of the truth, he said, what would thou that I should do, as
though he would say, I am sure thou art the son of God, and I am ready to
follow thee, but I would feign know the way. Mat. 2.
Likewise also ye Eunuch replied not to Saint Philip, nor the Centurion to
Saint Peter. There is not found in all the Scriptures any of them that have
replied or withstood, because they had a Faith inspyred. Do thou think that
the wise men took counsel whether they should believe that Christ was borne
or not, they were sure theroff, thorough Faith, only they enquired of the
place. Humane Faith as being feeble and weak, is easily hurt and offended, yea
many times it waxes feeble and faints thorough the infidelytie of his
neighbor, as is seen by experience in many children, who have denied Christ,
because their parents denied him and this was for that their Faith depended
upon them. And in like manner many when they have perceived any great sin
in those whom they accounted relygious and holy, they have been offended, and
have lost their Faith, yea many were wont to say unto such as those be, take
heed to your selves, for because our Faith is wholly placed in you. Look what
a good foundation this is. And some other say, I went to Rome, and thorough the
great enormities and abuses which I have found there, especially in the
Prelates, I have lost the Faith. And they say true, forasmuch as all their
Faith was humane and grounded upon them: but if it had been divine and
grounded upon Christ, they could not have lost it, for Faith inspired is so
clear, yt he which has it, whatsoever he should seem unto the world, he
shall by all means continue steadfast in Faith, otherwise if thou could
bring all ye persuasions of ye world, it could nothing help thee. Romans 6.
As if one would prove thee to be a black More, he could not persuade thee by
his reasons, for that thou see it manifestly to be contrary. He that
believes with a Faith inspired, has the Holy Ghost in his heart, which says
and testifies, that Christ is the son of God. And this witness alone can
do (...) more in him then all the reasons and authorities which can be brought
to the contrary, because the witness of God is greater. Humane faith is so
mutable and inconstant, that one while it believes this an other while that,
according as it is persuaded. Therefore all so many minds, opinions, faythes,
sects, and heresies, which be in the world are altogether humane: but the
divine faith abides steedfast in ye truth, without ever changing. Those that
have only a humane faith for because they feel not lively ye goodness of God,
therefore they love him not, yea, they offend him. And moreover, because they
believe not that there is found any other sort of faith, but theirs, they do
think that it is a blasphemy, to say, that faith alone justifies, and so
they be constrained to trust in themselves, and in works, and to extol man,
with falling from the confidence of God, and with darkening Christ, his grace,
his gospel, and his glory.

Human faith makes men superstitious, whereas divine faith makes them
sincere, simple, and pure.

Humane faith is like a painted flame of fire, it shines not, gives no light,
burns not, makes no flame. But an inspired faith is a fiery and divine
light, which burning does kindle and give light. Wherefore Christ said of
Saint John, that he was a shininge and burninge light.

Joan. 1.3
A purchased faith causes thee not to change thy life, nor ma^ners, as an
inspyred faith does, which makes thee to be borne again, and to become the
son of God, causes that a man changes companies, friendships, words life,
manners, and all he remoueth, becoming of a carnal man, divine.

A purchased faith keeps scilence, although it sees God dishonored, Psalm.
115.
but an inspired faith cannot keep scilence: Whereoff David said. I believe,
and therefore will I speak. Yea, whereas infidelity makes a man dumb,
faith, loaseth his tongue, as is plainly seen in Zacharias. Wherefore Paul
writing to the Corinthians, Luc. 1. 2. Cor. 6.
said: O Corinthians my mouth is opened unto you, my heart is enlarged I
cannot hold my peace, I must needs tell you that which I think.

Seeing that a purchased faith does not pacify the conscience, those that be
such continue always with a thousand prikes: but an inspired faith makes
quiet for that it makes the person certain of the remission of sins. Romans 5.


Likewise a purchased faith does not make the mind quiet, but such be ever full
of doubtful cares, pensiuenes, fears, suspicions, vain hopes and passions.
But the divine faith makes quiet, for that it makes a man feel the so great
bountifulness of God, that he is certain that God is his father, and that he
has a most special care of him.

Also a purchased faith makes not a man so joyful and happy, as an inspired
faith does, which makes him to rejoice, to sing and leap with an unspeakable
joy, and this thorough the great goodness which he feels in God. Humane
faith does not mortify the affections, as divine faith does, the which because
it makes thee taste the great goodness of God, and to feel that thou art his
son and heir, makes thee despise all worldly pleasures, honors, dignities,
and all frail riches. A purchased faith also does not govern and strenghthen
thee against persecutions, infirmities and adversities, yea, it makes us
feeble and fainte, and the divine faith makes more strong, 1. Cor. 11
as is seen by experience in Paul, who in them became more full of force.

If a great multitude of arrows were shot at a man, and he with a Target or
Buckler defended them all off, thou mast perceive that that is a good Buckler:
but if the arrows pass thorough and go into the man's heart, thou will say
that the Buckler must needs be made of paper, or such like trash.

So likewise those that have the shield of Faith inspired, are defended from
all the arrows of the iniuryes of the world, they come not near their hearts,
they know thorough Faith that so it pleases God to have it, Ephesians. 6
and that al is for their commodity and beatitude: but those which have only
the shield of purchased Faith, every small injury casts them down to the
ground, they blaspheme and would revenge, forbicause they do not feel through
Faith in deed, the goodness of God. A purchased Faith also does not make us
to forsake all worldly things, and our selves, yea if any of those be moved to
follow Christ, it is for his own lucre, for his profit, pleasures, honors,
satisfiyng, commodity, appetites, delycatenesse, or earthly Paradise, or else
to shun griefs, and the hellish pains both of this and of the other life:
and this because a purchased Faith, makes not a man to feel the goodness of
god, in such sort that for and thorough ye very mere glory of God, he
forsakes all. Always in such men the world can move more then God. They well
may leave ye garment, but it is for honor and also for pleasure, but not wholly
for God: because they do not feel with lively Faith his great goodness,
Joan. 4.
as the righteous do, who for the glory of God do leave with the woman of
Samaria their pitcher of worldly pleasures, the sweetness of this life and
themselves. And lastly a purchased Faith does not move thee to the observance
of Gods commandments, as the inspired Faith does which neither offends God
nor his neighbor, but abhors all wickedness. And although a purchased
Faith in the Hipocrites, at sometime does show it self forth with certain
glistering works, yet being dead, it cannot long time dissemble, but a true
Faith does not only continue for ever, but gets every day more force. Let
every one therefore examine himself, and see if in him be the effects of a true
Faith, or no, to the intent that if he do not find them in him, he may know
that he is no Christian: and so may humble and recommend himself to God, and
if he find them in him, he may give thanks unto God. To whom he all praise,
honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

If it be possible that in every honest estate, men may be perfect Christians,
or not. Sermon. 18.
IT is not possible that a man should be actuallye an adulterer, usurer, a
proud person, an Idolater, or any other sin repugning against the divine
grace and holy Ghost, and yet a perfect Christian, but it is possible that a
man in any estate not resisting against a lively Faith, Hope, and Charity, and
against other Christian virtues, may be most perfect. It is possible then that
whether a man be young, old, feeble, strong, hayle, sick, learned, unlearned,
man, woman, rich, poor, free, bond, married, unmarried, noble, ignoble,
Prince, private person, Master, Scholar, prelate, Captain, Soldier, Judge,
Advocate, Procurator, Notarie, Gentleman, Merchant, Artificer, Shepherd,
Plowman, and likewise in any other honest estate, and a perfect Christian.

Which thing also I say of women, and the reason is this, for that goodness
and stubburnenesse, and likewise the chiefest perfection and ungodliness,
consist not in the like outward matters, accidental, and indifferent, which
may be found in the good and in the wicked, in the perfect and in those which
are most evil, and be used in the honor and dishonor of God: but consists
in having a lively faith in Christ, in feeling lively his great benefit, and
the excessive love of the father manifested unto us in the death of his dear
and only begotten son, by whose means he has saved us, adopted us for his
sons, made us his heirs, and brothers and members of Christ, thorough his
lively faith, supernatural light, and spiritual knowledge of ye goodness and
mercy of God, grows in us, Faith, Hope, Charity, humility, patience, love
of our neighbor, mortifying of our selves, and all other true substantial
Christian virtues: wherefore it is necessary, that according to the measure of
faith, and of ye light which we have of god, by ye means of Christ, we be more
or less perfect in all virtues.

Romans 6.
In every estate therefore not contrary to a lively faith, in ye which we may
live without sin reigning in us, we may be, not only good Christians, but
excellent and most perfect in all virtues. I say not now, but amongst honest
estates are found some which be in themselves less dangerous then others, and
likewise of those be some most apt to honor God, but I say that in all estates
may be some most perfect: wherefore if a man be found in any estate honest, let
it be what estate it will, he cannot forsake his honesty, as when one is
married, poor, sick, a servant, ignoble, and likewise of all other estates,
he ought not to despair of habilitye, to be perfect therein, but to content
himself, and in this estate to serve God, with taking heed that they do not
offend, but disposinge themselves rather to loose their lives, then to agree
unto sin: and they ought not only labor to honor GOD in that estate which
they are in, with great Faith, Hope, and Charity: but also to give God thanks
for his singular grace, seeing that whereas many do not understand and know
their calling, he is certain and sure that it pleases God, that then it is
profitable for him to be in that estate, because he cannot honestly then
change it. It is sufficient before GOD that he do with heart and will, those
good works which in that state he cannot do with power, albeit in every
estate he ought to deal honestly, there can be found no exercise so simple,
if it be honest, which may not make to the glory of God, with a high Faith and
Charity, and therefore with a supreme acceptance allowed of God.

And so by the contrary, there is nothing so high, so noble and famous, in the
sight of the world, Romans 1. Luc. 1.
which being wrought without faith is not abominable before God. If
therefore, for an example, thou find thy self to have children, thou
ought be contented with them, and think that they be the children of God,
which he has given thee, to the end that thou should govern, lighten, and
teach them divine manners: this now is no small office. Thou will say, O, I
will go into some Forest, for I know that there I may best serve God.

Do thou not see that this is a temptation of the Devil, which would
bereave thee of a true, godly, and very perfect Christian Religion, would
rob thee of Charity, and of Christ, and would cause thee to depart from thy
vocation which GOD has appointed, 1. Cor. 7.
from the obedience to GOD, from his service, to the intent that thou beeinge a
backeslider might serve the Devil and thy self? GOD will be served of us
in obedience according to his word, and not according to our frantic
fantasies. Likewise, 1. Cor. 7. Gal. 3 1. Cor. 12 Ephesians. 6 Act. 5.
if thou find thy self to be in servitude, with thinkinge that thou art
free in Christ, thou ought content thy self, and in righteous matters thou
ought serve and obey heartely, with great love and charity toward thy
Master, as unto Christ, but in matters unrighteous, thou ought say with
the Apostle. It is more needful to obey GOD then men. It is very true that
without hurting Charity, thou may seek to be made free, for thine estate
being free, is more apt to honor God, and by GOD thou art thereunto called,
thou must take heed yet that by honest means thou becommest free, and all for
the greater glory of God. So that if thou find thy self in liberty to be
able to choose, change, or not change thine estate, thou ought with
praying unto god that he would give thee his light, take heed, not to thine
own peace, rest, and lucre, but to the honor of GOD, and so to turn thy
self, not according to thine own fantasy, but according as the Lord
inspireth and calls thee, with faith that God will in no wise forsake thee,
yea, if God called thee to walk and travail unto him thorough the midst of
all the dangers in the world, thou ought go safe, and be assured thorough
faith, that God with his divine grace will not nor does not forsake such as
with obedience to him do walk thorough his paths, after that he inspireth
and calls him. Do thou know when thou shall be in great danger? even when
thou art out of Gods way, and from his calling, and walk after thine own
fantasy: yea, in such a case how much that estate in which thou art found,
be in it self more high and perfect, so much the more if thou be not thereunto
called, it shall be to thee more hurtful. There may be then a good Prince and
the same a perfect Christian, as many were both in the old and new Testament:
yea, none can in truth be a good Prince, if he be not a good Christian.
Inasmuch as he which is without true Religion and faith, it must needs be that
he is ignorant of true wisdom, of true righteousness, strength, charity,
temperaunce, and all other virtues. If a Prince be not a Christian, he shall
never have such sincere, pure, and divine love to his subjects, as is
convenient, he shall never be mortified to the world and himself, and living
unto the honor of God, he shall not have so grave manners, so ripe, sound and
holy, as he that has faith in Christ. Paul wrote yt God would save of all
sorts of men, 1. Tim. 2
and not only of those who lead a private life, but also of those yt be set in
authority, wherefore he exhorted men to pray for them: Yea a Prince has a most
fit occasion to be and to show himself a Christian. I do not now deny but
that it is a most hard thing to be in a high estate, dignity, favor,
friendship, riches and pleasures, and with the eye of a lively faith, to
discern for his Lord, the simple, abiected, little esteemed, humble, forsaken,
poor, and passioned Christ upon the Cross, and so much more hard a thing it
is to find Christ in a Prince, as in this our age, the corruptions of the most
part (accounted for most holy Laws) be greater, their liberty and power more
tyrannical, their wills more unbridled, and flatterers which serve them in
steed of mighty men are great in abundance, so that we may say with the
Phariseyes and high Priests of the Jews, Joan. 7.
which of the great men have believed in Christ? there is none but the simple
and poor people that believe in him. Also the Judges, Advocates, Procurators
and Notaries might be good men, and do offices and deeds of great charity,
it is true that they ought to be of another sort then they commonly are. And
likewise also a man might be a soldier and yet a good Christian, as was the
Centurion: but it so hard, Mat. 8.
that it is next neighbor to a thing impossible. The like I say of other
honest estates of the world, in which every one that is found therein by the
will of God, ought to turn unto his said Lord God all his intents, thoughts,
will, actions, and works, with ordering al his life to his honor and glory.
Such also may and ought to have always god before their eyes, and him alone to
serve, and albeit they be found to be in the world, they ought not to be
drowned, entangled, shackeled, nor with heart be established in any wise
therein, but to tread the world under their feet. They ought to go heartely
unto God, serving altogether to his honor. Seeing then that in every honest
estate we may be perfect Christians, it is our duty to content our selves with
that estate in which it has pleased God that we should be, and to labor
with a supreme Faith and virtue, to do all that which is convenient in that
estate, so that we may render unto God all praise, honor and glory, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the foolishness of those that be governed with the prudence and wisdom
of the world: and of the wisdom of those that be guyded with the prudence and
wisdom of God. Sermon. 19.
THere is found in the world a prudence and wisdom which is carnal,
profane, humane and devilish: and an other that is spiritual, holy,
Angelical, and divine. Of the first Paul makes mention, whereas he said. Be
you not wise in your own opinions. And likewise when he said, that ye wisdom
of this world was foolishness before God, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 3.
and in many other places. Of the second Faith Christ made mention, when he
exhorted the Apostles to be wise as Serpents: Mat. 10. Mat. 15.
and also when he told of those five virgins, who entered with him into the
marriage. Christ also spoke both of the one and of the other, when he said that
the children of this world, Luc. 16.
be more wiser then the children of light, and forasmuch as ye greater part of
men, leaving off to be governed with spiritual prudence and wisdom, be
governed with carnal, by which they fall headlong into great dangers:
therefore I have judged, that it will not be unprofitable to show unto such
partly their foolishness. First, spiritual prudence and wisdom, as that
which has a great light, clear, supernatural and high, holds always the
eyes open, fixed, and steadfast upon God, having him alone for the last end,
unto whose glory it orders all our actions, and works, using all creatures
to his honor.

But carnal wisdom and prudence, as that which has small light and a feeble
discerning, opens not the eyes unto God, but unto the world and to the
commodities thereoff, which it accounts to be the latter end of all things:
and if it sometimes has respect unto God, that is a far off, and
imperfectly: it cannot fix steadfastly the eyes upon God, nor account him for
his last end, but it is offended at his great light, is constrained to hold
down the face and to get it away with the Bats flying about into the dark and
inextricable dens of the vain shadows of the world, with seeking to rest
in them, so that he cannot use God as his Lord, but seeks for his own gain
to use and to serve that, as though the other wisdom were a thing little
worth: Like as is seen by experience in carnal men, which love not, come not
near, esteem not, fear not God but for their own lucre. They respect
therefore human wisdom, and holding their eyes open and fixed not upon
God, who is in truth our last end and refuge, but upon pleasures, treasures,
honors and other benefits of the world, it must necessarily be said, that as
a man should be a very fool, if when he would go into the East parts,
should choose for his guide one that would conduct him into the West, likewise
those be fools, which being desirous to go unto God and to felycitie, which
is not found but in him alone, do choose to live and to be governed after
carnal prudence and wisdom.

But many will say: Would thou not that we should profit our selves
with that human prudence and wisdom which GOD has given us, at the least
yet in worldly things? think thou that GOD would have given it us, if it
had not been good for some thing? it is not now to be thought that God has
given it us in vain. Do thou think that we would live by chance, and
not govern our selves according to the wisdom that God has given us?
surely we may not deal so foolishly.

Now to such as these be I answer and say, that if carnal wisdom were of
God, it should not so be condemned in the holy Scriptures as it is: wherefore
it must needs be said, that it is naught and devilish. And what is carnal
wisdom else, but the ignorance of God, therefore sin? and it is not only the
ignorance of God, but also ye ignorance of creatures, which if they knew him,
he need not so be showed forth unto us for to be our last end as he is, we
would not so be persuaded to seek and enjoy this wisdom as we do, without
having respect to the honor of God. Know thou what prudence and wisdom that
is which God gives, and is commended in the holy scriptures, it is that which
guyding us, we see God, to be God, and our last end, and the creatures to be
creatures, and by due means do serve to ye honor of God, as is spiritual
prudence and wisdom to do. I say not then that men should live by chance,
but I say that in all their life, in all their actions and works, even in
worldly things they ought to have God always before their eyes, and to order
all their life to his honor and glory, so that although one would purchase
him apparel or any other worldly commodity, he ought not to desire it, but so
as he might use it to the glory of God, he ought not to seek it, but with
honest and just means, without dishonouring God in any wise: Like as he does
yt is governed and guyded with the wisdom of God. But they that be guyded with
worldly wisdom, locking their eyes against the glory of God, and fixing them
upon worldly things, with all craft, subtlety, malice, deceipts, treason,
extortion, usury, ravening, vyolence, and by all other means possible, which
may turn to their gain, without having any little respect to the honor of
God, do seek to have and to use things, not to the glory of God, but to their
own benefit. It is manifest therefore yt such wisdom as this is, is not of
God, because it is evil and devilish: and God would, that it should utterly be
left. But I would thou should understand, that those which be governed
with human wisdom, be fools, not only for because they forsake to be
guyded on the contrary, respecting the end, but also respecting the means:
inasmuch as although one would, without having any respect unto GOD, make
himself happy in this world by such means as he can, he ought not in any
wise be guyded after humane and carnal wisdom: because it is so blind,
frantike and foolish, that not only thou can not know how to find the due
means, but contrariwise it will make thee most miserable, even in things of
the world. And that this is true, put case thou find a man who has no
Religion, and that is as it were a beast, believes not that there is found any
God nor other life. Now in such a case, if this man would make himself happy
in this present life, he must live after the fashion of brute beasts, with
taking day by day, all those pleasures that he could obtain, without fainting
therefore, and not to think of the time to come in any wise: for that,
immediately when this man would begin to heed that, to heap up, and make
gardeines in the air, with that his carnal wisdom, he should enter into a
thousand cares, pensiveness, thoughts, travails, fears, suspicions, hatreds,
passions, torments, miseryes and hellishnesse; and so he should he most
miserable, not only by being without God, but also by being ignorant of
himself, with his own proper wisdom, of ye small felicity which he might
have in this life, in such sort as other living creatures have. So that I
judge, that if religion be taken away from man, it were better for him to be a
beast, then a man with wisdom. Humane wisdom then, as that which is
devilish and most evil, can not but hurt a man, in what estate so ever it
possesses him.

That was it which being figured by the Serpent, caused the first parents to
loose their happy and blessed estate. Wherefore they be of all other most
foolish and miseable, who leaving the bridle in yt hands of a carnal wisdom,
do commit themselves wholly to ye wicked, pernicious and frantic governance
there-off, although the blind world does extol such men for wise and happy
men. And know that this humane wisdom is so stiff-necked, that it cannot
yield it self to understand the truth which if it could be capable off, it
should no more be carnal, but spiritual, so that humane wisdom is none
other but an incurable frenzy, and more-ouer it is so blind of it self,
that not only it has taken in hand to order the world, with disordering it
every day more and more, but it presumes to judge and condemn even God in
his works, as though it were his superior both in wisdom and righteousness.
But will thou see if it be mere foolishness? then think and consider, that
albeit in Christ all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God do
consist, yet this (as a fool) will even read it to be true in their parents,
saying that God was mad and out of his wits: Christ, and likewise his
Church, never had, nor at any time shall have, a greater enimye then this. This
human Faith is it that has always persecuted grace, and the Gospel, and
with devising every day new sorts of living after the own fantasy, has
filled the world with superstitions, idolatryes, sects, heresies and wicked
religions. And lastly that is it which, although it has always persecuted the
Saints, and hanged Christ upon the Cross, yet in the kingdom of
Antechrist, in showing more wickedness then ever it did, has done and does
the last vyolence.

It is therefore exceeding foolishness, miserye and wickedness, for a man to
suffer himself to be guyded thereby: Like as it is most high wisdom,
godliness and felicity, to be governed and guyded with Faith, supernatural
light, and spiritual wisdom: forasmuch as such having God for their last
end, go unto him happily by due means, with using all creatures to his glory.

Let us pray unto God therefore, that he would give us of his light, that he
would quench and put out in us all carnal wisdom: so that living only unto
him, we may yield him all praise honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

The end of the Sermons of Faith.
Sermons of Hope.
How that the sin of desperation is the greatest sin that can be. Sermon.
1.
THere be found two sorts of desperation, one most holy, as when a man
despayreth of himself, of his own strength, of his own cunning, prudence,
wisdom, devise and goodness, distrusteth himself in all his works, and of
all help that he can ever have by creatures, with putting his trust whollye in
God: now this is a most godly desperation.

The other desperation is altogether devilish and most wicked, as when a man
distrusteth and dispayreth of the help of God. And this is one of the greatest
sins yt can be committed: forasmuch as a desperate person has most wicked
conceits of God, he thinks yt there is no God, or that if there be, he cannot,
or that he knows not how to help him, and if he knows how and can, that
he will not, that he loves him not, that he does not favor him, esteem him,
has not elected him, neither that he has a most singular care of him, yea he
thinks that God is partial, and an acceptor of persons, that he is his
enemy, cruel and angry with him, he believes not that thorough Christ he is
pacified with him. And this because he thinks that Christ has no power to
satisfy for his sins, and if yet he has power, he has no will to do it.
A desperate person setting himself to strive against God, as Cain did,
labors to with-drawe and wrest mercy from God, or at least so to diminish
it, that it abides the lesser toward him thorough his ungodliness. And if
the desperation in Cain was a great sin, in us it is so much greater, as that
God since that time has been showed unto us with greater charity, and
especially in Christ upon the Cross. And what worser thing can a man do,
then to distrust of that so great and infinite goodness, love and mercy of
God, made manifest to us most highly in Christ? The sin of desperation so
much displeases God, that if we should go on duly considering thereof, we
should find that what great works God has wrought from the beginning of the
world even until now, all has been for to eleuate and draw our Hope unto
him, and because that we should not fall into desperation. He has created man
so noble, excellent and worthy, and the world for to serve him, to the intent
that men seeing themselves so loved of God, they might trust in him. Also he
suffered man to fall, not only because he should no more trust in himself,
nor in creatures, but also because that coming in the greater need, he should
be of necessity constrained to have refuge to God: and so of him being helped,
approving his favor, might learn to put his trust in him.

He sent not also Christ immediately to set him at liberty, but would that for
a long time he should abide so, because yt he should first thoroughly try his
own strength, and seeing that they were not sufficient for him, beeinge
altogether distrusting in himself, might be lifted up with Hope unto God. He
chased him out of earthly Paradise, because ye tasting of the troubles of the
world, he might be moved to recommend himself unto God, and to trust in him.
When he sent the flood and drowned the world, he preserved those few in the
Arc, because they might learn to depend only upon God. He confounded ye
languages, because that being disparsed thoroughout the whole world, and in
every part, trying and feeling the divine providence and goodness of God, they
might put in him all their trust. He would that those most holy Patriarchs
should be ever strangers and pilgrims amongst unknown and envious Nations,
in perpetual dangers and necessity, because that they might learn to put
confidence in God. He would also that his people should be oppressed in Egypt,
persecuted by Pharao, and that abiding in the desert die forty years, they
should be fed with Manna, because that experiencing so meruaylously the
goodness of God, they might learn to distrust of the world, and to trust in
God: he gave them a law by Moses, to the intent, that by it, men seeing their
sins, and that they were not able to observe the same law, dispayring of
themselves, might seek their salvation thorough Christ. To the self same end
did God suffer them to be destroyed, when they trusted to overcome in battle
by their own strength, and always they overcame if they did put their trust
in God. He commanded Joshua, that he should kill all the horses, and burn all
the chariots, which they had taken from their enemies, because they should have
no occasion to put confidence therein. He also forbad David that he should not
number the people, because he might not trust in the multitude. In the mean
time while they were in the land of promise, he would that his people should be
compassed about with enemies, and always molested, because of necessity they
might sometimes be turned unto God. And lastly, sending his own son, he
would, that dying upon the Cross, with showing to us great love, he might
make satisfaction for our sins; to the end, that we might have no occasion
to distrust in our selves of the great mercy of GOD: whereoff, who so doubts,
does in deed the greatest injury that can be done unto God: in as much as like
as a Lord having received great harms by one of his servant, and seeinge
him justly condemned to be led unto execution, is moved with such pity
toward him, that for to ransom him, to satisfy for his justice,
appoyntinge in his place his own beloved and only begotten son, caused him
to dye, and afterward (all this notwithstanding) that servant would not
trust or put any confidence, but dispayred to have or ever obtain mercy at
his hands: in such a case the Lord would be more offended at this last
iniurye, then by all them that be passed: and that because he should see that
all the means which he had wrought to save him, and that the death of his
son for him was in vain, and also for because he could have no more any
remedy to save him: even so we, if we despair of the mercy of GOD, seeinge
that he has appointed his own son unto the cross for to satisfy for our
sins, we do unto GOD a most great injury, for as much as it is by our own
means, we make unprofitable and vain the passion and death of Christ, and all
that which God and Christ has wrought. Neither remains there any more remedy
for our salvation, except the passion of Christ be profitable to him. Chiefly,
for that like as if a sick man, who might easily be healed with medicines, and
being frantic or out of his wits, thought himself to be hail, and would take
no medicines, that his madness should more hurt him then all other sickness:
so likewise unto a desperate person, the only frenzy of desperation does
more hurt, then all other his vices. So that if it were possible, thou might
better choose to have committed all the sins of the world, and to trust in
God, then not to have committed any other sin, but to distrust in God
Desperation also is most evil, not only because a desperate person does not
allow any remedy, but also because he gives ye bridle at will unto al
wickedness, with saying: and why not? in any wise I cannot be remedied: I must
needs be damned: seeing it is so, it is best that while I am in this present
life, I take my pleasures, without having any respect unto God. Seeing then
that desperation is so horrible a vice, let us pray the Lord that he would
deliver us from it, with giving us grace that we may have steedfast hope in
him, so that we may render unto him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

How that in God alone, every one ought to put their whole Hope and confidence.
Sermon. 2.
THe comfort of the wretched, whilst they be in their miseries, is Hope, the
which vpholdeth them, comfort, nourishes and makes them happy, so that
it be a true Hope: for that a deceitful Hope makes them so much the more
miserable, as that it beguileth the^ ye more. And forasmuch as there is no true
Hope, but only ye which is grounded upon god: therefore like as by him alone we
must confess yt we have al good things whatsoever we possess, and to him
alone we ought to render all thanks: so also in him alone we ought to hope. And
this, because al those things yt can be desired in any person, to the intent
that in the same person all our hopes ought of us to be placed, are found in
God. Inasmuch as God is omnipotent, most wise, most rich, most liberal, most
good, of infinite charity, and most meek. And although he be righteous, and
we continually offend him, yet notwithstanding he is in Christ, and thorough
Christ pacified: and that in such sort, that although we have cause to fear,
yet we may hope that he chastises us as a Father, we have not therefore any
cause to fear that he forsakes or condempneth us: but always to trust that
we shall be saved, and that all that which he works with us, is for his
greater glory, and our felicity. He strikes us upon the hands with his
rod, to the intent that we may leave these wordly things, and so may be
constrained to turn us unto him, and to taste of the great deintinesse of his
love. He plucketh us back sometimes with his benefits, mouinge his creatures
against us, to the end, that we may so much the more stricktly embrace him:
yea, he suffers us oftentimes to fall, because that the better knowing our
own infirmity, and his goodness, we may depend always upon him. Besides
all this, God from everlasting has determined, and in time promised to save
us, and not with this condition, if we shall do good woorks, but by being sure
of our salvation, and to the intent that it should not depend in any wise
upon us, and that he may be steedefast in his words, and firm in his
promises, he has made an unchangeable determination to save us absolutely
which trust in him, although we have been contrary unto him: he has utterly
purposed to change our wills, to give us a new heart, to make us walk
thorough his paths, to cause us to observe his precepts, to make us do good
works and to save us. And moreover to have of us such a most singular care,
that all things that we shall do, and that shall happen unto us, shall serve
to our salvation. He has also, not only promised us all the foresaid things,
and that absolutely, as it is evident in diverse places of the holy Scriptures,
but already in Christ, and thorough Christ has observed the same, as may be
seen in so many Saints as have been saved. Seeing that we have experience,
which is such a Mistres, that makes us see plainly the truth, with making us
in the end to feel the same. If a Prince besides his ability and that thou
know certeynly he is a good man, knows how, and will help thee as much as
he can, that he is determined to take thee for his son, and has promised
thee so, that he has also bestowed upon thee many benefits, and still daily
does, in the end for thy benifite, he offered his own son to dye, in such a
case, would thou not trust him? yes truly. And if any should persuade thee
to distrust the said Prince, by and by thou would say, and why? I have tried
his goodness so many times, and in such sort that I ought not nor can doubt
of him any more. Now we ought much more to do and say the same of God, in as
much as his love is greater then all the love of men, his words more
steedfast, his promises more firm, and his benefits greater, continual and
more durable. If God should but only the twinklinge of an eye leave off to
preserve us, and to do us good, we should suddenly come to naught. And what
need I speak any more, we try by a thousand ways and continually his
goodness, and shall we doubt thereoff? But it happens unto us (I will not
say) as unto Jonas, but much worse, because that although Jonas when he was on
the earth, felt not the goodness of God, and therefore was disobedient unto
him, it seemed unto him yt the earth, and not god sustained him,
notwithstanding after yt he was cast into the Sea, and devoured of the fish,
and saw that he lived, he opened his eyes and perceived that it was god which
sustained him, wherefore he recommended himself unto him from his heart and
gave him thanks: but we, although we be in the Sea of this miserable and
tempestuous world, already thorough our sins swallowed in by Satan, and God
for all this preserves us, we yet do not in any wise seal his grace, his
benefits, in his goodness, and we think that creatures, and not God does
sustain us. God being willing to make us sure of our salvation, could not
give us any greater knowledge and sign of our salvation, then his own son
upon the cross, nor a more sure pledge, then his own spirit. Christ hanging
upon the Cross, forsook himself, above the senses of man, and would
concerning his passion, be abandoned even of his Father, to the intent that we
might have confidence in him, and might think that he would never forsake us
any more.

Wherefore we do a most great iniurye to God, if we trust not in him. And so
much the greater as on the other part, besides God there is nothing, in which
we ought or may justly put our confidence. And this, because that creatures be
all most vain shadows the which as without the good will of God they cannot
hurt us, so they cannot help us. Seeing that the things of this world are not
steedfast, the wheel thereoff always turns, therefore if we arm them upon
us with our own Hope, we must needs be in continual turmoilings, miseries, and
trauayles. The men also in whom GOD does not reign, although they appear now
thy dear friends, or they be now thy bounden kinsfolks, and to reach a great
way, they will show themselves to be self lovers, liars, unfaithful, and
traiterous. If also thou will put confidence in Saints, thou shall displease
both them and God, they cannot help thee. God shall be he who will suffer
thee to forsake thy self, to the intent thou may be constrained to go for
help unto him. Thou must think that it is not without cause that god by his
prophet has cursed those which put their trust in men. And if thou shall put
confidence in thy self, thou shall put confidence in the greatest enemy that
thou have. Ier. 17


Also if thou shall trust in thine own proper wisdom, power and goodness,
this shall be none other, but to put trust and repose thy self upon
foolishness, in impotencie and malice. And what need I say more, the power of
Egypt, the strength of the world, Esaias. 36.
is nothing else but a most vain reed, whereunto if any man lean, by and by it
breaks, with hurting those that would rest thereon. If the things of the
strong men of the world, as Job did write, be like a spiders web, Job. 8.
what shall those be which are most weak? All the wisdom of the world in the
sight God as Paul says, 1. Cor. 3.
is nothing but foolishness, the goodness thereoff abomination. Wherefore
in God alone we ought to trust, Luc. 16.
on whom alone depends all our help. He only therefore is happy, who as a
true and good divine, has god for all his goodness, depends on him alone,
and in him only does repose himself.

This is a most high divinity, which cannot be learned in books, nor taught
by men: we must needs have Christ our only Master to teach it us, with
imprinting it in our hearts with his spirit, and with making us understand
by experience, not of the flesh, but of the spirit: so that thorough him we may
render unto the father, all praise, honor and glory, Amen.

Whereoff it grows that men with hope, do not depend wholly upon God..
Sermon. 3.
MEn have many desires, amongst which, this is principal, yt they would be like
unto god. The which thing is manifest, inasmuch as there is no man ye naturally
does not abohorre seruide. We all would, if it were possible, be as GOD, Lords
over all, know all things, have power and dominion over all, be in every place
and time, and most happy: and to conclude, we would have a being that were
infinitely noble, perfect, and excellent, without passions immortal,
everlasting, necessary, without depending upon any, and most divine. And for
as much as this desire is so high that it conteyneth all things which can be of
men desired, therefore above al others, it is most mighty in us. Man therefore
by his own nature in Adam being corrupted, and thorough the pride which he
has for inheritance, would if it were possible be as a God upon the earth,
and never to have need, neither of creatures, nor of God. And for as much as
he is not by nature happy, he desires to purchase him heaven by himself,
because he would not acknowledge it to be of god, as he should do if he had it
by grace. And this his devilish pride is puffed up with so unbridled and
blind a love of himself, that whereas he has need, not only of God, but
also of all the creatures of God, he persuades himself that he is able even
to save himself. He is also so blind of himself that his vices do appear
virtues unto him, so that it may be thought, how he can know his miseries. By
our great pride therefore in not willinge to bend, or humble our selves to
crave help at others, and by being deceived by the unbridled and blind love
which we bear unto our selves, in believing and thinking that we can and know
how to help our selves, and that we shall ever have a will to do it in our
own power, does grow all the confidence and trust that we put in our selves.
And if sometimes we be by open and manifest necessity constrained to seek
other help besides our self, we have not access unto God, as we ought, but
unto creatures. And this because as carnal people, we believe not yt god has
care of us. The graces and benefits which we continually receive: we do not
acknowledge to be of God, from who^ they do come, being invisible, but from
creatures, which are before our eyes, used by him for instruments to do us
good. So yt, although God being unmeasurable, is most ready at our hands with
his presence, yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as he is most high, and in such
sort, that betwixt us and him is no agreement, lykenes nor any proportion, but
an infinite distaunce, it appears that he is most far off from us, and as
though he were not at all. And if that sometimes we have any small opinion of
God that he regards us, by and by knowing that we have offended him, and not
seeing that he is pacified with Faith in Christ, and that he is our most dear
Father: we imagine him to be as a most severe Lord and Judge, angered against
us: wherefore we can not place any of our Hope in him: but he constrained with
our first Father to run away, to hyde us and to distrust of him. So that albeit
it should happen, that we being forsaken of all creatures, should be driven to
have refuge unto God, we should not altogether recommend our selves in any
wise with our whole hearts unto him, nor with a steadfast confidence and sure
Hope to be heard, as is fit and convenient for us to do: and so much the more,
as that God has never suffered the like, we could not think that he would
have compassion of us. Whereas on the other part, for that the creatures be
before our eyes, we have with them agreement and likeness, they have some pity
of us, and a great deal of themselves, they not only have not ben by us hurt
and iniuried, but have received benefits at our hands, we are bent to put our
trust in them rather then in God: and especially in men, because they are of
the same form and kind that we be, and singularly in friends and kinsfolk,
because they are most near unto us: but above al, we are inclined to trust in
our selves, being unto us (I will not say) more like and near, but one and the
self same thing with our selves. And here may be seen the great ignorance,
blyndenesse, and pride of man, for that having their being and all beatitudes
from God, by whom alone he may trust for and have all benefits, does leave
him, and does rest with his Hope on vain shadows of this world, which of
themselves being most vain and depending only upon God, can not of
themselves do any good. For the Son of God descending from heaven, has
taken it upon him, not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham, to the intent
that he being to us the next neighbor, like to us, of ye same form, man
together with us, our dear friend, our next kinsman and brother, we should be
altogether inexcusable, if we do not put our confidence in him. And so much
the more as with his spirit, with a special illuminating to his elect, he
makes them more properly feel, that it is not their own spirit. For this
cause also Christ would, both in his passion and in other things, except in
sin, be made like unto his brethren, to the intent yt knowing that Christ
our high Priest has experience our miseries, we might think that he will have
compassion on us, and so we might trust in him. He also would dye for us upon
the Cross, to the end that seeing in him and thorough him satisfaction is
made for our sins, and God is reconciled with us, we should not fear to go
unto him, but should hasten thither, with a most sure confidence. At all times
therefore when we consider of God without Christ, by diverse respects we
can-not have a true Hope in him, inasmuch as he appears to be a very great
way off from us, unlike us, and such a one as we are not worthy off, yt he
comes not near unto, that he loves us not, that he esteems us not. And
further because we have done him injury, it appears unto us that he is our
enemy, angry with us, unjust and cruel: wherefore we cannot put our trust in
him. In Christ alone therefore God is discovered unto us, and we see him, and
he is merciful unto us, a most delycate friend, and a most dear Father, in
him alone is seen how much he loves us, how he holds us in price and
estimation, and how great his pity, mercy, goodness and love, which he has
used toward us, is. Wherefore like as thorough Christ alone our Mediator,
all graces descend from God unto us, so only by him, we may lift up to God
all our Hope, let us fix our selves steadfastly therefore upon Christ with the
eye of a lively Faith, to the end that thorough him our Hope being lyfted
unto Heaven, we may yield unto the Father all praise, honor and glory,
thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

How that he which trusts in God, can not be confounded, but of necessity
must obtain all that he hops for. Sermon. 4.
IT is no marvel, if many trusting that thorough their good works, GOD
ought to give them beatitudes in this present life, and more-ouer afterward
even the fruition of Heaven do abide with confusion, without obtaining that
which they hope for: forasmuch as that is no true Hope but a presumption,
because it is founded upon their own works: where-as true Hope has no other
foundation but the pure grace and goodness of GOD: and therefore is ever safe,
firm and steadfast.

There be also many which as they say, hope to have continuance in a good
life, and further to have it amended, and this to be gotten by the grace of
God, which as they judge, shall never fail, and this because they have their
will and arbitrament free, and be wise as they think, they give themselves to
mark what they can do, they will know and be willing to do that good thing,
to persevere and continue therein, chiefly thorough the means of their own
good devices: wherefore they bind themselves with continual vows. Now this
is also is a presumption and distrusting, because it has not God alone for the
foundation, but also the wisdom, power and goodness of man. And God most
justly suffers such as these to fall, to the intent ye opening their eyes,
and knowing their foolishness, weakness and malice, they might learn not
only not to put confidence any more in themselves, but rather despair
thereoff, and so put their whole trust in God. Also that Hope which many have
is not true, who believe that God will bestow his gracious gifts upon him,
thorough the intercession of Saints, or of the Virgin Mary. They wickedly
imagine, that the Saints and Saintesses, whilst they were in this present
life, did works which were in themselves of such goodness and excellency,
that by them they did merit, not only that glory in which they are, but that
also moreover they deserved to be heard, when they being in Paradise do pray
for us. This also is not true Hope, seeing in some part it is founded upon
men's works. It is very true, that I may and ought entreat people that be
in this present life, that they would make prayers for me, to exercise us in
virtue, and not because I should think that they must of necessity be heard
thorough the worthiness and excellency of their prayers, but only thorough
Christ and the mere goodness of God: Now this is the true Hope, founded wholly
in the bountiful goodness of God, and therefore most sure and certain.
Likewise to speak of worldly things, I say yt those be no true Hopes, which
being men's guides they hope to have preservation or recovery of health, by
means of Physicians or Medicines, with putting confidence therein, to have and
obtain judgment, favorable toward them, by means of Judges, Advocates,
procurators, friends, kinsfolk, favors, gifts, sleights or reasons: to have
means to defend themselves, or to overcome their enemies by force of their
own strength, or by their wisdom, to get friends, favors, honors,
dignities, raiment, knowledge, virtues, and other worldly things, with their
own wit being the guide, and their sapience, care, dilygence, industry and
virtue: and likewise to have by these means the aforesaid things preserved or
augmented. Now all these are presumptions, and not true Hopes, because they be
not founded upon God, but in things of this world: wherefore such as they be,
do often remain with confusion, being vain, and no true Hopes. There be also
many which although they hope to have of God temporal benefits, goods
corporal and spiritual and heaven it self, and that by no means, either of
Saints or merits, but only by the mere grace of God and by the merits and
intercession of Christ, nevertheless their hope is not true, although it be
gr^^ded upon God: and this because they have not for ye end of that their Hope
and desire the glory of God, but only their own proper gain. They desire and
hope that thorough Christ and the pure goodness of God, they shall have
prosperity in this world, and afterward heaven, but for their joys and
triumphs, and not for the mere glory of God. But this is no true hope:
inasmuch as true Hope, being the Theological and divine virtue, like as it
has God only for the foundation even so it has him alone for the refuge and
end. So that as Love when it is set upon creatures, is no more so sincere a
love, nor so pure, spiritual, divine and full of Charity, as it is, when it
seeks the glory of God, and furtherance of his Gospel, but is carnal and
profane: so when our hopes be set on pleasures, treasures, honors, dignities
and felicities, without being directed and elevated unto God, they are no true
Hopes, but false, vain and deceiptful. Seeing then ye true Hope is founded
wholly upon God, and who so has him alone for his refuge and end, can not be
confounded, yea it is necessary that we obtain all that which with the said
Hope we look for. For to understand this truth, we must first know, that like
as Charity is nothing else but a spiritual love of God, and of creatures for
his honor and glory: so Hope, is no other thing but a spiritual desire of
the glory of God, and of other things to this end and purpose, with a sure
and safe expectation, that God will grant me that being for his glory, like as
if, for an example, I hope to have at Gods hand some temporal benefit, either
corporal or spiritual, this hope in me is nothing else but a spiritual desire
that I have of the foresaid things, for the glory of God, and not for mine own
gain, with a sure and certain expectation that God will give it me when it is
for his glory, not for any merit of mine, but only for his mere goodness,
and for Christ who dyed for me upon the Cross. And forasmuch as when we shall
be in Heaven, we shall have all that we can and ought to desire, therefore
being without desires and expectation of any better thing, we shall be also
without Hope as Paul did write. 1. Cor. 13
And here it may be seen how they are deceived which say, that a man may
believe both good and evil, but no man can hope for any thing but that which
is good, nor fear any thing but that which is evil: so that according to
their opinion, a man might agreeably say, I believe that I shall have
prosperity, and also adversity, but a man cannot congruently say, I trust
that I shall have adversity, but he must say, I fear that I shall have
adversity, and I hope that I shall have prosperity. This their opinion is
false, forasmuch as albeit adversity can not be desired of carnal men, nor
therefore be hoped for, because they account adversity to be a naughty thing,
yet notwithstanding spiritual men which know that adversity is good, and the
gift of God, can both desire and hope for it: so that a good Christian may
congruentlye say, I hope that GOD of his mere goodness and grace, will give
me adversity, with granting me patience: and further that he will do thus
much favor, that I may spend my blood for his glory. Then seeing that Hope
is nothing else but a godly and spiritual desire that we have of things for
the glory of GOD, with a sure and certain expectation, that GOD for Christ and
his mere goodness, will give them us, forasmuch as they shall be to his
glory, it is of necessity, that this Hope can never be confounded, but shall
obtain all things.

And this, because that such desires and spiritual expectations, having not
for foundation refuge and end any other but GOD, it must needs be said that
they are of God: wherefore not vain. GOD is he that gives me that desire,
which being my guide I wish to have those things to the glory of God.

God also is he which governing with his spirit, talks to me in my heart,
witnesses unto me, and makes me sure and certain, that I shall obtain at
his hand: Wherefore inasmuch as GOD can-not lie, he that puts his trust in
him can-not remain with confusion, or deceived, so that his hope and trust
be right and true, the which Hope, like as GOD gives it not but to his elect,
so also he never grants unto any person habilytie to obtain any thing,
but when it pleases him to give it.

Wherefore David said: Save me O Lord, Psalm. 16
for I have put my trust in thee: as though he had said, Thou can not
forsake them that commit themselves to thy charge, and do put their confidence
in thee.

And in an other place: Those which put their trust in the Lord, shall never be
brought to confusion: those that put confidence in him, be compassed about with
mercy. The Lord is good, Eccl. 2. Iud. 6. Romans 5.
and for such a one he shows himself to them that trust in him. There was
never any that hoped in the Lord and was confounded: and this because God never
forsakes them that trust in him: Hope therefore does never abide with confusion
or ashamed. Wherefore Christ demanding of his Apostles, if when he sent them
forth without wallet scrippe, Luc. 22.
or shoes, they wanted any thing, and they aunswering him no, he said unto
them, now let him that has a wallet sell it and likewise his scrippe, and he
that has none, let him sell his coat, and buy him a sword: as if he would
say, whilst that you trusted in me, although you were poor and without any
worldly thing, ye wanted nothing, but forbicause now you being offended at my
death which is near at hand, will distrust of me, therefore I say unto you,
buy you swords, and defend your selves by your own strength: and this, not to
persuade you to any confidence of your selves and of worldly things, but to
disdain the strength of this world, and to show that without the grace of God
they be most vain. Seeing then yt the hope of this world is most vain and
deceiptfull, and the divine Hope sure and certain, let us pray unto the Lord
that he would give us grace, to put all our trust in him, to the end we may
render unto him all praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

How that albeit men ought to trust in God, yet they ought not to tempt him.
Sermon. 5.
ALthough that men ought to depend whollye upon God, and in him to put all
their hope and confidence, yet notwithstanding they ought not therefore to
abide in idleness, and wait for Manna from heaven, but every one ought to
choose him an art, or honest and profitable exercise; according to which he
feels himself called by God, that he may be able to live of his travail,
doing all to the profit of his neighbor and glory of God, without envy,
vain glory, pride, covetousness, and vice, every one also ought in using
their said trade, not to be overmuch careful, with being in such sort
attentive and labourous, yt they would kill themselves, bring their life in
ieopardy weaken themselves, or let things undone necessary for the soul as of
ordering well his household, or helping those which be in necessity, and have
not wherewith to sustein themselves, of hearing the word of God, having need
thereoff, and other works necessary for the health of the soul and the
benefit of our neighbor, according as ye best ordered love does require. And
moreover the Christians ought not to be careful (as Christ said) in thinking
and saying, what shall we eat, what shall we drink, and wherewith shall we be
clothed, as the Gentiles do, which do not believe that God has care and
providence of them: not that a Christian man ought not use due diligence and
care in using his art, occupation, and business, and likewise in seeking by
honest means to get his hire or duty, and provide him things necessary, yea,
if in the foresaid things they shall be negligent, such negligence shall be
unto them a damnable thing, but now they need not be vexed and careful in
thinking and fearinge that although they do the foresaid things, God will in
any wise fail them: so that man ought of duty to be careful in doing that
which belongs unto him to do, but he ought not to be careful in doubting
that God would not do all that which apperteyneeh unto him. Christ condemns
and forbids only that carfulness which grows of distrust in GOD.
Likewise the purpose of Christ in condemning those which were careful for the
time to come, was not to condemn the carfulness of such, as honestly gather
together that they may be the better able to provide for the want of their
neighbors, as Joseph did in Egypt, forasmuch as such carefulnes grows of
charity: but his purpose was only to condemn and forbid the carfulness of
those, which gather riches together for covetousness and a distrust that they
have in God. So that a good christian ought to do that which is his duty to
do, and then to be sure and certain that God will not forsake him: and so he
shall live without any great grief. And although a Christian man does not all
that is his duty, he ought not in any wise at any time fall from confidence
in God, but to trust and say, albeit I am a wicked person, God is good, which
will help me. Job. 13
And if I knew that God would not give me raiment, yea, would take away all
that I have, so yt I with all my householde must dye for hunger, I would in no
wise cease to trust in him, because I know certainly by faith that he would do
all for my benefit, with great charity. Also a Christian man ought, if he will
not fall unto the earth with his hope, but stand still lifted up unto God with
hope always, as is his duty to do, acknowledge that the bread which he
gets is not obtained by any his own strength, wit, diligence, or cunning,
but only by God. And so also he ought to think, that not that bread which he
eats does sustain and nourish him, but the virtue of God. Likewise a
Christian when he is sick, may and ought to use medicines, and Physicians,
without having therefore any confidence in them, 2. Par. 16
but in looking and hoping for help wholly by God. Asa king of the Jews sinned
not, in yt he used Physicians, but that he put his confidence in them and not
in god. And in like manner we may use ye help of Magistrates, (as Paul used,
when he appealed unto Caesar) so that we offend not charity, and do not by
this mean absent our selves with our hope from God. And lastly, a good
Christian ought with charity, when it is expedient, use the help and
commodity of things ordained by God and his creatures, so yt with all his hope
he may abide ever steadfast in god. And in like sort also ought he to do of
things perteining to ye soul, a Christian man ought not to say, I am one of ye
elect, wherefore I will live carnally, because I shall in any wise be saved: or it
is true yt I can not with my works make satisfaction for my sins, nor merit
not only Paradise, but not the least grace of God, wherefore I will stay my
self in idle carelessness: yea but he ought to travail by all means that he
knows and can to seek the health and profit of his neighbor and the glory
of God, without putting any confidence in his own works. If Hope were grounded
upon our own works, men might of necessity hope more or less, according as
they had done mo or fewer good woorks: but forasmuch as our Hope ought to be
founded only upon God, therefore both the good and bad, whilst they are in
this present life ought to have a like hope and that most perfect. And whereas
the good by their spiritual and holy works, may and ought to take occasion to
think and believe that God loueeh them, seeing that he has given them grace
to do such good works, and thereby to think that they are the elect of God,
and to hope for their salvation, the wicked also by their sins may take
occasion to trust for salvation, inasmuch as they may and ought to believe,
that God has suffered them to fall, to ye intent that knowing the better their
frailty, ignorance, and stubburnenesse, with a more humble heart they may go
for help unto God: and he may show himself unto them with greater abundance
of his grace. The like I say concerning worldly things, he ought no less to
put his trust in God which feels adversity, then he yt has prosperity,
forasmuch as like as the first, by those gifts that he has received, seeing
that God loves him ought to hope for better, so ye second, seeing that by that
adversity, god gives him so fit occasion to exercise himself in all virtue,
ought with eleuating his Hope, to think that God loves him most singulerly, and
that he uses toward him the same manner of tender care, that he was wont to
use with his elect, and before time with his only begotten son. The elect
therefore if they have prosperity and benefits of this present life, they do
not put their confidence in them, knowinge that they be most vain shadows,
given them by GOD for to raise them up to the consideration of Gods divine
goodness, and to make them the more steedefast upon God with their Hope: and
likewise if they have adversity, as the true children of God, feeling a divine
love in him, and that the LORD does give them that adversity for their
benefit, they be so much the more enforced to turn them unto GOD and to
confirm their hope in him. Whereas the wicked, like as the more prosperity
they have by GOD, so much the greater confidence they have in him after a
sort: so likewise how much the more they are in trybulations, so much the
more, they thinking that he is their enemy, do absent themselves from him,
with their Hope, and do distrust in him. Let us pray therefore unto God, that he
would give us grace to acknowledge that all doodnesse comes from him, to the
end that we being most zealous of his honor, and most fervent in doing
good, may yield unto him all praise honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Of the mercy of God. Sermon. 6.
IN GOD is no mercy or pitifulness, for that he has an heart capable of
miseries, as we have in sorrowing together for our mishaps: for as much as
God is such a one as cannot be molested with perturbations or passions, he is
unchangeable, most happy, and of a high perfection, but he is merciful for
that he has regard to our miseries, without changing himself. The Angels
do see his infinite mercy, in the own proper spring, that is in God, whereas
we on the other side do see it in rivers of his works, and of the effects of
great pity which he uses. And in the first is seen how much pitiful God is,
seeing that when the first man had sinned, and offended against god, he did not
condemn him immediately, as he justly might have done, yea for to heal the
pride that was hidden in him, he forbad him that he should not taste the Apple:
knowing that he would not obey him, although he threatened him death, to the
intent that committing so manifest an error, he might open his eyes to
acknowledge himself, and to crave pardon: notwithstanding albeit he had eaten
thereoff, he did not by this mean humble himself unto God, but then he hid
himself with flying from God as fast as he could, and covered him a new. And
if that god had not called him, and prevented him with his grace and mercy, he
would never have returned again unto god. But god who is rich in mercy, yea,
and the Father of mercy (as Paul did write) for that from him proceed all
mercies, called him, saying unto him: Adam, where art thou? open thine eyes a
little, and see into what great miseries thou art fallen, from a most high and
perfect felicity, to the intent that thou may crave pardon at thy most
pitiful and most gentle Father. And he being worser then before: did the^
seek to excuse himself with casting ye fault upon God, because he had given
him that woman, and likewise the woman blamed the Serpent, for to clear her
self. Then God might have had occasion not to suffer the^ any longer, to
punish them, or at the least to let them alone in ye estate, whereas he seeing
them so near unto desperation, for to comfort them, and draw them unto him, he
promised yt of the very same woman, should spring ye blessed seed Christ,
which should take away all the strength and force of the Serpent with breaking
in sunder his head. And for because man was fallen from God in such sort, that
he took no more pleasure in beholding him, as he had done before that he
sinned, God to the end he would have him occupied in some thing, and because
he might not continue in idleness, which is the sink of all evils, and should
not commit many sins, accursed not him, but ye earth, and willed that it
should bring forth thorns and brambles, and should have need of tillinge,
for to bring forth fruits, to the intent that man being willing to live,
should be constrayed, not to remain in idleness. Also he multiplied the
miseryes of the women, for to assuage her so great pride, for that she would
be a Goddess. And made her subject unto the man, because that of him she
might be well governed, inasmuch as she knew not how to govern her self. So
that all those penaunces which were appointed by God to our first parents were
nothing else but effects of great pity and mercy: and all alone for their
benefit. He would not that they should taste of the tree of life, because they
should not live always in those miseries, into the which they were fallen: he
chased them also out of Paradise, to the intent that trying the miseryes of
this world, they should be so much the more stirred up to remember the
felicity that they had lost, and thereby to repent them of their sin: and
with all this there is not read yt they did once crave pardon at gods hand, but
increased their sins in such sort, that all the earth was corrupted, and
here may be seen what thing man is, when he will be guided by himself. God
did determine, and that for the benefit of man, to send the floude, but he
told Noe of it an hundredth years before, to the intent that they might have
time to repent, but they made no more but a mock or iestinge thereat. The Arc
it self might have moved them unto repentance, especially when of all living
creatures some entered into it: notwtstanding man only was not moved thereby,
but gave himself to all worldly filthynesse. At ye last in sendinge the flood
he preserved eight souls, and with all this dealinge, they all that repented,
were by GOD embraced with his mercy, and many by this mean were saved, yea,
all the elect: and the other forsaken, if they could have lived longer yet they
should in any wise have been damned, and that with greater sin: wherefore the
very flood was an effect of the great mercy of God.

God would that his people should be so oppressed in Egypt, to the intent that
in delivering them they might feel so much the more his divine goodness and
mercy. And although they offended him many times in the desert, he did not
therefore cease to preserve them meruaylously. He gave them also a law, the
which they like proud persons, promised to observe, and they could not
observe it stricklye, to the intent that they might come unto the knowledge of
their sins, their frailty, ignorance, and stubburnenesse, and so might be
moved to go seek for grace at Gods hand. Lastly, he used with us great
mercy, in sending Christ his only begotten son, who albeit for the space of
thirty and three years, he showed himself most pitiful unto sinnners, yet
they always persecuted him, so that at last, with very great ignominy and
shame they crucified him.

And he of that death which they put him unto, wrought means to give us life
showing himself still pitiful, unto man, when man was most cruellye bent
against him.

And besides all this, arisinge again, he showed himself oftentimes unto his
elect, more amyable, godly, and pacified, he lightened them with divine
matters, with bestowinge on them many gracious benefits. He ascended visibly
into heaven, that our hope might be lifted up on high, abiding therefore with
his spirit upon earth. He sent the holy ghost upon his Apostles, visibly at the
day of Pentecost, like as he sent it unto his always inuisibly. He prays for
us, and continually bestows new graces upon us, although we be most unworthy.
There is no man yt can devise greater mercy then yt which God has used with
us. Seeing that we offend him he should have used great mercy with us, if he
should but once have had remembrance of us, but that he sent not a servant,
but his son, to heal our sickness with his own blood, yea, and took our
infirmity upon him. and suffered ye which of duty we ought to have suffered,
this was a very great mercifulnes, yt after sin committed, has saved Adam
and all his posterity. Be our sins never so great and innumerable, yt if we
do heartily crave pardon at gods hand, we shall immediately be pardoned. His
mercy it is that preserves us from innumerabe sins and evils, into which we
should fall if that were not ready to help us, that preuenteth us, makes us
rich, delivers and saves us. If ten only righteous men had been in
Sodom, God would not have destroyed ye filthy city, so ever is his mercy.
Sometimes God punishes even to the third and fourth generation, and shows
mercy upon a thousand. The sin of David was great, and therefore with his heart
he said, I have sinned, and immediately he was pardoned. The holy Ghost does
extol in the holy Scriptures, no perfection of God so highly, as his mercy, to
ye intent yt we should not despair, and nothing does so much displease him,
as when we distrust in his goodness and mercy, so yt I would choose rather, if
it were possible to have committed all sins and to have hope in God, then to
have this one sin of desperation. We al have need of ye mercy of God,
therefore we all ought to gasp after it, chiefly, mark that it is offered
unto all: and he that has the eyes of faith, shall see yt the works of god be
full of mercy not only when he chastises us, but also when he suffers us to
fall into any sin. He suffered (as Paul did write) even the Jews to fall,
that he might save ye gentiles. Having then to bring us unto the mercy of god,
one so mighty and pitiful, an high Priest, as Christ is, who preuenteth us
with his mercy, we ought in him put all our hope, and forasmuch as he has
already delivered us from all sins, therefore also from all miseries. He as
Joseph the Patriarch, although he had been hurt by his brethren, could not in
any wise refrain, but yt with his mercy he would embrace us. He alone was that
Samaritane, who truly had pity upon us. He also has been, and is that divine
shephearde, which came down from heaven for his lost flock.

He together with the father of the prodigal son, receives and embraces
with great joy the miserable sinner, when he humbly turns unto him. He
without being many times requested, rayseth again the dead son of the
Church militant, as before time he raised up the widows son. And what need
I say more, he has turned all the world up side down for to find again the
groate that was lost. Seeing the^ yt the mercy of God is so great, let us
labor by all means possible to put all our trust in him, so that we may render
unto him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Of the good Thief. Sermon. 7.
WHo is it that is not astonished in considering the bottomless profunditie of
Gods divine Judgment? Seeing Christ upon the Cross, altogether tormented,
next unto deaths door, betrayed of Judas, denied of Peter, forsaken of the rest
of his Disciples, persecuted of the Jews, scorned of the Gentiles, every body
fell from the Faith, and even then a poor Thief opened his eyes and began to
have Faith, when all the world had lost their Faith. The others had talked with
Christ, heard the Gospel his doctrine, seen his innocent life, his exceeding
charity, his excellent wisdom, profound humility, and other his divine
virtues: his so great wonders, signs, and miracles, they had read the
Prophets, studied the Scriptures, seen the figures, and all to be fulfilled in
Christ, and yet for all this they believed not on him, not only whilst they
saw him hang upon the Cross, but whilst he showed himself glorious upon
the earth: and on the other part a Thief or robber being blind and
ignorant, without (peradventure) ever having seen or read the holy
Scriptures, with out miracles, being with such great pain and sorrow upon the
Cross, even ready to dye, and seeing that Christ dyed upon the Cross,
believed that he was the Son of God, and hoped for Heaven by his means who
hanging on the Cross said, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me. It cannot
be said but that his conversion was a singular light and grace which he had
from God: so that as his conversion was the last miracle that Christ wrought
upon the earth, so it was of all other the greatest. He was a figure of all the
elect, who are saved only thorough grace as he was. He is set for an example
to all the world, to the intent that none should ever despair of the grace of
God, seeing that a Thief, who for his wickedness was punished even with death,
and for his ungraciousness was crucified, is saved. Was it not a great matter,
that in the same day, when Christ with so great zeal shed his blood, that then
he opened the windows of his divine treasures, and rayned down grace in such
abundance, that a Thief was illuminated and is saved. The good Thief
perceiving that Christ with great pity, prayed unto the Father for those that
crucified him, more-ouer excused them with saying, that they knew not what
they did, wondering at this so great love, he turned his eyes unto Christ,
and saw that he suffered so great evils without any perturbation: he saw
such pitiful tears fall from him to the ground, and such fervent and
kindeled groanings mount from him up to the Heaven: he heard his words so full
of love: he beheld such his gestures and divine acts, such his wonderful
patience, profound humilytie, high wisdom, large love, long perseverance, and
other his divine virtues, whereby he was moved and stirred up, (the inward
light which was granted him thorough grace being his guide,) to believe that
this Jesus who suffered in such sort, was the Son of GOD.

Christ regarded him with the eye of his pity, and therefore he was saved.
It cannot be denied but that the virtues, gifts and graces of the good Thief,
were meruaylous at the first, as it is in the elect of GOD, for that opening
his eyes, he acknowledged and confessed, that he was wicked, and that he
suffered iustlye for his ungodliness, like as did all other sinners, wherefore
approving the works of God to be righteous, he said. We suffer justly, we
receive guerdon according to our works: whereas the wicked with ye evil Thief
do say, if thou be Christ, save thy self and us, forasmuch thou should save
both thy self and us. He also excused innocent Christ with saying, this man
has not sinned, he suffers for us and for our faults, being constrained
thereto by his own mere goodness and love, wherefore we ought to give him
thanks, that in suffering for us he would excuse us before the Father. There
can be done unto a Lord or noble man nothing more grateful, then when he
were slaundered and accused of all his subjects and countrymen, that one
would excuse him, defend him, and testify of his innocence and virtue, as
the good Thief did, who upon the pulpit of the Cross, when there was none
that durst say well of Christ, yea when every one reviled him, he with out all
fear, preached forth openly his innocence. Reproved also the naughty
thief, saying. Do not thou also fear God, and art upon the Cross and
ready to dye? Afterward praying, he said unto Christ. O Lord remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom. As if he would have said, when thou shall be,
I say not carnally of great authority in this present life, for that thy
kingdom is not of this world, but when thou shall be in thy heavenly
inheritance and glory, purchased for us with thy precious blood, be mindful
of me, not of my sins, but of my weakness and frailty, remember that I am
thy creature, formed and created by thee unto blessedness, after thine own
similitude, remember that thou came down from Heaven for me, that thou have
taken human flesh upon thee, that thou have prayed, have taken pains, and
have suffered tribulations thirty and three years, for me have been
crucified, and for me shall now dye. Remember that I thorough the Faith that I
have in thee, am thy brother and member. I crave not to be next unto thee in
thy kingdom. Justice would yt I should be damned, but I know by Faith that I
shall not be damned, O Lord thou can not forget that I am one of those for
which thou sheddest thy blood, and suffer so much, and which being thy
companion upon the Cross, has put all his hope in thee, for that he saw
opened in thee the windows of all divine treasures and graces. His Faith was
great, seeing that in the time of greatest darkness, and when al men cloased
their eyes against Christ, he opened his, and knew him to be the son of God.
His hope also was nothing less, in hoping for heaven by his mean who hanged
on the Cross. Also his love was great, seeing that he offered unto Christ his
heart, all his thoughts, his love, his tongue and words, yea he offered
himself wholly, being upon the Cross. O what great strength and constancy
was this in him, seeing that he being on the cross in such great torments,
lifting up his mind above himself, he remembered with how great love of
Christ, and with what temperaunce, he settled himself wholly upon the good
will of God, ascribing with great justice, glory and honor unto God, to
himself confusion and punishment, and correction unto the wicked thief: his
prayer likewise was altogether spiritual, forasmuch as he desired not things
brickle and things which are below, neither prayed he for any other thing, but
that he would look upon him with a pitiful eye. He craved that he might live
in his remembrance and Christ promised him Heaven, saying, Verily I say unto
thee, that this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. He added unto the
promise, this word verily, to the intent that he might be assured thereoff: as
if he would say, be assured, that thou shall be with me in Heaven as thou art
with me on the Cross. He requested to be in his remembrance, and Christ
promised him Paradise: and when should he be there? the very same day: and with
what company? with Christ: and how long? for ever: and to whom did he promise
such great treasures? to a most vile thief, who for his wickedness was hanged
upon the Cross: and wherefore did he promise him such a benefit? not for any
merits of the Thief, but for his own merits, and thorough mere grace. What
answer did Christ make then? Assure thy self that although thou have been
ever hethertoo a wicked person, notwithstanding, I say not a thousand years
hence, but even this day, and so forth into everlasting, where is not, was,
nor shall be, but all that is present shall be: for that by and by thou shall
be with me, that am the Son of God in Paradise, inasmuch as thou shall be in
felicity. And so distributing his daily penny, he began at the last. It was
no small privilege, that one so vile a Thief, amongst all the other elect,
was appointed by God to suffer punishment upon the cross with Christ, and
that he had grace granted him to ask mercy of Christ, when he in such
abundance showed forth grace abroad: and to believe that he should receive
abundantly, seeing that the Chest of the treasury of Christ was opened. Let
us pray therefore unto the Lord, that with the eyes of his pity he would
look upon us, as he looked upon this Thief, so that we may render unto him
all praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Of the wonderful conversion of Saint Paul. Sermon. 8.
ALbeit that God is wonderful in himself, and is so also declared in his
creatures, and especially in the Saints, yet in Paul he is declared most
wonderful. And this, because that whilst he was an enemy to Christ, and
most earnest in seeking to pervert the honor of God, upon a sudden God
converted him, and wrought so in him, that he was a most zealous setter forth
of the honor and glory of God. Where is to be noted, that as all creatures
depend on God, so likewise they belong unto him, and man so much ye more, as he
has a being more noble: notwithstanding man thorough his malice and perverse
nature does oftentimes resist against God, he tourneth his shoulders, and
walks ye contrary way, with absenting himself every day more and more from
him, as Paul did in times past, who with a meruaylous force, made have and ran
to seek ye dishonor of God. And this, first because he was a young man, and
his blood boiled in him, he was proud for that he was a Jew, and further of the
Tribe of Benjamin, unto whom Jerusalem fell by lot, and was the highest among
ye other. He was also of the sect of ye Phariseies, who accounted themselves
the best of all others, and moreover he was a Citizen of Rome: so that it may
be thought, if he were without the grace of God, he had occasion to be proud.
Forasmuch as he was learned in the Law, in that he had been instructed by
Gamaliel, brought up in Moses rightes, and thorough continuance of custom made
as it were unchangeable. He saw that Christ had been, not only by the Jews
but also by the consent of the Gentiles judged to the death and crucified, it
seemed unto him that Christ was contrary to Moses, and to the Law, wherefore
with great vyolence he persecuted both him and those that believed in him.
Going to Damascus of his own accord, he had gotten authority granted him, to
bring unto Jerusalem, all those that confessed the name of Christ. He himself
writing unto the Galathians, confessed that he had persecuted the Church of
Christ exceedingly. It may be thought if he were terrible and vyolent against
the Christians, that the Disciples themselves also, after they had received the
holy Ghost in such great abundance, were afraid of him: so that after he
was converted, coming to Jerusalem, and seeking means to be united with the
Apostles, Barnabas was faint to bring him in, so great was the fear that they
had of him. Before that he was converted, he breathed forth nothing but
threatenings and death, as it is written. Ananias said unto Christ. Lord I have
heard by many, of this man, how great evils he has done to thy Saints in
Jerusalem.

He would have destroyed and utterly rased out the Church of Christ, if God had
not prevented him: inasmuch as his woodnesse and anger was wonderful, and of
so much the greater force was it, as that he persecuted Christ, under a show of
goodness, thinking blyndly, that he did a great service to God.

The Apostles were not sufficient for to instruct him, wherefore he set
himself against CHRIST: for that like as he was according to the
righteousness of the Law unblameable, so he was most wicked, inasmuch as he
persecuted Christ our righteousnrsse.

In the mean while that Paul went with so great anger unto Damascus, Christ
assaulted him by the way, he used vyolence with him, and by force converted
him. When David had sinned, and God would convert him, he sent to him Nathan ye
Prophet, who showing him flatly his fault, caused him to acknowledge it, so he
confessed his sin, and repented: but we do not read that he used with him
any vyolence. And likewise when he counuerted that sinful woman that fell
weeping at his feet, the good thief, and many other sinners, the which at the
least recommended themselves unto him: But as for Paul, he called him, when he
was most his enemy, to give us to understand, that those which be righteous by
the righteousness of the Law, as Paul was, be greater enemies unto Christ,
then the wickedest people in the world: wherefore Paul, not by ceremonies,
and fables, but heartely and in truth writing to Timothy, called himself the
greatest sinner in the world, and this, because the righteousness of the Law
was of all other most farthest off from grace, and most contrary thereto.
Paul then being nigh unto Damascus, was on a sudden wholly compassed about
with a great light, which came from heaven, in token of the great inward light
which he ought to have, by that that he being astonished fell unto the ground, to
note that he must fall from all confidence in himself. And he perceived a
voice which says unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is a
pleasant thing when we be in extreme miseries, to be called by our right
names, of our true friends, and much more of Christ, as Paul was. He repeated
twice the same name, not only in token of the exceeding love he bare toward
him, and that he should consider, that he was come now the second time for
him, but to note that Paul being in the profunditie of erroures, lulled a
sleep under the shadow of the law, had need of a singular calling for to be
awaked, and to the intent that he might open his eyes unto Christ He said then
unto him, why persecutest thou me? know thou not that thou persecutest one
who never offended thee? one that is thy friend, one that for thee came down
from Heaven, one that dyed for thee upon the Cross, and would dye a thousand
times, if it were so expedient, persecutest thou one so dear a friend of
thine, that albeit thou have offended him most highly, yet notwithstanding,
without any thy forward disposition, does not only pardon thee, but has
elected thee for one of his principal Capitaynes? Then Paul said, who art thou
Lord? as if he should say, I perceive a voice, I hear words, I feel that
one talks with me, but I cannot tell who it is. I have read that GOD talked
with Adam, with Noe, with Abraham, with Moses, with Samuel, and with many
others, it might be that thou art God thou which talkest with me? look how
thou have cast me to the earth sodaynely. Then Christ answered and said: I am
Jesus, whom thou persecutest, with attributinge to himself all the hurt that
was done to his elect. As if he would say, read my Gospel, consider all my
life, and thou shall find that it has been continuallye and always, full of
reproaches, infamyes, labors, persecutions and crosses, and for all this thou
shall not find that ever I did lament mine estate: but forasmuch as thou
persecutest mine elect, which being soul of my soul, and heart of my heart,
are to me more dear then mine own life, I cannot abide that thou should
persecute them. If that be not sufficient which I suffered by thee on the earth
in thirty and three years, but that thou would I should suffer more,
work thine anger upon me, and let my dear brethren alone, who be so precious
and dear unto me, yt with mine own death I have given them life. It is a hard
matter for thee to kick against he prick. It is a thing very hard and
dangerous to fight against Christ, who unto the wicked and to those that be
rebelling against him, is a rock of offense and a stumblinge block: for that
like as beasts when they stricke out their heels against a prick, do hurt
themselves and not the prick, so thou Paul, if thou would kick against
Christ, at the last without preuayling against Christ, yea, with manifesting so
much the more his glory, shall hurt only thy self. Then Paul being by this
time altogether inwardly changed, disposing himself to the good will of God,
said: Lord what will thou that I should do? as if he should say, I commit
my self wholly into thy hands, do with me what it pleases thee. O happy
sick man, seeinge that he committed himself into the charge of one so expert,
able, and loving a Physician. O happy lost flock, seeing it is now fallen
into the pitiful arms of the heavenly shephearde: Christ said then: arise up
and go into the city, and there it shall be told thee what thou ought to
do. Those which were in his company, stood astonyed hearing the voice,
although they understood not the word, and seeinge nothing. And Saul arising
from the earth; opening his eyes, saw nothing, in token yt he was altogether
lifted up and ravished unto God. Then leading him by the hand they brought him
unto Damascus, where he was afterward instructed by Ananias.

Then being perfectly illuminated, he saw how greatly blind his prudence had
been, his wisdom foolish, his piety ungodly, his righteousness unjust, his
goodness mischievous, his charity cruel, his innocence spotted, and all his
virtues full of vice. Then putting off utterly ye old Adam, he clothed
himself with Christ, and countinge himself of no reputation, he was
transformed in God. And likewise Christ made of him a glorious and divine
conquest, inasmuch as where he went to attach the elect of God, he himself was
attached of Christ. He would have bond them, and himself was bound with the
golden cheines of charity: brought unto Jerusalem, and was eue^ ravished and
lifted up unto the third heaven: he would have imprisoned them, and himself
was shut close in the good will of God: he would have slain them, and he was
mortified unto the world, and made living unto God. His conversion also was
wonderful, not only because Christ stayed him on a sudden from so great an
anger and violence, with which he went to the dishonor of God: but moreover
converted him, turned and drew him unto him, with great force: so that he
conducted him to the top and height of all virtues, in such sort that
concerning his following of Christ, he said: Be ye like unto me, followers of
Christ. I know not who could more have despised the world and his own
righteousness, seeing that he accounted for dounge, every thing yt was without
Christ. Who is it that has for Christ so despised this present life, as Paul
did? who said, I desire to be disolued, and to be with Christ. And as
concerning mortification of the old Adam, he said, I chastise my body and
bring it in subjection. He was crucified with Christ, wherefore he said, with Christ
I am nailed upon the cross. There was none of ye Saints yt took so much pains
for Christ as he did: he himself writing to the Corinthians said, yt he had
labored more abu^dantly, the^ al ye other Apostles. He was so inamoured on
Christ, yt he was ready and prepared, not only to be taken and bound for
Christ's sake, but also to dye: yea, he said, God forbid yt I should glory but
only in ye cross of Christ. His glorious Ensigns, were ye marks of Jesus
Christ, which he bear in his body. And his glory was the witness, not of
men, but of the holy Ghost, and of his own conscience. When he was for Christ
reviled, apprehended, bound, and imprisoned, he accounted himself most
happy, then when he was taken up to the third Heaven.

Writing his Epistles and being willing to give authority to his word, he
called himself most often Paul in bonds for Christ, adiudging himself
greater, when he was imprisoned for Christ, then if he had been in ye most
high throne and seat of dignity in the world. His faith was certain,
wherefore he said, I run not as to an uncertain thing, his hope was
steadfast, wherefore he said, we are made safe thorough hope: and his charity
was perfect, therefore he said, who shall separate me from the love of God? he
had such zeal and love of souls for the honor of God, that he desired to be
accursed from Christ, for the glory of God and ye salvation of his brethren. He
was ever fixed with his heart and mind in heaven, wherefore he said, our
conversation is in heaven. And for all this he was so humble, that he called
himself the least of the Apostles, unworthy the name of an Apostle, borne out
of due season, and nothing, yea, the chiefest sinner of the world. Paul was a
spiritual temple of God, in which he wrought wonderful things. And what need
I say more, he was an instrument of Christ, and a vessel elected to publish
all abroad the name of Jesus, and to suffer for him. Seeing then yt from the
bottomless gulf of his sins, he was ravished up even to the third heaven,
and enriched with so great light, virtues, gifts, and graces, so that in him
is verefied that which was aforesaid, that whereas sin does abound, grace
does superabound. Let us set this glass before our eyes, not only to the
intent that we may never despair, but also, so that following him in all good
things, we may render unto God all praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The end of the Sermons of Hope.
What thing it is to love God. Sermon. I.
THere be some who forbicause they say that they love God, do think that
they love him sufficiently, but God is loved with the heart, not with words.
To love God is an other manner of thing then only to say, I love GOD. Some
other because they fast, give alms, pray, and do like works, do think
that the doing thereoff is a loving of God. But love consists in the heart,
not in the hands, albeit by the works, it is declared and made known. Such
outward works may be done by hipocrites, and by such as be not in love with
God: and when they are done also by those which love God, notwithstanding,
albeit those outward works do grow of love, they are not therefore love it
self, but the effects theroff. Also those be deceived which because when they
talk have a feeling of that they talk, when they read or meditate on any
devout thing, have a certain taste, and do feel a certain pleasant
sweetness therein, do believe that the having of such like taste and feelinge,
is the loving of God: but forasmuch as such like pleasure and tasting, is many
times granted, not only to the imperfect, but also to the wicked, the which
be not in love with God: therefore such sensual appetites and effects, be
effects of the flesh, and not of the spirit. It is very-true, that they which
love God truly, for that they feel with the spirit that they be of the
elect, that God loves them, that he is their Father, and that he has a
singular care of them, wherefore they have in their hearts as it were always,
a certain ioyfulnesse, but sincere and pure: they take pleasure to reason of
God, to hear his word, to read the holy Scriptures, to behold his divine
goodness, and to pray and do other good works, yet notwithstanding this
pleasure is not love it self, but the effect of love. To judge God of greatest
price, to esteem him, to account him dear, to set more by him then by all the
world, and himself, they all be effects of love, but not love it self. And
so likewise, although ye love of god, making us of no reputation in our selves,
transformeth us in God, and that in such sort, that esteeming nothing good but
God, we account our selves and all other things nothing worth, except in that
that they may serve to the glory of God, notwithstanding this abiecting our
selves, and transforming in God, be not love it self, but the effects of
love. Also those do deceive themselves, which for that they have a desire to
go unto heaven, for their own felicity and profit, do believe that this
desire is the loving of God, and in very truth it is but an effect of self
love, contrary to ye love of God. It is very true, that the desire of going to
heaven for the glory of god, is no effect of self love, neither the very love
of god, but an effect thereoff. Likewise also to love God because he has given
to thee, gives to thee, or because thou hopest yt he will give to thee riches,
children, honors, pleasures, and other benefits, is in truth no loving of
God, but of thy self. And in like sort also, forasmuch as GOD has plentifully
all benefits, therefore seeing that in himself cannot desire any good thing,
if the loving of god were to desire any good thing in him, God could not be
loved. It is very true, that we may and ought to desire it, not that GOD is
more glorious in himself, because this is impossible, but that he is more
glorious unto the world, with his glory by creatures, being made manifest and
famous. But this desire is not the loving of GOD it self, but and effect
thereoff. Neither is it the loving of God to be glad and rejoice together of
his benenefite, because that all this grows of the love which we bear him
but it is not love it self. Love is a thing much dearer unto us. And so also
the love of GOD is not that liuelye and spiritual, knowledge, taste, and
feeling, that we have of GOD, yea love grows of it self, inasmuch as, for
that lively with the spirit we do feel his goodness, therefore we do love
him.

Wherefore it is to be noted that love is a thing so inward to us, that albeit
we do love, yet notwithstanding we know with great difficulty what love is,
and with greater difficulty can we express it. So that like as it is an easy
thing to know that GOD is, but very hard to discern what manner of one he
is: so it is easy to love, and to know that love is, but to understand and
express what manner of thing it is, that is a most hard matter. And for all
this I think to express it. Love is nothing else but a certain inclination
which we have to hinges. Like as the natural love is none other but a natural
inclynation, which all creatures have unto their own being, whereoff it
grows that they naturally have a longinge after, do desire, and are moved to
seek all those things which do preserve it.

In like sort sensual love is an inclynation which all lyuinge sensible
creatures have unto pleasure, whereof it grows that they desire and be moved
to seek for those things which would cause it, as meat, and other things
whereoff pleasure grows. And likewise humane and reasonable love, is nothing
else but an inclynation which men have unto honestye, whereoff it grows that
they desire and be moved to seek for virtues, be pleased and delyghted therein.

Now the true and spiritual love of GOD is nothing else but a spirytuall
inclynation which the Saints have unto the glory of GOD, the which grows
of a lively feeling that they have of the goodness of God, and of this
inclynation grows that they long for and desire to honor him, and that he
may be honored of all creatures. They are moved to honor him in such sort
as they can, and do seek that he may be also honored of others, and so they
come to show forth acts of love, they rejoice together and be delyghted in
all those things which make to the glory of God, wherefore they take pleasure
in all the good works that be done, and likewise also do seek to have every
day more light of the goodness of God. But it is to be understood, that
seeing such inclination is altogether spiritual, it is not found in carnal
men, but only in those, who being regenerated thorough Christ, be spiritual,
wherefore they alone do love God in truth, those which are by having faith
borne again, those the more, which have the greater faith. And forasmuch as
God, as he that has in himself the fullness of all perfection, has no
inclination to creatures, therefore he loves them not in such sort as he is
loved of us, yea, the love which GOD bears to creatures, is none other but a
willingness to do them good effectually, for as long time as he thinks
good. But let us pray unto the Lord that he would make us feel his love, to
the intent that we may render to him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

How God alone ought of us to be loved. Sermon. 2
Goodness is an object to love, so that it only ought to move us to love ye
which we love: wherefore we ought to love nothing but yt which is good: and
forbicause, according as Christ said, God alone is good in truth, therefore he
only ought to be loved. In him alone is the true beauty, by the which things
are loved, the true Charity, wisdom, mercy, and all other virtues, which can
move and stir us up to love: inasmuch as the virtues that be sound in
creatures, and likewise ye beauty, are no true virtues nor true beauty, but
shadows a far off, and Images of the virtues and beauty of God: yea God
alone is he, who is in truth, wherefore he only ought to be loved. Creatures
have not any true being, but shadowed, wherefore God said unto Moses, I am: as
if he would say, Go down unto Egypt to deliver my people without fear, for
that creatures because they have no true being, they can-not without me do
thee any hurt nor yet help thee, but I alone am he, who for that I am in
truth, can do thee both good and evil. And although when we be looued, that
love procures us to love them again which love us yet because we be not loved
in truth of any but only of God, from whom alone we must acknowledge to have
all our beatitude, therefore him only we ought to love. Wherefore as God is ye
first beginning of al our beatitude, so also he ought to be our last end, vnt
who^ we ought to go with al our love, with which in him alone we ought to
stablish our selves: as he himself commanded saying. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart, soul, mind, strength, and virtue. Therefore God
willing to have of us all love, as is convenient he should, lays hard to our
charge, yt we ought not in any wise give part thereof to creatures. Thou will
say God has commanded yt we love our neighbor as our selves, wherefore we
ought not to love God alone, but also creatures. I answer and say that Christ
said also, that he which hates not father and mother, children, brothers,
sisters, and moreover himself, can-not be my Disciple: and how shall it be
possible that we hate them, and on the other side, being our neighbors, that
we love them as our selves, seeing that hatred is contrary to love?

For the understanding therefore of the truth, it is to wit, that nothing in
truth is loved, but only that thing in which love is steadfastly fixed and set:
and in like sort there is in truth no hatred, but only that, in which hatred
is fixed and bounded: and because that like as the waters run all into the
Sea, neither do they ever rest until they come thither, so God, for that he
alone is in truth good, our first beginning and last end, our love passing by
creatures, ought not to be stayed in them, but wholly to be directed even unto
God, and to rest in him: wherefore he alone in truth ought to be loved. And
likewise also, forasmuch as sin only is in truth naught and filthy,
therefore it alone ought to be hated: so that albeit our hatred pass by
creatures, it ought therefore not to be stayed in them, but to be directed unto
wickedness, and there only to rest. And to understand this the better, I will
bring an example of a perfect Christian. whose heart if thou saw, thou
should see that his love is wholly upon God: and yet for all this, he
loves creatures, without staying therefore his love in them, yea he loves
them not, but for the glory of God, and inasmuch as they serve to make it
manifest: so that such a one might say unto God the same words that Augustine
said in time passed, O Lord when I love and creture, I love not that creature,
but thee, for whose love I love it. Although the spouse, does love ye gifts of
her husband, she does not therefore stay her self with her love upon them,
but only does love them for his sake yt gave them, and because they serve for
his glory and credit: in like sort the true spouse of the Son of God, does
not love, account precious, nor esteem the benefits of God for the
worthiness of them only, nor yet for her own gain, but only for being
given of God, and for that they serve to his glory. Likewise also a good
Christian hates no persons, but for their wickedness, which be to ye
dishonor of God, being by him most highly loved, so that his hatred is not
fixed in the creature but in the sin.

We ought therefore to love God with all our heart, and that with staying our
selves with all our hopes upon him: and we ought to love our neighbors as our
selves, with out stablishing in any wise our love upon them, but with loving
them only for the glory of God, and inasmuch as they serve to the making of it
manifest. We ought also to hate our neighbors, our parents, and our selves, as
Christ said, not with staying our selves with hatred toward them, but
toward their vices and sins: inasmuch as we ought to hate them only, for
that they being carnal do hinder us, draw us back, make us slack, and
suffer not us to make famous the glory of God. Like as then there is one only
God, so he alone ought to be loved: and as al other things be of God, so only
for him they ought to be loved. All the creatures together be not worthy of our
love, which is fit for none but God. And all this of our love which rests in
creatures, is lost. God as he who is jealous over us, will have all our love
for himself: of other things that we have he is content that we should
communicate and give unto others, so that it be to his glory, but love he would
not, that should give unto any but him. If we love men, for that they be our
kinsfolks, be like unto us, and come of the same blood that we do, such love
is natural and not virtuous.

If we love them for their beauty, and there-in do establish our selves with
our love, in such a case that is a lascivious love. If we love them for
profit, ye loue-proceedeth of covetousness: if for dignity or honor which
we look to obtain, that love comes of pride: If also we love the^, for that
we hope that they shall serve for our salvation, and for that we trust by their
means to go unto Heaven, which we desire only for our own felicity,
without having respect to the glory of GOD, this also is wholly a wicked and
carnal love.

But now this truly is a love, bright, sincere, pure, spiritual and of
Charity, when we love our selves and creatures, only for the glory of God,
and only when they do serve, or be to serve to the manifesting thereoff.

True Charity then, as Paul did write, seeks not the things that be our
own, but the glory of God: yea it is a virtue that is most worthy, most high,
most pure, and altogether divine, holds the eyes always open, steadfast and
fixed on the glory of God, and albeit sometimes, as that which is most pitiful
and humble, it debaseth it self, to help the neighbors, it is not therefore
stayed in them, but immediately with exalting it self on high, it returns to
the glory of God: yea, for that Charity makes us of no reputation in our
selves, and transformeth us in God, therefore it makes that not seeing us any
more in our selves, but only in GOD, we cannot any more love us in our selves
but in God alone. Let us pray unto God then that he would give us that love, to
the intent that we may render unto him all praise, honor and glory, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

With how great love God ought to be loved. Sermon. 3.
FOrasmuch as goodness is such, that being objected to love, it ought to be
loved, and so much the more, as it is the greater: seeing that Gods divine
bounty is infinite, it ought of us to be infinitely loved, as it is loved by
divine will: yea we ought infinitely to love God, not only because of his
infinite goodness, but also because of his infinite beauty, wisdom, power,
mercy, charity, righteousness, and for every other his infinite virtue and
perfection. And more-ouer, for that love ought to be recyprocall, in our
loving of God with infinite Charity, as he loves us, we ought to love him
again with an equal love, therefore with a love that is infinite, yea and
with a greater if it were possible, seeing that in loving us he first begins.
We can-not say that he has not showed us his love with effects infinite,
seeing that he has given us his son upon the Cross, himself in him, with all his divine graces and treasures, and his own spirit. Wherefore whereas other
virtues, for that they have for their object means, do consist in a certain
mediocritie, so that it is a vice, not only the failing or want of that
mediocritie, but also the excess thereoff: Charity like as Faith and also
Hope, for that they have God our last end for their object, and therefore be
called Theological virtues, do not consist in that mediocritie: inasmuch as
God cannot of us be loved too much, as also we cannot trust in him overmuch,
nor put too much confidence in him, yea we do ever fail in loving him,
believing in him, and putting our trust in him as we ought. The mean to love
God, is to love him without measure, and if it were possible infinitely. We be
then bound, and that by many respects, not only to esteem more of God then
of infinite worlds, if there were infinite, and to spend our life for God
infinite times, if infinite times, we should arise again, but also to love him
with an infinite love. Thou will say, is it possible yt we love God with an
infinite love? seeing yt our will is finite, limited and bounded, therefore we
are not bound to love him with such love. I answer and say, that like as if
thou having lent unto one a thousand Crowns, and the time being come in which
he ought to pay thee them again, thou could not have them, and this
because he is come into poverty thorough means of his great household, in
such a case if the said man seeking about to his kinsfolk and friends, should
use all possible diligence for to have it and pay it to thee, and at last could
get but one Crown thereoff, and this alone he paid thee, tell me in such a
case, albeit he could not pay thee the thousand Crowns, should this be for
this that he was not bound to pay thee them? surely no, but he should remain
and be in any wise bound, albeit he could not then pay them. And that the truth
is so, is most certain, inasmuch as if one should ever become rich, he should
be bound to give them thee, not by any new Obligacion, but by that old, the
which did always continue, and was never cancelled, albeit it has lain hidden
for that time, in which he was not able to pay them, wherefore thou ought
not to cause him to be cast in prison, seeing that he could not pay them, and
that it was without his fault: so likewise, if we cannot render unto God
infinite love, but only a very little, for this cause, not that we are not
bound thereto, so that if it were possible that God should make us so perfect,
that we might love him with an infinite love, we should be bound to love him
infinitely, and not by any new Oblygacion, but by the old which lasts ever.
It is very true that it lies hidden, seeing that we be not able to love him
with an infinite love: wherefore although we do not love him with such great
love, he will not for this cast us into the prison of Hell: so that we love
him as much as we are able. And if thou would say, that God has dispensed
and unbound us of this Bond of loving him with an infinite love, seeing that
we are not able to observe it. I will say, that if this our Bond depended
only on his divine will, he might dispense with us and unbind us, but it
depends on his infinite goodness, wherefore like as God can-not take away
any thing from his infinite goodness, and yet be infinitely good, so he
cannot unbind us, that we should not be always bound to love him with
infinite love, as is fit for his infinite goodness, and is our duty, to do
although we cannot. And here it may be seen, not only how great the
goodness of God is, seeing that whereas an infinite love is due unto him, he
is contented with a small love, but also how great our imperfection is, seeing
that infinitely we do fail of doing that which is convenient for us to do
unto GOD. Albeit God does not impute unto us such a defect and sin, neither
does he punish us therefore, seeing that we cannot love him, as much as for him
should be convenient. But thou will say, I would know with how great love I am
bound to love God, so that in me there may be no fault unto me imputed, and so
I might be damned. I answer that we are bound to love him with all our heart,
soul, and mind, neither can it be said, that God in saying, Thou shall love
God with all thy heart, soul and mind, did not command that we should love
him whilst that we are in this present life with so great a love, but that he
would only show us what we should do when we shall be in Heaven, as some
have said heretofore, inasmuch as Christ said contrariwise, that this was not
only a commandment but the chiefest. Nor yet can it be said as the Papists
say, that to fulfill and observe this commandment, it is sufficient that we
give unto God one part of our love, so that it be the greatest part: and that
we love God alone, more then all other things, and this first, because God is
of the contrary will in commanding us that we should give all our heart and
thereby all our love: the which also he repeated with many words, diverse ways,
to the intent yt we should be inexcusable. And to expound, thou shall love God
with all thy heart, that is with part, is not to declare the word of God, but
to deprave it, and to gainsay it. For that they have against them, Basil,
Origene, Augustine, Bernard, Gregory, Nicene, Hugo de santo vittore, and many
other holy men, all the which notwithstanding with diverse words in expounding
this commandment, have said, that we are bound to give unto GOD all our
love.

Thou will say, if it be so, we must be all damned, inasmuch as there is no
body, which gives to God all his love, yea whilst that we be in this present
life, without a singular privilege, we cannot do it, for that since the sin
of our first parents, thorough the concupiscences that be in us, we be hindered
and slacked from the love of God, and in such sort, that we do never love him
with all our love, yea some part of our love does always abide in the earth.
Now to this I answer and say, that the commandment of divine love is in it
self righteous, honest and holy: and if we be unable to observe it, this is
thorough the fault of man which sins, wherefore such sin God justly may
impute unto us, and for it punish us, and for all this, seeing that God by the
obseruaunce of this commandment, and of his divine law, could not justify
and save us, he has chosen to justify and save us, thorough grace, and
thoroughe Christ, to the intent that as by the disobedience of Adam we be lost
and destroyed, so by the obedience of Christ we should be made ^^^e: Wherefore
if we would be justified and saved, we ought not to seek our salvation or
righteousness, by way of observing the Law, inasmuch as by it in Adam we being
fallen into the ignorance of God, and the concupiscence of worldly things,
cannot observe it, but ought to seek for grace in Christ, with uniting our
selves unto him by Faith.

And then feeling in Christ the divine bountifulness of God, we shall love him
above all other hin^^* and although we cannot love him with all our heart, yet
such sin shall not be imputed to us. Our Oblygation then wherein we are bound,
is not only to love God above all other things, with holding him in price and
estimation more then all treasures, pleasures, honors, dignities, Paradises,
and our own life, but to set all our love upon him, and moreover to love him
with all our heart, soul, mind, strength and virtue, yea if it were possible
to love him infinitely, with applying al our force to this end.

Let us therefore pray unto the Lord, that he would give us grace to love him,
as we are bound to do, to the intent that we may render to him, all praise,
honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

With what manner of love, God ought of us to be loved. Sermon. 4.
GOD ought to be loved of us, with a pure and sincere love: that is, because
that he is good in himself, and not because he is good unto us. Forasmuch as
he that loves God, because he has received, does receive, or hops to
receive some temporal benefit, corporal, or spiritual, such a one, in that
case loves not God, but himself, seeing that he bounding out love in
himself, is desirous of ye foresaid benefits, willing that God should serve
them, as a vile instrument to let them have their purpose. As the kingly or
principal floudes or rivers without loosinge their name, or never stayed
until they be joined to the Sea, but always running, do draw with them al
other rivers which enter into them, so likewise a true spirytuall love,
although it passes by the creatures, is not stayed in them, yea, drawing with
it all our affections, it directs the course even unto God, and there alone
it rests. We cannot without iniurye and despising of God, forsake God with
our love, and stay our selves upon his gifts. Wherefore as God loves us with
a sincere and pure love, so yt all whatsoever he has wrought and shall work,
is wholly for our benefit, and not in any sort for his own gain, seeing that
having in him the fullness of all benefits, we cannot be profitable to him
in any sort, we cannot show him the least pleasure that is, nor make him in
himself more glorious then he already is, forasmuch as his glory and felycitie
is infinite: now we ought thus to love God without respecting in any wise our
selves, and thus to work and do all for his glory. So that as when it was
told Jacob that in Egypt were many treasures, and that Joseph his son was
chief governor there, he answered, I have enough that Joseph my son is yet
alive: as if he had said, I care not for, neither desire the treasure of
Egypt, but as one that have all my love in Joseph, it suffices for my perfect
felycitie, that he lives, and that I may see him in that glory: even in like
sort when it is said unto us, that in heaven be so great treasures, pleasures,
and felycitie, and that Christ is the LORD there, if we had all our love in
God, as we ought, we would answer, we care not for our own pleasures, no
nor for heaven in any other sort, but as we may serve to the glory of God: it
is sufficient for us, for our most perfect felycitie, that Christ lives in his
elect, that he reigns, that the glory of God is made manifest thorough him.
And there it may be seen how that many do deceive themselves, which do
think that men are bound to love God so much the more, as they have received
more or greater benefits at his hand, as though they were bound to love God,
not for that he is good in himself, for that he is good unto us, and because
he bestows benefits upon us. And I say that if it were possible we should
be, and had never received any benefit at the hands of GOD, we should be
bound to love him nothing less, then now that we have received so great
benefits of him: and this, because we ought to love him, for that he is good
in himself, and not for that he is good unto us: and bestows benefits upon
us: and this is properly to love him.

Seeing then God is infinitely good, he ought of all men be most perfectlye
loved, therefore equally to his goodness. It is very true that those unto
whom GOD does make himself known with greater goodness, and with bestowing
on them more graces and greater benefits, although they be not bound to love
GOD with greater love then others, forasmuch as all are bound to love him with
a most perfect love, yet unto that most perfect love, they are so much more
bound then others; as by those greater benefits they are stirred up to love
him, the which if they do not, they sin more grievously. And this is it
which CHRIST willed, when he said, that he to whom much was given he was
bound greatly to love.

And likewise the servant that shall have had greater light of God, and of his
will, and shall not have loved him, nor done his will, shall be grievously
beaten, because his sin is greater, and this not for that others be not
equally bound to love god, as well as he, inasmuch as all men be bound to love
him most perfectly, wherefore equally, but for that such a one, unto whom is
so much the more bound then unto others, as he is more stirred up thereto, and
inasmuch as he has more light and more grace, therefore more means how he
may love him. We all be therefore bound to love GOD with a love most
perfect, sincere, and pure, albeit to such a perfect love, he is more bound
that has received more graces.

Let us pray unto GOD therefore, that with extinguyshing in us all self love,
he would give us a supreme light, to the intent that tasting with the
spyrite his great goodness, and louinge him with a sincere and pure love, we
may render unto him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

When God ought to be loved. Sermon. 5.
FOrasmuch as only wickedness ought to be hated, and in God is no wickedness
or fault, that God ought not at any time be hated: and he that should hate him
but only the twinkling of an eye, should commit a most horrible sin. Also
the creatures ought never to be more esteemed then God, inasmuch as like as
Christ said, he that loves his Father, his Mother, his sons, his daughters,
or other things more then him, is not worthy of him, yea, he is unworthy. He
then which loves and esteems more his parents, raiment, pleasures, honors,
dignities, himself, or creatures, then God, although it were but a moment of
time, does sin, and inasmuch as God exceeds in perfection the creatures, in
so much does he offend in iudgeing him inferior to them: he sins then
infinitely, like as God in goodness does exceed them infinitely. We also ought
never to account God equal with creatures, yea, he ought not only be exalted
above them all, but he alone ought of us to be loved, and that with all our
heart, soul, mind, strength, and virtue. And if thou would demand when
we are bound to love him so, the Papists do say, with deceiving therefore
themselves and others, and say, that the commandments negative do bind us
always, and for all times, but the commandments affirmative do bind
always, but not for all times. As for example: for that not to steal is a
commandment negative, we be always bound with this commandment, and
moreover bound to observe it thorough every moment of time, so that it is not
lawful for us at any time to steal. But on the other side, forasmuch as the
doing of alms is a commandment affirmative, therefore albeit we be never
free from this precept, but are always bound to observe it, we be not
therefore bound to observe it thorough all times: forasmuch we are not bound
to give alms at all times, and continually, but only at certain times, that
is, when we be able, and see our neighbors in need. Now they say likewise,
that seeing not to hate GOD, is a a commandment negative, it binds us
always, and thorough all times, in such sort, that continually and for ever it
shall not be lawful, by any moment of time to hate him, but forasmuch as to
love God is a commandment affirmative, therefore albeit we shall never be
unbound from this commandment, we shall not be therefore bound to observe
it thorough every moment of time, but only when it shall be needful. Then
according to their saying, we be not bound to love God, but when it is
needful. And if this need should never happen, yet in any wise they say,
that we should be bound to love him sometimes, for that a man could not be
without the dispising of God, and without sin, if he did not once love God
all his life long. And if thou would ask at what time GOD ought to be
loved, they will answer, that on the Sabbath and festival days: and this
not only to the intent that we despise not GOD in not loving him at any time,
but also because we are bound to sanctify the sabbath day, which we cannot
do being Gods enimyes, wherefore on that day we ought to reconcile our
selves unto God, to be sorry together thorough his love for that we have
sinned, and thereby we are bound to have toward him an act of love. It is
sufficient therefore to a Christian, according to their divinity, that for to
observe the chiefest commandment of the law, and of the love of God, that
only the Sundays and holydaies, had toward God an act of love, with exalting
him above all other things, albeit it were but for a small moment of time. Thus
they say, yt their most holy and innocent Church has decreed. But first,
whereas they say, that we are bound to love God only when it is needful, I
would that they would tell me what they mean by this saying to be needful. If
they mean that like as we are not bound to give alms, but when our
neighbors have need thereoff, so that we be not bound to love God, but when
God has need of our love, it is certain that we should never be bound to
love him, seeing that God shall never have need of us, nor of our love. Thou will say, that albeit God has in himself the fullness of all good things, and
is in himself most perfectly happy and glorious, wherefore has not, neither
can have need of us, yet notwithstanding for to make manifest unto thee our
God, his glory, and to the intent that he may not be dishonored, it is
needful that we love him, and that with effects we show unto him our love: as
if thou see one that blasphemeth God, then it is time and needful that thou
love him, and that for his love thou art moved to reprove and correct such a
one: the like I say of all other iniuryes which thou see done unto god. In
like sort if yt thou see thy neighbor be in any necessity, then it is time
also and needful that thou love God: and that for his love thou be moved to
provide for him, and so in other cases we are bound to love God, when such
necessities do happen. And I say, yt forasmuch as God is always most
perfectly good, pitiful, righteous, wise, omnipotent, and most excellent,
therefore he ought of us to be most perfectly loved always. And so much the
more, as that continually and at all times he loves us with an infinite love,
and bestows benefits upon us. And the commandments affirmatiues, in
respecting the inward act, do bind always and thorough al times, as well as
the commandments negatiues do: so yt like as although we are not bound to
give alms at al times, but only when our neighbors have need thereff,
notwtstanding we are bound always and thorough all times to love them
inwardly. In like sort also, albeit we are not bound always to praise GOD with
voice, but only when it should be expedient for to stir up our selves or
others to give glory unto God, yet notwithstanding we are bound to love God
always and continually with all our heart. We ought also, not only on the
Sundays and holidays, but all the time of our life, and every moment thereoff,
sanctify him, with making him shine in honor of his majesty, forasmuch as to
this end only it is granted us from God. Neither is it without iniurye done
unto him when we fail of that high and perfect love which is fit for him. And
although yt whilst we be in this present life, without a singular privilege
and grace we cannot love God continually, as also we cannot love him with all
our heart, soul, and mind, notwithstanding for this cause it is not fully set
down, neither can it be said, that such love is not convenient for God, nor
our duty to do. Wherefore if we would abide under the law, we should be
always, as Paul did write, subject unto malediction, so yt we could in no wise
be justified, except by grace we go unto Christ. And here it may be seen,
how that the opinion of them is false, which say yt we be not bound to love God
always: and in like sort may be seen yt they be very intricate, in willing to
determine and appoint the time, in which we be as they say, bound to love him.
This their opinion, is nothing else but an imagination of theirs, without any
foundation of the holy Scriptures: and a thing invented to this end that I will
tell you. The Papists being desirous to hold against the truth, that men may
be justified and saved thorough their own works, and by observing the
commandments of God, and seeing yt there is none that loves God continually
and with all his heart, with deprauing and expressly gainesaying ye holy
Scriptures, they be forced to persuade men, that for observing the first and
chiefest commandment of the law, it is sufficient that at the least the
twinkling of an eye upon the sabbath day, we have in us some act of love
toward God, with exalting him above al other things: and that this, thorough
our most and mighty free will, is always in our power. It is our duty, to
beseech the Lord that he would heal and deliver them from all such prensies,
with giving them the light of the truth, to the intent that together with other
the elect, they may render unto God, all praise, honor, and glory, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

If it be in our power to love God, when and how much we list. Sermon. 6.
LIKE as if an Eagle were without wings, bound upon the ground, wounded and
dead, it could not stir it self, not fly up into the air, and if yet it
could fly, it could not direct the flight up to the Sun, and if it could
thither direct the course, yet it could not fly above it self: even so the
soul thorough the sin of Adam, beeinge without the wings of Christian
virtues, bound upon the earth with carnal affections, and thorough sin wounded
and killed, cannot move it self, be elevated, nor fly with love on high, and
although it could be elevated above the creatures, it could not in any wise be
directed unto God, and if it could be directed thither, yet it could not with
the wings of love fly above it self, so that it should love God more then
it self. Peradventure thou wylt say that this is true, if we speak of our
natural and sensual love, with which we can love none but our selves, and the
things that be for our profit, commodity, delyght, and honor: Wherefore
with this love we do not love God, but for our own gain, and inasmuch as he
bestows benefits upon us: which in truth is no loving of God, but of our
selves: but if we would speak of love procured by will, now with this we might,
with out any other grace, love God above all creatures, and more then our
selves: and the reason is this. There is none so wicked a person, that without
other grace, does not acknowledge and confess that he is bound to love God
above all things, wherefore if he cannot love God more then himself and all
creatures, as his understanding does show and declare unto him, his will shall
not be free, and moreover he shall be naturally wicked, seeing that it could not
obey the understanding. I answer and say, that as Paul did write, we are by
nature ye children of wrath, wherefore wicked and the servant of sin: not
therefore so created of God by nature, but by nature corrupted in Adam,
wherefore with out divine grace, we cannot have liberty of power to love God
above al other things: and likewise it is true that our will, by nature in Adam
corrupted, is always mischievous and a servant of sin, until that thorough
Christ it be made free. Peradventure thou will say, if that a valiant Citizen
does hazard his own life for his country, with out any other grace or light
supernatural, yea and the hand does offer it self for the sauegard of the
head, as is oftentimes seen by experience: and thereby if a politic man,
without any other grace can love his country more then himself, and likewise
also the hand does many times love the head better then it self, we have
cause to think and believe, that our will may so much more then the foresaid
things love God more then it self, as that God is more greater then the head
or the country. Unto this also I answer and say, that a valiant Citizen does
hazard his life many times for glory which he loves more then his own life,
or it is true, yt he foreseeing, that loosing his country, he should loose all
that he has, therefore he adiudgeth it be less hurt in such a case to spend
his life. Some other be moved to take armor upon them for the profits sake
which they hope to obtain, or else for the loss which they fear will happen.

All this then that a polytike man does as one that is carnal, is only for
himself, and for his own proper gain. And likewise also a man when he
offers his hand contrary to the proper inclination, to receive a wound for
the safeguard of the head, does it, because he loves himself, and sees that
it would be smaller hurt and less danger, if he suffer his hand to be hurt,
then if he suffer his head. It is always then self-love, which causes us to
do any thing, when we be without divine grace. And albeit that God alone
in truth is good, and includes in him al virtues, and being al goodness,
wherefore not only we ought to love him above all other things, but in him
alone we ought to stay our love, notwithstanding thorough the sin of our
first parents, we be so blind, feeble, mischievous and miserable, that without
his grace and light supernatural, not only we cannot set our whole love upon
him, no nor yet love him above all other things. Thou will say, I prove yet,
that although I be wicked, and without divine grace, I have notwithstanding a
certain desire to love him, above all other things: and forasmuch as this
desire is nothing else but love, therefore it may love him above all creatures
without any other grace. Unto this I say, yt if thou shall go forward seeking
diligently, thou shall find that this desire which thou have to love him, is
none other but for thine own lucre. If thou be carnal, thou do not desire
to love him for his glory, but for thine own felitie, and this is not to love
God, but thy self. And if thou would say, I desire that all my will, love
and desire may be most entire and sincere. I answer likewise and say, that
this thy desire also, if thou be carnal, is only for regard of thy self,
wherefore thou love none but thy self. Whilst therefore we be carnal, and
that self-loue does reign in us, not only we cannot love God above all
things, but we cannot in truth love him, but for our own gain: the which is
not to love him but our selves. Thou will say, it is sufficient that divine
grace being our guide, we may love him as much as we would, and forasmuch as
divine grace does never fail, therefore it is always in our power io love
him, and that in what sort it pleases us. Unto this also I answer and say,
that there is experience to the contrary, inasmuch as men do not love God as
much as they would, yea although the reprobate should use all their wit and
strength, they could in no wise love him. It must needs therefore be said,
that this grace of loving him, is not granted always, nor to all men, nor yet
to love him after our fashion: yea the elect themselves have not always this
grace to be able to love him, at their instance, nor in such sort as they
ought: wherefore like as Faith is given of God, so also is Charity. And they
deceive themselves who thinking to have always in them power to love God,
drive off to repent and convert unto the latter end of their life. Seeing then
that Charity is a divine and supernatural fire, let us pray unto GOD that
thorough his grace he would kindle it in our hearts, to the intent, that we may
render unto him all praise, honor and glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen

How the way of Heaven is easy. Sermon. 7.
THere be some which think that the way of Heaven is most difficult: and
this because like as Christ said, for to enter into everlasting life, it is
needful that we observe the Commandments of GOD, wherefore we must love
our neighbors as our selves, that we pardon from our hearts all injuries,
with loving our brethren, all our enemies. It is needful also that we
patiently suffer all adversities, and all sicknesses, even death, with
contenting our selves with whatsoever it shall please God to appoint us. That
we despise riches, pleasures, honors, friends, parents, and all other worldly
benefits, that we mortify all our affections, our own will, our judgments,
with accounting our selves of no reputation, and that we love God with all our
heart, soul, mind and virtue. And for that the doing of the foresaid
things, is very difficult unto us, seeing that as in Adam be we made blind,
and as the concupiscences of the flesh be most mighty in us, the world most
corrupt, thorough evil examples and temptations most mighty, thorough
subtlety, malice and power of the Devil, therefore they say that the way of
Heaven is most difficulte and hard, which thing also they confirm by Christ,
who said, that straight is the path which leads unto syfe.

Whereoff it grows that many believing that, being afraid of the
difficulty, dare not walk by the way of God, but retire back from it. And I
say that although the path be straight, and the gate narrow which enters into
the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and this because into it no man can enter
but by a lyuelye Faith, the which is not in our power, wherefore not depending
on us, it is hard for us, yea impossible, to enter by our selves into the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, notwithstanding seeing that by grace and
thorough Christ we be regenerated, and already entered into the kingdom of
Christ, having of God a lively light, and a spiritual taste and feeling, we do
love him above all other things, do walk thorough good works without any
difficulty, inasmuch as in such a case the love of God makes unto us all
painful travail easy, all bitterness sweet, every yoke pleasant, and
every burden light, as Christ said. And it is seen by experience, that when
one in truth has fixed his love upon God, that it is not hard matter for him
to pardon for his love all injuries, to love his enimes, to despise the world,
yea and himself, to bring down himself with watchings, fastings,
abstinences, disciplines and other kinds of penance, so that they be done
thorough force of love, not only they are not sharp and grievous, but also
pleasant and light, and in such sort, that suffering for Christ, they judge
themselves happy. Thou will say, I see yet many, which make profession that
they are willing to serve God, that do afflict themselves with fasting,
abstinence, watchings, disciplines, nakedness, pilgrimages, and with doing
and suffering these and many other most difficult things. I answer and say,
that to go unto Heaven there is no ordinary need, that we walk by such like
extremities, if we be not thereto moved singularly by the spirit of God, but
it is sufficient that we walk by the way of mediocritie, in which truly
consists virtue, with ordering all our life to the glory of God. Wherefore at
any time when we have Faith, and in us is sobriety, sparingnesse, temperaunce
and other virtues, we be in the way of God, and not when abiding barefooted
and naked in a wilderness, we eat nothing but roots of herbs. All they
therefore that be so extreme in their life, as they which be out of the way of
God: and be not drawn to live so by the honor of God, but by the honor of
the world, and by other their proper gain, by the spirit of pride, or by some
other devilish and unclean spirit. And if thou would say that ye
Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs, and all other Saints,
have suffered much, and likewise that other shall suffer: forasmuch as
according to Paul's judgment, all they which would live godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer persecution. Thou will say, that the elect whilst yt they are in
this present life, do not abide in idleness, nor in carnal delights, but that
they work and take pains, although moderately and in honest matters, and do
suffer much: but forasmuch as al ye which they do and suffer they do and suffer
it for ye love of god, wherefore willingly, joyfully, and without difficulty,
yea with pleasure more or less, according to the measure of love. When
therefore in working we do feel any il-willyngnesse, it is a sign also that
we be not perfect in Charity. Know thou to whom it is hard to do good
works, and thus to suffer? unto him that works and suffers by force, and
contrary to his will. Go forward and consider the life of carnal men, and
thou shall see that they travail and suffer for to have worldly benefits, much
more then the elect do for God: and yet notwithstanding if thou would
demand of them which were the hardest, either the way of God, or the way of
the world, they would say that the way of heaven were the hardest, and this
because yt having their love set upon ye world, they do not feel ye
difficulty in working and suffering for it, whereas on ye other side for yt
they love not God, they adiudge it a most hard matter to obey him. I say not yt
in the way of Heaven men do walk without pains and sufferings, but I say, yt
forasmuch as we go not unto God, neither are moved by him, except when we be
moved by his spirit and drawn by his love, ye which makes easy every
difficulty, and makes every sharpnes and bitterness pleasant: therefore it must
needs be said that ye way of heaven is most easy and happy. Al they therefore
which work and suffer, either work and suffer by force of ye spirit, and of
Charity, and so without difficulty: or else they work and suffer thorough
human respects, and so they are not in the way of God, seeing they are not
moved unto him, but unto the world. It is a matter most difficult unto carnal
me^, yea impossible, although possible with God and most easy, it is to be
regenerated, to become spiritual, to have a lively light and spiritual
feeling of ye goodness of God, to have a lively faith and hope fixed in God,
and to be in love with God: and thus also after yt they be regenerated to grow in
Faith, Hope and Charity: but after yt we be spiritual, and that having a
lively light of God, be in love with him to work and suffer according to ye
force and mesure of ye spirit, of faith, and of love yt we have to God, it is a
thing most easy, most pleasant and happy. And if with humane prudence and
cunning we be forced to work or suffer beside this motion in such a case,
although we had difficulty in working and suffering, it should be no meruail:
and this because we being moved by the love of God, should not be turned
thereby, for then we should go backward, and not by ye right way. Al they
therefore who are entered into ye spiritual kingdom of Christ by ye gate of
Faith, which is called strait, forasmuch as it is granted but to a few, as
unto those which have been thorough grace drawn and elevated above al
difficulty, they do taste with ye spirit in Christ, ye great goodness of God,
they do walk easily with suffering for works done thorough love to ye glory of
God. Neither is it necessary, for yt there is none ye loves God with all his
heart, and his neighbor as himself, to ye intent yt we might be turned unto
God, yt we might walk by ye perfect observation of Gods co^maundeme^ts,
forasmuch as if it should be so, seeing there is none in this present life yt
perfectly observes the^, none should walk unto God: but in truth it is not so:
for like as if one walked by a narrow way, and on his side were many briers and
thorns, if they plucked him by ye garment, in any wise such a one when he were a
lusty fellow, might prevail and go away, although he were somewhat staid and
hindered by ye said thorns. Even so a Christian, if he be regenerated, and that
sin raineth no more in him, but ye spirit and love of God, although he does
perfectly observe Gods commaundeme^ts, but not turning himself unto God, with a
most zealous force, vehemency, and swiftnes as he is bound to do, and should be
moved, if a most perfect charity being in him, his co^cupisce^ces were wholly
mortified, so yt in him were nothing, which when he turned to God could draw
him back, yet notwithstanding for yt in him be co^cupisences, whereby is he
holde^ back, on ye other side the spirit is in him so might, yt it prevails,
so that in any wise he is turned unto God, wherefore to have a motion to seek
the glory of God, the perfect observation of Gods commandments is not
necessary, but it is needful that we feel thoroughly with the spirit, Gods
divine goodness, that God may draw us unto him more then the world. Let us
pray therefore unto the Lord, that he would give us such light, and that he
would increase it in us every day more and more, to the intent that with great
zeal we walking by his paths, may render unto him all praise, honor and
glory, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

What thing it is, wherein God has showed us greater love then in all the
other. Sermon. 8.
FOrasmuch as to kindle in us divine love, it is very profitable to know what
thing it is wherein God has showed unto us greater love then in all other
things, I have judged that it would be requisite, to consider amongst all the
signs of love which God has showed, which is the greatest. Some say that the
greatest sign of love which God has showed unto man, was when he created him
after his own similitude and likeness, capable of him, and to beatitude. And
moreover having given to him a being so noble, enricheth him with many gifts
and graces, with making him Lord over all creatures. So that when Adam opened
his eyes, and saw that God had created this world for him, that he conserved
and governed it for the service of him, and that every creature was obedient
unto him, to the intent that he confessing all his beatitude to come of him,
might seek to set forth his glory, seeing his excellency, he felt toward
him a singular love of God. Other say that the greatest sign of his love was
in forbearing sin. And this, inasmuch as man not knowing the great charity
and goodness of God perfectly, by his so great benefits, God suffers him to
fall, and to injury and dishonor him, that he might have occasion to show him
unto him as to an enemy with greater superaboundance of love, to the intent
that he might the better feel how greatly God loved him. There have been also
some which have said, that as when the father shows greater love unto the
son when he chastises him, then when he dandleth with him. Even so, when God
chastises us for our benefit, shows unto us greater love, then when he
gives us worldly prosperity. But those which be more near unto the truth,
have said that the most high sign of love which GOD has showed unto us, has
been that GOD (being more high then he could come unto us) which be unworthy,
most vile lewd persons, and his enemies (more love then he could descend unto)
has, I say, not sold, but thorough mere grace given (a gift most high and
worthy yt could be) not a servant, or one of his friends, but his own dear
and only begotten son: a thing to him more dear and entirely beloved he
could not give us: not poor but the richest of all divine treasures, virtues
and graces, yea, in Christ he has given us al things, even himself. And
moreover he has given him to us, to the intent that he might serve to wash us
from all our filthy and stinking sins, with his own blood, and to dye for us
upon the cross. He has also given him unto us for an example, direction, and
rule, for a pleasant friend, spowse, and brother, for a Captain, for a
Shephearde, Priest, Alter, Sacrifice, food, raiment, and for a reward. But in
giving us him upon the Cross, he had showed us a most singular love, chiefly,
for that he has given him to us with a most high and infinite charity. And
likewise the son with great love offered up himself upon the cross, and
altogether for our benefit. Wherefore Christ wondering at ye great charity of
ye father, said. So god loved ye world yt he gave his only begotten son for it.
And in an other place, speaking of himself, he said. None has any greater love
then to spend his life for his friends. Wherefore S. John said. In this we have
known ye love God, for yt he has spent his own life for our sakes. Man
knows not, neither can he imagine ye God could show any greater love then yt
which he has showed with giving us his own son upon ye Cross. There be also
some which say, yt the greatest sign of love which God has showed us, has been in giving us his spirit: forasmuch as although god had created us and
bestowed innumerable benefits upon us, with giving us also Christ upon ye cross,
we should in no wise have been helped, if god with his spirt had not opened our
minds, and made us feel in deed his great goodness and love. Other say, yt
God shall then show greater love the^ at any other time, when at ye day of
judgment, he raising us again glorious, both in respect of our souls and also
of our bodies, and delivering us from al evil of this present life and of ye
life to come, shall set us in quiet, restful, and peaceable possession of
heaven, and of ye most high and perpetual felycitie, with making us always to
enjoy and use ye most pleasant fruits of ye passion and death of Christ, and of
his divine grace. And I judge yt the greatest love which God has showed unto
us, has been in purposing from all eternity in his divine mind to save us,
with his most perfect felicity, high triumph of Christ and his most great
glory: forasmuch as this benefit includes in it all other, the which do depend
on it alone, Inasmuch as, forbicause he determined to save us with our most
high glory, therefore he created us so noble, after his own likeness, and
capable of him, and the world for to serve us: for this cause he suffers sin,
to this end he chastises us, calls us, bids us, tarrieth for us,
dissimuleth himself, tollerateth us, and bestows innumerable benefits upon
us: for this cause he sent ye Patriarchs, gave a law by Moses, sent ye
Prophets, and lastly his own son: for this cause he appointed that they should
preach, work miracles, and do all yt which they did: for this cause he sent
Christ ye lastly he should dye upon ye cross. And likewise because he had
elected us to most perfect felicytie, therefore Christ arose again, ascended
into heaven, and sent ye holy ghost, like as he sends it inuisibly always
upon his elect. And likewise also, for because he has predestined us to ye
glory, therefore he sending Christ to judge the quick and the dead, we shall be
by him thorough Christ taken up to a most high and perpetual felicity. God
therefore loving us with an infinite love, and having showed his love in so great
and exceeding means, let us beseech him yt he would give us a spiritual taste
and feeling of him, to ye intent that thorough Christ, we may render unto him,
all honor and glory. Amen.

How Christ upon the cross draws every thing unto him. Sermon. 9.
HE that will duly behold Christ upon ye cross, shall see yt with a most
earnest violence, and by all means possible he draws all things unto him.
First for that words, especially when they be pronounced wc eloquence, order
and pithy propriety, be most effectual to move men's hearts and to draw the^
unto it, as has been, and is seen continually in orators: wherefore Christ
upon ye chair of ye cross was not dumb, yea he spoke words yt would move and
draw unto him any hardened, faithles, and obstinate heart. And although Christ
had in his life time spoken, and his words were altogther divine, notwtsta^ding
those words which he pronounced upon ye cross, were of so much force above al
other, and so much more effectual and violent, as yt being ye last, and
pronounced by ye son of God, when already near unto death, he was in great
torments, they are full of exceeding wisdom, swetnes, pity, goodness,
righteousness and charity, as every one proves which with the spirit does taste
them.

The iestures also do help when they be fitly applied unto the words to move
greatly, wherefore when a mother would have her young son come unto her, she
does not only call him, but also proves him the more with beckening her head,
and with opening her arms. The which Christ also did for to draw us unto him:
forasmuch as he stretched out his arms upon the cross, as if he would say,
behold that I open and offer my self unto all men, ready and prepared to
receive and embrace every sinner, which by my mean does thirst for his
salvation. Or if thou had seen with what and how great fiery tears,
burning sighs, and exceeding love, he lifted up his eyes to heaven to pray for
us, and with what sweet pity he debased himself and beheld those which
had nailed him on the cross, and others who were present, if thy heart were
a thousand times harder then an Adamant stone, thou should in any wise have
been constrained, that it should not only be mollyfied, made feeble and
pleasant, but moulten: chiefly, seeing that for thy love blood guished out
from every part of him. And if the wisdom of Solomon could work so much in
the Queen of Sabba, that with causing her to leave her rich and delicate
kingdom, drew her from so far a country to travail even to his presence for
to hear him, the wisdom of Christ exceedingly showed upon the Cross, ought
so much the more effectuallly draw us from the world unto him, as that his is
the greater without proportion. Wherefore also in Christ upon the Cross are
fulfilled all the Prophets, are verified all the Scriptures, all shadows and
figures are made manifest, and all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge
of GOD are opened, wherefore as the most high, perfect, open, and manifest
truth, he draws our minds to behold it in him. And likewise also for that
liberty, especially of riches, is most effectual in alluring, chiefly the
poor, and such as be in necessity therefore Christ for to draw us unto him,
used toward us upon the cross a most high and exceeding liberality:
forasmuch as by mere grace, he not only delivered us from sin, from the
power of the devil, and from all evil of this present life and of the life to
come, with making satisfaction for all our bonds, but also moreover gives us
all his divine treasures, heaven and himself. Yea, he draws us to him even
with his righteousness, inasmuch as we be drawn and moved to have compassion
on him, seeing that in him, although he be most innocent, the Father with most
rigorous justice punishes all our sins. Notwythstandinge, albeit upon the
cross he stirs us up with words, provoke us with his deeds, and divine
iestures, calls us with his wisdom, moves us with his truth and binds us
with his benefits, draws us with his Charity unto him, with forcinge us
violently. Neither ought any body to wonder heereat, forasmuch as GOD being
not only the first beginning of all things, but also the last end, and this
because that like as all things depend on him, so also they wait upon him,
it must need be said that he vpholdeth them all, moves and governs them,
not only as their first efficient cause, but also as their last end. And
forasmuch as the final mocion, beeinge voluntary and loving, is more swift and
forcible, then the motion of the efficient cause, against the which, whilst
that it pricketh us, we repugne and resist:

Therefore GOD being willing to cause man that he should come unto him, he
chose not only to move us with our first beginning, with impulsion of his
spirit, but also with our last end, he would draw us unto him by the mean
of Christ crucified. Wherefore if the celestyall bodies be moved with so great
force by the Angels, by what force and violence may we think that the noble
spirits of the elect of GOD he moved, when as being regenerated, loosed from
the affections of creatures, beeinge active and lively, are not only driven
by the holy Ghost, but drawn with great violence by CHRIT crucified. And if
thou would see how great the force of ye love showed to us in Christ upon
the Cross is, consider that if in the earth there were a man most sensual,
with all his affections most stricktly bound unto treasures, pleasures,
honors, and benefits of the world, if in any wise it should be granted
unto him to open his eyes but for very short time to Christ upon the Cross, to
see him with a lively light, and to feel him with the spirit, that he was so
crucified for him, he should be by his love in such sort ravished in the
inward parts of his heart, and with such violence and force drawn, that
shaking in pieces all the fetters wherewith he was bound unto worldly things,
he should immediately be found with all his heart, soul, mind, and spirit
elevated, ravished, and transformed in God. And heereoff we have example in
Paul, who whilst that he had turned his shoulders against Christ, and
whilst that with great force he ran to seek the dishonor of God, beeinge
called and illuminated by Christ, was drawn with such violence to the glory
of God, that he was ravished up even to the third heaven. And albeit that before
time even until his conversion, he had been most vehement against Christ, yet
being converted, he was drawn to honor him with a greater vehemency,
inasmuch as CHRIST was to him more effectual, then all other objects which had
before time moved him to the contrary. When that sinful woman came to bewail
her sins at the feet of CHRIST, she was drawn with so great a vehemency
and force, that if there had been offered her a thousand worlds, with all the
possible treasures, pleasures, honors, and felicyties of the world, she could
in no wise have been hindered nor stayed.

Christ himself said unto the Apostles, you have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you: as if he would say, you are not come unto me by your own
accord, but because I have drawn you. As concerning you, ye be none such
that ye have had power, once to think of coming to me, yea, as those
which be carnal, yea, have always resisted and fought against me.

Like as Christ expressed an other place, when talkinge with the City of
Jerusalem, he said: How often would I have gathered thy children together,
as the Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and thou would not?
unto the which words Augustine adioyneth, speakinge of the elect, and says,
and has gathered them together against thy will: forasmuch as like as
Augustine himself said in his Enchiridion, there is none so wicked which dare
say, that GOD can at any time when he will, convert the wicked and draw
them unto him, Although he were ungracious and obstinate, GOD can when he
will, mollyfie his heart, and make him of wicked, godly. There never was any
holy man who in any wise, by his own accord went unto CHRIST. They all have
been by him drawn with the violence of love. Thou think peradventure that
CHRIST, for to see him so upon the Cross, as a weak and feeble person, and I
say unto thee, that as Paul did write, he is the virtue and power of GOD which
draws unto him and saves every one that beholds him upon the Cross with
the eye of a lively faith: wherefore he said. If I shall be exalted up, I will
draw all things unto me: that is, if beeinge fastened and lyfted up on the
Cross, I shall be exalted in the hearts of men, so that they shall see me
with a lively faith, for the son of GOD, crucified and dead, with great
Charity for the love of them, I shall draw every thing unto me, inasmuch as
I shall draw unto me, not only the spirit of such as they be, the mind,
the understanding, with all the thoughts, the will with all the affections,
the soul with all the powers, virtues, and operations, but also all other
creatures, inasmuch as seruinge unto man, and he being by Christ drawn to the
glory of GOD, they also shall be thorough Christ drawn in man to serve unto
the glory of GOD. Man in Adam was fallen, a stranger from GOD, and in such
sort drowned in the world, and bound with iron cheines of human affections
unto creatures, that by himself, not only he could not come unto GOD, yea,
his forces were all unto worldly things. It is not sufficient that God sent
the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the other Saints, with bidding us to his
divine wedding, wherefore being willing to draw us unto him, he at the last
sent his own son in the form of a servant, and appointed that he dying
upon the cross, should give us such and so great light of his goodness, and
should so make manifest unto us his love, that we should be constrained and
forced to come unto him. Neither is it profitable that man should be such a
stranger from God, so drowned in the world, ungracious, and obstinate, that
he might not be immediatlye drawn by Christ, if he see him to be the son
of GOD, and dead for him, yea as calamytie draws unto it especially
hardness, likewise Christ draws unto him the great sinners, so that they
acknowledge them to be such. All they therefore which be gone unto Christ, and
climed up into heaven, are gone and climed thither by the force of love, and
likewise by force they do abide, and shall abide there for ever. Christ then
would chiefly suffer, for to declare unto us his most high love, and therewith
as with a most mighty thing, and most dear unto ye heart to enforce and draw
us unto him. Forasmuch as love is a spiritual fire which we do not seek to
quench, but to nourish: it is a most pleasant knot, from which we do not seek
to be unbound, but to be fast tied: it is an amorous vyolence, against which we
make no resistaunce, yea every one favors it. He draws us not unto him,
but by drawing us to the father, wherefore being upon the Cross naked of all
treasures, pleasures and worldly benefits, he is showed unto us altogether
divine. And if Noe could draw the living creatures into the Arc, how then
should not Christ be able to draw us into his breast? The Angels could draw
Lot out of Sodom, and shall not I believe that Christ can deliver me from
hell, and from all my sins? I see that Moses could draw out of Egypt so
perverse and obstinate people, and shall not I believe that Christ can draw me
out of the world? Joshua brought them into the land of promise, and shall not I
hope ye Christ will conduct me into heaven? Christ in Peter converted and drew
unto him in one day three thousand persons, and in an other day five thousand,
in Paul as it were the whole world, wherefore I can-not doubt but that he will
also draw me unto him. One woman Samaritane could move the whole City of
Samaria, and shall not Christ be able to move and draw me unto him? The
multitude of people followed Christ thorough the wilderness, even till they
had forgotten themselves, being allured by his pleasant words, and shall not I
be drawn to follow Christ, seeing that for me he dyed upon the Cross? the
deaf heard, the blind knew him, and the children praised him: and I seeing
that he has opened my heart, lightened my mind, in this age, shall I not
feel his great goodness and love with his most high and exceeding spirit,
discovered upon the cross: This can in no wise be possible, yea, it will of
necessity be that I continually love my Jesus, and that by him I be drawn to
render unto the father for ever all praise, honor and glory. Amen.

How the love fo God makes right our purposes. Sermon. 10.
ALthough God made man righteous, yet notwithstanding he is turned away unto
creatures: so that if by Christ he be not regenerated, he does not work nor
suffer for the glory of God, but for his own gain. Speaking therefore of
carnal men, they al have for their Idol, raiment, pleasures, honors, or other
worldly things, by ye which as by their last end, they are principally moved
to work. And albeit sometimes they think to work to the glory of God, yet
they work not in truth but for respect of themselves, as should well be
known, when they might enter into the inward parts of the dark Laborynth of
their own hearts: for that they should see that they seek to know by being
known, do love by being loved, be lyberal for to move others to be
prodigal toward them: do praise every one, for that they would be
praised: do tolerate, because they are bound to be patient: are afflicted,
because they would be called Saints: do choose miseryes because they
would be happy, despise the world because they would be holden in
estimation: do debase themselves, because they would be exalted: and in
humblyng themselves be proud: they care not to dye, so as they may live in the
remembrance of others: and so appearing to shun glory, they go seeking it,
although by secret and priuye ways, they would be humble, so as they might
not feel it, yea for to rejoice in confusion, they thirst after patience,
because they would be happy even in shame: they would be content to be
without worldly affections, that they might live more content in every place,
time and state: they desire to depend only upon God, because they would not
be drawn and tumbled about with the turning wheel of worldly things: they be
discreet unto themselves, for that they would have no grief in governing them,
they would be reposed wholly in God: they desire a perfect faith, because they
might always be heard, they long to be holden of no reputation, but for their
own glory: they would willingly loose their own will for a divine will: they
have a desire to live blameless because they might live without pain: they
frame the Arc with Noe, but it is to save themselves: they build the tower of
Babel for to make their name famous: they leave their country with Abraham,
but it is for the land of promise: with Lot they fly out of Sodom, but for
fear: they serve with Jacob unto Laban, but it is for to have Rachell: and with
Sichem be circumcised, for to have Dina: they humble themselves unto Joseph
with his brethren, for fear: and with Pharao they suffer by force the people
of God to depart: they fly out of Egypt with the Hebrew people, but it is
because they would not be oppressed: and if when they be in ye desert, they
return not unto ye dainties of Egypt, it is because they be holden with the
pleasantnes of Manna: they would have been borne then when Christ was, yt they
might taste and live with him without being therefore persecuted of Herod, they
would willingly be found with Christ at the marriage, but they would not yt they
should want wine: and likewise also they would be contented to be with Christ
in ye desert, so yt the Angels would minister unto them, they would with Christ
go up into the mountain, so ye Christ would increase bread and fish. And
likewise also in ye mount Thabor, they willingly would be clymed up, for to see
Christ transfigured: they would bear him company upon Palm Sunday riding to
Jerusalem, because they would be honored: and in like sort they would have
been at the last supper with Christ, for to eat the Pascall Lamb: but when
Christ should take the Cross for to go unto death, they will with Peter deny
him, and with the other forsake him, and if that they should have dyed with
Christ upon the Cross, that should have been only because they would have
risen again glorious: but to dye wholly for the glory of God, this is for the
perfect to do. The carnal men, as those which cannot lift up their head to
the glory of God, all that which they work and suffer, is by chance,
unadvisedly, for natural pity, for custom, for fear, for shame, by force,
for to fly griefs, to have rest and peace, for their own pleasure, profit,
commodity, honor, for the contentation of others, for that it lyketh them to
lead an honest and polytike life, for that they would not be punished and
addicted to any, to purchase or preserve friends, to have a certain
contentation of the mind, and to shun the tormenting of the conscience, not
to have any adversity at Gods hand, but prosperity, for to escape Hell, and
to enjoy Heaven always, and for other like innumerable respects, It is not
sufficient to work or suffer truly to the glory of God, that we say with
our mouth when we work or suffer that it is to the the glory of God. Also it
is not sufficient to have a certain feeble desire theroff, the which is found
even in the wicked: inasmuch as they would also love God, work and suffer for
his honor: yea it is not sufficient to do any thing to the glory of God if
we be wicked, that with all our might and force we purpose and determine to
work for his honor, forasmuch as whilst we be wicked, we cannot worship God
truly, nor lift up our head to his glory, with accou^ting him for our last
end. And more over it suffices not that we imagine and think that we work
for his glory: for that the Jews also in crucifiyng Christ, and in persecuting
his saints, thought that they did God service, as Christ foretold unto the
Apostles. They supposed that they were moved by zeal of the honor God, but
they deceived themselves as Paul did write: forasmuch as in truth if they had
been moved and drawn by the honor of God, they would not have done things,
which should be to his dishonor, as they did: and this because, seeing that
the honor of God is in truth our last end, it does not draw us to do any
thing, but that which serves to honor God. To make therefore in truth our
purposes right, it must needs be that we feel with the spirit a lively Faith
and light supernatural, the goodness of God in Christ, in such sort, that it
can work more in us, then all the benefits of the world, so that loving it
above all other things, we be drawn to do things for his glory: and so much
the more as that man with a lively faith, seeing that Christ has not only
delivered him from al evil of this present life and of the life to come, but
also has merited all, he could no more be moved to work or suffer as a
servant, for his own gain: wherefore it shall of necessity be, that as a
regenerate heir and Lord over all, and sure of salvation, he should be only
moved to work by the Son for the glory of the Father. Now these do only
worship God in spirit and truth forasmuch as they account him for their last
end: they alone do truly love him, not because he is good unto them, and
bestows benefits upon them: but because he is good in himself: and this is
properly to love God. They only do also acknowledge God and his name in
truth: for that whereas others do not feel nor know God, but in that he has
created them, preserves them, governs, and bestows benefits on them,
wherefore they do for his own gain, in himself acknowledge him in his own
being, to be absolutely, and without respect unto creatures. Unto these also
the Heaven being open as unto Stephen, they see the glory of God, wherefore
they be moved to work thereby. And albeit such as these do not actually
think at all times to do things unto the glory of God, yet notwithstanding
like as all that which the Mariners do, is that they might be conducted unto
the haven they seek for, albeit they do not always actually think thereon:
even so the elect of God, and those which have with the spirit tasted the
goodness of God, be drawn to work for his glory, although they do not
always actually think there on.

Wherefore like as when thou castest on thee a cloak, that not finding any
let, is moved by some part, although thou do not continually touch and dash
it with thy hand: and this by that first force which thou did use in casting
it on. Even so when thou beginnest to do a good work to the glory of God,
although thou do not always actually think to do it to the glory of God,
nevertheless in virtue of the first force, it is wholly to the glory of God,
so that there is found no let, that is, so that afterward thou do not change
for to do it with any wicked intent, repugning against the glory of God. It is
very true, that as to shake this cloak oftentimes, will cause it sway with
much the greater force and swiftnes, so likewise when we do a good work, the
refreshing of it oftentimes, the thinking by force of a lively spirit to do
it to the glory of God, profits much to make us do it with greater
vehemency. Like as therefore ye Hounde if he feels not the smell of the
Hare, runs one while this way, another while that: but if he sees it or
feels the smell theroff, is moved and runs to it with great speed the
right way, without turning either to the right hand or to the left: even so he
which feels not in Christ the great goodness of God, is moved to work, now
by this worldly thing, and then by that: but he which feels it is drawn to
work without straying, with a right purpose, for the glory of God, the which
as our supreme beatitude and last end, we ought to have always before the
eyes of our mind. Neither ought we account it a hard matter, to hold our
mind always lyfted up unto God, seeing that not only the love which he
bears us, and that he always thinks on us, but moreover over how he being
infinitelye good, has made himself known unto us, in bestowing benefits
upon us, with great excess of his love. To this end he has created us, and
done all that which he has done, to the intent that knowing him for our first
beginning, last end, and chief happiness, with making his glory shine, we
labor to set forth his glory: which to do, is a thing in it self so honest,
that in the world can nothing be done in it self so vile, which if it be done
for the glory of God, is not glorious in the sight of God: like as also there
can nothing be done in the world so glorious in it self, that being done for
human respects, is not most abiected in ye sight of God. If thou should
give all that thou have to the poor, and thy body to the fire, if thou do it
not for the love of God, every thing is lost, as Paul did write. Although thou
can not serve God unrewarded, thou oughtst notwithstanding serve him without
having respect unto the reward, but only to serve for his glory. And when ye
eye of our purpose is so simple, sincere and pure all the body of our works is
light and acceptable unto God. There is nothing that hurts so much the art
of living well, as a perverse intent, the which disordering the whole, and
taking the honor from God, makes men idolaters, and vain: inasmuch as all ye
which they work and suffer, and not for the glory of God, is lost and cast
away, yea and sin in ye sight of God, for that they are not done for the
glory of God, as they ought to be. O how happy were we if all that we have
suffered and wroughte, even until now, we had suffered and wrought for the
glory of God: but we ought at least to do so hereafter, and then every thing
that we shall do shall be acceptable unto God: so that our purpose be right unto
him. Every man therefore ought to have God for his last end before his eyes,
and to order al his life unto him, with choosing those things yt serve most to
his glory, and with forsaking those things which do hinder or stay us, without
regarding things which appertain not to us: which we shall be constrained to
do at any time when being in love with God, we feel with the spirit in Christ
his great goodness. Let us pray to God therefore that he would give us a lively
light of him, to the intent that having always our eyes open to his honor, we
may render unto him all praise, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

How that the Law of the Gospel is more perfect then all other Laws. Sermon.
11.
AS there is but one only God, one only Christ, and one only holy Ghost, one
only Faith, one only Church, and one only Gospel: so likewise unto the
world is but one only divine Law, imprinted already by God in the mind of
man, darkened by sin, expressed somewhat by moral Philosophy, but much
better by Moses, and most perfectlye by Christ, and a new by Christ, the spirit
of God being the guide, powered in, imprinted, and written in the bowels, and in
the hearts of the regenerate, as God before time promised by his Prophet, They
call notwithstanding the natural Law, those canons, rules, and truth
practiced, of that which is right, and of that which is not right, imprinted in
the book of the mind, in the which every one reading, when he comes to
years of discretion, without any other master and book, he discerns by
himself good from evil. And the truth it self, inasmuch as by Moses it was
expressed in tables, is called the Law written: whereas afterward by Christ, the
holy Ghost being the guide, it was in a more perfect manner imprinted in the
hearts of ye regenerate, yt is called the Euangelical law, of grace and of ye
spirit. Where is to be noted, yt although a philosopher has for example,
imprinted in mind this truth, yt God ought not to be dishonored, but honored,
and knew that this thing is most right, yet notwithstanding he observed not
this most just law. Yea, the Jews, albeit they had this same truth, not only
imprinted in ye minds but also expressed in ye tables of Moses, and discerned
the righteous from ye unrighteous, and that with greater light then the
Philosophers, they could in no wise observe yt just and honest law, because
they were let by their concupisences. But in a Christian already by faith
regenerated, the goodness of God thorough Christ is in such sort imprinted in
his heart, yt by the lively, spiritual taste and feeling which he has in
Christ of God, he cannot dishonor him, yea, by the spirit which he has, ye
which preuayleth against his carnal concupisences, he is constrained to honor
him. And this according to the measure of faith which he has. The Philosopher
then albeit he knew in part his bounden duty, he did not therefore fulfill it
because the flesh resisted him. And in like case also the Jew, albeit he knew,
and that better then all the Philosophers, what the will of God is,
nevertheless being without Christ and without grace, he obeyed it not:
Wherefore he shall be punished the more grievously, as he had greater
knowledge of the law of God. The natural law therefore, and much more the
written law, is the Minister of death and damnation, whereas the evangelical
law, of spirit and of grace, is the minister of life and salvation: Wherefore
Paul speaking of it, said, ye law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
delivered me from the law of death and of sin. The written law, therefore is
imperfect, although the natural law be much more imperfect, seeing that
albeit they show those things which ought to be done, they do not therefore
give the grace to be able to observe them. The law natural, then was as it
were in darkness, the law of Moses in shadows, and the evangelical law in
light. The law natural came at midnight, Moses law at the morning, and the
evangelical law at noone day. The natural law came with a little candle
burning, Moses law with a great torch, but covered, and the euangelical law
with the clear light of the Sun. The natural law saw god in his creatures,
Moses law in the Scriptures, and the euangelical law in Christ. The natural law
sees not Christ, Moses law saw him and showed him a far off, and the
evangelical law has seen him openly, and embraced him for his own. The
natural law has embraced no man, Moses law has painted him out, with giving
him colors, the euangelical law has given him spirit. The natural law made
him serve by reasons, Moses law for fear, and the evangelical law for love.
The natural law delivers us from worldly infamy, Moses law from ye tyranny
of Pharao, and the evangelical law from the tyranny of the world, of the
flesh, of sin, and of the devil. The natural law has for the guide
understanding, Moses law a pillar of fire, and the evangelical law the holy
Ghost. The natural law is the law of the Philosophers, Moses law has him for
the author, and the evangelical law is of Christ. The natural law feeds
men with worldly things, Moses law with Manna, and the euangelical law with
God. The natural law builds up a worldly common wealth, Moses law the holy
city of Jerusalem, and the evangelical law the heavenly country. By the
natural law we were strangers, by Moses law servants, and by the evangelical
free and the sons of God. The natural law guided us to a certain human
felicity, Moses law into the land of promise, and the evangelical law unto
heaven. The natural law is a burden fit for human strength, Moses law is a
burden sharp and grievous, and the evangelical law is pleasant and
delectable The natural law has a respect to the comelines of virtues, Moses
law unto felicity, and the euangelical law unto ye glory of God. The natural
conducteth thee into Aegipt, and there leaves thee, Moses law delivers thee
from thence, makes thee walk thorough the desert, and ye euangelical law
brings thee into ye land of promise. The natural law begets thee unto the
world, Moses law kills thee unto God, and the euangelical law raises thee
again. The natural law accuses thee, Moses law condemns thee, and the
evangelical law saves thee. The natural law awaketh man when he sleeps,
Moses law makes him to tremble, and the euangelical law sets him at rest.
The natural law makes men righteous in their own sight, Moses law in the
sight of the world, and the evangelical law makes them righteous in the sight
of God. The natural law promises not any thing that is supernatural, Moses
law makes promises of most rich divine things, and the evangelical law
observes them. The natural law makes us men, Moses law makes us Angels,
and the evangelical law even as Gods. Wherefore the natural law is good, Moses
law better, and the evangelical law best and most perfect. Let us pray
therefore unto the Lord, that he would imprint it in our hearts, to the
intent that we may render to him all praise, honor, and glory, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by Thomas East, dwelling between Paul's Wharfe, and
Baynards Castle. 1580.

MIEVLX VAVLT MOVRIR EN VERTV QVE VIVRE EN HONCTE coat of arms of Thomas East


