THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST DISCOVERED: AND OTHER CHRISTIan doctrines
delivered: IN TWELVE SERMONS UPON PART of the tenth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews.

By SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD Doctor of Divinity and Professor for the Lady
Margaret, in the University of OXFORD.

1. COR. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall.

Oxford University crest AC: OX


AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, LORD PAGET, BARON OF BEAVDESERT, GRACE AND
PEACE BE MVLTIPLIED.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
MANY years have expired, since these Sermons began first to have their life
in this Famous University. They have hitherto lain in obscurity. Only, a few
copies of some of them have been transcribed, for the use of a few. Now they
all see the light. They were penned with intent, to work honest and good
minds in Gods people. If they shall so far prevail with the Christian
Reader, they have their happiness. Their maine Subject is, the greatest of
Sins, the SIN against the HOLY GHOST. I describe it to be, (not every sin
of presumption, or of desperation, or against knowledge and Conscience, but)
such a kind of presumptuous offense, wherein, the profession of the Christian
faith is totally renounced, and that, of set purpose and resolved malice
against the very Majesty of Almighty God himself, and his Christ, our ever
blessed Savior. A sin absolutely unpardonable: There remains no sacrifice
for it. The more need is there, that every man be armed against it. For this
purpose at this time is this poor mite cast into the Lords treasury. It Is the
best I have in readynesse. Such as it is, I dedicate it to your HONOR, under
whose protection it may lodge in safety, as under the covert of Minerva's
shield. I may not seek to any other to Patronize it. It is your Honors of
due. The liberal maintenance, which it pleases your HONOR to extend to the
Reader of Divinity for the Lady MARGARET for his further encouragement and
support, challenges MORE from me. Mean time, accept this, my good Lord, as a
grateful agnition of your so rare bounty. GOD Almighty, the great recompenser,
who renders to every one according to their works, keep you, give you life,
make you blessed in this world, and when the resurrection of the just shall be,
give HE unto you that never-fading Crown of glory.

From my Study in CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE in OXFORD, March 25. 1615. Your
HONORS in all duty and service, SEBASTIAN BENEFIELD.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON PART OF THE TENTH CHAPter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
HEBR. 10. VER. 26.27. 26 For if we sin willingly, after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin:

27 But a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries.


IN this Scripture the Apostle endeavoring to perswad the Hebrews, and us in
them, to continue and persevere constantly in the faith which they had, and we
have in Christ Jesus; and willing to shake of from them and us, all
carelessness and fleshly security, presuming so far of our sluggish
dullness, as that possibly it may not be healed without sharp medicines:
uses these words, nothing pleasing to carnal minds, for that they are very
forcible, sharper indeed then any two edged sword, to prick all such
consciences as are well nigh seared up.

Herein it may please you to consider two things; 1 What it is from which in
this place we are dissuaded: it is from sinning willingly after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth: in these words, for if we sin
willingly, etc. 2 What inducements are brought to dissuade us from so sinning.
They are two.
1 Because if thus we sin, we shall never be able by any sacrifice to make
an atonement between us, and God revenging us. In the latter words of the 26.
verse: there remains no more sacrifice for sin. 2 Because if thus we sin,
we can look for no better, then eternal destruction, specified verse. 27. by a
fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries.


In the first general part we may be moved to the consideration of three
circumstances.

1 Who they needs must be, that may fall into this sin, from which the
Apostle so effectually dehorteth us: and they are such as have received the
knowledge of the truth. 2 With what mind this sin is committed. The mind
must be willing. 3 What manner of sin it is.
I shall at this time content my self, to speak only of the first general
note, and some of the circumstances therein.

If we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth] My
first observation here, touches the persons, who alone do fall into this
sin. Here they are said to have received the knowledge of the truth. They are
said to have been once lightened, and to have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
to have bin made partakers of the holy Ghost, and to have tasted of the good
word of God, and of the power of the world to come, Heb. 6.4, 5. They are said
to have escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of the
Lord, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, Mat. 12.43. Our Savior speaking of such,
says, that the unclean spirit is gone out of them; and verse 44. that they
are swept and garnished; and Mat. 13.20. that they hear the word, and
inco^tine^tly with joy receive it. Other like places for the same purpose,
might be alleged; but these may suffice to show, that God has many ways made
himself known unto them; that he has given them true understanding, that he
has quickened their spirits to receive gladly his Gospel; that they had a
feeling of the kingdom of Heaven; that they had known sin to be full of
misery, and vexation of the spirit; that they had confessed all true joy to be
only in Christ. Such is the state of knowledge to which they are called; such
are the graces, wherewith they are endued.

Whence it necessarily follows, that nor Turks, nor Infidels, nor Atheists,
nor Epicures have yet sinned this sin: nor Pharaoh, a vessel of Gods wrath;
nor Sodom and Gomorah with all their filthiness; nor blasphemous Esai 36.13.
Rabshakeh, making the Idols of the nations equal with the God of Heaven, have
yet sinned this sin. A curse (I grant) has gone out against them, and all
like them, and truly are they accursed: their sins have been abominable;
bondslaues are they of Satan, and strangers from the God of Israel: but yet
must I say, that a heavier curse is passed forth against all such as sin this
sin. The time will come (and far of it cannot be, for long since it was at
hand) when it shall be easier for Turk, for Infidel, for Atheist, for Epicure,
for Pharaoh, for Sodom, for Gomorah, and the like, then for such, as sin
this sin. Much easier for Turk, for Infidel, and the rest, then for those
wicked blasphemers of the holy Spirit, who do not only fulfill the full
measure of those Pagans sins, but contemn also the Graces given unto them,
the knowledge, whereto they have been called, and that good Spirit, whereof
the Pagans were never made partakers. Now look we back for a while to those
marks, wherewith they are noted, against whom our Apostle in this place
denounces. If they be duly considered, they will move our hearts to wisdom.

One is: they have been once lightned] that is, they have been endued with the
knowledge of God; and that not only by the heavens, though they Psalm. 19 ^.
declare Gods glory; nor only by the firmament, though that shows his handy
work; nor only by other his creatures, though in them also his eternal power
and godhead appears and shines, (for of this light all nations are made
partakers:) but they have been lightened also with his holy word. This has
been a Ps. 119, 105.
lantern to their feet, and a light unto their paths. When they found it, they
did greedily taste of it, and it was unto them the joy and rejoicing of their
hearts. And can we think, that any thus lightened are near unto cursing? Yea,
the Heb. 6.7.
Scripture tells us, that they may so fall away, as that it shall be
impossible for them to be renewed again by repentance, Heb. 6.6. Indeed the
earth which drinks in the rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth
herbs, meet for them, by whom it is dressed, shall receive a blessing of God;
but that earth, which bears thorns and briers, is reproved, is near unto
cursing, the end thereof is to be burned. Presume we not then, beloved in the
Lord. Whosoever 1. Cor. 10.12
thinks he stands, may fall. O! work we out our salvation with fear and
trembling.

An other mark of theirs is: they have tasted of the heavenly gift. This
heavenly gift is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. It is
that great salvation that is in Christ Jesus, so called by Christ himself,
speaking to the woman of Samaria, John. 4.10. This gift they have not only
known, but have also tasted of it. Would you know what taste this is? One
expounds it thus. Suppose a banquet provided, wherein are many sweet, pleasant,
and dainty meats. At this banquet, the bidden guests must be set down; they
see the meats, they taste the^, they eat them, they digest them, they are
nourished and strengthened by them. The unbidden guests! it is not so with
them. They indeed may see the meats, yea more then so, happyly they may be
permitted to handle them, and taste of them, to feel how good they are; but
eat, or feed of the^, they may not. Apply this; and in the unbidden guests,
tasting of those dainety meats; you shall perceive this taste of the heavenly
gift resembled. They have tasted of the heavenly gift; that is, they have
gladly sometime received it, and rejoiced in it; like Herod, who did gladly
hear John Baptist preaching, Mark. 6.20. and like the second kind of naughty
ground, that joyfully received the seed, Mat. 13.20. Herod may willingly hear
the preaching of the word, and yet be accursed; the naughty ground receiving
the seed with joy, in the end may be burned. Many may have a taste of eternal
life, and of that great salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, and yet may
finally fall away. Presume we not then, beloved in the Lord. Whosoever thinks
he stands, may fall. O! work we out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Their third mark is; they have been made partakers of the holy Ghost; that
is, many graces of the spirit of God have been given unto them. They may
repent, like Judas, Mat. 27.3. confess their sins, like Pharaoh, Exodus
10.16. love God, as Saul did, 1. Sam. 10.9. They may desire to be like Gods
children in happiness, as Balaam desired, when he said: O let my soul die the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, Number. 23.10. They may
show liking to Gods Ministers, reverence them, and fear to displease them, as
Simon Magus did, who at Philips preaching believed, wondered at his miracles,
and kept company with him, Act. 8.13. They may be zealous in the profession of
the gospel, as the Galatians were, who received Paul as an Angel; and if
possible, would have plucked out their eyes, to have done him good, Gal. 4.16.
Thus may they be qualified, yea much better then thus; and yet may finally fall
away. Presume we not the^, beloved in the Lord. Whosoever thinks he stands,
may fall: O! work we out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Their last mark, (for I omit the rest, as being all reducible to these four)
their last mark is: They have received the knowledge of the truth: that is,
they have caused their Ezech. 3.3.
bellies to eat, and have filled their bowels with that sweet roll, as sweet
as any honey in their mouths: they have received the word of God in their
hearts in such abundance, as that they are become preachers of the word: for
they have Heb. 6.5.
tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, they
have tasted it indeed, but only have they tasted it.

Here let me once more remember you of the resemblance of tasting. You know
that Cooks which are busied in preparing of banquets, have commonly as much
feeling and seeing of the meats, as any other, and yet, there is none that
eats less of it then they; their stomachs are so cloyed with the smell and
taste thereof: so is it here; it may come to pass, that the preacher, which
dresseth and provideth the spiritual food, may eat least of it himself, and
so laboring to save others, himself may prove a reprobate. It has been
thought, that some of them which built the Arc, were not saved in the Arc:
but certain it is, (not only thought so) certain it is, that diverse
spiritual builders of Christ's Church, shall not be saved with the Church, They
may by us be taken for Gods sheep, because they are kept in the same pastures,
and folded in the same fold with us; they may by us be taken for Gods sheep,
though indeed they be very Goats. There is a day to come, wherein the 2. Pet.
3.10.
heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat,
and the earth, with the works that are therein shall be burnt up: then may
Demas allege for himself his old and once-true religion, and Judas for
himself, his Apostleship: and many others for themselves, their prophesying in
Christ's name; but al in vain. For that just Judge will profess unto them,
Mat. 7.23. Luke 13.27.
I never knew you; depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Presume we not
then, beloved in the Lord. Whosoever thinks he stands, may fall. O! work we
out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Having thus considered their marks, and finding that they have been once
lightened, that they have tasted of the heavenly gift, that they have been
made partakers of the holy Ghost, that they have received the knowledge of the
truth, that they hear the word, and receive it, and receive it forthwith, and
receive it forthwith with joy; examine we our selves by those notes, whether we
are sown in the Lords field, have taken root, have grown to perfection, yea,
or no. For if our righteousness exceed not theirs, their lot shall be as good
as ours: if we be (...), time-seruers, as well as they, their backeslidings shall
have as easy a judgment as ours: if we apply our religion and conscience to
the present condition of things; the change of this present condition, must
work in us new religious, new consciences. And therefore would I counsel you,
as Philadelphia is counseled, to hold that which you have, that no man take
your crowns, Revel. 3.11. and as Sardi is counseled, to strengthen and
confirm the things that remain in you, that your works might be fulfilled
before the Lord, Revel. 3.2. You are now in a race, and must run, not only to
pace the ground, or to make up the number of runners, or to weary your bodies,
or to spend your breathes, but you must run to obtain also; such is the
Apostles counsel: So run, that ye may obtain, 1. Cor. 9.24. There is no time
of standing in this life, we must still forwards. Some came into the vineyard
at morning, and some at noone; but none received any reward, but they which
staide until night, Mat. 20.8. Jacob prevailed not with God at his first
wrestling: but when he had wrastled with him all night, Genesis 32.26. It is not
our praying for an hour can do us good; for we must pray continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.

See my third sermon on Luk 9 page 56.
Having a long time been fed Lam. 4.5.
delicately and brought up in scarlet, shall we now perish in the streets,
shall we now embrace the doung? Having a long time had our heads of gold, shall
we now (to become like Nabuchadnezzars Image) put on Dan. 2.33.
feet of clay? Having long since begun in the spirit, shall we now end in the
Gal 3.3.
, flesh? So shall our last estate, be worse then our first: so shall we all this
while have runned in vain. For he runs in vain, whosoever he be that runs
(run he never so swiftly) that sits him down, or stands still before he comes
to the goal. There is no time of standing or sitting still in this life; we
must still forwards. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still; he that
is holy, let him be holy still. Since we have bin once lightened, since we have
bin tasters of the heavenly gift, since we have bin partakers of the holy
Ghost, since we have been receivers of the knowledge of the truth, such be we
still: and think we, that every blessing of God bestowed upon us, is a further
calling and provocation of God, as were his callings upon Elias, 1. King. 19.4,
5.

When God found Elias a days 1. Kin. 19.4.
journey in the wilderness sitting under a Juniper tree, and sleeping, he called
upon him, saying, Verse. 5.
up and eat, and when he had found him a Verse 7.
second time so sitting and sleeping, a second time also he called upon him and
said, up, and eat, thou have a great iourny to go: and when he had travailed
Verse. 8.
forty days and was lodged in a Verse. 9.
cave, he called upon him again and said, what do thou here, Elias? at last
he was brought forth to the Verse. 11.
mount, and then also there came a Verse. 12.
voice unto him, and said, Verse. 13.
What do thou here Elias? Verse. 15.
Go and return by the wilderness unto Damascus; and do so, and so.

Here is instruction for us, whether we be entered into our way, or have
proceeded in it; whether we be babes in Christ, or strong men; whether carnal,
or spiritual; we must up and eat, and strengthen our selves; first with
milk, and then with stronger meat; we must up and eat, we have still a great
iourny to go, we must walk from light to light, from grace to grace, from
virtue to virtue, from knowledge to knowledge: we must think that always we
hear a voice calling us forward, up; thou haste a great journey to go: what
do thou here, Elias?

Excellent is that commendation given to the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2.19. I
know thy works, and thy love, and thy service, and faith, and patience, and
that thy last works are more, then thy first. Here was no backesliding, but
great increase; She was a true branch in that vine, which bare fruit, John.
15.2. She was purged, that she might bring forth more fruit: she grew up
daily in Christ, and became better and better; fuller of faith, fuller of love,
fuller of all good works: and as a newborn babe she coveted the sincere
milk of the word, that she might grow thereby: her last works were more,
then her first.

And the conclusion of the Epistle written to this Church, and of all the other
Epistles written to the other six Churches, is this: (...), not he, that
draws his sword, nor he, that fights the battles of the Lord, nor he, that
spends his blood, much less he, that faints, that flies, that sleeps,
that stands, or sits still, but (...) he that overcommeth, shall Revel.
2.7.
eat of the tree of life, and of the Vets. 17.
hidden Manna, shall receive a white stone, shall be clothed in Rev. 3.5.
white array, shall be made a Verse 12.
pillar in Gods Temple, and sit with God himself in his Verse. 21.
throne.

The sum of all this is: See my third Sermon. on Luke 9. p. 57.
not every one, but he only, that endures to the end shall be saved, Mat.
10.22. Not every one, but he only which is faithful unto the death shall
receive the Crown of life, Revel. 2.10. Not every one, but such only as are
marked in their forbeads with the letter (...); with the note of perfection and
perseverance, shall enter the inheritance of the blessed, Ezech. 9.4. (...), he
that overcommeth, Rev. 2.11.
shall never be hurt of the second death.

Let the dog return to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire;
but let us (like Abraham) hold on our sacrifices till the evening, the last
evening of our lives, and a full measure shall be measured unto us. If we are
lightened, endeavor we to increase this light in us, if we have a taste of the
heavenly gift, cease we not to taste it still; if we are made partakers of the
holy Ghost, rest we not, but walk we from grace to grace; if we have received
the knowledge of the truth, let us hold it fast till our Lord Jesus come, and
he will deliver us from that hour of tentation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try the^ that dwell upon the earth. Thus much of the persons, who
alone do fall into this sin. Now see we, with what mind this sin is
committed. For that is my second circumstance.

If we sin willingly] How desirously and with what consent of mind this sin
is committed, it appears partly in this place, by this word (willingly) and
partly by those words, Heb. 6.6. they crucify again unto themselves the
son of God, and make a mock of him. They crucify again the son of God,
that notes their envy and malice; they crucify him again unto themselves,
that argues their willingness. Their consciences, and their hearts filled with
envy and malice, do make the^ with all willingness commit such abomination.
This their willing mind to do so ill, may arise from three of their conceits.

One is: that a man may repent when he will, and this persuasion they have,
because, Ezech. 18.21. they find, that at what time soever a sinner shall
return from all his sins, that he has committed, and shall do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not die: all his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him;
but in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. Here they may
conceive that late repentance is seldom true repentance, and justly may they
fear, lest that repentance which they frame to themselves when they are dying,
die with them. The first lesson that John Baptist taught, was Repent, for the
kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. The first lesson, that the Disciples
taught, was Repent, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Math. 10.7. And the
first lesson which Christ himself taught, was, Repent, too, for the kingdom
of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 4.17. Here is no posting over to the hour of death.
Repentance must be first of all learned both by young, and old. It is not for a
young man to say, I will repent; for certainly could Judas have repented, when
he had listed, he would never have Mat. 27.5. Act. 1.18.
hanged himself; neither is it safe for an old man to say, I have repented: he
has lived long enough to know that God is I am, and therefore is best pleased
with I am: he little cares for, I was, or I will be.

A second conceit of theirs, making their mind so willing to do wickedly, is,
that the best man that is has seven falls every day into gross sins, and
here they allege that place, Prove. 24.16. the righteous man falls seven
times in a day, and rises again. But we may answer, that this place is to be
understood of falls into afflictions and calamities, rather then of falls into
actual sins, and so makes little for their purpose.

Their third conceit is: that their small sins, or hidden sins are no
sins, and that their greatest sins, wherein they live and lie wallowing
most dangerously, are but sins of infirmity. And here they are perfect in the
reckoning up of Peter's fall, Lots incest, Solomon's Idolatry, Noah's
drunkenness, David's murder, Sarahs lie, Rebeccahs persuading her son Jacob
to beguile his own father, the theft of Onesimus, the many Concubines of the
Patriarchs, and the like: they find that the grace of God has abounded above
sin in all these; and why may it not abound above their sins also? In this
resolution they hold on their own and proper walk. Impij in circuitu
ambulant, Psalm. 12.8. the wicked have their ways: but they are crooked, they
are circular endless ways, they walk by compass, not much unlike their
father the Devil, who testifies of himself, that he had compassed the whole
earth, Job. 1.7. they walk by compass indeed, but never toward the mark,
never toward the price, that is set before them. For how can they attain
thereto, as long as they go thus wheeling about, to no purpose, like the
turning of a mill; which, when it has labored the whole day long, is found at
night in the self same place, where it first began? So these men in circuitu
ambulant, they walk by compass, and when the night shall come, their last
night, the last hour of their lives, they shall be found, not to have
proceeded one step forwards, except it be in wickedness.

To this point I say, howsoever grace abounds above sin, yet accursed are
they, yea ever cursed shall they be, who do sin, that grace, and blessing
may abound unto them, Romans 6.1. we are forbidden to do Romans 3.8.
evil, where we certainly know that good may come thereof; much less may we
make the grace of God a defense for our sins. This must be our shield: there
is no Romans 8.1.
condemnation to the righteous, though he fall many times a day; but if any
man shall sin, presuming of Gods mercies, let such a one know that his
damnation is just; and himself is like that thief that steals, because he
sees one among twenty pardoned by the Prince.

Thus you see, with what mind this sin is committed, the heart is full of
envy, full of malice, and the mind in all willingness assenteth. But do not
Gods children, having received the knowledge of the truth, sin also
willingly? If they do, how the^ is it, that they are freed, from this sin,
for which there remains no more sacrifice? This doubt will be clear if we
do but consider this one position: The child of God though he cannot fall
finally in the end, nor utterly at any time, may notwithstanding fall
grievously, may fall dangerously. First, by his default the graces of God may
be lessened in him: and therefore has S. Paul exhorted the Thessalonians not
to quench the spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. and the Ephesians, not to grieve the holy
spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. By his default then the graces of God may be
lessened in him; yea, they may be so buried in him for a time, as that he may
be like a man in a trance, who both by his own sense, and by the judgment of
the Physician is taken for dead. Hither may you refer the estate of Peter, of
David, and of others, whom I have already mentioned unto you. Secondly, he may
fall again into the same sin after repentance; and this may we learn of
Paul praying the Corinthians in Christ's steed, that they would be 2. Cor. 5.20
reconciled to God; who indeed were reconciled to God before. Thirdly, he may
sin presumptuously, that is, he may sin wittingly, willingly and wilfully.
Against this David prayed unto the LORD, Psalm. 19.13. keep thy servaunt from
presumptuous sins; that he was in danger of them appears by the words
following, let them not reign over me. Lastly, he may sin desperately; and
this is a fearful sin: he may despair of Gods mercies for a time, as the
incestuous man was like to do, as S. Paul shows, when he says, comfort
him, lest he be swallowed up of overmuch heavines, 2. Cor. 2.7. So, true is one
part of our former position, the child of God may fall grievously, may fall
da^gerously. For he may quench the spirit within him, after repentance he may
sin again; he may sin presumptuously, he may sin desperately. The child of
God may fall grievously, may fall dangerously, yet cannot fall finally in the
end, nor utterly at any time. The reason hereof is this: after that he is
sanctified, he receives from God an other special grace, you may call it
corroboration, the strengthening power of Christ. Hence is it that Paul prays
for the Ephesians, that they may be strengthened in the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16.
and for the Colossians, that they might be strengthened with the glorious power
of Christ, Coloss. 1.11. and of himself he says, that he is able to do al
things through the power of Christ, that strengthens him, Philip. 4.13. This
corroboration, this strengthening power is that, that raises up the children
of God as often, as they are fallen. DAVID in the anguish of his soul may say; I
am cast out of thy sight, O Lord, Psalm. 31.22. Mark how this strengthening
power lifts him up: first, it makes him confess that he spoke that in have;
and then it puts into his mind a Veruntamen, a particle of better grace,
wherewith he corrects his hasty speech; Veruntamen audisti vocem
deprecationu^ mearum, cum vociferarer ad te. I said in my have, I am cast out
of thy sight, YET thou hardest the voice of my prayer, when I cried unto thee.
And in the same Psalm verse 12. he uses those harsh words, iarring very
unpleasantly in his own ears, and striking out of tune; I am forgotten, as a
dead man out of mind; I am like a broken vessel. And here see, how this
strengthening power helps him with a vero, a note of better sound: Ego vero in
te confido, IEHOVA, dicens, Deus meus es. I am forgotten as a dead man out of
mind, I am like a broken vessel; BUT Psalm. 11.14,
I trusted in thee, O LORD; I said, thou art my God. When Jonas had been cast
into the bottom Ion. 2.3.
in the midst of the Sea, and the floods had compassed him about, when all
the surges, and all the waves had past over him; then (looking on his former
disobedience) he said, I am cast away out of thy sight, O Lord, Ion. 2.4. and
here also this strengthening power revived Jonas spirits with a Veruntamen and
an Attamen, words of comfort; Veruntamen perga^ intueri in templum sanctitatis
tuae; Attamen eduxisti a corruptione vitam meam, IEHOVA Deus mi. I said, I am
cast away out of thy sight, O Lord; Verse. 4.
YET will I look again toward thy holy temple: The Verse. 5.
waters compassed me about unto the soul, the depth cloased me round about,
and the weeds were wrapped about mine head; Verse. 6.
I went down to the bottom of the mountains: the earth with her bars was
about me for ever; Verse. 7.
YET have thou brought up my life from the pit, O LORD my God.

One has noted upon this place, that if it were not (for Attamen, vero, and
veruntamen, but, yet, notwithstanding, and such like comforting particles, our
hearts might quake within us, to see such passions in the Saints of God. But it
is the Lords property, ever to send a gracious rain upon his inheritance, to
refresh it, when it is weary, Psalm. 68.9. and true it is that Hosea says,
though we look for a day or two, as if we were dead and forlorn, yet Hos 6.2.
after those two days, he will reviue us, and the third day he will raise us
up, and we shall live in his sight. So true is the other part of our former
position, the child of God cannot fall finally in the end, nor utterly at any
time. For God has blessed his children with repentant hearts: And ever blessed
shall they be, that are so blessed by the Lord.

For he has made a decree with himself, it belongs to the new Testament, it
is ratified by the death of the Testator; it is witnessed by three in heaven,
and by three in earth, and never shall it be altered; and this is the DECREE? At
what time soever a sinner, Ezech. 18.21
whosoever he be shall repent him of his sins, whatsoever they be, and shall
do judgment and justice, he shall surely live, he shall not die. If he truly
repent of his wickedness he need not be troubled, either by the vexations of
this wretched life, or by the horror of conscience, or by the malice of many
foes, be they men or Devils; and if Devils, be they seven in one, a legio^ in
an other, all the principalities, all the powers of darkness in the third; for
he shall be assured to have forgiveness; and therefore I say again: At what
time soever, a sinner, whosoever he be, shall repent him of his sins,
whatsoever they be, and shall do judgment and justice, he shall not die.

Hitherto have you seen, how willingly this sin is committed, and how Gods
children, though sinning also willingly are freed from it. In the third place
must I speak of the sin it self.

THE SECOND SERMON.
HEB. 10. VER. 26. 26 For if we sin willingly, after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin:


NOW are we to speak of the sin, from which we are in this Scripture
dehorted. This sin, seated in such a subject, as they are, who have received
the knowledge of the truth, and proceeding from such a cause, as is a willing,
a set, and an obstinate malice against God, and against his Christ, is the Sin
against the holy Ghost. The very naming whereof, before I proceed to the
handling of it, causes me to remember you, and my self, of two blemishes,
wherewith the spirit of man (in such a business as now we have in hand) uses
very much to be infected.

1 Too much boldness. 2 Too much fear.
Solomon has said, there is a generation, which are pure in their own
conceit, and yet are not washed from their filthiness, Prove. 30.12. Experience
makes me presume, that I may as truly say: there is a generation, that are
wise and learned in their own conceit, and yet they are not washed from their
folly, yet they are not washed from their ignorance. Many men will boast, every
one of his own goodness, but who can find a faithful man? says the wise man,
Prove. 20.6. So many think they stand, yet stand not; many think they believe,
yet believe not, they know not what faith means: many look to be saved, yet
are ignorant who shall save them: many would be counted Ioh. 3.10.
masters in Israel, teachers of others, yet know they no more then Nicodemus,
what it is to be Verse. 9.
borne again.

So far has this boldness thrust it self, as that now, be there any talk
of Divinity, it is thought but a small matter, for such, whose necks are as
sinews of Iron, and brows like brass, I mean, for careless hearts and
venterous tongues, to be up with predestination or the Sin against the holy
Ghost. To such what shall I say? Even as one said in the like case: it were
better for them they had neither tongues in their heads, nor hearts in their
breasts, then that they should delight in their so vnreverent and ungodly
usage. For hereby what do they else but blaspheme the eternal wisdom of God?
It is a faithful lesson for servants, to be obedient to them that are their
masters according to the flesh, in fear and trembling; you may find it, Ephesians.
6.5. And shall we, servants to that great LORD, our master according to the
spirit, when we enter talk of his word, not fear? shall we not tremble? shall
we at his greatest mysteries, be careless and mockers? The knowledge of Gods
predestination should cast down our proud reason, even to the ground; it
should make us confess before him, that all his doings are secret, all his
judgments unsearchable, all his ways past finding out; yet we like fools,
unwilling (though we should be brayed in a mortar) to let our foolishness
depart from us, doubt not at all, to examine the high judgments of God, as if
they were pliable to our foolish reason.

And so likewise, the Sin against the holy Ghost, is mentioned to make us
fear, to work in us the fear of the LORD, which is, as a wellspring of life,
to free us from all the snares of death, to make us love the LORD, and learn
al his judgments, to assure us so far of his favor as that we cannot
possibly sin against his spirit: yet we, as discontent herewith, put all
fear apart, and make no end of questioning, whether the Sin against the holy
Ghost, be this sin? or that sin when (God knows) at al sins we make but
a jest. Justly may we fear, lest God say to us, as once he said to the wicked,
Psalm. 50.16. Quid tua, vt enarres decreta mea? Gods ordinances being holy and
pure should not come into mouths given to filthiness. With what face then
dare men of uncircumcised minds and mouths, meddle with such holy mysteries,
either publicly, or privately? Quid tua, vt enarres decreta mea? What have thou
to do to declare mine ordinances? Does it belong to thee to take my covenant
in thy mouth? says the Lord. You see how far too much boldness carries us
headlong.

The other fault I spoke of was too much fear.

Some there are (and they none of the worst of us) who by the singular mercies
of God have so been humbled, as that they cover their faces, and hang down
their heads at the remembrance of their sins. To such every sound of the Sin
against the holy Ghost is a piercing of their hearts: they stop their ears at
the name of it: they would not have it spoken of at all, for fear lest
themselves should be holden in the transgression. In which their opinion they
seem to accord with those, who hold of predestination and election, that they
are matters not to be thought of, too high for man's learning. Which conceit
was first founded in the forge of a Popish brain, and thence has been
derived to us.

Hence sprang that their comfortless lesson; hope well, and have well: and
that their assertion leading unto wilful blindness; it is not the duty of a
man to know his election. In the 2. to the Corinth. 135. it is thus written:
Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith: examine your selves; know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Consider the words. Shall God here by his Apostle bid, prove, and
dares man say, doubt? Shall God bid, examine, and dares man advise us, only to
hope? Shall the spirit of truth command us to know our salvation, and dares a
lying spirit in the mouths of false prophets account it presumption to know
our salvation? To this purpose is it, that S. John exhorts you, 1. John. 4.1.
Try the spirits, whether they are of God, or not.

As for those in whose ears the naming of this Sin against the holy Ghost
sounds harshly, Christ has said the sum of all that has been said: Luke
12.32.
Fear not my little flock, for it has pleased your father to give to you a
kingdom, not momentary, but eternal, purchased not with gold and silver, but
with the most precious blood of his only son, and therefore may ye well be
assured, that he will also give you victory over sin and death.

This great and heinous Sin, be it what it will, (let it never discourage
you) it cannot hurt you; it is none of yours. This sin, is the sin of those
that have despised knowledge; but like as the Heart desires the water brooks,
so do your souls thirst after more knowledge of the Lord. This sin is the
sin of such, as have contemned the Cross of Christ; but the delight of your
lives is therein. This sin is the sin of such, as have made the world their
God, but your God with who^ ye walk, in whose fear you live, has had such
mercy on you, as that ye account all the world but dung, to the end ye may
win Christ. And therefore I say again: this great and heinous sin, be it
what it will, (let it never discourage you) it cannot hurt you, it is none of
yours. Wheresoever they dwell, that have thus sinned, and are in this
condemnation (be of good comfort) God himself bears you witness, that their
tents and their tabernacles are not near you.

Thus have we been warned, touching Gods holy mysteries, that we be neither
too bold, nor too fearful: let us now, walking in the midst between both,
between fear and boldness, draw near with reverence; and with glad and
faithful ears, abide we the hearing of this sin; let us not be so foolish,
either to fear the smoke, since the fire cannot hurt us; or to wade too
far, since the depth may devour us.

Now then, not to trouble you long, with those Desperatio, Praesumptio,
Impoenitentia, Ob^tinatio, Impugnatio ^eritatis agnitae, Invidia gratiae
fraternae Angelus del Pas ^nchirid. Scholast. Theolog. Sect. 2. lib. 2. c. 1.
p. 56.
six kinds of sins against the holy Ghost, much spoken of by the Schoolmen,
as namely, presumption of Gods mercies, and Despair contrary to presumption,
and the Oppugning of the known truth, and the Envying of all the good gifts and
graces in our brethren, and Obstinacy, and Impenitencie; let it be sufficient
for us to understand, that in the word of God, there is mention of one only
sin so called. In Mat. 12.31. as also in Mark. 3.29. and Luke, 12.10. it is
called the blasphemy against the holy Ghost. You shall find it at large
described, if with these words of my text you will confer those other places,
as Heb. 6.4, 5. 2. Pet. 2.20. 1. Ioh. 5.16. All which will manifest, that there
is but one only Sin against the holy Ghost.

As for the repining at our brethrens good, being but a breach of the second
table, and touching the presuming upon Gods mercies, being but a kind of
hypocrisy; I see not how they may be called Sins against the holy Ghost.

The other four indeed have some reference to this Sin. The falling away
from the known truth, and obstinacy, are in the nature of this sin: final
impenitencie, is a consequent, a punishment of it, and so is despair. And here
because there goes somewhat a general conceit that despair indeed is the Sin
against the holy Ghost, let me show you some difference between that Sin and
despair.

This Sin against the holy Ghost is a blasphemy spoken against the known
truth; so is not desperation, though sometimes it be a punishment of this
sin. This Sin against the holy Ghost brings with it final impenitencie;
it shall be impossible for such a sinner to repent; so is it not in
desperation. A despairing man may repent. This Sin against the holy Ghost, is
a denial of Christ, arising from a set, a wilful, and an obstinate malice; so
is not desperation; for it may arise either through ignorance of a man's own
estate, or through horror of conscience for sins committed, or through an
often relapse into some sin, or through a serious consideration of our own
unworthiness, or by abiuratio^ of the truth through compulsion and fear. The
sum of all is, the sin against the holy Ghost is a sin of the Reprobate,
but Gods chosen children may fall into despair.

For whose comfort let me add a word or two. It is a true saying, God in some
sense may be said to forsake his children. Else why should DAVID say, Psalm.
77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord absent himself for ever? Will he show no more
favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has he shut up his tender
mercies in displeasure? Else why should JONAS say, chap. 2.4. I am cast out of
thy sight, O Lord? Else why should GEDEON say, Iud. 6.13. Now the Lord has
forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites? Else why should
the Savior of us all say, Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?

It is manifestly true, God in some sense may be said to forsake his children,
and thus it is. God hides his graces for a time, and covers them even within
his children; he takes them not quite away; only he removes all sense, and
feeling of them: and so far forth he forsakes them. The resemblaunce is
usually made by your trees in the winter season. They are beaten with wind and
weather; they bear neither leaf, nor fruit; they look, as though they were
rotten, and dead. The reason you know; the sap lies hid in the root. It is no
new thing, nor strange to such as tread in the paths of godliness, to have
their souls like affected to those your trees. The time of comfort will pass
away and tentation follow, and then is the winter for your souls; then shall
yea be, as beaten with wind and weather; as bearing neither leaf nor fruit;
and look, as though yea were rotten and dead. The reason is plain: Gods
graces do lie hidden and covered for a time within the closets of your hearts.
But as your trees do spring again, and bear both leaf and fruit, receiving
comfort of a better season, so shall you. You shall be restored, God will turn
your mourning into joy; God will loose your sack; God will gird you with
gladness.

Here may we learn this lesson: Cuncta dei opera sunt in medijs contrarijs; it
is Gods use, in, and by one contrary to work another. A man would think, that
an infinite host of enemies could not be overcommed without an exceeding great
multitude. But it was the Lords doing; Gedeon with his three hundred soldiers
put to flight such an host, Iud. 7.21. A man would think that clay and spittle
tempered together should put out ones eyes. Wonderful are the Lords doings:
Christ used clay and spittle so tempered, as a means to give sight unto the
blind, Ioh. 9.6. A man would think water should put out fire. Behold the
finger of the Lord! Elias poures water on his sacrifice, and fills a trench with
water to make his sacrifice burn, 1. King. 18.35. The like you may observe in
the work of Grace to salvation. A man living long in security has at length
his eyes opened to see his sins, and heart touched to feel the intolerable
burden of them; now he bewailes his wretched estate, with anguish, with
bitterness of heart, and thinks that God will presently make him a firebrand of
hell: see how by this contrary the contrary is wrought. The Lord is now about
to work and frame in his heart sanctification, and such repentance, as never
needs to be repented of.

A man that has had some good persuasion of Gods favor in Christ, comes now at
last upon many occasions to be troubled, and to be overwhelmed with
distrustfulnesse and grievous doubtings of his salvation. Now he judges
himself to have been but an hypocrite in former times: for the present time,
he thinks himself a castaway: and see here how by this contrary the contrary
is wrought. For now indeed the Lord does nothing else, but exercise, fashion,
and increase his weak faith. Cuncta Dei opera sunt in medijs contrarijs. The
graces of God peculiar to the elect, are begun, increased, and made manifest in
or by their contraries.

And therefore if any, whose delight has heretofore seemed to have been in
the Law of the Lord, shall despair at his end, we must (for so we learn in
this place) leaving secret judgments to God, in charity judge the best of
them. We must not weigh their speeches; for men in such cases speak, not as
they are, but as they feel themselves to be. We must rather look unto God,
who at all times, and especially in temptations, (such are his mercies) accepts
the will for the deed; a willing mind to obey God, for faithful obedience; a
willing mind to repent their sinful lives; for perfect repentance.

But happyly some will doubt, if a man in despair make a way himself, if he
spill his own blood, what may then be thought? The case, I grant, is very
fearful; yet still must we carry the same opinion. For if Gods judgments are
very secret; if for any thing we know, a man may repent in the very agony; if
none of us be able to comprehend, the bottomless depth of the graces and mercies
which are in Christ, we should not dare (passing the bounds of charity) give
too rash a censure, but rather pray in the spirit, that God come not upon us
with the like visitation.

Thus have we seen the difference between despair and the Sin against the
holy Ghost, as also what comfort, what joy may from thence shine unto feeble
and weak spirits: Now seek we farther into this sin. Let us first consider,
what manner of rebellion it is. Secondly in what regard it is so named.
Thirdly, what object it has.

The manner of rebellion, namely, how far they fall away, who have fallen
into this sin, we shall perceive, if we look unto the beginning of the sixth
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. There verse 1.2. the Apostle speaks
of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God, of the doctrine of
baptism, and laying on of hands, of the resurrection from the dead, and of
eternal judgment. All these he calls the beginning, the foundation of
Christianity. Then verse the 6. he speaks of an apostacy, of a falling away
from all these points, even from the foundation and first beginnings of
Christian faith, giving us thereby to understand, that they who are holden in
this transgressio^ and have sinned this sin, have forsaken all the principles
of religion, have lost their former light, have departed from their first
understanding. As for repentance, they cast it behind them, and the first
faith, they regard it not: they esteem baptism no more then the washing of
their hands, neither care they to be received in to the Church of God: the
resurrection of the dead, that feeds them with many a merry conceit; they
think pleasantly with themselves, what manner of bodies they shall have, of
what age these their bodies shall be, whether they shall have hair and nails,
and the like. But the eternal judgment, the remembrance indeed thereof
sometimes frighteth them, yet are they encouraged again, when they think, how
far of it is. So prefer they darkness before light, ignorance before
knowledge, error before hope, infidelity before faith, shame before glory, a
cursed death before eternal life.

They are fallen away from repentance, and therefore impossible shall it be for
them to repent; they are fallen away from faith toward God, and therefore
never may they hope to believe again: they are fallen away from the doctrine
of baptism, and laying on of hands, and therefore are they not likly any more
by those means to be illuminated; they are fallen away from the doctrine of
resurrection, and therefore though they rise again, it shall be to their own
confusion; they are fallen away, from the doctrine of eternal judgment; and
therefore shall eternal judgment swallow them up.

It is no more but thus: they have fallen away wholly from CHRIST, they have
despised the sweet graces of the HOLY SPIRIT, wherewith they once were
lightened, and therefore shall they be fed with wormwood, and be made to drink
the water of gall; and not this only, but let all the rivers and streams of
fresh water, which glad the city of God, and comfort the souls of the
faithful, run also into their souls, they will resist them and drive them
back, they will admit no entrance for any persuasion of the graciousnes and
kindness of the Lord, though it be preached a thousand times. They have sinned
against the holy Ghost, and condemnation is their portion. You see in the
manner of rebellion, how far they may fall away; now for the name.

It is not called the Sin against the holy Ghost, as if it were against the
Godhead of the holy Ghost: for the same God is also father and son: The
godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one, their
glory is equal, and their majesty coeternall: nor is it so called, as if it
were against the person of the holy Ghost, for that is no greater then the
person of the father and of the son: The whole three persons are coeternall
together and coequall. Nunquid alia est offensa filij, alia spiritus sancti,
says S. Ambrose De spiritu sancto Lib. 1. cap. 3. His answer is; Sicut vna
dignitas, sic vna iniuria. Can the holy Ghost be grieved, and the son well
pleased? No; Sicut vna dignitas, sic vna iniuria. The Father, Son, and holy
Ghost have all one glory, and therefore an injury done to one, is done to all.
Trium personarum non sunt divisae offensae, says the Master of the Sentences,
Lib. 2. Did. 43. art. 4. It is impossible, that a sin committed against the
holy Ghost, should not also be committed against the Father, and against the
Son; yet says he, Peccatorum genera distincta sunt; you may use a
distinction between sins: where he shows that although power, wisdom, and
goodness, be one and the same in all three persons, yet sometimes in a more
peculiar sort, there is ascribed, power to the father, wisdom to the Son,
and goodness to the goly Ghost; and hence arises this distinction of sins.
If a man sin through infirmity, he may be said to sin against the Father,
for in him is power; he is the father of might. If he sin through ignorance,
he may be said to sin against the Son, for in him is no want of knowledge;
he is the wisdom of the Father. If he sin through wilful malice, he may be
said to sin against the holy Ghost, for in him is all goodness; his office
is to sanctify.

You see then why this Sin is called the sin against the holy Ghost; not
because it is against the Godhead of the holy Ghost, nor yet because it is
against the person of the holy Ghost; but because it is against the goodness
of the holy Ghost: against the goodness, that is, against the graces of the
holy spirit given us to the setting out of the praises of the LORD. For
whosoever shall despise those good graces, and turn them to the contempt of
Gods majesty and glory, and tread the^ under foot, and account them profane,
and purposely, and wilfully, Heb. 6.6.
and maliciously carry them away to all wantonness, he crucifieth again unto
himselfo the son of God, he despites the spirit of grace, he sins against
the holy Ghost.

I shall not need to speak of the object, which I proposed unto you in the
third place; the two former notes have made it sufficiently manifest, that the
malice of this sin is directed against the whole TRINITY, against the very
majesty of God himself, and against his Christ: it directly respects the
first table of the moral law, it is not any particular slipping aside, it is a
general defection, a general apostacy from God, and that totally.

Here should I show you, what punishment is provided for such sinners: but that
discourse is better fitting the later words of my Text. Yet that we be not
swallowed up by secure and careless living, as long as we hear nothing of any
punishment due for so great a sin, let it not be troublesome to us at once to
take a view of it.

Certain it is, an end shall come upon them, yet never shall they end; death
shall take them away, yet never shall they die; they shall be in fire
unquenchable, yet shall see nothing, for the darkness so palpable;
everlastingly shall they burn, yet not consume.

You may read of the wine of giddiness, Psalm 60.3. of a strange kind of
worm, Esa. 66.24. of the winepresse of Gods wrath, Revelat. 14.10. of fire and
brimstone, Ezech. 38.22. All these, and (if worse may be) many more worse then
these, are for so many torments, assuredly allotted them. Their cup is a cup of
the deadliest wine, that ever yet was tasted, even the wine of Gods wrath,
wherewith they shall be filled for evermore; their worm, is a worm, that never
leaves gnawing. They shall be tormented before the holy Angels, and the lamb
in fire and in brimstone: not such as fell upon Sodom and Gomorah; (for so
might they have some hope at length to be dissolved into heaps of ashes, or
clouds of pitch) but in fire and brimstone, ascending from a mine without
bottom, burning in the lake of death, giving them no rest, either day or
night. The smoke of this their torment ascends for evermore, and is appointed
to continue, for a time, and times, and no time, even when time shall be no
more, Rev. 10.6. When time shall be no more, yet then shall their torment
continue, and that in such a measure as no eye has ever seen the like, no
ear has ever heard the like, no tongue has ever uttered the like, no heart
has been, is, or shall be able ever to conceive the like.

Having thus pointed at their punishment, let us now consider the degrees, by
which they have ascended to that fullness of their iniquity, as also how far
our selves have trodden in their steps.

The degrees are these.

1 They are deceaved by some sin. 2 By the same sin their hearts come to be
hardened. 3 This hardness of heart by continuance breeds in the wickedness,
and perversitie. 4 There follows incredulity and unbelief. 5 After their
unbelief, they fall to a general apostacy, necessarily, and that immediately.
Necessarily and immediately they fall away from faith in Christ.
These are the degrees: first deceit by sin, then hardness of heart arising
from deceit, the heart being hardened it becomes wicked and perverse, this
wickedness and perversitie of heart, causes incredulity and unbelief, whereby
is wrought that highest step, general apostacy, and falling away from God.
The two first steps have been and are usually trodden in by us: namely deceit
by some sin, and hardness of heart by the same.

That old Prophet, 1. King. 13.11. entised a younger Prophet contrary to the
commandment of God, to 1. Kin. 13.18.
turn home with him, and to eat and drink, but at the last he cursed him for
his labor, and his curse took effect, for as he returned he was slain by a
Verse. 24.
lion in the way. Not much unlike is Satan's dealing with us. He entiseth us to
sin, from which we are, by the Lords commandment, to fly, as from a serpent;
we have yielded unto him, and have sinned; but he has cursed us for out
labor; only as yet, we have not met with any lion in the way. Notwithstanding
sinned we have, and that not once only: for Satan has deceived us still, and
we have yielded still unto him, and still have we sinned. And are not our
hearts now hardened with sinning? Yes, very much hardened.

I grant, it may be, our cheeks will be red to talk of Christ, as theirs
were, who went to Luke 24.13.
Emaus, and we will blush apace to seem so holy; but the Blackmore will blush
faster then we, when fearfully, and fowly we sin against the Lord. Be there
any sin, that delights us more then other, we will take part with Naaman,
( 2. King. 5.18
let God be merciful unto us if he will) we will not leave it, we will wallow
in it, joy in it, live in it, grow old in it. Do we not bath this matter of
earth and worms meat, wherewith we are clogged, in all pleasure and ease, as
if there were neither corruption to rot it, nor Heaven to receive it, nor Hell
to burn it?

Behold the progress, sin has made in us: first there was titillatio
delectationis in cord, then followed consensio, then factum, then consuetudo.
First Satan slily crept into our hearts, and there he moved a tickling delight,
which so well pleased us, that by and by we gave consent thereto; and to show
that our consent was not in vain, we were not long before we brought it into
fact, not long, I say, before we did that wicked deed, whereto we were
incited; and done it we have, and that not once or twice only, but many times,
now it is become a custom. And yet do we securely sleep? See we not the
danger we are in? Surely the next step we make, after we are accustomed by
hardness of heart to yield unto the deceit of sin, except God give us grace to
return, can be no other, then into a wicked and perverse heart, and then will
follow incredulity and unbelief, whereupon immediately and necessarily must
ensue the highest degree, even general apostacy, and falling away from God.

In which case at this time I say no more unto you, then the Apostle said unto
the Hebrews, chap. 3.12, 13. Take heed, my brethren, lest at any time there be
in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to depart away from the living
God; Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

THE THIRD SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 26. 26 There remains no more sacrifice for sins.


WE are now come to the first reason used by our Apostle, to dissuade us from
committing so vile a sin, as is the sin against the holy Ghost. There remains
no more sacrifice for sins.

Here let us first consider, how true it is which Novatus has collected out of
these words, namely: that, whosoever sins after he is baptized, his sin is
not possibly pardonable. Secondly, let us examine that which these words do
naturally afford, and that is, that the Sin against the holy Ghost is not at
any time, nor can ever be, forgiven. Of both these at this time.

To spend the time in delivering, whence and what Novatus and his followers
were, This (...) was preached Ianu. 4. 1598.
and at what time they first sprang up, I hold it needless, for that, it would
but little adva^tage the understanding of the younger, and the rest already
know it better then my self. The consideration of this doctrine may be
material for us all. For if it be true, that they which sin after Baptism
once received, be it either of ignorance or of infirmity, ca^ have no hope of
pardon for their sin, are not we, who hitherto have learned the contrary, of
all men most miserable? Have we not just cause with those men of Israel, Act.
2.37. to be pricked in our hearts, and to cry out as they did, Men and brethren
what shall we do?

For defense of their opinion, they suppose the Scriptures to be very pregna^t,
alleging these words of my text: If we sin willingly after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth there remains no more sacrifice for
sins: as also those other words, Heb. 6.4. It is impossible that they which
were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God and of the
power of the world to come, it is impossible for such, if they fall away to be
renewed by repe^ta^ce. Out of both which places their conceit is framed: they
affirm, that a man in baptism is washed from all his filthiness, and
cleansed from all his sins, but if he shall fall afterward, that then there
remains no more sacrifice for his sin, that then, he cannot possibly be
renewed by repentance; so unpardonable do they judge a relapse into sin.

The fathers of the Western Church misco^ceiving these two cited places, as in
the one understanding by (...), but an ordinary falling, in the other by (...),
a sinning only in general, whether of ignorance, infirmity, or otherwise;
misconceiving (I say) these two places, yet unwilling to subscribe to so foul
an heresy, have rejected this Epistle as unfit to prove any principle in
religion, have accounted it, as not Canonical.

But we need not use any such shift to answer the argument of the Catharists.
That spirit of truth, which was long since promised to come, and to lead us
into all truth, is already come and has given sufficient witness to the
irresistable authority of this Scripture: and withal has taught us, that
these places must be understood of that sin, which is to death; of that sin,
wherein men of desperate malice against Christ, universally and wholly, fall
away from religion. For the holy Ghost says not, if they fall, but (...), if
they fall away; and in the same, Heb. 6.6. it is added, they crucify again
unto themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him; and Heb. 10.29. it
is said, that they tra^ple under foot the Son of God, that they count the
blood of the Testament an unholy thing, that they despite the spirit of grace,
and in the 26. verse the word (...), translated with us willingly, imports some
what more, as if, to sin willingly, were to sin, because a man will sin,
and that is, to sin wilfully.

These places then thus understood prove (I grant) an impossibility of pardon;
but it is to such, as commit that sin, which is to death, and fall away from
their first light; to such, as crucify again unto themselves the son of
God, and make a mock of him, and trample him under foot; to such, as count the
blood of the Testament an unholy thing, and despite the spirit of grace; to
such, as sin (...), only because they will sin, purposely, wilfully, and
maliciously, to such (I grant) these places prove an impossibility of pardon:
but that a man, sinning ignorantly, or of infirmity, should be past hope of
forgiveness, these places prove not: and therefore make nothing at all for
defense of the Catharistes opinion.

They press us yet, for the further establishment of their conceit, with old
Elies words, 1. Sam. 2.25. If one man sin against another, the judge shall
judge it; but if a man sin against the LORD, who will plead for him? Who will
plead for him? that is, say they, no man shall plead for him. For God is just,
and will take vengance upon him, that sins against him: NO man shall plead for
him. S Ambrose l. 1. de poenitentia c. 8. much disliketh this their exposition;
and there shows by other like speeches in the Scripture, that these words are
not necessarily to force that meaning which they would have. Ps. 15.1. David
says LORD who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, who shall rest in thy holy
mountain? Quaeritur quis, non excluditur; the question is, who shall dwell in
the Lords tabernacle? Every one is not excluded from so dwelling: for in the
words following it is answered, He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart, he shall never be moved; he
shall dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord, he shall rest upon his holy
mountain. Psalm. 24.3. the same Psalmist has likewise said, who shall ascend
into the mountain of the LORD? and who shall stand in his holy place? And here
also Quaeritur QVIS, non exeluditur, the question is, who shall ascend into the
mountain of the LORD? Every one is not excluded from so ascending. For the
verses following are a sufficient answer: He that has innocent hands, and a
pure heart, that has not lift up his mind to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully,
even he shall receive a blessing from the LORD, and righteousness from the God
of his salvation, he shall ascend into the mountain of the LORD, and stand in
his holy place. Luke 12.42. the LORD has said; who is a faithful steward, and
wise, whom the master shall make ruler over his household, to give them their
portion of meat in season: and here aagaine, Quaeritur QVIS, non excluditur.
The question is, who shall be a faithful steward? Every one is not excluded
from so being. For that which follows, imports as much: Blessed is that
servant (says the LORD) whom his master, when he comes, shall find so doing.

Other like places are cited by this Christian Bishop to the same purpose;
after all which he gives his judgment upon the words of old Ely alleged by
the Novatians, for confirmation of their opinion. The words as you heard, are
these; If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge it: but if a man
sin against the LORD, who will plead for him? The vulgar translation has, Quis
orabit pro eo? If a man sin against the Lord, who will pray for him? Quis
orabit pro eo? that is, says S. Ambrose, Singularis vitae aliquis debet orare
pro eo, qui peccavit in Dominum: Some man of exceeding integrity must pray for
him that has sinned against the LORD. His reason is added, Quia, quo mayor est
culpa, eo maiora sunt quaerenda suffragia, because the greater the sin is, so
much the more worthy must the person be, that by prayer shall obtain pardon
for such sin. I leave this Fathers exposition, and show you a more natural;
and that is this: If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge it,
that is, if one man do injury and wrong unto another, there may be a
composition and an agreement made between them, either in Ecclesiastical or
civil policy: but if a man sin against the LORD, who will plead for him?
that is, if a man sin (...), only because he will sin, if he sin elata
manu, Number. 15.30. with a high hand, not only presumptuously and secretly, but
openly, perversely, conte^ptuously, maliciously, neither fearing nor regarding
God nor man, exscindendo exscinditor anima illa, it is the Lords irrevocable
sentence. Number. 15.31. that person shall utterly be cut of, that soul shall die
the death. Behold (says the Lord to Samuel) 1. Samuel, 3.11. I will do a
thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears shall tingle: I
will raise up against Elie all things which I have spoken concerning his house;
when I begin I will also m^k^ a^ and; I have told him, that I will judge his
house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows, because his sons ran into
a slander, and he staid them not: Now therefore I have sworn unto the house of
Elie, that the wickedness of Elies house shall not be purg^d with sacrifice
nor offering for ever. I have sworn (says the LORD) unto the house of Elie
etc. which words are a sufficient evidence, to show, what sin it was that
Elie did mean; even that sin, which shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever. And therefore we may be bold to grant that those words of
Elie do prove an impossibility of pardon, but it is to such as do sin
Elata manu, with an high hand, only because they will sin, openly, perversely,
contemptuously, maliciously, to such I say, we may be bold to grant, that
these words do prove an impossibility of pardon; but that a man sinning
ignorantly, or of infirmity, should have no hope of forgiveness, they prove
not, and therefore make nothing at all for defense of the Catharists opinion.

I will not stand to refute other their reasons, used by them for the further
confirmation of their opinion. S. Ambrose (to whom I refer you) has very
co^fortably discoursed against them Lib. 1. de poenitentia, and the thirteen
first chapters of that book: and so has S. Cyprian in that his tract written
to Novatianus the Heretic. My endeavor shall be to prove a doctrine
contrary to theirs. I may comprise it in this proposition. They which stand by
grace may fall, and yet be pardoned. Which proposition devides it self into
two parts severally to be confirmed, 1. the chosen of God (for they only stand
by grace) man fall. 2. notwithstanding their falls, they may find pardon.

The former (namely, that the chosen of God may fall) I shall not need much to
prove, since the truth thereof is sufficiently witnessed by each man's
conscience to his own heart. Yet lest happily some one or more, through the
abundance of knowledge given from above shall think better of themselves, the^
meet is, I will be bold to remember them of S. Paul's estate, who 2. Cor.
12.7. speaks thus of himself; Least I should be exalted out of measure
through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto me a sharp pointed
stake in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. Because I should not
be exalted out of measure there was given me, says he, (...), a sharp stake
fastened in my flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, because I should not
be exalted out of measure: meaning hereby, that how glorious a vessel soever
he seemed to be in the eyes of men, yet in him there was a rebellion of the
flesh against the spirit.

If such were blessed Paul's estate, what may the best liver that now is
profess of himself? Surely as much; that there is in him also a rebellion of
the flesh against the spirit, that he has had many falls, yea such falls, as
his very remembra^ces of them, are like so many knives in his eyes, so many
thorns in his sides, so many (...), even sharp pointed posts driven into his
flesh to vex him, as long as he shall live in this world.

And if thus it fares with the best, what shall become of the more evil sort?
Surely See my third Lecture upon Amos 1. p. 3^
there is no man just in the earth, that does good and sins not, says the
preacher, Chapter 7.22. And Prove. 20.9. So^omon has this question: who can say I
have purged my heart, I am clean from my sin? O says Eliphaz unto Job.
chap. 15.14. What is man that he should be clean, and he that is borne of a
woman, that he should be just? Behold (says he) God has found no
steadfastness in his Saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight, how
much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like water?
whose desire to sin is such, as a thirsty man's desire is to drink? He is
altogether sinful. Sinful in his conception, sinful in his birth, sinful in
the whole course of his life; in every deed, in every word, in every thought
wholly sinful.

I will not be too forward in the discovery of the nakedness of Gods chosen
children, descended from the loins of Ada^; and therefore will not trouble you
with the relation of Genesis 9.21.
Noah's drunkenness, of 2. Sam 12.9.
David's murder, of Gen 18.15.
Sarahs lie, of Genesis 27.3.
Rebeccaes persuading her son Jacob to beguile his own father, of the theft
of Philem. 11.
Onesimus, and of the several falls of many other, as stout champions, as ever
fought the Lords battle. Touching them, I only say, as David said in a
different case, 2. Sam. 1.19. O noble Israel, how are the mighty overthrown?
The point I am to prove, will be clear enough, if we will consider, in what
sort the elect of God may fall.

First therefore, The child of God by his own neglect may diminish and lessen
the good graces of God within him. The consideration whereof moved S. Paul in
the bowels of compassion, to exhort the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. not to
quench the spirit: and the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.30. not to grieve the holy spirit
of God. For he well knew, that the holy spirit uses to be grieved, and the
fire thereof to be quenched, whenever we put away from within us the care of
Gods word, not regarding the sanctified motions of our hearts, the sanctified
words of our lips, the sanctified actions of our hands; but entertaining the
contrary; corrupt thoughts, evil speaking, wicked actions. Thus may the child
of God be affected, and grieve that good spirit, whereby he is sealed unto the
day of redemption, and quench it too; yet not utterly, but diminish and lessen
the good graces thereof; and that in such a measure, as that he may be like a
man in a trance, who both by his own sense, and also by the judgment of the
Physician is taken for dead: Thus have David, Peter, and other, the strongest
pillars in the Lords temple, been shaken.

2 The child of God after he has repented for some sin, may fall again
into the same sin. This is a lamentable estate. Yet it may befall a true
Christian. Ioh. 5.14. when Christ had healed the man, that had been sick 38.
years, he said unto him: Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, least a
worse thing befall thee. And you know by Luke 11.26. how the unclean spirit
returning, took unto him other seven spirits worse then himself. In regard
hereof S. Paul, 2. Cor. 5.20. prays them in Christ's steed, that they would
be reconciled to God, when (as it is evident by the former Epistle) they were
reconciled to God, before.

3 The child of God may sin presumptuously, that is; wittingly, willingly,
yea and in some sort, wilfully. What else is it, that David prays against,
Psalm. 19.13. Keep thy servant, O Lord, from presumptuous sins? Now that he
was in danger of so sinning appears by the words following; O Lord, let the^
not reign over me: although I fall through frailty of my flesh, yet let not
sin have dominion in me.

4 The child of God may sin desperately. And this is a very dangerous sin;
yet he may fall into it. Some think David was tainted herewith, when he said
in his have, that he was cast out of the Lords sight, Psalm. 31.22. as also when
pouring forth the deep anguish of his soul for the Lords long absence, he
says, this is my death, Psalm 77.10. Surely the incestuous man, 2. Cor. 2. was
very like to be holden in this transgression, and in regard thereof Paul
wishes the Corinthians to forgive him, and to comfort him, least he should be
swallowed up of overmuch heaviness, verse 7.

Who is able to look upon these ruins without compassion, and to remember
them, without fear? Can the weak shrub hope to stand when the strongest
Cedars are blown down? They which have had more gifts the^ we, deeper roots
then we, stronger hearts then we, surer props then we, have fallen down: and
can we inferior to them in all these, hope to stand? O all ye that thirst come
to the waters of comfort, drink, and drink till your souls be more then
satisfied: let your weak knees be strengthened, and your feeble hands be lifted
up.

Is it true indeed that Gods chosen children may thus fall? Yet behold, as true
it is, that notwithstanding their falls they may rise again: and this is that
other point of my proposition, implying a truth, against which Hell gates shall
never be able to prevail; and this is that truth: He which is once in the
estate of grace, shall be in the same for ever.

The reason thereof may be this: After a man is sanctified, he receives from
God another special grace, to raise him, even then, when he is most perilously
fallen; we may call it corroboration, or the strengthening power of Christ. This
is it, St. Paul means, when he prayed for the Ephesians, that they might be
strengthened in the inner man, Ephe. 3.16. and for the Colossians, that they
might be stre^gthned with the glorious power of Christ, Coloss. 1.11. and when
of himself he says, that he is able to do all things through the power of
Christ, that stre^gthneth him, Phil. 4.13. This corroboration, this
strengthening power of Christ is that, that raises up Gods chosen, as often as
they are fallen.

We may (I grant) like David, Psalm. 31.12.22. in the very anguish of our
souls break out, and say as he did: we are forgotten like dead men out of
mind; we are as so many broken vessels, we are cast out of thy sight, O Lord:
yet see the gracious goodness of our Lord, how he suffers us not too far to
be plunged in heavines, but assisteth us with his strengthening power, and
causes us to say further with the same Psalmist: yet, O Lord thou then hear
the voice of our prayer, when we cry unto thee: yet we trust in thee O LORD;
yet we say O LORD, thou art our God.

Wonderful and fearful may the passions be, wherewith the Saints of God, as
long as they wa^der in this vale of mourning, may be shaken, only through the
remembrance of their sins committed. But, it is the Lords property ever to
send a gracious rain upon his inheritance, and to refresh it, when it is
weary, Psalm. 68.9. And true it is, and comfortable it is, which the Prophet
Hosee has, chap. 6.2. though we look for a day or two, as if we were dead and
forlorn, yet says he, After two days the LORD will reviue us, in the third
day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

That golden chain of the causes of salvation laid before you, Romans 8.30. can
never be broken. Who^ God has predestined, them has he called, them has he
justified, them has he glorified. What shall we then say to these things?
Shall any one lay ought to the charge of Gods chosen? Shall tribulation,
anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, or the sword? Shall Angels,
principalities or powers? Shall things present, or things to come? Shall death
or life, or height or depth, or any creature be able to sever us from the love
which is in Christ Jesus? I am persuaded they shall not: for whom God has
predestined, them has he called, them has he justified, them has he
glorified. We may be barren, and hear not, and forsake the laws of the Lord,
and refuse to walk in his judgments, and break his statutes, and cast behind
us his commandments; and the Lord may visit these our transgressions with the
rod, and our iniquities with strokes; but as for his loving kindness, that he
will never take from us, Psalm 89.33. He may hide his face from us for a
moment, for a little season, but with everlasting mercy he will have compassion
on us, says the LORD our redeemer, Esaias, 54.8.

Our corrupt nature, by reason of our ill husbandry, may be like the field of
the slothful, Prove. 24.30. It may be all grown over with thorns; nettles
may cover the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof may be broken down, and
through that breach may be descryed from within us, all manner of filthiness
and abomination. In this estate we may continue for a while, as if we were
forsaken of the LORD. But his eternal compassion wherewith he will gather us,
that shall not be forgotten. He will build again our broken wall, Esai 54.12.
laying the stones thereof with the carbuncle, and the foundation with
Saphires, he will make our windows of pearl, and our gates shining stones.
And this is unto us, as the waters of Noah, even as sure as the promise which
God made unto Noah: for as he has sworn, that the waters of NOAH shall no
more overflow the earth, so has he sworn that he will not be angry with us
for ever. The comparison holds out of the 54. of Esai, verse. 9. and in the
tenth verse it follows, that the mountains may remove, and the hills fall
down, but Gods mercy shall never depart from us, nor the covenant of his peace
fall away. And all this (I say) is unto us, as the waters of NOAH, even as sure
as the promise which God made to NOAH: for whom God has predestined, them
has he called, them has he justified, them has he glorified.

I might here allege many other places, and some examples out of the holy
Scriptures, to show you yet farther, that the child of God, notwithstanding his
many falls, may find pardon, and, that he which is once in the state of grace,
shall be in the same for ever.

That which I have already delivered (I hope) has sufficiently cleared this
point, and overthrown the doctrine of the Catharists. All which I have
delivered for your comforts, which have already sinned, not for your
encouragements, who mean to sin hereafter. For howsoever Grace abounds
above sin, yet cursed shall ye be, and that with an everlasting curse, if
ye sin, that grace and blessing may abound unto you.

You may read for this purpose the beginning of the sixth chap. to the Romans
there shall you find an impossibility for you, that are dead to sin, yet to
live therein: know ye not, that all ye, which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? Why then, ye are buried by baptism
into his death, that as he was raised from the dead, so ye also should walk
in newness of life. You are forbidden to do evil, where you are assured that
good may come thereof; Romans 3.8.
much less may you make the mercies of God a defense for your sins. I grant,
it is true, that there is no condemnation to the righteous, though he fall
seven times a day: but if a man sin, presuming upon Gods mercies, that he
shall have time hereafter for repentance from his former dead works, I must
needs say, his damnation may be warrantable to be very just. Thou fool, how
know thou, Luke 12.20.
that this night they will not fetch away thy soul from thee? I come to my
second note: to show you, that, the sin against the holy Ghost is not at any
time, nor can ever be forgiven.

If I should stand to refute the reasons brought against this doctrine, by
them, who have given their names to great Babylon, that mother of whordomes and
abominations, I should pass the time limited unto me; and therefore since one
contrary (as in the schools we learn) may be the better known by the other,
let it suffice, that at this time, I set down a positive doctrine without any
refutation of the contrary.

There is a woman clothed with the Sun, the moon is under her feet, and on
her head is a crown of twelve stars; al she has, she has from Christ; all
her beauty is spiritual and heavenly; all her milk is sweet and comfortable.
This comely one deciphered unto you by St John's vision, Revel. 12.1. has never
fainted, and taught us also never to faint, in maintaining this doctrine,

The sin against the Holy Ghost is not at any time, nor can ever be forgiven.

She believes that this sin not only easily shall not be forgiven, but not
at all. Her spowse says, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, Mat.
12.32. St John tells her, that there is a sin unto death, which she may not
pray for, 1. Ioh. 5.16. Our Apostle assures her, that such sinners cannot
possibly be renewed by repentance, Heb. 6.6. and my text has, there remains
no more sacrifice for such sin. It is a necessary consequence: This sin is
not pardonable either in this world or in the world to come; we may not pray
for it; we cannot repent for it; there remains no sacrifice for it; therefore
we may truly say, as the Church has truly taught, The sin against the Holy
Ghost, is not at any time, nor can ever be forgiven.

The latter of all these reasons best fitteth the point we have in hand; No
sacrifice can be offered for the sin against the Holy Ghost, therefore that
sin can never be forgiven. For the declaration of the force of this reason,
we may note touching the sacrifices, by which the Church of Christ does live
(for the Jewish sacrifices I omit, in regard that Christ our redeemer, is the
very substance of them all) touching the sacrifices (I say) by which Christ's
Church does live, we may note that every such sacrifice is either (...) or
(...), either a propitiatory sacrifice, a sacrifice for sin, a sin
offering; or else a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, a peace offering.

The former of these two makes most for our present occasion. That therefore,
is either cruentum, or incruentum, a bloody sacrifice, or a sacrifice without
blood. The bloody sacrifice is that which Christ our faithful Savior did once
offer up for us upon the Altar o^ the Cross: of which sacrifice the necessity,
the efficacy, the unity, the perpetuity are at large laid open to our view by
our Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews.

That other sacrifice without blood, not simply propitiatory, yet a sin
offering too, and in some sort enabled through the propitiation of Christ to
procure pardon for our sins, is the sacrifice of repentance from dead works,
proceeding from a lively says in Christ, causing us to make our most humble
suite for pardon, even for Christ Jesus sake. Here are only two kinds of sin
offerings: the one propitiatory, able to cleanse us from al our sins, even
Christ himself once offered up for the sins of the whole world: the other not
propitiatory, yet effectual to us, through him, that is the propitiation for
our sins, even our repentance from dead works, wherein through a lively
faith, we give up our selves, Romans 12 1.
our souls, and our bodies, a living, a holy, and an acceptable sacrifice unto
God.

And these two are so linked the one to the other, as that they cannot by any
means be severed. For if Christ has died for us, then assuredly he will be
at all times ready to offer up our broken and contrite hearts, our humiliation,
our repentance from dead works, our prayers, praise and thanksgiving, yea and
all our sacrifices upon the golden Altar, which is before the throne. But they
for whom Christ has not died (as he has not died for all) can by no sacrifice
make an atonement between God and themselves: and such are all they, that have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, yea, such are all the reprobate. For all which
TOPHET is prepared of old, it is prepared for the noble, as well as for the
baser sort, not one of all such shall be exempted: it is made for them deep
and large, the burning thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the LORD
like a river of br^mstone does kindle it: so says the Prophet, Esai. 30.33.

And touching them who have sinned against the holy Ghost, departing from their
former light, and casting behind them their first understanding, I add yet
farther: since they are fallen away from repentance, impossible shall it be
for them hereafter to repent; since they are fallen away from faith toward
God, never may they hope to believe again; since they are fallen away from the
doctrine of the baptism and laying on of hands, they are not likely any more
by these means to be illuminated; since they are fallen away from the
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, when they shall rise again they
shall rise to their own damnation: and last of all, since they are fallen away
from the doctrine of eternal judgment, needs must it come to pass that
eternal judgment shall devour them.

It is no more but this: since they are fallen away wholly from Christ, since
they have trodden him under foot, since they have despised those sweet graces of
the holy spirit, wherewith they were once lightened, they shall be fed with
wormwood, and be made to drink the water of gall: and somewhat happy were
they, were this all. But this is not all: for let all the rivers and streams
of fresh water, which glad the City of God, and comfort the souls of the
faithful, run also into their souls, they will resist them, and drive them
back: they will admit no entrance for any persuasion of the graciousnesse and
kindness of the Lord, though it be preached to them ten thousand times: they
have sinned against the holy Ghost, and condemnation is their portion.

There remains no more sacrifice for sinne] No more, I say. For Christ's blood
which was once shed for man's ransom, may be shed no more. The price which was
once paid for man, may be paid no more: all the riches of Solomon, all the
treasures of Ezechias, all the silver, all the gold within the bowels of the
earth could never have mounted to so high a reckoning. Christ has once spared
his own most precious blood for man's redemption, but will spare it no more. We
may not now look for more Christ's, for more passions. They that will go into
captivity again, let the^ go but they shall not return: they that will sell
the^ selves to the will of their enemy, let them sell themselves, but they may
never hope for a second ransom: they that will sin after that they have
received the knowledge of the truth, let them so sin, but there remains no
more sacrifice for their sin.

They which have ears to hear let them hear. If it be true that they which
sin willingly, after that they have received the knowledge of the truth, may
so fall away, as that no sacrifice may remain for cleansing of their sin,
what may be hoped for of us, in whom willingness is no day wanting to our
sins. It is a true saying, excusatio omnis tollitur, vbi mandatum non
ignoratur: If the commandment be known, no excuse may serve for the breach
thereof. I shall not make it a false saying, though I do a little invert it:
excusatio omnis non admittitur, vbi mandatum ignoratur: though the commandment
be not known, yet every excuse may not serve for the breach thereof.

Peter gave unto the Jews a shield of ignorance, wherewith they might partly
defend themselves against the weapons of Gods wrath, and that, not in any
common cause, but in the vilest and bloodiest fact, that ever yet the sun saw
attempted: I know (says he) that through ignorance you did it, as did also
your governors, Act. 3.17. speaking of their slaughtering the Lord of life. I
know (says he) that through ignorance you did it, as did also your
governors. Yet that they should not lean too much upon this broken reed of
ignorance, in the 19. verse. he advises them, to repent and return, that their
sins might be done away. Here we see that Ignorance must be beaten, unless
it be cleansed by repentance.

The like cloak had S. Paul gotten to cast over his blasphemies, his
tyrannies, his merciless persecutions of the Church: I was (says he) received
to mercy, because I did it ignorantly, through unbelief, 1. Timoth. 1.13. I
was (says he) received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly through
unbelief. And here also we see, that ignorance must be beaten, unless it have
mercy to cover it.

And surely could ignorance have pleaded for her own innocence, never would
the blood of Christ have cried to the Father upon the Cross, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.34. And here again we see, that
ignorance must be beaten, unless it be forgiven by the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

What? Is ignorance of the Lords will sure to be beaten with rods? and shall
not our contempt of his will, our careless, and unprofitable knowledge of his
laws, be requited with scourges? Shall Tire, and Sidon, and Sodom, wherein
was never virtue done that might have reclaimed them, shall they (I say) burn
like stubble in Hell fire? Shall the smoke of their torment ascend for
evermore? And shall Corazin, and Bethsaida, and Capernaum, whose streets have
been sown with the miracles of Christ, and made fat with his doctrine shall
they escape untouched, and not drink down the dregs of endless destruction?

Diverse Cities of the East and West Indies, devoted to the worship of Devils,
shall once wring their hands, for that they have known so little: and I fear
me, I may too truly say, that Oxford shall once rend her heart, for that she
has known so much to no better purpose: for surely, were she so fruitful in
good works, as she ought to be, there could be no such report of her, as there
is; of ignorance in her Citizens, of corruption in her Colleges, of idleness and
loosenes of life in her seniors, of wilful, impudent, and contemptuous
behavior in her juniours.

Dictum sapienti. You will not marvel to see the wilderness lie wast and
desert; but if a ground well husbanded and manured yield no profit, that
deserves cursing. Our ground in all likelihood should be well husbanded and
manured. Here is much preaching, much hearing, but where is any profit? What
our Savior said of the Scribes and Pharisees, dicunt and non faciunt, they say
and do not, may truly be spoken of us, we see, we hear, we say, we know, but
do not. O let us not still be sick of Adams disease, desiring rather to eat
of the tree of knowledge, then of the tree of life. We may and must be careful
of knowledge unto sobriety, but we must have a regard also of profiting
thereby, that the fruit of a good life, bringing eternity of days to come, may
wait upon our knowledge. For S. Peter assures us, that it is better for us
never to know the way of righteousness, the^ after we know it, to turn from it,
2. Pet. 2.21. The same is also taught us by my text, If we sin willingly
after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 27. 27 But a fearful looking for of judgment and violent
fire, which shall devour the adversaries.


I should not trouble you with any long rehearsal of that, which heretofore I
delivered unto you. Yet the son of Sirach, chap. 22.8. persuading me that
many exhortations may be spent, as upon men that are asleep, who when the
Sermon is done, will say, what is the matter? and the truth requiring our assent
to Elihues words, Job. 33.14. God speaks once and twice, and man sees it
not; and a greater then either Sirachs son, or Elihu, even Jesus our Savior
in the parable, Mat. 13.4. teaches us, that much seed sown miscaryeth, some
by the high ways side, some among thorns, some upon stony ground; have made
me bold to recall to your reme^brances what before by me was delivered. And if
herein I shall seem tedious to any, I can say no more for excusing my self,
then what S. Austine said, when he was enforced to some iteratio^: lib. 2. de
baptismo contra Donatist. c. 2. Ignosca^t scientes, ne offendantur nescientes:
satius est enim offerre habenti, qua^ differ non habentem. Let those that
know it already, pardon me lest I offend those that are ignorant: for it is
better to give to him that has, then to turn him away that has not.

May it please you therefore to remember how in the words, containing an
effectual persuasion for our constant continuing and persevering in the faith,
which the Hebrews had, and we have in Christ Jesus, or which is the same,
containing a disswasion, a dehortation from our backslidings and fallings away
from the same faith, I proposed to your godly considerations two things.

1 What it is from which in this place we are dissuaded; it is from sinning
willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the truth. 2 What
reasons are used by our Apostle to dissuade from so sinning: and they are two.
1 Because if thus we sin, we shall never be able by any sacrifice to make an
atonement between us and God revenging; in these words; There remains no
more sacrifice for sin. 2 Because if thus we sin, we can look for no
better, then for eternal destruction, specified verse 27. by two things; by
Judgment, and by Fire. For if we sin willingly, after etc.

In the first general part my endeavor was to unfold three circumstances.

1 Who they needs must be that do fall into this sin. 2 With what mind
this sin uses to be committed. 3 What the sin it self is.
In the
First of these was manifested the subject of this sin. Second, the efficient
cause. Third, the name, the nature, and the object of it.


Touching the subject of this sin (I mean the persons in whom it is possible
for this sin to have dominion) we have heard, that they are neither Turks,
nor Infidels, nor Atheists, nor Epicures; not such as Pharaoh was, though a
vessel of Gods wrath; nor such as Sodom and Gomorah were, though full of
filthiness; nor such as blasphemous Rabshakeh was, though by him the Idols of
the nations were accounted equal with the God of Heaven: but such as have
received the knowledge of the truth, so my text has: such as have been once
lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers
of the world to come: so this Apostle says, Heb. 6.4, 5. such as have escaped
from the filthiness of this world, through their knowledge in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: so S. Peter tells us, 2. Pet. 2.20. such as have swept
and garnished their houses after the departure of the unclean spirit, witness
our Savior Christ, Mat. 12.43, 44. Who also, Mat. 13.20. says, they are such,
as hear the word and incontinently with joy receive it.

This at the first sight, may seem to be that vesture of needle work wrought
with diverse colors, wherewith the Queen was clothed: it may seem to be the
robe of Adam, that his robe of innocence, of holiness, and of the grace of
God, wherewith before his fall he was invested. To have received the knowledge
of the truth, to have been once lightened; to have tasted of the heavenly gift;
to have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost; to have escaped from the
filthynesse of this world; to hear the word and incontinently with joy
receive it: are ^hey not sweet blessings descending from the LORD of lights?
What could the Lord have Esai, 5.4.
done more unto his vineyard, then that he has done to it? Yet, see the
perversity of the nature it has; in steed of grapes, it may bring forth wild
grapes, briars, and thorns; the Queen may be stripped of her jewels; Adam
spoiled of his robes; and why may not the soul of man be robbed of her
ornaments and rich attire? Surely she has no great privilege to the contrary.
For all these, before recited graces may be lost; the possessours of them may
so fall away, as that it shall be impossible for them to be renewed by
repentance.

The consideration of this point, might have moved our hearts to wisdom: it
might have persuaded us, to beware of presumption (for 1. Cor. 10.12
(...), he that only thinks he stands may fall away: though he that stands
indeed can never so fall) it might (I say) have persuaded us, to beware of
presumption, and seriously Philip. 2.12
to work out our salvation with fear and trembling: and since we have been
once lightened, to endeavor our selves to increase this light in us; since we
have tasted of the heave^ly gift, to cease not to taste it still; since we have
been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, to rest not, but to walk from grace to
grace; since we have received the knowledge of the truth, to forsake it not,
but to hold it fast, till our Lord Jesus come. For behold, he comes shortly,
and his Rev. 22.12.
reward is with him, to give every man according as his works shall be.
Blessed are they, that keep his commandments: for to them, in that day of his
coming, shall he give to eat of the tree of life, and of the hidden Rev. 2.17.
Manna, to enter in through the gates into the city; to receive a white stone,
to be clothed Rev. 3.5.
in white array, to be made Rev. 3.12.
pillars in the Temple of God; and to sit with God himself in his Rev. 3.21.
throne.

In the second place, we heard, that the efficient cause of this sin is a
set, a wilful, and an obstinate malice deeply rooted in the hearts of some
backsliders by reason of a threefold misconceit, wherewith even we also use
too much to please our selves.

1 We are very ready to persuade our selves, that we may repent, when we will.
Else would we continue, to walk by compass, as we do, in our perverse and
crooked ways?

2 Finding it written, that the righteous falls seave^ times a day, and
rises again, are we not encouraged to think it no great prejudice against
our selves to have a few falls?

3 We shame not to hold opinion, that our small sins and hidden sins, are
no sins; and that our greatest sins, wherein we live and lie most
dangerously, are but sins of infirmity. And hence is our hope (it may be our
vain hope) that it shall be as well with us for all our sins, as it was with
Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and many other, the strongest pillars of the Lords
Temple for their many downefalls. Here I endeavored, as I could, to imprint in
our hearts the wholesome doctrine contrary to these three misconceits: and
withal, because it was thereby manifest, that Gods chosen children do sin
also willingly, I took occasion to put some difference between them so
sinning, and the sinful reprobates: and for that purpose I the^ remembered you
of two evident truths in Christian Religion.

1 The Saints of God may fall grievously and dangerously.

2 They cannot fall finally in the end, not utterly at any time.

Touching the third circumstance, wherein were observed, the name, the nature,
and the object of this sin; we have heard that this sin is commonly called
the sin against the holy Ghost: not because it is against the Godhead of the
holy Ghost, for the same God is also Father and Son; the Godhead of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one, their glory is equal,
their Majesty is coeternall: nor because it is against the person of the Holy
Ghost, for that is no greater then the person of the Father and of the Son;
the whole three persons are coeternall together and coequall: but because it is
against the goodness of the holy Ghost; against the goodness, that is, against
those good graces of the holy Spirit bestowed upon us for the setting forth of
the praises of the Lord. For whosoever shall despise those good graces, and
turn them to the contempt of Gods Majesty, and tread them under foot, and
account them profane, and purposely, and wilfully, and maliciously carry them
away to all wantonness, he crucifieth again unto himself the Son of God,
he despites the spirit of grace, he sins against the holy Ghost.

Whereby it is plain, that the nature of this sin, is such, as we find it to
be described, Heb. 6.1, 2. where the Apostle mentioning repentance from dead
works, faith toward God, the doctrine of baptism, of laying on of hands, of
resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment, and in the same place
calling all these the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, speaks verse. ^. of
an apostacy, of a falling away from all these points, even from the very
foundation and first beginning of Christian faith, giving us thereby to
understand; that they who are holden in this transgression, and have sinned
this sin, have forsaken all the principles of Christian religion, have lost
their former light, have departed from their first understanding.

From the name and nature of this sin thus considered, we came to seek the
object of it: and found the malice of this sin to be directed against the very
Majesty of God himself, and against his Christ; directly to respect the first
table of the moral law; to be not a particular slipping aside, but a general
apostacy, a general falling away from God, and that totally.

Here I came to the first reason used by our Apostle to dissuade us from
committing so vile a sin, contained in these words; there remains no more
sacrifice for sin. Out of which words because Novatus has made a collection
void of comfort; namely, that, if a man sin after he is once baptized, to him
there remains no hope of pardon for his sins: first I applied my self to
establish comfort in our hearts, by setting down the contrary doctrine: and
secondly, I came to the consideration of the truth of that, which these words
do naturally afford, and did prove unto you, that the sin against the holy
Ghost, is not at any time, nor can ever be forgiven. There remains no more
sacrifice for sin.

Having thus repeated unto you the sum of that which heretofore I have
delivered, I come now to the second reason in my second general part, to
speak of this fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries.

The doctrine grounded upon the first reason of our Apostle in this place might
have sufficed, to make all that love God, to look to their steps, that they
fall not away by committing so grievous a sin.

But there is a generation of men monstrously misshapen in the powers of the
soul, who like the Kings and Princes of the earth, Psalm 2.2.
banding themselves and taking counsel together against the Lord, and against
his anointed, are ready to break the cords of religion asunder, and to cast
her yoke from them; and to say with those in Tully. lib. 1. de natura Deorum:
Totam de dijs immortalibus opinionem fictam esse ab hominibus sapientibus reip.
causa, vt quos ratio non posset, eos ad officium religio duceret: judging the
service of God to be a mere devise of man for the better government of the
common wealth, wherein inferiors, since they will not be ruled by reason, must
be ordered by religion.

Tell such of Scriptures, you may as well urge them with Lucians narrations; of
repentance, they cast it behind them; of faith, they regard it not; of
baptism, they hold it of no greater price then the washing of their hands; of
the resurrection, this feeds them with many a merry conceit, they think
pleasantly with themselves, what manner of bodies they shall have at that day,
of what proportion their bodies shall be, whether their nails and hair shall
rise again.

I only note them, as I pass, by the way, whom, were they used for their
deserts, the preacher should Levit 13.44
pronounce, and the Prince proclaim, the foulest leapers, that ever yet sore
ran upon; well worthy to be excluded the host, and to have their Levit.
13.46. Number. 5.2. 2. Kin. 15.5.
habitation alone; and more then so; to be exiled the land, and to be expelled
from nature it self, which so unnaturally they strive to bring to naught. For
though the Lord God of hosts by his Ministers and servants, do call them unto
weeping and mourning, to baldness, and girding with sackcloath, as he called
the Jews, Esai 22.12. Yet behold, with them is joy and gladness, slaying Oxen,
and killing Sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine; for (say they) to morrow we
shall die.

Now if our Apostle, to dissuade such men from sinning willingly, should use
this as a reason, because there remains no more sacrifice for sin, what
would it advantage them, being fully persuaded that the dead are not raised up,
and that in death there is no difference between them and the vilest worm,
that ever they could tread upon. Therefore to meet with these me^ also, our
Apostle brings a second reason, able, at some time or other, to affright the
hardest heart, that ever yet Atheism had infected, telling them, that for them
which sin willingly though there remains no more sacrifice, which they
regard not; yet there remains something which shall touch them near, even a
fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour them.

For if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. But a fearful looking for
of judgment and violent fire which shall devour the adversaries. By this
fearful looking for of judgment is meant nothing else, but the vexation of an
evil conscience, wherewith the wicked are, and shall be, in a fearful sort
tormented. Her condition is to be pitied: when no other eye can perceive her,
she will be marked by her own: when nothing else in heaven and earth
pursues her, her own foot shall chase her: when she is free from the whole
world besides, her own breast w^ll be full of witnesses. If she lay her down,
her case will be, as Jobs was, chap. 7.4. She will say, when shall I rise? she
measures the hours of the night, she is full of tossing to and fro until
the dawning of the day. And verse the 14. if she say, my couch shall relieve
me, and my bed shall bring comfort in my meditation, the^ is she feared with
dreams, and astonished with visions. To such a conscience this looking for of
judgment can it be less then fearful?

Who is able to conceive the terror of the Judge? St John saw a great white
throne, and one sitting on it, from whose face fled both the earth and the
Heaven, and their place was no more found, Revel. 20.11. Wonderful is the
terror in this place resembled. Earth and Heaven creatures without sense,
great and mighty creatures, and creatures that have not sinned, they tremble,
fly, and hide themselves from his presence, as not able to endure the terror
of his sight: and shall man, seely and sinful man, be able to abide the day
of his coming, and to endure, when he appears? Could man present himself
spotless and without blame before the Lamb, he should not need at all to
fear: but his condition is far worse then so.

The Preacher, chap. 7.20. does assure us, that there is no man just in the
earth, that does good, and sins not; and so much does Solomon's question
import, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have purged my heart, I am clean from my
sin? O says Eliphaz unto Job, chap. 15.14 What is man, that he should be
clean, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be just? Behold, says
he, God has found no stedfastnes in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean
in his sight; how much more is man unsteadfast, how much more abominable and
filthy, greedyly thirsting after iniquity? When the LORD looked down from
heaven, to see, if there were any child of man, that would understand and
seek God, Psalm. 14.2. could he find any, framed according to the rule of that
perfection, which he requires? He could not: this only he found; that all were
gone out of the way, that all were corrupt, that there was none that did good,
no not one. So sinful is man in his whole race, sinful in his conception,
sinful in his birth, in every deed, word, and thought wholly sinful: the
actions of his hands, the words of his lips, the motions of his heart, when they
seem to be most pure and sanctified, yet then are they as unclean things and
filthy clouts, Esaie 64.6. And shall man thus deformed, approach unto the
throne; and him that sits thereon, without fear?

Not so. The kings of the earth, the great men, the rich men, the chief
captains, the mighty men, bondmen and free men, as many of al sorts as are not
washed clean in the blood of the slaughtered Lamb, shall Rev. 22.1^
hide themselves in dens and among the rocks of the mountains, if possible,
to be covered from the presence of their judge; in the great day of whose wrath
they know they cannot stand. And therefore the looking for of judgment must
needs to them be most fearful.

The next words of my text are, (...), read in the Vulgar Latin, ignis
aemulatio; by Tremellius out of the Syriacke, as it is in the Greek, ignis
zelus; by Castalio, ignis saevitia; by Beza and Vatablus, ignis fervor; in the
Rhemish translation, rage of fire; in our common English, violent fire; all
describing, the punishment, which shall follow that great judgment.

By the word (...) in this place, some understand exceeding violence, and
parching heat. I think, that it may well signify vehementissimam Dei iram,
as Tremellius explicates it, the fierce anger of God; for so much in many
places of holy Scripture it imports. Ezech. 38.19. the Lord to signify his
anger conceived against the enemies of his people, uses the like phrase, and
says, In my zeal, and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken. And Ezech.
16.38. taking displeasure against his spowse for her filthiness, tells her, that
he will give her the blood of wrath and zeal. And Zephan. 1.18. and 3.8. the
Lord tells us, that in the day of his wrath the whole earth shall be devoured
with the fire of his zeal.

All which places (to omit many other) do somewhat illustrate the words of my
text. Whereupon St Chrysostom says, that, as a wild and savage beast
provoked to ire, never rests until it has seized upon some prey or booty;
so this fire, as it were enraged with zeal, desires to be avenged upon the
adversaries of the Lord by devouring them.

And this fire, so zealous for the glory of the Lord of hosts, is the
unquenchable fire provided to burn the chafe, Mat. 3.12. that Hell fire
never going out, Mark. 9.43. That flaming fire rendering vengeance unto them,
that love not God, and are disobedient to his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. that
eternal fire, whose vengeance must be suffered, Jude. 7. that everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.

Of what quality this fire is, it is not expressly defined in the written word.
St Augustine de civitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 10. and St Hierome in his Epistle
to Avitus, and Aquinas contra Gentiles, lib. 4. cap. 90. are of opinion that
Hell fire prepared for the damned, is a corporal fire. This opinion is
subscribed unto by Zanchius part. 1. de operibus Dei lib. 4. cap. 19. and in
his explications in cap. 1. ep. 2. ad These. and allowed of by the Divines of
Magdeburg in their first Century, lib. 1. cap. 4. and favored as it seems by
Musculus in his comment upon Mat. cap. 25.

I leave these and many other of the same opinion; and, for my part, do
subscribe to Damascens resolution of this point, who in his 4. book de orthod.
fide cap. 28. writes Ignem aeternum no^ (...)
materia instar huiusce nostri constare, that the fire of Hell is not
material, like our fire.

Esai. 66.24. The Lord himself speaking of this everlasting punishment of the
wicked, says: Their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched,
and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. Which words are again in some
sort thrice repeated by the same Lord, Mark 9.44.46, 48. In Hell fire their
worm dies not, and the fire never goes out. In which places Hell fire, and
the worm of conscience being four times joined together by him, that is the
wisdom of the Father, (as I take it) do show evidently that the kind of
speech in both is alike. Now there is no man so carnally minded, as by this
worm of conscience to understand a material worm. It is a Metaphor, and
signifies that cursed and damnable torment of conscience, which continually
shall gnaw upon the children of unbelief, like unto a worm, whose property is
to eat and wear away any thing wherein it breeds. This worm then being
immateriall, why should we judge this fire to be corporal?

I grant indeed that the body is subject to burning with bodily fire; but that
the soul, which is spiritual, should be subject to such burning, I cannot
find it proved; and therefore do conclude that Hell fire meant in my text, is
not any material fire, or any bodyly flame, but a grievous torment, fitly
thereby resembled; even a seazing of the fearful and terrible wrath of God on
body and soul for ever. For our Lord God, the Lord of Heaven and earth, giving
certain names, to such punishments as shall be inflicted upon the damned, to
make us careful by shunning sin to be freed from Hell, deals no otherwise,
then he does, in giving names also to such blessings, as are prepared for the
godly, to make us willing by doing well, to seek for Heaven. In both he deals
(...), applying himself to our weak capacities, who are not able by our
deepest meditations to conceive in any mean, what either the joys of Heaven,
or torments of Hell may be. For us therefore and for our good, for our easier
understanding, it has pleased the Holy Ghost, to show unto us, the joys of
Heaven under the types of temporal blessings, and eternal torments under the
figures of earthly punishments.

Touching the joys of Heaven; we may see almost in all the Prophets, when they
come to speak of Christ's kingdom, how they set it forth with abundance of all
good things: teaching that his kingdom shall be Psalm. 2.8.
very far enlarged; that his Esai. 9.7.
increase of government and peace shall be without end, that there, no nation
shall Esai. 2.4.
lift up a sword against another, but that their swords shall be turned into
mattockes, and their spears into sythes; that nor Esa. 60.18.
violence nor desolation, nor destruction shall be within her borders, that the
Esa. 11.6.
wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard with the kid; that every
child there shall fill his Esai 65 20
days; that from our faces Esai 25.8.
all tears shall then be clean wiped away; that we shall go in through the
gates into the citte, and there Rev. 2.7.
eat of the tree of life, and of the hidden Verse. 17.
manna, and be clothed Rev. 3.5.
in white array, and receive Rev 2.17.
white stones, and be made Rev. 3.12.
pillars in Gods Temple, and the like. All which speeches of sensible and
temporal blessings, are so many figures, leading us, as it were by the hands,
to some reasonable knowledge of those joys spiritual and eternal.

In like sort, and by the like types of temporal and earthly punishments, we
are brought to have some understanding of hell torments. Luke 19.27. Christ
says, those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me. Could he in more familiar terms
signify that eternal death prepared for the unbelievers and blasphemers? Only
he alludeth to the custom of the princes of this world, in whose presence
rebels many times are put to death.

Luke 16.23. there is much uttered in common and sensible speeches to signify
the gluttons torments endured in Hell: as, his seeing Abraham a far off, and
Lazarus in his bosom, the burning of his tongue, and the cooling thereof, the
dipping of Lazarus finger into the water, the great gulf between them both,
and the like; all which though it be spoken as of things corporal, yet has it
a spiritual meaning.

And that which is spoken, Matt. 22.13. of the state of Hell, that there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth; must needs have some other sense then the
letter will afford, because the damned souls which now suffer torments in
Hell, have neither teeth to make any gnashing, nor eyes to shed tears.

What shall I further trouble you with the relation of diverse other attributs,
used in the word* diversely to express the horror of Hell? As the names, of
outward darkness, of the deep, of the lake burning with fire and brimstone,
of the never dying worm, and such like?

Our judgment of all these may be the same, as it was of the former; even that
the Holy Ghost does use them all, as a table to represent unto us, the state
and condition of the damned. Which estate of theirs, because it is represented
unto us, only under types and shadows, and that according to the wisdom of
the spirit, we must not curiously prye farther into it, but rather lay our
hands upon our mouths, and stop the course of our lips, lest, meddling with
such secrets, we falter in our speeches before the LORD.

It follows in my text, that this fire shall devour the adversaries. SIC
vorabit vt perdat, non consumat, says Calvin; this zeal of fire shall
greedily consume them. Consumet, says AQVINAS, non totaliter consumendo, sed
in perpetuum cruciando; this zeal of fire shall feed upon them, not to bring
them to naught, or consume them utterly, but to torment them eternally.

What heart is able to sound the depth of this punishment; that a man, should
be devoured, yet not cease to be; that he should be eaten up, yet not
consumed; that he should be taken away by death eternally, and yet live
eternally? Never have any descended to that fiery lake, and returned thence, to
tell us the torments thereof. Yet as by one drope of Sea water we may give
some judgment of the saltness of the rest, and as we may guess at the
stature and pitch of a mighty giant by the length of his foot; so by a taste of
bitterness, wherewith this present life is seasoned, we may have some conceit
of the sorrow and vexation, to be endured by the wicked in the life to come.

The grief of man's heart in this world may be exceeding great, as great, as
ever mortality may be able to endure. Ca^ we read of the mournings of Joseph,
of Hanna, of David, of Job, of Jeremy, of Jerusalem, and not be moved? Could
we? Our hearts certainly should be harder then the hardest iron. Can we
think of the hideous torments invented, and inflicted by Tyra^ts, as the teeth
of wild beasts, hot glowing fornaces, caldrons of boiling oil, fiery brase^
bulls, powning to death in morters, rouling in barrels of nails, roasting upon
spits, boring with augers, parting the nails from the fingers ends with
needles, nipping the flesh with pincers, renting asunder the joints with wild
horses, can we, I say, think of these, and the like most merciless and
pitilesse torments, and not be moved? Could we? Our hearts certainly should be
harder, then the hardest iron.

Yet behold my text leads you to the sight of far more grievous torments;
in regard of which, all those foresaid agonies, and as many besides, as ever
have wrested, or may wring, the spirit of man, are only shadows and
counterfeits. It shows you, though there be never so many already in the
bowels of Hell, to empty her storehouses, and to part her punishments among
them, yet, has she in store an unmeasurable portion to bestow upon her
children that now live, or are yet unborn: such a portion as may not be
refused; a patrimony of howling, weeping, and gnashing; a patrimony of
darkness, blackness, and obscurity; a patrimony of fire, brimstone, and the
wrath of God. There shall they be tormented before the Holy Angels, and before
the lamb; and shall be a gazing stock unto the blessed Saints, who shall not
pity them, but rejoice to see their confusion. And the Rev. 14.11.
smoke of this their torment ascends for evermore, giving them rest neither
day nor night; and it continues for a time and times, and no time, even when
time shall be no more, Rev. 10, 6. When time shall be no more, yet, then
continues their torment, and that in such a measure; as no eye has ever seen
the like, no ear has ever heard the like, no tongue has ever uttered the
like, no heart has been, is, or shall be, ever able to conceive the like.
And this I hope may suffice for the explication of my text.

Now that we do not, like sleepy Adders, pass our times in a dream, let us
awake our selves. Why should we be that ground by the Mat. 13.4.
highway side, or that Verse 5.
stony, or that Verse 7.
bushie ground? The good Verse. 8.
ground it is, that receaues the seed, and bears, and brings forth fruit.
Since we have brought our ears to hear the word, let us keep our hearts here
also. It is not meet our hearts should be like many of your waiting men, who
think their duty fully done, if they wait upon their Masters to and from the
Church, though they hear not one word of the sermon themselves. But so they
shall never learn Christ. Nor we; if when we present our bodies in this and the
like places, we send our hearts upon other businesses, to attend our private
affairs. Let us therefore lay these things, whereof we have heard, to our
hearts, and be assured, they will be for our profit. The consideration of the
terror of the Judge, of Hell fire, and of the torments there to be endured,
may move us, to think with our selves how near that day of judgment is, and
thereupon to provide our selves against the coming of the Judge.

Touching this point; if the day of judgment were at hand sixteen ages since,
as the Crier in the wilderness proclaimed, Mat. 3.2. as the Disciples taught,
according to their charge, Mat. 10.7. and as Christ himself preached, Mat.
4.17. if in those days the end of the world were come, as S. Paul says. 1.
Cor. 10.11. if then was the last time, as S. John tells us, 1. John. 2.18. if at
that time the end of all things drew near, as S. Peter affirms, 1. Pet. 4.7.
Can we religiously think, that yet this day of the LORD is far of?

In the time of the Apostles there were two heresies concerning this second
coming of Christ; the one refuted by S. Peter, the other by S. Paul. S.
Peter, 2 Pet. 3.3. wishes us to understand, that in the last days (which then
were come) there shall be mockers, walking after their own lusts; and saying,
where is the promise of his coming? For, since the fathers dyed, all things
continue alike from the beginning of the creation. Miserable men, to be
persuaded that the day of the LORD shall never come, because it is deferred.
But such jesting, scoffing, and mocking at that fearful day used heretofore,
and hitherto practiced, by the whole progeny of unbelievers, may be unto us a
good argument, that this judgment shall speedely be hastened. For so says the
Holy Ghost by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. when they shall say PEACE and
SAFETY, then shall come upon them sudden destruction.

St Peter in his answer to such deceavers, says first, that the LORD
differs not, very long to come to judgment. For (says he verse 8.) one day
with him is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, alluding to
the words in Moses prayer, Psalm. 90 4. A thousand years in thy sight are as
yesterday, when it is past, and as a watch of the night: as if he should have
said; were it possible for a man to live a thousand years, yet those thousand
years are as soon passed over in respect of God, as one day only is in respect
of a so-long-living man. Yea those thousand years are but as a watch of the
night, that is, they are of very short continuance. For the old Jews divided
the night into four watches, and appointed to every watch three hours, as may
appear by the conference of these places, Mat. 14.25. Luke 12.38. Exodus 14.24
The words then suffering this expos^tion, that a thousand years in respect of
the Lord, are but as a watch of the night, but of three hours, do plainly
show that Peter meant not to speak any thing distinctly of a thousand years,
but of a long time, so his meaning is, that innumerable years are but as a
short time with God. He might as well and truly have said, two thousand,
eight, or ten thousand years with God, are but as one day. And this is his
first answer to such as ask, where is the promise of his coming?

His second answer is verse 9. when he says: The LORD is not slack
concerning his promise (as some men count slacknes) but is patient toward us,
and would have no man to perish, but that all should come to repentance. Where
it being manifest, that the LORD differreth his coming only for our good, to
give us time to turn unto him, is it meet we should mock at the slacknesse
of his coming? You see the first Heresy refuted.

The second is quite opposite to this, set abroach by certain false teachers,
who taught the Thessalonians, that the day of the LORD was so nigh, as that it
should happen within their age. Where by the way, note the exceeding subtilty
of Satan, slyly leading us into one of the extremes, to make us believe;
either, that the day of the Lord shall never come, or else that it shall come
within such a time. In this rank of false teachers may be placed they, who
have held opinion, that the day of judgment shall be about six thousand years
after the beginning of the world; as also they, who abusing the places in
Daniel and in the Revelation, do say, that the end of the world shall be three
years and a half after the revealing of Antichrist.

But St Paul answering these false teachers of Thessalonica, answers all of
the like opinion; and therefore, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. to ^nstruct them, against the
assaults of such teachers, he bids the^ believe it for a certainety; that the
day of the Lord is not at hand; and he gives a reason of his persuasion, verse
3. For (says he) that day shall not come, except there come a departing first,
and that man of sin, even the son of perdition, be disclosed.

But how is it, that St Paul says, the day of the LORD is not at hand, When
it is evident by Heb. 9.26. that Christ appeared in the end of the world to put
away sin by sacrificing himself? And by Iam. 5.8. that the coming of the
Lord is at hand, and by the authorities before alleged, of John Baptist, of
the Disciples, of the Apostles, yea of Christ himself, that the kingdom of
God is at hand, that the ends of the world are come, that the last time is
come, that the end of all things is at hand. This being so, how is it that St
Paul says, the day of the Lord is not at hand?

Calvin says, that the answer here is easy; namely that in respect of God,
the day of judgment is at hand, but, as for us, we must continually look for
it. Beza, and Rollocke give an other exposition, which I take to be more
natural. In those many places, wherein it is avouched, that the day of the
Lord is at hand, they observe the word used in the original to be (...),
Appropinquat; signifying, that the day of the Lord may be this day, as well as
to morrow; and to morrow as well as the next day; and many a day hereafter, as
well as now; and this in general only. But in this place of St Paul, where he
says, the day of the Lord is not at hand, they note the word in the original
to be (...), instat, and to signify, not only generally, a time drawing nere,
but also precisely, a limited and certain time; as, such an hour, such a day,
such a week, such a month, such an year, such an age. And in this sense St
Paul's saying is very true; (...), non instat, the day of the Lord is not at
hand; not so at hand, as that we may be able to say, it shall be this hour,
this day, this week, this month, this year, this age. And this is no other
doctrine then Christ's own, Mark. 13.32. for there he says: Of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son
himself.

Thus we see, it is certain, that the day of the Lord, that the day of
judgment, is at hand; but in what precise age or time it will happen, we see
it is uncertain. The Lord himself tells us, Act. 1.7. It is not for us to know
the times and seasons. And why should we be desirous to have ears to hear,
where God has no tongue to speak? It may suffice us, to be so well warned, as
to know that this day is at hand. For if we duly consider this point, it will
make us take heed to our speeches, and by no means to say with the evil
servant, Matthew. 24.48. Our master deferres his coming, let us eat and drink
and beat our fellows; but rather to betake our selves to the performance of
the good servants duty, verse 42. even to watch. For the day of the Lord
comes 1. These. 5.2.3
as a thief in the night, and as travail comes upon a woman with child;
even so comes the day of the Lord. Watch we therefore. For we know not what
hour our master will come.

But when he comes, if he shall find us doing good, and dealing faithfully;
happy shall we be; we shall partake the blessings of the Deuteronomy. 27.12
six upon the mount Gerizzim: we shall not need to fear the cursing of the
other Verse. 13.
six upon mount Ebal. We shall not be afraid of the Exodus 20.18
thundering and lightning of Sinai, nor of fire to the midst of Heaven, nor of
mists nor of clouds, nor of Rev. 9.2.
smoke ascending like the smoke of a furnace, nor of the lowdest sound of a
Exodus 20.18 Heb. 12.18
trumpet; for all our pleasures shall be in Sion.

But when he comes, if he shall find us doing wickedly, cursed shall we be;
we shall be sure to possess Esai 61 3.
mourning for joy, ashes for beauty, the spirit of heaviness, for the oil of
gladness, and a rent in steed of a girdle; whatsoever shall become of our
garments, assured we are, our hearts shall be torn a sunder. Watch we
therefore, for we know not what hour our master comes. And let me conclude
with Saint Peter's exhortation. Be we 2 Pet. 3.14.
diligent, that when he comes, we may be found of him in peace, without spot
and blameless.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 28, 29, 30, 31. 28 He that despises Moses law, dies without
mercy under two or three witnesses.

29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be worthy, which
treads under foot the Son of God, and cou^teth the blood of the Testament
as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the Spirit of
grace.

30 For we know him that has said, vengeance (belongs) unto me: I will
recompense says the LORD. And again, the LORD shall judge his people.

31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


N the former verses I have heretofore showed, how that the author of this
Epistle uses an effectual persuasion for our constant continuing and
persevering in the faith, which the Hebrews had, and we have, in Christ
Jesus; or a disswasion, a dehortation from our backslidings and fallings away
from the same faith. In the words themselves ious meditations two things.

r, what it is, from which we are disswa- willingly, after that we have
received the ^.

^ our hearts the reasons brought by our us from so sinning, which in these
words 1 Because if thus we sin, we shall never be able by any sacrifice to
make an atonement between us, and God revenging us: There remains no more
sacrifice for sin. 2 Because if thus we sin, we must look for no other,
the^ eternal destruction, specified, verse. 27. by two things, Judgment, and
Fire: For if we sin willingly, after we have received etc.


Of these points, and many other circumstances by occasion of those words
observed, I have already spoken.

The principal argument of the whole place is: Whosoever sins willingly,
after that he has received the knowledge of truth, to him there remains no
more sacrifice for sin; he must fearfully look for judgment, and violent
fire, wherewith he shall be devoured. Therefore if we, having received the
knowledge of the truth, do sin willingly, to us also there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, we also must fearfully look for judgment, and violent
fire, therewith to be devoured.

This principal argument is confirmed by two other reasons, in these words,
which I have now read unto you.

The first drawn a comparatis minoribus, by a thing done less probable, to
prove unto us a thing of greater probability, verse. 28, 29. He that despises
Moses law, dies without mercy, under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye* shall he be worthy, which treads under foot the
Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament, wherewith he was
sanctified, as an unholy thing, and does despite the Spirit of grace?

The second is taken from the authority of the Scriptures, verse. 30. where two
testimonies are cited: one out of Deuteronomy. 32.35. where the LORD says, Vengeance
and recompense are mine. The other out of verse 36. of the same chapter, where
we read, that the LORD shall judge his people.

The truth of both those testimonies, is in this my text confirmed by the
witnesses of the consciences of Gods elect, who do assuredly know Gods nature
and custom to be such, as it is witnessed to be in these Scriptures before
cited: for we know (says the Apostle in the behalf of all the faithful) we
know him that has said, vengeance (belongs) unto me: I will recompense,
says the LORD: And again, the LORD shall judge his people.

Then follows an acclamation, an epiphoneme, a conclusion to this whole
argument, whereby all backsliders from the truth, whose whole delight is, to
tread under foot the Son of God, to account the blood of the Testament
wherewith they were sanctified, as an unholy thing, to despite the Spirit of
grace, may be admonished of their future fall. Though they live in peace
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them; though Psalm. 73.7.
their eyes stand out for fatness, though they have more then heart can wish;
yet should they remember that God is a living God; a God with heavy hands
against all stifnecked and rebellious; a God able to cast both body and soul
into Hell fire. O! it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, verse. 31. It is a fearful etc.

Now return we to the first reason here set down, for the confirmation of the
principal argument of this place, verse. 28, 29. He that despises Moses Law
etc. Here my purpose is, first to speak somewhat of the words themselves, of
their meaning; and then to gather out some points of doctrine, the one
consideration whereof may be for our bettering. Both these at this time.

He that despises Moses law, (...). Erasmus reads it, he that abrogateth Moses
law; the Syriacke has, he that transgresses Moses law; but neither is so
right, as the original requires. For this place is not to be understood of
breaking, violating, transgressing, or sinning against any one commandment,
but of an apostacy, of a defection, of a falling away wholly from religion.
This exposition is afforded us out of Deuteronomy. 17.2. there the Lord gives Moses
charge; if any man, or woman, has wrought wickedness in the sight of the
LORD, in transgressing his covenant, that then he be brought forth to the
gates of the city, and there be stoned with stones till he die. But what is
this, for man or woman to work wickedness before the Lord in transgressing
his covenant? Is it not to transgress some one or other commandment of the
LORD? No: the LORD himself tells Moses, what his meaning is, verse. 3. whosoever has gone and served other Gods, and worshipped them, as the Sun, the
Moon, or any of the host of Heaven, which God has not commanded, such a one,
whether man, or woman, has wrought wickedness before the Lord in
transgressing his covenant; such a one without mercy must die the death. Such
is the meaning of the words of my text: (...), he that does reject, cast
behind him, make frustrate, and despise the law of Moses, he dies without
mercy under two or three witnesses.

(...), Moses law] whereof God was the sole author, and Moses only the
Minister: God put the word into Moses mouth, and Moses conveied it unto the
people. In regard of such his ministering, and conveying the law of God unto the
people, the law of God is in this place termed, the law of Moses, a son of
man, the more to set out and to amplify, the worthiness of the Gospel,
discovered and delivered to posterity by Jesus Christ the Son of God.

The like comparison to this we have, Heb. 2.2. As here Moses is, so there the
Angels are compared with Christ. Thus says the Apostle; if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression, and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God bearing witness thereto, both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost? So is it here, if he that despises Moses law dies without mercy; how
shall we escape, if we tread under foot the Son of God.

He that despises Moses law (...), dies without mercy] This (...), this
putting away and contemning the law of Moses, deserves for punishment death
without mercy. (...), he that reiects the law, he that sins against it, Elata
manu, Number. 15.30. not only secretly and presumptuously but openly, perversely,
contemptuously, and maliciously, neither fearing nor regarding God nor man,
Exscindendo exscinditor anima illa; it is a sentence not to be recalled, for it
is passed from the Lords own mouth, Number. 15.31. That person shall utterly be
cut off, that soul shall die the death. A false witness rising up against his
brother to accuse him of trespass (Deuteronomy. 19.16.) a stubborn, and disobedient
son, a rioter, a drunkard, one that will not hearken to the voice of his
parents ( Deuteronomy. 21.20.) a man and woman taken in adultery (Deuteronomy. 22.22.) all
these, because they reject and despise Moses law, must die the death, your
Deuteronomy. 19.21.
eyes shall have no compassion, you shall Deuteronomy 22 22.
take away those evils from among you, that Deuteronomy. 21.21.
all the rest of Israel may hear it, and fear.

(...), under two or three witnesses.] These words have a reference to a part
of the civil and politic government under Moses law. Two or three
witnesses: for one is not sufficient to convince any one of a crime committed.
For thus says the Lord: One witness shall not testify against any person to
cause him to die, Number. 35.30. One witness shall not rise up against a man for
any trespass, or for any sin, or for any fault that he offends in, but at
the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter
be established, Deuteronomy. 19.15. At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he
that is worthy of death die, but at the mouth of one witness he shall not die,
Deuteronomy. 17.6. Under two or three witnesses.] This is spoken disiunctiuely, not as
if the testimony of two were always true, but because it is so to be
accounted, if it be the testimony of two.

For we know that the testimony of two may be forged. Two wicked men did falsely
witness against Naboth, that he blasphemed God and the King, 1. Kings 21.13. Two
wicked men did falsely witness against Steven, that he spoke blasphemous words
against Moses and God, Act. 6.11. Two wicked men did falsely witness against
Christ, that he should say, I can destroy the Temple of God, and build it in
three days, Mat. 26.60. One witness shall not testify against a man to cause
him to die; two may, and their testimony may be false. Two, three, or more may,
for at their mouths shall every matter be established. He that despises Moses
law shall die the death, etc.

Out of these words thus understood, we may for our instruction take two
lessons.

1 Necessity is laid upon us, and woe is unto us if we despise man's law: For he
that despises Moses law, dies without mercy.

2 A caveat is given us, that we be not too credulous, that we open not our
ears to private reports tending to the discredit of any; for, He that
despises Moses law, dies (not, but) at the mouth of two or three witnesses.

Our first lesson we comprehend within this proposition; Every one is bound, to
subject himself to honest and just politic laws, and this, even for
conscience sake.

Our second within this, It is a breach of the rule of charity, to conceive ill
of any one for any private report.

Touching the first, namely: That every one is bound, to subject himself to
honest and just politic laws, and this, even for conscience sake; we may
note, that all such laws, politic, civil, man's laws, are either just or
unjust; if just, then without doubt they bind our consciences to due obedience.
And this they do, not because they are set forth and published by man; but
partly because they have their original from the law of Nature, whereunto our
consciences stand bound; and partly because God in express commandment has
made us subject to such laws. If unjust, then are we not in conscience bound
to observe them.

Such unjust humane laws have their difference: for first they are said to be
unjust, either because he that makes them has no authority so to do; or having
authority, because he makes them rather for his own private, then for any
common good; or making them for the common good, because he bids and commaundes
that, which is above a man's power to perform. And in this first sense, unjust
humane laws, though they tie us not in conscience to observe them, yet
(because they put nothing that may detract either from the law of nature, or
from the law of reason, or from the law of nations, or from the law of God, and
his glory) they leave unto us a liberty, either to keep them as well, as we
shall be able, or not to keep them at all, unless charity, which charge us
in any wise to beware of giving offense to our neighbors, commands us to
observe them. Rather then we break this bond of charity, rather then we give
just offense to our neighbors, it is our Saviors counsel, Mat. 5.39, 40,
41. Whosoever shall smite us on the right cheek, that we turn to him the
other also; whosoever, suing us at the law, shall take away our coat, that we
let him have our cloak also; whosoever shall compel us to go one mile, that
we stick not to go twain with him.

The care then we are to have, not to offend the weak consciences of our
neighbors, may bind us to the observing of those humane laws before spoken
of, which, albeit in regard of their maker and his private respects, they are
called unjust, are notwithstanding otherwise left to our free choice to be
kept or broken, because without any repugnancie they may stand together with
those eternal laws; the law of nature, the law Celestial, the law of reason,
the law of God, the just law of man, and the law of nations. So in a first
sense, the laws of man are called unjust; if he that makes them has no
authority so to do; or having authority, if he makes them rather for his own
private, then for any common good; or making them for the common good, if he
bids and commaundes that, which is above man's power to perform.

In a second sense, humane laws are said to be unjust, if they bid that which
is contrary to Gods laws, to Gods revealed will, to Gods glory: and these
laws are so far from binding us to their observance, as that the love of
God, dwelling in our souls, deeply charge us with all our might to resist
them. The answer which Peter and John made to those of Jerusalem, Act. 4.19.
well fitteth this place; whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you
rather then God, judge ye. And as fit is the protestation made by Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles, Act. 5.29. We ought rather to obey God, then men.

Thus we see, that the laws of men, if they are unjust, do not simply bind
us in conscience to any obedience; and if they be so unjust, as to detract
from Gods laws and his glory, we see again, that we are in conscience bound
to disobey them. Obedience is first due unto God; and next unto men for Gods
sake. And therefore if men shall require any thing of us, which by any means
may redound to Gods dishonor, leave we men to themselves, and reserve we all
due obedience for our God. We ought rather to obey God, then men.

Yet are there humane laws, just laws, laws of equity and vprightnes,
binding the consciences of all that are placed in public societies, whether
civil or spiritual. In such societies though the laws of nature and of
reason, be of necessary force, yet those laws suffice not: over and besides
them, somewhat is necessary, namely, humane and positive law, together with
that law, which is of commerce, of mercha^dise, of exchange between the
greatest societies, the law of nations, and of nations Christian.

Humane laws are measures in respect of men, to direct their actions. Measures
they are, yet to be measured by higher rules. Those rules are two; the law of
God, and the law of nature. Humane laws then, must be made according to the
general laws of nature, and without contradictio^ to any positive law in
Scripture. If they are otherwise made, they are ill made. Unto laws thus
justly made, and received by a whole Church, a whole common wealth, a whole
corporation, a whole College, they which live within the bosom of that
Church, that Common wealth, that Corporation, that College, must not think it
a matter indifferent either to yield, or not to yield, obedience.

The law of God has said, let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
Romans 13.1. The public power of all societies, is above every soul contained
in the same societies: and the chief use of power, is to give laws unto all
that are under it; which laws in such case we must obey, unless there be
reason showed, necessarily to enforce, that the law of reason, or of God, does
enjoin the contrary. For unless our own private resolutions be overruled by the
law of public determinations, we shall leave no possibility of sociable
life in this world.

This made our Savior to admonish those hypocrites which came to tempt him, to
give unto Caesar the things of Caesar, Mat. 22.21. This made Paul to exhort
servants to be obedient unto their Masters, with fear and trembling in
singleness of their hearts as unto Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. This made Peter to call
upon us, to submit our selves in all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake.
1. Pet. 2.13. who, verse. 15. tells us, that it is the Lords will, we should
do so. The Lords will: and therefore we must be subject, not because of wrath
only, but also for conscience sake: and this is Paul's conclusion, Romans 13.5.
We are all bound to subject our selves unto honest and just politic laws,
and that for conscience sake.

But do we al herein, as we are bound to do? Those which live within the
bosom of the Church, the common wealth, or great corporations, I leave to
their own examinations. Their hearts will witness with them, that nor laws of
Church, nor laws of common wealth, nor laws of University, nor laws of great
towns, are in any mean kept, as they ought to be. Now not only great ones,
but little flies also are strong enough to break through: so rent and torn
are the cobwebs.

Great and little, old and young, every one that is willing to learn, come,
and receive instruction of SOLOMON: My son (says he, Prove. 6.20.) My son
keep thy fathers commandment, and forget not thy mothers instruction, bind
them both always about thine heart. It does not stand with the duty which we
owe to our heavenly father, that we should show our selves disobedient to the
ordinances, to the good and just ordinances appointed by authority for the
directing of our steps in the course of this life. Let us not say, we keep the
commandments of the one, when we break the law of the other: for unless we
observe both, we obey neither. God has expressly commanded us to obey man's
laws, which if we obey not, Gods law by us is disobeyed.

Now let the Sun, the Moon, any one of the heavens or elements once cease,
fail, or swerue; the sequel is manifest, ruin to it self, and whatsoever
depends upon it. And is it possible, that man the noblest creature in the
world, yea a very world in himself, transgressing the law of God in despising
man's law, should draw no harm after him? Man's nobleness above other
creatures in this case helps him nothing. Tribulation and anguish unto every
soul that does evil. This we are assured by S. Paul's testimony, Romans 2.9.

As for us, who live within these goodly buildings provided for us, when we
were not, what shall I say? That we live according to our laws; O happy hour,
wherein such a speech might truly be uttered! But this latter and last age,
full of the ripest and last sins, which no posterity shall be ever able to
add unto, forbids me so to say. I must say the contrary: We live not according
to our laws. We will murmr and repine, (and it may be, not without cause) if
we be abridged of our founders and usual allowance; and yet are we unwilling
to observe those easy, honest, and just laws prescribed us by our founders.
Surely we have forgotten, that we ought to be subject, not because of wrath
only but also for conscience sake.

Where my desire is, that every one, both Head and members, of all our
particular societies, would enter a due examination of their own hearts, and
consider whether they have been obedient to their local laws, with fear and
trembling in singleness of heart, as unto Christ: and my prayer is, that it
would please the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to turn the hearts both of
Heads and members; of Heads, that they would not grieve their companies, by
stopping, or withdrawing their ordinary and statutable maintenance; and of
members, that they think not much to be restrained by their Heads according
to the laws of their Colleges: that so jointly and joyfully both Heads and
members may labor together for the due performing of their Founders will.

As in a plague time, we marvel not so much at those that dye, as at those
which escape; so in this general infection of sin, wherein these latter and
last times are drunken and drowned, we marvel not so much at the vileness of
the most, as that any almost is innocent. If I the^ in this case should plead
for your innocence, if I should speak you fair, if I should sow pillowes
under your arme-holes and make vayles upon your heads, happily you would like
it well, but assured I am I should endammage mine own soul. So much Solomon
teaches me, Prove. 29.24. where he says, He that is partner with a thief,
hates his own soul.

Therefore to deliver my soul, though you should not turn from your
wickedness and wicked ways, I must warn you of a matter, and howsoever it
may nearly touch some amongst you, yet I beseech you hear me patiently. It
has been often spoken out of this place (and I doubt not but with good fruit)
of an intolerable abuse nusled and fostred up for a long time in some of our
Colleges; I mean the dear and usual selling of Places, which at the first
were destined and appointed by our Founders laws to scholars of best desert.
It has been herehence told us, This Sermon was preached 1599.
that in diverse of our judgments, 20. 30. pownds or more, are but easy
prices for so good preferme^ts. I grieve, and shame (even for the love we all
ought to have of this place wherein we live) to repeat all that has been
publicly preached unto us concerning this point. I hope and believe, we are
not of the number of those, that hold religion to be a pretty policy to keep
the meaner sort in awe: I doubt not, but believe, that we have a greater
measure of Gods Spirit.

Guided therewith consider we (I beseech you) that it is no small matter to
despise the just laws of our Founders, and remember we, that he that despises
Moses law dies without mercy. Our founders laws do direct us, to make our
elections free from corruption: Moses law charge the same. Can we therefore
hate the one, and lean to the other? or despising one, despise we not both?
Our founders do charge us in regard of our elections to take no bribes, no
rewards, to make no bargain; and we, as well liking of it, have been ready by
solemn oaths to bind our selves ^o do accordingly: Moses also forbids ^s
to take any gift, Exodus 23.8. and Deuteronomy. 16.19. and in the same places gives a
reason, why he forbids us. It is; because rewards do blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the just.

But such has our practice been, as that thereby we are made careless of that,
whereof indeed we should be most careful: careless of our oaths, and
careless of Moses reason. Careless of our oaths, whereby we have bound our
selves to obey our founders laws; and yet we know, that the messenger of the
covenant, (coming near to us in judgment, like purging fire, and fullers
soap) will be a swift witness against all false swearers, Mal. 3.5. Careless
of Moses reason, used by him to enforce our obedience to the law; (thou shall
take no gifts) and yet we know by my text, that he, that despises Moses law,
dies without mercy.

Thus pollute we the LORD and his holy name, not like those false prophetesses,
Ezech. 13.19. for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread, but for gold and
silver. For gold and silver, we slay the souls of them, that should not die,
and we give life to the souls of them, that should not live, that is, we admit
into our societies Asinos auro onustos, those which are very unfit, for
learning and manners, excluding far their better.

So, and so have we sinned, and more wickedly: yet have we not girded our
selves with sackcloath, we have not wallowed our selves in ashes; we have made
no lamentation; we have not mourned; yea, we are so far from being grieved at
these our misdoings, as that we joy and rejoice in them, and exercise our wits
to cover and defend them.

Our defenses for this corruption so heartely entertained amongst us, are
usually those, which every one of us, cunningly alleges for our private and
daily trespasses; and therefore the consideration of them, may worthyly belong
to every soul among us. Therefore let every one, that has an care to hear,
hear.

Our first defense, is our misconceit about the time of our repentance; we are
persuaded we may repent when we will. See the first Sermon. p. ^.
Touching this point, I now say nothing; only we may be advised, that late
repentance is seldom true repentance; and justly we may fear, least that
repentance, which we frame to our selves, when we are dying, die also with us.

Our se^ond defense, is grounded upon such places of Scripture, wherein is
signified; how that the stowtest pillars of the Lords house are sundry times
and grievously shaken. One place may serve for all, Prove. 24.16. The just man
is said to fall seven times a day, and rise again; and hereby we judge it no
great prejudice against our selves to have a few falls. But we misunderstand
this place, being spoken of falls into afflictions and calamities, and not of
falls into actual sins. And if it be spoken of falls into actual sins, what
then? Is this a necessary consequence, Seave^ falls a day are pardoned to the
just; therefore for a few falls we shall have pardon?

I must needs confess, the patience of God is very abundant; He is merciful
and gracious, long suffering, and of great goodness. He cries unto the fools:
Exodus 34.6. See my sixth Lecture upon Amos 1.3. p. 69.
(and are not we such fools?) O ye foolish how long will ye love foolishnes?
Prove 1.22. He cries unto the faithless (and is our faith living?) O
generation faithless and crooked, how long now shall I suffer you? Matthew.
17.17. He cries unto the Jews (and are not we as bad as the Jews?) O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem how often? Matthew. 23.37. He dresseth his vineyard with the
best and kindlyest husbandry, that his heart could invent, Esai. 5.2. afterward
he looked for fruit, he required it not the first hour, but tarying the full
time, he looked that it should bring forth grapes, in the autumn and time of
vintage. He waits for the fruit of his figtree three years, Luke 13.6. and
is content to be entreated that digging, and dunging, and expectation a fourth
year, may be bestowed upon it. Whatsoever judgments are pronounced against
Damascus, Azzah, Tyrus, Edom, Ammon, Moab, Judah, and Israel. Amos chapt. 1.
and 2. are for three transgressions, and for four; so long he endured their
iniquities. Gods dealing with us sinful wretches, is like David's dealing with
Saul; he took away his 1. Sam 26.12
spear, and his waterpot, and a 2. Sam. 24.5.
piece of his cloak: so God takes away from us a little rest, and a little and
little more, and gives us, as it were, remembra^ces, to let us understand, that
we are in his hands, and, if we take not warning, that he will further punish
us.

Thus we see (and it may not be denied) that the patience of God is very
abundant, that the Lord is merciful and gracious, long suffering and of great
goodness. Of such his patience, mercy and goodness we may not presume. Our
safest way shall be to rise at the first call; if we differ our obedience
till the second call, we may be preve^ted. Then may God have just cause to say
to us, as he said unto the Jews, Esai. 65.12. I called, and ye did not
answer; I spoke, and ye heard not. And albeit some fall seven times a day
and rise again; albeit to some sinners, it pleases the Lord to iterate his
sufferance: yet may not we take encouragement hereby to iterate our misdoings.

We have learned, that God punished his Angels in Heaven for one breach; Adam
for one morsel; Miriam for one sclander; Moses for one angry word; Achan for
one sacrilege; Ezechias for once showing his treasures to the ambassadors of
Babel; Josias for once going to war without asking counsel at the Lord; and
Ananias and Sapphira for once lying to the Holy Ghost. Is the Lords hand now
shortened, that he cannot be as speedy and quick in avenging himself upon us
for our offenses? Far be it from us so to think: God is not slack in
coming, 2. Pet. 3 9.
as some count slacknes; he makes the clouds his chariots, he rides upon
the Cherubins, he flies with the wings of the wind: and so he comes, and
comes quickly, and his reward is with him, to give to every one, according
as his works shall be.

Our third and last defense is builded upon slattery, cherished in our own
bosoms. Because we have been waryly corrupted; because we have taken bribes
so secretly, as that possibly two witnesses may not be produced to testify
against us; because for this our sin, Gehazies leprosy as yet has not
broken out upon us; because for other our sins done in darkness, the rod of
God has not yet smitten us, we slatter our selves, and persuade our selves,
that all is well: we set our mouths against Heaven, and our tongues do walk
even through the earth; we imagine with those wicked ones, Ps. 73.11. and Ps.
94.7. that God will not behold our iniquities, or if he do, that he will not
much regard to punish us for them. We set up Idols within our breasts against
lum; we forsake his Testimonies, we follow the voice and persuasion of our own
devises. So bold we carry our selves upon our cunning, sly, close, and secret
kind of sinning.

But all in vain, if so it seem good unto the Lord. For he has means
enough, to discover and bring to light that which we think most secret, and
hidden. He can make the fields to have eyes to see our deeds; the woods to
have ears to hear our counsels; the walls of our bed chambers to have mouths
to witness against us; our friends to fall out with us, and the men of our
secrecy to bewray our wickedness. He can use us, our selue^ as instruments,
against our selves; even our own mouths to testify against us: for he can make
us, either unawares to disclose our faults; or in our sleep by dreams to make
the^ known; or in our s^^^nesse to rave of them; or in some phrensey to vomit
them out; or in the torment of our consciences to confess them all. And if he
should not deal with us thus, or thus; yet know we, that there is a time to
come, spoken of by St Paul, 1. Cor. 4.5. wherein the Lord shall come, to
lighten things that are hid in darkness, and to make the counsels of the heart
manifest. And this he will be sure to do, because in presence he beholds
whatsover is done in the darkest places, and is privy to all the devises, of
our hearts.

I will not stay your ears with commemoration of many notable places of Holy
Scripture, set down by the holy Spirit to amplify Gods illimited presence. In
the 139. Psalm, wonderful are the testimonies brought there by the Prophet
for this purpose. O LORD, thou have tried me, and known me, thou know my
sitting and my rising, etc. as it follows in the Psalm. See Lect. 10. upon
Amos 1. p. 115. and Lect. 14. p. 159.
Thus I gather the sum of it; there is no corner in Hell, no mansio^ in
Heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no fishes belly in the bottom of Sea, no
dark dungeon in the land of captivity, nor the clouds of the day, nor the
darkness of the night, nor a secret friend, nor a more secret conscience, nor
any like evasion that can hide us, that can hide any our actions, from the
presence of the LORD: Our sitting, our rising, our down lying, the thoughts of
our hearts, the words of our mouths, the ways of our feet, yea our reins,
our bones, our mothers wombes, wherein in our first informity we were
wonderfully lodged, they are all thoroughly known unto him. If therefore
secretly taking bribes for fellows, for scholars places, and the like; if
SECRETLY living in fornication, adultery and uncleanness; if secretly stealing;
if secretly any way sinning we purpose to avoid the presence of Almighty God,
I must the^ needs say with Jeremy, chapter 10.14. Doubtless* every man is a beast
by his own knowledge.

Thus far have I been guided by my first position, Every one is bound to
subject himself to honest and just politic laws, and that for conscience
sake. For he, that despises Moses law, dies without mercy.

The second remains: It is a breach of charity to conceive ill of any for
any private report: For he that despises Moses law dies not, but at the mouth
of two or three witnesses. Of this second in the next.

Now beseech we Almighty God, by whose great mercies we have received the
knowledge of the truth, that by the same his mercies, he would give us grace to
continue, live, and die therein: that he would guide us in all ou ways; make us
obedient to higher powers according to his will; cleanse our hearts, renew our
spirits, and free us from all desire of doing wickedly, that so at the last
day, we may be presented spotless and without blame before him that sits
upon the throne. Even so be it Lord Jesus.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 28, 29. 28 He that despises Moses law, dies without mercy
under two or three witnesses.

29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be worthy, which
treads under foot the Son of God, and cou^teth the blood of the Testament,
as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the Spirit of
grace?


THe second position grounded upon the 28. verse, which was, It is a breach of
the rule of charity, to conceive ill of any, for any private report, is now to
be handled. I will briefly run it over, that so at this time also we may
have some taste of that which follows in the 29. verse.

It is a breach of the rule of charity, etc. To speak much of charity, what it
is, what objects, what ends it has, before such as abound in knowledge, I
hold it needless. If your practice has been according to your knowledge, it
may truly and boldly be said unto you, as Christ said unto the Scribe, that
had answered discreetly, Mark. 12.34. You are not far from the kingdom of
God. For declaration of the point I am to prove, let us consider somewhat
touching the rule of charity, which uses by us to be broken, as often, as we
conceive ill of others (whether our superiors, or equals, or inferiors) for
any private reports.

Christian Charity, has three branches.

The first, (...), our love of God and Christ. The rule for this part is laid
before us, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thiy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. In which words, is noted
together with the unity of the divine essence, the trinity of the persons;
and therefore the commandment is, that as one God is, so the three persons
are, to be loved. Diliges Iehovam (...) thou shall love the LORD thy God, one
God and three persons, not with part of thine heart, nor with part of thy
soul, nor with part of thy might, but with all of all, both heart, soul, and
might. The reason why God is thus to be loved, is put before, ver. 4. Hear O
Israel, the LORD our God is LORD only. The meaning is; there is but one God,
and therefore thy heart, thy soul, thy might, thy love, may not be distracted,
they may not be divided. All thy heart, all thy soul, all thy might, must
jointly be employed to love the LORD thy God.

In this place of Deuteronomy our charge is but general, yet necessary, to love
one God, and the three persons of the Trinity. For the second we have a more
special charge, 1. Cor. 16.22. There S. Paul says, If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; let him be had in
execration, let him be excommunicate unto death. Which is also signified by
Christ himself telling us, Mat. 10.37. that we cannot be worthy of him, if
we love father, mother, wife, children, brethren, sisters, yea our own lives,
above, before, or more then him.

The second branch of Christian charity, is (...), brotherly love, peculiar,
and belonging only to the sons of God. The rule for this part is laid before
us, Ioh. 13.34. Christ there has given us a new commandment, that we love one
another; as he has loved us, that even so we love one another. We must love
one another; that is, we must love the whole Church and every member thereof,
all that are our brethren in the Lord and the sons of God: even the whole
number of Gods holy ones and the blessed Angels which are in Heaven. Al these
must we love, eve^ as Christ has loved us. But how has Christ loved us?
Consider we these five things, and it will be manifest.

See my second sermon on James 4. p. 80.
1 Look we unto the cause, which moved Christ to love us; he loved us because
we were elected; because we were chosen in him, by God the Father, to be his
members, and to be saved by him. For this cause has he loved us with a
peculiar love above other men; with such a love wherewith he loved S. Paul,
Gal. 2.20. for that we might live unto God, we are crucified with Christ, and
so we live; yet not we now, but Christ lives in us, and in that, that we now
live in the flesh, we live by faith in the Son of God, who has loved us,
and given himself for us. So peculiarly has Christ loved us. Therefore must
we also peculiarly love our brethren in the Lord, for that very cause, because
for ought we can discern; (and how can we discern spiritually, being but
flesh?) they are the elect and chosen of God the Father in Christ, from before
the foundations of this world, to be saved by Christ.

2 Think we of the time when Christ loved us. We shall find that he loved us
first, 1. Ioh. 4.19. he stayed not for our love: we love him, because he loved
us first. He loved us first: therefore must we also prevent one another in love;
we must not look that our brethren first love us. For if we be friendly to
them only, who are friendly to us, what singular thing do we? Do not even the
heathen likewise? Mat. 5.46, 47.
If we love them only, which love us, what reward shall we have? Do not
Infidels even the same? We Christians must love our brethren first.

3 Let us respect the quality of the persons, whom Christ has loved: He has
loved us, Ioh. 15.9. Us, that is, all: all the elect, Gentiles as well as
Jews; Barbarians as well as Grecians; bond as well as free; women as well as
men; the base and the poor, as well as the noble and the rich. For all the
elect, for all these, for all us he died, when as yet we were his enemies, when
as yet we were sinners, Romans 5.8. Therefore must we also love al men, be they
sinners, or seem they righteous; seem they our friends, or be they our foes; be
they of what estate or condition soever, so it be not evident, that they are
adjudged to be partakers with the Devil and his Angels in the ever burning
lake.

4 Regard we the end, why Christ loved us: he loved us for no profit of his
own, but for our souls health. Therefore must we also love others, not for our
own gain, but for their good. So did Moses, who prayed to have his name rased
out of Gods book, rather then that the sins of the people under his
government should not be forgiven, Exodus 32.32. So did David, who made his
supplications to God, for to lay the pestilence upon him and his fathers house,
and to spare the people committed to his charge, 2. Sam. 24.17. So did S. Paul,
who wished his own damnation, to redeem the reiection of the Jews, Romans 9.3.
Christ loved us for our souls health, not for any profit of his own; therefore
must we also love one another, for the good of others, not for any our own
gain.

5 Consider we the measure of the love, wherewith Christ has loved us. It is a
true love; for Christ is truth it self, John, 14.6. It is a burning love; for
Christ laid down his life, Christ shed his blood for his sheep, Ioh. 10.15. It
is an everlasting love; for Christ loves his own unto the end, John. 13.1.
Therefore must our love also to all the faithful, be true; it must be earnest;
it must be constant. Ioh. 13.34.
Christ's commandment is that we love one another, as he has loved us, even
so, that we love one another.

The third branch of Christian charity is (...), the love of our neighbors.
The rule for this part is laid before us, Levit. 19. ver. 11, 13, 15.16.
acknowledged by the scribe, Mark. 12.33. and proclaimed by Christ himself, to
be like that great commandment, Mat. 19.19. etc. This is the rule: Thou shall
love thy neighbor, as thy self. Thou shall love thy neighbor, that is, every
man; for so Christ expounds it unto the lawyer, showing him by the example of
the Samaritane, who is his neighbor, Luke 10.30. Thou shall love thy
neighbor, not only such as fancy thee, or are thy friends, but thy enemies
too. Thou shall bless them, that curse thee; do good to them, that hate thee;
pray for them, that hurt thee.

Thou shall love thine enimies] Thy enemies I say, not Gods enemies; for Gods
enemies, thou must hate with a perfect hatred. David is thy warrant, Psalm.
139.22. Thou must not receive them into house, or bid them, God speed: such was
S. John's counsel to the elect Ladies children, 2. Ioh. verse. 10. who also in
his first and general Epistle, chap. 5. verse. 16. speaking of a sin unto
death, reigning in the enemies of God, forbids us to pray for it. Whom God
hates we may not love. In him and for him we must love every man. If we can
know any to be of the number of the reprobate, to whom God will not pardon
their transgressions, we may not in our prayers desire forgiveness for their
sins, we may not pray for their salvation.

Romans 11.34.
But who knows the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor? He
alone separateth the Goats from his Sheep, he alone knows who are his. And
this rule simply binds us (who cannot discern between the reprobate and the
elect) to love every man, understood here, by the name, of neighbor; Thou
shall love thy neighbor.

But how? It follows in the rule; as thy self. That is, not with a feigned
love, not with a cold love, not with a temporary love, not in word only.
Therefore must thy love toward thy neighbor be unfeigned, it must be
ferve^t, it must be enduring, it must be effectual. A fifth condition is
required that our love be holy and pure; for we must love our selves, and so
our neighbors, in God, for God, and to Gods glory.

Such are the branches of Christian Charity; and such the rules to measure
them. Christ reduces the^ to two heads; to a great commandment, and another
like unto it: on which, he says, the whole law and the Prophets do depend,
Mat. 22.40. and Mat. 7.12. he puts down but one head, and calls that one
the Law and the Prophets: Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
even so do ye to them; for this is the law and the Prophets. In like manner
St Paul has said; He, that loves another has fulfilled the law, Romans 13.8.
and verse 10. Love is the fulfilling of the law. And, Gal. 5.14. All the law is
fulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. In those places, where our Savior and the Apostle, do ascribe to our
love of others, the fulfilling of the law, they mean nothing else, but the
fulfilling of the second table of the law in this one branch, co^teining two
members of my division (...) and (...): Brotherly love, and love of our
neighbors. And so Christ in the place before cited, Matthew. 22.40. making of
the whole law but two parts, love of God, and, love of our neighbors,
excludes not my third part (...), that brotherly love, whereof you heard, but
includes it in his latter.

Let this then stand for truth: Christian charity has three branches; love of
God; love of our brethren in the Lord; and love of our neighbors. The rule for
the first is; you shall love the Lord your God with all your hearts, with all
your souls, with all your might: For the second, you shall love one another,
as Christ has loved you: For the third; you shall love your neighbors as your
selves. And think not that you live according to the first rule, if you fail
in keeping either the second or the third. Lincked they are together, and that
so, that unless you observe all, you keep neither; you cannot love God and
hate your neighbor; neither can you love your neighbor, but you must love God
too. Every stepping aside, every transgressio^ of the law is a blemish to your
love. And therefore for my position, your charity shall be much obscured, if
for private reports, you conceive ill of any. The reason is, because so doing
you commit sin, and are rebuked of the law, as transgressors. You commit
sin (I say) and so you break the rule of Charity, if you conceive ill of
any, for any private reports.

There cannot be a greater poison; See my second Sermon on James p. 83.
there cannot be a deadlier bane of friendship and amity betwixt man and man,
then to love to hear, what bitter and sharp tongues shall seek to speak.
Soon creepes it into your ears, that will never out again, whilst the
breath is in your bodies. You may know it by this. If any one be misreported to
you to be spotted with adultery, bribery, theft, or any like grievous offense,
though happily you can be content not to credit all, because all is not
sufficiently proved unto you; yet something remains to the blot of your
brother, yet sticks the scarre of suspicion still. Something you will believe
for the reporters sake, whom you will take to be a very honest man.

Well; though Ziba be long since dead and rotten, who did wrongfully sclaunder
Mephiboscheth, his Lord, unto the King, 2. Sam, 16.3. yet may we be assured,
that a great measure of Zibaes spirit now at this time dwells in the hearts
of the sons of men, and so shall dwell, even until the day of the Lords
appearing.

Solon.
A wise lawmaker, being asked why he appointed no punishment for such a one as
should kill his parents, made this answer, that he thought no man so barbarous,
as to do such a deed. Without doubt if a law be made against any actions,
words, or thoughts, it was first in the lawgivers conceit, that there would
be hearts to harbor such thoughts, lips to utter such words, and hands to
work such actions.

There is one lawgiver, which is able to save and to destroy; from him out of
the Highest Heavens a law is given unto us, to be of force as long as we shall
walk upon this earth: it is conveyed unto us, by the hand of Moses, Levit.
19.16. where thus it is written; Thou shall not walk about with tales among
thy brethren. The very making of this law, is an evident argument, that the
Lord knew that there would be no want of such in the world; of such (I say) as
should walk about with tales among their brethren. Such there were in the time
when Ezechiel prophesied: for chap. 22.9. Jerusalem is reproved, because in her
were tale-cariers, men that carried tales up and down to shed blood. And the
strife that hitherto has been, now is, and here, after is like to be in all
places, in Church, in Common wealth, in societies, in families, proves that no
age is void of such whisperers. You need not to doubt of the proof. It is
Solomon's, Prove. 26.20. Without wood fire is quenched, and without a talebearer
strife cease. If there be not a new supply made of wood, the fire will go
out; so if there be not some, that will carry tales between man and man, strife
will die quickly. For as wood is the matter of fire, so a tale-carier fostereth
strife. The like has Solomon spoken of scorners, Prove. 22.10. and sure it may
well be: for commonly a scorner is a tale-carier also.

To such as by their private reports in your ears, that are any way in
government, shall depresse and disgrace their brethren, in hope to lift up and
adva^ce themselves; I have not much to say. Only, I will pray them to join
together the first and third verses of the 15. Psalm; I hope it will not be
their lost labor. If I may do it for them, thus I do it: He that
sclaundereth with his tongue, shall not dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord, he
shall not rest in Gods holy mountain.

As for you (dearly beloved in the Lord) whose heads it has pleased God to
advance above your brethren, either in Church or common wealth, or lesser
societies, or private families, let me be bold to put you in mind of a
danger, very near you in respect of such busybodies, which will not let
your ears take rest. You have already heard, there is no want of them. The
danger I speak of, is descryed, by the wisest among the sons of men. He,
Prove. 18.8. tells you, that, the words of a talebearer are as flatterings, and
they go down into the bowels of the belly. One expounds it thus;

The words of a talebearer are as flatterings.] That is, such words and
speeches as he uses against others, are as sweet and pleasant to you that
hear them, as if you were flattered: and, they go down into the bowels of the
belly,] That is, they creep smoothly, sweetly, and pleasantly, into your most
secret place; you readily receive them, earnestly lay them up, and deeply
remember them.

If this exposition like you not, thus he expounds it otherwise: The words of a
talebearer are as flatterings] That is, the speeches which he utters to you
against others, seem pleasant and sweet, yea, they seem softer then butter,
and gentler then oil. And they go down into the bowels of the belly] That is,
but for all that, for all they seem so pleasant, so sweet, so soft, so gentle,
yet notwithstanding, they go down into the bowels within you, they wound your
very entrails; and if they be once perished, what hope is there of your lives?
Yea they wou^d you grievously, they wound you deadly. Admit of which
interpretation you will, you shall see your selves in great danger by listening
to such evil speakers. This golden saying putting you in mind of your so
near peril, Solomon desires to be written in your memories, and therefore
using the very same words repeates it again, Prove. 26.22. where also he
says: The words of a talebearer, are as flatterings, and they go down into
the bowels of the belly.

To keep you spotless and without blame, that this danger, which you have
heard of, overtake you not, a commandment is given you, Exodus 23.1. not to
receive a false tale: the breach of which David, has sealed up, with no less
then the loss of Heaven, Psalm. 15.1.3. where he tells you, that you shall never
dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord, nor rest in his holy mountain, if you
receive a false report against your neighbor.

Public Magistrates, and all such as have authority to punish faults, may be
well advised, by that charge which the Lord gives, Deuteronomy. 13.12. If you shall
hear say, that wicked men are gone out from among you, and have drawn away
the inhabitants of your city, to go and serve other Gods, which ye have not
known: then you shall seek and make search, and enquire diligently; and if it
be true, and the thing certain, that abomination is wrought among you; then
shall you slay the inhabitants, utterly destroy the city, etc. What charge is
there given, concerning the punishment due unto the authors of apostacy, to
such as iutise men unto Idolatry, and to Idolaters themselves, is given to you
all, to be followed in your civil punishings. If you shall hear say, concerning
any that live with you, that they despise your laws, your Churches laws, common
wealths laws, or Collegiat laws, then shall you seek, make search, and enquire
diligently; and if it be true, and the thing certain, that such despisers of
your laws live among you, then shall you proceed to punish them accordingly. You
shall seek, make search, enquire, and that diligently; and why, I pray you, is
all this repetition of words? if not to give us to understand, what a fault it
is to condemn before we know, and by and by to believe whatsoever we hear?
You shall seek, make search, enquire, and that diligently; and if it be true,
which was privately told you against others; if by diligent inquiry out of the
mouth of two or three witnesses you find it to be certain, then may you
safely conceive of them as they are; you may do it without breach of the rule
of charity.

But one private reporter, though he speak nothing but the truth, is not
sufficient to convince any one of a crime, neither should be able to make you
conceive hardly of any. One witness shall not testify against a murderer to
cause him to dye, for he must die through witnesses, Number. 35.30. One witness
shall not cause an idolater to die; for he must die at the mouth of two or
three witnesses, Deuteronomy. 17.6. One witness shall not make the despiser of Moses
law to die; for my text requires two or three. One witness shall not rise up
against a man for any trespass, or for any sin, or for any fault that he
offends in: but at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three
witnesses, shall the matter be stablished, Deuteronomy. 19.15. And why is this often
repetition of witnesses, of two and of three witnesses? but to teach us, not to
be light of belief, when we are whispered in the ear against any? Why should
we by and by kill our brother in our hearts, by conceauing ill of him for one
reporters speech?

To rob my neighbor of that his credit in my heart, which he has had there
heretofore (though he truly deserve it) yet unless it be certain to me by
sufficient witness, that he deserve it) can in me, be no less, then a branch
of murder.

Solomon tells you, it is folly and shame, to answer a matter before you hear
it, Prove. 18.13. and let me tell you, it can be no less, to believe a matter
against any man, before you know it. I say with the Prophet Malachie chap. 2.10
[and my prayer to God is that we may ever consider it] Have we not all one
Father? has not one God made us? Why then should we transgress every man
against his brother? and break the covenant of our Father?

By this which has been spoken, we have seen what the rule of charity is,
and that every stepping aside, every transgression, every sin is a breach of
it; we have also seen our selves excluded from Heaven, if we receive false
tales; and we have seen, that we may not punish such a one, as is reported
to be an Apostata, and to have fallen away from God, unless first by search
made, and diligent inquiry, we find it to be true and certain, which is
reported of him: and we have seen, that no fault, no trespass, no sin, nor
murder, nor Idolatry, nor the despising of Moses law may be punished, but at
the mouth of two or three witnesses: Therefore, needs must, it be true, which
I undertook to prove: It is a breach of the rule of charity, to conceive ill
of any for any private report. And so much for the proof of my position.

It follows verse. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall he be
worthy, that treads under foot the Son of God, and accounts the blood of
the Testament, wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing; and does
despite the Spirit of grace. THe Apostle here magnifieth, the Gospel of
Christ, above the law of Moses, by the punishment appointed for contempt of
both. He that despises Moses law dies without mercy, he means only the
death of the body; such a death as man may lay upon him; for he must die at
the mouth of two or three witnesses. A far greater punishment is allotted to
the despisers of Christ's Gospel. He also must abide death without mercy, but
it is the death of both body and soul; for as it is verse. 27. (which I have
already explicated) he must fearfully look for judgment and violent fire
therewith to be devoured. Of the despiser of Moses law, I have already spoken.

Touching the despiser of Christ and his Gospel thus I say: It is not
necessary that he should be altogether unlike to you, that love Christ; he
may live with you in the same Church, he may profess with you the same
religion; he may seem to you as good a Christian, as your selves. For, (...),
with the blood of the Testament is he sanctified. Yet does my Text discern
such a one from him that loves Christ by three his attributes.

(...); he treads and tramples underfoot the Son of God.

2 (...); he accounts the blood of the Testament, a vulgar, a common, an
unholy, a profane thing.

3 (...); he despiteth the spirit of grace.

The doctrines which this place affords us, are two.

1 Because the reprobates (not all of them, but such as are deepest in Gods
displeasure, such as do sin against the holy Ghost) are in this place said
to be sanctified with the blood of the Testament, we are to consider; how far
a man may (being so sanctified) go in the profession of the Gospel, and yet be
a reprobate.

2 Because the adversaries of our doctrine, whereby we defend the perseverance
of Gods Saints in their faith, do out of this place make a strong argument (as
they take it) for their purpose; we are to consider, whether a Son of God,
sanctified with the blood of the Covenant, may fall away.

To enter a due discourse of these doctrines, or particularly to examine the
words, from which these notes do arise, it would carry me beyond the time
limited; and I had rather be too short, then to hurt your patience. Only hear
one word of exhortation.

Is it not a fearful condition that a man sanctified with the blood of the
Testament, should tread under foot the Son of God? that a man living as we
live, and prosessing as we profess, should fall away wholly from Christ, and
Christianity? Yes (beloved in the Lord) very fearful is the condition of such
a one; and if we have not brows of brass, necks of iron, and hearts of flint,
our very hearing of it, must needs in some sort cast us down; if we have any
feeling of Gods spirit within us, it will make us use all diligence in working
our salvation, in attaining unto faith, in dying unto sin, in living unto
newness of life. We have been admonished in the Philippians, to run forward
in that race of righteousness, wherein through Jesus Christ God has freely
placed us; that being conducted by his Spirit to walk in good works, we may
make our vocation sure. My beloved (says S. Paul) as you have always obeyed,
so make an end of your own salvation with fear and trembling, Philip. 2 12.
And so (beloved in the Lord) let us also make an end of our salvation with
fear and trembling.

Some of us do gladly preach the word, we willingly declare good tidings and
publish salvation, saying unto you, your God reigns; Esai. 52.7.
yet hereby are we not justified: our evil ensample may make the name of God
to be blasphemed among the people; Romans 2.24.
and if we beat not down our bodies and bring them into subjection, it may
be that after we have preached to others, our selves may prove castavvaies. It
is Saint Paul's judgment, 1. Cor. 9.27.

By Christ's name we may prophecy, we may cast out Devils, we may do many great
works; yet hereby are we not justified; it may be, Christ at his coming will
profess unto us; I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity,
Mat. 7.22. We have hitherto been fed delicately, and brought up in scarlet,
Lament. 4.5.
shall we now perish in the streets? shall we now embrace the dunge? O let us
not go backward, or stand still; but make we an end of our salvation with
fear and trembling.

We all cause our bellies to eat, and fill our bowels with that sweet roll,
Ezech. 3.3.
as sweet as any honey in our mouths; we willingly hear the word, and with
joy receive it into our hearts. Yet are we not hereby justified; no more then
Balaam was, who desired to be like Gods children in happiness, when he said, O
let my soul die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his,
Number. 23.10.

Remember the Galatians; they received St Paul for his ministeries sake, as an
An^ell of God, yea as Christ Jesus; and if it had been possible, would have
plucked out their own eyes, and have given them to him, to have done him good.
So zealous were they in professing the doctrine which Paul preached. Yet false
Prophets turned them backwardes to begin again the Jewish ceremonies; they
turned again to impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto at the first they
were in bondage; in steed of going forward toward Christ, they turned backward
from him, Galat. 4 9. Having hitherto had our heads of gold, Dan. 2.32.33.
shall we now, that we may be like Nabuchad-nezzars image put on feet of clay?
O let us not go backwarde, or stand still, but make we an end of our salvation
with fear and trembling.

We all believe Christ, and the word preached by his Ministers. Yet are we not
hereby justified. Many of Christ's disciples went back, and walked no more with
him, Ioh. 6.66. Simon Magus believed at Philips preaching, and was baptized,
and wondered at his miracles, and kept company with him: yet afterward was it
found, that his heart was not right before God, Act. 8.21. The Devils also they
believe and tremble, says St James, chap. 2.19. Now having begun in the
Spirit, shall we end in the flesh? Galat. 3.3.
O, let us not go back ward, or stand still, but make we an end of our
salvation with fear and trembling.

We all do daily before the Lord confess our sins; yet are we not hereby
justified. For so happy had Pharaoh been; for he said, I have sinned against
the LORD God, Exodus 10.16. so blessed had Saul been, for he also said, I have
sinned, 1. Sam. 15.30. so, well had it been with Judas, for neither was he
behind them in saying, I have sinned, Mat. 27.3. Well: Pharaoh, Saul, and
Judas through unbelief are fallen, and you stand by faith; yet, be not high
minded, but fear. So St Paul counseled the Romans, chapter 11.20. Be not high
minded (I say) but fear. And take heed, it come not unto you according to the
proverb; the dog is returned to his vomit; and the sow that was washed, 2.
Pet. 2.22.
to her wallowing in the mire.

Since you have gladly preached the word, willingly heard it, and carefully
believed it, hold you on in so good a course: and do your best endeavors,
that your preaching be not turned into dumbnes, your hearing into deafness,
your belief into infidelity.

Since you have confessed your sins, be ye not unwilling to forsake them
also. For to confess your sins with your lips, and say with Pharaoh, Saul,
and Judas, We have sinned; will nothing profit you, unless your hearts also be
ready to say with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3.18. We will not
sin. For it is most true, which Solomon has, Prove. 28.13. He that hides his
sins shall not prosper; it follows, but he that confesses and forsakes
them shall have mercy. Not he that confesses only, but he that confesses, and
forsakes his sins, shall have mercy.

And last of all, since you have been sanctified with the blood of the
Testament, beware, O beware, that you account not that blood, an unholy thing;
for so doing you tread under foot the Son of God, and despite the Spirit of
grace. It is without controversy better for us, 2. Pet. 2 21.
never to know the way of righteousness, then after we know it, to turn from
it.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 29. 29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
worthy, wh^^h ^re^deth under foot the Son of God, and cou^teth the ^^^od of
the Testament, as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does
despite the Spirit of grace?


IN my former Sermon the despiser of Christ and his Gospel was out of this 29
verse discovered by certain marks. First to be somewhat like us, that love
Christ. Secondly to be much unlike us. He is somewhat like to us that love
Christ: for he is sanctified with the blood of the Testament. Again he is
much unlike to us that love Christ: for 1. He treads and trampleth under
foot the Son of God. 2. He accounts the blood of the Testament, a vulgar,
a common, an unholy, a profane thing. 3. He despites the spirit of grace.

The consideration of such his marks, may occasion us to touch two questions.

1 Because the reprobate, (not all of them, but such only as are deepest in
Gods displeasure, such as do sin against the holy Ghost) are in this place
said to be sanctified with the blood of the Testament; it may be asked; How
far forth a man may be so sanctified; how far a man may go in the
profession of the Gospel, and yet be a reprobate.

2 Because they that have given their names to the strumpet of Babylon do upon
this place build their doctrine, for the final relapse of the Saints of God; I
shall not err from the meaning of my text, if I answer this second demand;
whether a Son of God sanctified with the blood of the covenant may fall away.
Of these at this time.

The first mark, wherewith men, swallowed up of so monstrous a sin, are here
noted, is common to them, together with the elect and chosen of God. They may
be sanctified with the blood of the covenant, (...). Some read it per
sanguinem foederis, in the Vulgar and Erasmus it is, per sanguinem Testamenti.
We may not disallow of either of these read^ngs. For though the word (...) do
properly signify a testament, and is often so used, Heb. 9. yet also it fitly
answers to the Hebrew wo^d (...) and signifies pactionem viventiu^,
conventionem inter ^i^entes, an agreement or covenant between the living. In
which sense it is used by the expositors of the Old Testament in many places. I
cite only one. 1. Sam. 11.1 When Nahash the Ammonite had besieged Iabesh
Gilead, the men of the city said unto him, (as the Seaventie do expound it)
(...), make a covenant with us, and we will be thy servants.

These two significations of this word, do very fitly agree with the respects
of that covenant, which God has made with his people. For it respects God,
and it respects man. God was displeased, because man had sinned. Hence was it
necessary that an agreement should be made; God was to be appeased, and man was
to make satisfaction. God required (and that worthily) the pain of death for
satisfaction: of which durst man have adventured to make payment, needs must he
have been swallowed up thereof.

Nothing then remained for the making of this agreement between God and us,
but that the Son of God, very God and very man, should interpose himself.
Which already is performed. For he being in the form of God, Phil 2 6.
and thinking it no robbery to be be equal with God, has made himself of no
reputation, has taken on himself the form of a servant, and was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh: and being thus humbled, he has
undertaken to satisfy his angry Father for us, and in fullness of time became
obedient to the death, to that death of the Cross; and so has wrought our
reconcilement. And now he sitting at the right hand of his Father in the
highest heavens, holds for us in possession an eternal inheritance; and
because the right of this inheritance is purchased by him for no less price,
then the shedding of his most precious blood, hence it comes to pass, that
the agreement, reconciliation, and atonement, the covenant made between God
and us (that he will be our God, and we shall be his people) may bear the
show, and have the name, of a Testament. For, he that made it was dead; though
now he lives, and lives for evermore.

It was not the blood of bulls, nor of calves, nor of goats, nor the ashes of a
heyfer, that could make us acceptable to the Lord: but the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; that is it,
that purges our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. And for
this cause, is Christ the mediator of the new Testament, ((...) Heb. 9.15. in
which chapter this word (...) is often used in the same signification) for this
cause. I say, is Christ the mediator of the new Testament, that through death,
which was for the redemption of the transgressions in the former Testament,
they which were called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. In
regard of Christ the^, whose death has made the covenant between God and us
to be of force, this covenant may very fitly be called a Testament: and this
respect of him, that dyed for us, warranteth both those expositions; that for
the word (...), we may read either Covenant or Testament.

(...)] The blood of Christ [which in the conceit of the Nestorians differs
nothing from the blood of any other creature, and is in the judgment of such,
as sin willingly, after that they have received the knowledge of the truth, but
common blood, as it were the blood of any other man] this blood of Christ, is
here called the blood of the Covenant, or the blood of the Testament; because,
as Theophylact and Aquinas do both note, the new Testament was confirmed by the
blood of Christ. And this is the Testament: After those days, says the LORD,
I will put my laws in their mind, Heb. 8.10. and 10.16.
and in their heart will I write them; and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people; and I will be merciful to their unrighteousness; and their
sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.

This new Testament, by which that other is disanulled and waxed old, is
confirmed by the blood of Christ. Now may we be bold to enter into the holy
place: a new and living way is prepared for us through the veil, which our
Apostle, Heb. 10.20. affirms to be, the flesh of Christ.

With this blood of the covenant, the sinner against the Holy Ghost, is in my
text said to be sanctified. (...), with which blood, though now he account it
common and profane, he was sanctified. I may not stand to remember you of the
many significations, by which in many places of the Holy Scriptures, these
words, Sanctus and Sanctificare, are expounded: diverse of them are
impertinent, (and should be wrested) to the place we have in hand: for the
understanding of which, it may suffice, if we consider, first, that God alone
is properly holy, secondly that all man's holiness is from God. God must not
only help, but do also all in all; or else, man cannot be sanctified.

These points are undoubtedly believed of us, and need no proof. Yet for
explications sake, we may briefly note, that whatsoever men do truly call
Just, the same in relation to God, must be called, and is, truly holy: and
therefore, that God being alone absolutely Just, must of necessity alone be
absolutely Holy: that is, God being Just with that universal and most perfect
Justice, yea himself being his own Justice, it must needs be, that he is (as
the Seraphins, Esai. 6.3. and as the four beasts, Revel. 4.8. have made
proclamation) Holy, Holy, Holy, LORD God Almighty; thrice holy, that is, most
Holy.

I will not here dispute, whether in those places the Spirit of God notes the
three persons in the Trinity, by thrice repeating the word Holy. I know that
many of the ancient, and some of our later writers, have so judged of those
places, and used the^, as testimonies, to confirm so maine a point of
religion. Unto whose judgments herein I need not doubt, nor will refuse, to
yield reverence. Yet may I wish, and I shall wish no more the^ Calvin does, on
Esaias 6. that if at any time we are to deal with Arrians, and are against them
to maintain and prove three persons in one divine essence, that we would be
careful to use testimonies of greater strength. For those enemies of the
blessed Trinity, when they are assailed with such testimonies, which may as
naturally be expounded otherwise, are so far from yielding to the truth of
that doctrine, as that they become much more obstinate and overthwart.

But to our purpose: the Seraphins and the four beasts proclaiming, the LORD
God Almighty to be Holy, holy, holy, do testify, that all the ways of God,
even all his most severe judgments are just, and upright, and holy, howsoever
they may seem unto men. This threefold repetition of the word, makes the sense
to be, as if they had said; God of all is most Holy, and to be hallowed of
all. Neither is this kind of speech altogether without example. For God willing
to let Zedechias understand of the utter and final ruin of his kingdom, bids
the Prophet say from him unto the profane and wicked King, Ezech. 21.27. I
will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more, until (the
Messiah) come; his right it is, and I will give it him: as if the Lord had
said; assuredly and without repentance will I overturne, and bring to ruin the
kingdom of Zedechias; such force does the repetition give the speech. And as
there, so here; God is Holy, Holy, Holy: without doubt Holy, only Holy, most
holy.

Holiness becomes the house of God for ever, so we read Psalm. 93.5. I will
not restrain it to any particular house. Understand it, if you will, of the
palace and basilicke of the great King, or of the Temple of Jerusalem, which
the children of God in former times had respect unto; or of any other Temples
on the earth now consecrated to the service of God; or of your private selves,
for your selves also are the Temples of the Lord; the saying stands firm
without contradiction; Holiness becomes the house of God for ever. And
hereby has God set a bar about his Temples, as he did about the mount, to
keep out beasts and brutish men. For as his Temples upon the earth none
should, so that other far more sacred, which is in Heaven, none shall, ever
enter into, that is, unholy, and unclean.

The Apostle, Heb. 7.26. describing the sanctity of Christ, says, that, such
an high priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens. Where the latter
attributes, do only expound the former; and it is, as if the Apostle had said,
to be holy is nothing else, but to be harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners: for whosoever is harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, he
is already made higher then the Heavens. Thus we see, that God alone is
naturally, properly, and absolutely Holy. Whereupon it follows necessarily
that all man's holiness is from God. Which was the second point to lead us to
the understanding of this place, where the wicked are said to be sanctified.

It is a true rule, which may be collected out of Saint Cyrils treasury lib.
3. cap. 1. Quae in Deo sunt naturaliter, ea in creaturis esse posse
participatione. Such things, as are naturally in God, may be in Gods creatures
by participation: as, when we do participate the effects and similitudes only
of those attributes, which essentially and naturally are in God. So may we be
said to be partakers of the divine nature, when those most great and precious
promises are given us, 2. Pet. 1.4. There he teaches us, that we have all good
things from Gods free promise; thereby are we delivered from the corruption of
this world, from those sinful lusts which we carry about us; and so are made
(...), partakers of the divine nature, in a sort like unto God. For by divine
nature in that place is not meant (...), Gods divine essence, but participatio
qualitatum, certain qualities, which the power of God has wrought in us, that
by them his image, in us now a long time defaced, may be restored again.

In the Scriptures we are charged to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is
perfect; to be merciful, as he is merciful; to be Holy, as he is Holy. Where
we must not think, we are enjoined to have such perfection, mercifulness,
holiness, as is essentially in God [that is not communicable to any creature:]
but then are we perfect, merciful, and holy, according to that charge, when we
are fulfilled with the effects, with the image and similitude of that
perfection, mercifulness, and holiness, which is in God. The same may be
spoken of wisdom, goodness, justice, and other like proprieties of God. We
are then wise, then good, then just, when there appears in us the image and
similitude of Gods wisdom, goodness, and justice. It being true then, that
God alone is Holy, and man not holy, but by participation only; as if it shall
please God, by his power and grace to sow in the hearts of sinful men some
seeds of his own sanctity; and to effect, and to make to shine in their lives
and conversations the image and similitude of his own holiness; it remains
a truth not to be contradicted; All man's holiness is from God.

Now because the Spirit of God comes to, and works in diverse men,
diversely, and in diverse measures; we must know, that holiness, a gift of
that Spirit, is not in all me^ after one sort. We may therefore note a general
sanctity, and a special sanctity, appliable to the difference of such, as live
within the bosom of the militant Church; wherein there are not only godly men,
and holy men, but counterfaits and hypocrites; not only gold, but dross too;
not only wheat, but chafe also.

The special sanctity, I call that, by which the true believers in Christ, are
truly, properly, and indeed sanctified before God, by the holy Spirit. They in
whom this sanctity shines, were elected from everlasting, according to the
purpose of him, which works all things after the counsel of his own will;
and according to that his purpose are they called; and so are justified; and by
the Holy Ghost are not only taught the truth in understanding, but also in
heart are truly renewed and regenerate. It is manifest by that indissoluble
chain of five linkes, Romans 8.29, 30. For whom God knew before, them has he
predestined, them has he called, them has he justified, them has he
glorified. This true holiness is meant by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4. where he
says, That God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world,
that we should be Holy. And what is this, to be Holy? It is expounded in the
same place; even to be without blame before God in love.

The same is meant, Ephesians. 5.26. there it is said, that Christ gave himself
for the Church, that he might sanctify it. And what is this, to sanctify the
Church? It is expounded in the words following; even to cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, that he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy, and without blame. Other like places might be alleged out of
the Holy Scriptures, which I omit. By these we see, that special sanctity,
making us spotless and without blame before God, what it is.

The general sanctity, I call that, by which the Church visible and militant,
consisting of good and evil, of dissemblers and hypocrites as well, as of the
Godly, is called, though not truly and properly, yet (...), in a figurative
kind of speech, tota sancta, the Holy Church: and that especially in regard of
him, the holy of holies, that most Holy one, who dwells in the Church, and
sanctifies them that believe in him: and again in regard of such, as in the
Church are in deed and truly holy. Neither should this seem strange, that
hypocrites, dissemblers, and godless men are called holy. For whosoever give
their names to Christ, and are baptized into his name, though all of them be
not truly grafted into Christ, nor all of them be truly baptized into Christ's
death and resurrection; that is, though all of them be not newborn and
regenerate; yet in the Scripture phrase, after the custom of the Scriptures,
they are al called Holy; and have other such titles given them, as indeed may
beseem the blessed of the Lord.

In this sense, St Paul says, that all the Romans are Saints, beloved of
God, Rom 1.7. and that all the Galatians are sons of God, Galat. 3.26. and
that all the Corinthians are washed, and sanctified, and justified, 1. Cor.
6.11. And so says St Peter of all the Jews which dwelt here and there
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, that they were a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, 1.
Pet. 2.9. The Scriptures are very plentiful in gracing the sons of darkness
(such as fall away from the truth) with beautiful and glorious titles, to take
from them, against that great day, all excuse. In Heb. 10.26. they are said to
have received the knowledge of the truth. and in my text, they are noted to be
sanctified with the blood of the Covenant. In Heb. 6.4, 5. they are reported to
have been once lightened, to have tasted of the heave^ly gift, to have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and to have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come. In 2. Pet. 2.20. we read, that they have
escaped from the filthiness of this world, through their knowledge in our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. In Mat. 12.43, 44. we find, that they have swept
and garnished their houses after the departure of the unclean spirit. And in
Mat. 13.20. Christ tells us, that they hear the word, and incontinently with
joy receive it.

This at the first sight may seem to be that vesture of needleworke, wrought
with diverse colors, Psalm. 45.14.
wherewith the Queen was clothed: it may seem to be that roabe of Adam, that
his roabe of innocence, of holiness, and of the grace of God, wherewith
before his fall he was invested. To have received the knowledge of the truth;
to be sanctified with the blood of the Covenant; to have been once lightened;
to have tasted of the heavenly gift, of the good word of God, and of the powers
of the world to come; to have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost; to have
escaped from the filthynesse of this world; to have the unclean spirit
departed from us; to hear the word, and incontinently with joy to receive it;
are they not sweet blessings descending from the LORD of lights? What could God
have done more unto his vineyard, then he has done unto it?

Yet see the crookedness of the nature it has: in steed of good grapes, it
brings forth wild grapes, briars, and thorns. The Queen may be stripped of her
Jewels; Adam spoiled of his roabes, and the soul of man may be robbed of her
ornaments and rich attire. For all those before recited graces may be lost; the
possessours of them may so fall away, as that it shall be impossible for them
to be renewed again by repentance. And then for their sin there remains no
more sacrifice, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire,
wherewith they must be devoured.

Which being so, it follows, that the places now alleged must be understood
of that general sanctity, by which me^ may be said to be sanctified,
justified, cleansed, washed, and the like; though not truly, nor before God,
yet in the face of the Church, and before men; as it were sacramentally; and so
must we expound this clause of my text: where we see, that he that treads
under foot the Son of God, may be said to be sanctified with the blood of
the covenant. And so he may be sanctified; but how? The meaning is; he may be
sanctified, not truly, nor before God, but in the face of the Church and
before men.

Hitherto have I endeavored to make plain the first mark, by which
back-sliders from the truth are in my text noted; namely that they are
sanctified with the blood of the covenant. The question arising hence, may out
of that which already is delivered, easily be answe^ed. The question is, How
far forth a man may be sanctified with the blood of the Covenant, and yet be
a reprobate?

I answer thus in general; To be sanctified only in the face of the Church,
and before men, does not exempt a man from being a reprobate. Or thus may the
question be proposed.

How far a man may go in the profession of the Gospel, and yet be a
reprobate? I answer thus in general; So carry thy self outwardly in the
profession of the Gospel, that no exception may be taken against thee; let
thy life be such, as that the Sons of God, which live with thee in the bosom
of the same Church, can judge no otherwise of thee, then of a rightful heir
to eternal happiness; be it, that they think of thee much better, then of
themselves, yet will not all this exempt thee from being a reprobate. What thou
art inwardly and in the sight of God, God alone knows; he alone is (...), and
sees, and knows thy heart. Since thou have given thy name to Christ, and have
had the washing of the new birth, the Church in charity must judge of thee, as
of one truly grafted into Christ, and truly regenerate; but (I say) what thou
art inwardly and in the sight of God, God knows: examine thou thy self.

More particularly I answer thus: As I said before; (...) and (...), in a
figure, and according to the custom of the Scriptures, all that are in the
Church, though they all be not of the Church and truly holy, are
notwithstanding called holy, and are said to be sanctified with the blood of
Christ. Now of such as are said to be sanctified, when indeed they are not
sanctified, there are two sorts.

Some there are, that have Christ much in their mouths, but nothing at all in
their hearts or understanding. They know him not; yet as they see others do,
so do they; with others they worship and confess him. Much like them, of whom
our Savior said to the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.22. Ye worship that, which
ye know not. And because this confession of Christ, in such as are borne anew
of water and of the Spirit, is an outward testimony of an inward new birth,
hence it comes to pass, that such mere talkers of Christ (if their lives be
not exceeding wicked) may be said to be regenerate, justified, and sanctified.
These go not beyond one step in the profession of the Gospel.

Others there are, which possess Christ not only in their mouths, but also in
their understanding. These of all reprobates go farthest in the profession of
the Gospel. So far they go, as that it is impossible for man to discern
between them and Christ's sheep, though they be but goats; between them and
true Christians, though they be but hypocrites. For they are kept in the same
pastures, and solded in the same fold with us; and do so behave themselves in
obedience to the word and discipline of the Church, as that by us, they must
needs be taken for true members of Christ. And because this their knowledge of
Christ, is in the elect the beginning of regeneration, hence it comes to
pass, that these men, though indeed they are not borne a new, may yet be said
to be regenerate, justified, and sanctified. Thus we see how far a reprobate
may go in Christianity.

The elect out-goes him by one degree; for he receaues Christ not only into
his mouth or understanding, but into his heart also: he receaues the word, not
only into his mouth, to talk of it, or into his understanding to know it, but
into his open and enlarged heart to embrace it. And so is he sanctified in
mouth, in mind, in heart; and being so sanctified, he chearefully runs
forward in that race of righteousness, wherein through Jesus Christ GOD has
freely placed him, that being conducted by his Spirit to walk in good works,
he may make his calling and election sure.

Now to consider, that a man sanctified with the blood of the Testament, may
account that blood unholy and profane, may trample under foot the son of
God, and may despite the Spirit of Grace; will not this move our hearts to
wisdom? To consider, that men, living as we live, and professing as we
profess, may utterly and finally fall away from Christ and Christianity; will
not this in some measure cast us down? Happily brows of brass, necks of
iron, and hearts of flint, will here proclaim their stubbornness. But (dearly
beloved in the Lord) if we are chosen out of the world; if in Christ we are
anointed and sealed; if our building be of God, not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens; the consideration of these things, whereof we have
heard, will remember us, that it is now time we should arise from sleep; yea,
it will cause us to use all diligence, in working our salvation, in attaining
unto faith, in dying unto sin, in living unto newness of life.

We see how far reprobats may go in the profession of the Gospel. If we
go no farther, but sit down and rest with them; yea, if we be weary, before
we have gone so far as they; if we come short of them in the duties of
religion, can we in reason look to be rewarded better then they? Shall Herod
fear, and reverence John Baptist, and hear him gladly, and yet be damned? and
shall we nor fear, nor reverence Gods Ministers, not hear the^ willingly, and
yet be saved? Shall Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas, confess their sins, and yet
be damned? and shall we hide our sins, and yet be saved? Shall the wicked
confess Christ with their mouths, and know him in their understanding, and
yet be damned? and shall we use our mouths only to swear, to blaspheme, to
lie, to speak evil of others, and keep our understanding, (like a fair and
clean table book) without all godly knowledge, and yet be saved?

Surely, the ground that bears briars and thorns, is reproved, is near unto
cursing, and in the end must be burned: so says the Apostle unto the Hebrews,
chapter 6.8. where, see how one plague follows upon the neck of another; first
reproving, then cursing, then burning, and all, for the ground that bears,
briars and thorns. The Apostle in the verse following modestly and kindly
qualifieth his speech; But (says he) beloved, we have persuaded our selves,
better things of you, though we thus speak.

Should we thus speak of these unprofitable days, we are persuaded better
things? Doubtless we should seem to you, to walk before you in the spirit
of falsehood, and flattery. For you know, that we cannot but know, that
ignorance in the most, and Atheism in many, grows to a head, and does advance
it self.

I shall not need, for ignorance to want witnesses; I will content my self
only with the servants of your families. Some of them (I doubt not) are better
learned in the school of Christ, then their fellows; but I fear me, it may
too truly be verified of the greatest part of them, which Christ spoke of the
Samaritans, that they worship that which they know not: and it is credible,
that in their hearts there is an altar erected, ignoto Christo, to the unknown
Christ.

For the advancement of Atheism, I need no witnesses. Too many now, have put
on the cloak of policy; they find so good patrons. They are content to
confess Christ, yea and do willingly also receive him into their
understanding, that they may be able to talk of him; they would forsooth, be
like Christians, if for nothing else, yet only for preferment sake. Woe unto
such professors of Christ; they are that bad ground, which bears briars and
thorns, and therefore may look for the plagues attending them; they are
reproved, are near unto cursing, and must be burnt.

As for us (beloved in the Lord) let us be that good ground, spoken of by the
same Apostle, Heb. 6.7. The rain, that most sweet rain, distilling from no
clowdy region, but from Gods most gracious f^vour, This Sermon was preached Ian
1599.
has now these forty years and better, watered this our ground, why then
should it not bring forth herbs meet for the husbandman, that dressed it?
Let us do our best, to pluck up by the roots ^ll briars, and thorns, and
weeds, that the herbs may be seen. For it is warranted by the Holy Ghost;
that the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth h^arbs meet for them, by who^ it is dressed, shall receive
blessing of God. Since then by Gods gracious favor, we have received Christ
into our mouths, to confess him; and into our understandings, to know him;
let our hearts be opened and enlarged to embrace him So shall we be sanctified
in mouth, in mind, in heart; and be most willing to run forward in that race
of righteousness, wherein through Jesus Christ God has freely placed us, by
whose spirit being guided to walk in good works, we, (leaving far behind
us all reprobates) shall make our calling and election sure. Now God grant us
so to do, for his welbeloved Son Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 29. 29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and cou^teth the blood of
the Testament, as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does
despite the Spirit of grace?


OF the first mark by which the sinner against the Holy Ghost cannot be
discerned from one truly elected; and of the first question grounded thereupon,
I spoke unto you in my last exercise out of this place, as God enabled me. At
this time of the other three marks, by which he may be known to be a vessel
of wrath, and not of mercy; by Gods gracious assistance.

The first mark by which men swallowed up of so monstrous a sin, may hence
be known to be such as they are, is proper to themselves: Gods elect have no
part with them; Every one of them treads under foot the Son of God. (...)
^ notable pattern of the disposition of those plants which must be rooted out,
Mat. 15.13.
because they are not planted by God the Father. They are among the number of
those many, that are called, Mat. 2^.14. but God never vouchsafed them his
Holy Spirit, in so great measure, as to seal them unto the day of redemption.
And therefore this calling has not that effect in the^, which it has in Gods
chosen.

The chosen of God, when they are called, do speedily answer, and have ready
hearts to come unto the Lord. The Lord can no sooner say of his little remnant,
which he brings through the fire, and fineth, as silver; and tries, as gold;
it is my people; but they shall say again, the LORD is my God, Zach. 13.9. And
he shall no sooner say unto them, Seek ye my face; but their hearts shall
answer him again, like David's heart, Psalm. 27.8. O LORD, I will seek thy
face.

Far otherwise it fares with them, whom the Father has not given unto
Christ. For when they are called, either they readily make answer, like one of
those Lords, who ( Ierem. 2.31.) told God to his face; we are Lords, we will
no more come at thee: or else in outward show only, they yield obedience to the
calling of God. I say in outward show only; for their hearts, are not upright
with God. He that is (...), and sees and knows their hearts, knows they are
but hypocrites. Hypocrites they are, howsoever their conversatio^ for a time
(yea, even unto the hour of their death) may be such, as that by us they must
be taken for true members of Christ.

This impossibility to discern between such Goats and Christ's Sheep, made
St Paul to say of all the Romans, that they were Saints, beloved of God, Romans
1.7 and of all the Galatians, that they were the Sons of God, Gal. 3.26. and
of all the Corinthians, that they were washed and sanctified, and justified,
(1. Cor. 6.11.) It made St Peter also, to say of those Jews in Pontus,
Galatiae, Asia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia; of all of them with out exception;
that they were a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, (1. Pet. 2.9.)

In this very regard, the Holy Scriptures in many other places have graced such
sons of darkness with glorious titles. In Mat. 12.43, 44. they are said to
have swept and garnished their houses after the departure of the unclean
spirit. In Mat. 13.30. Christ says of them, that they hear the word and
incontinently with joy receive it. St Peter Ep. 2. chap 2. ver. 20. records
of them, that they have escaped from the filthiness of this world through
their knowledge in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The writer of this
Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 6 verse. 4, 5. notes of them, that they have been
once lightened; that they have tasted of the heavenly gift, of the good word of
God, of the powers of the world to come; that they have been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost. And chap. 10.26. that they have received the knowledge of the
truth. And in the 29. verse, this present parcel of my text; that they are
sanctified with the blood of the Testament.

Here might we stand amazed, to see such beauty in fire bra^ds prepared for
Hell, were it not, that the wisdom of God in all these places now alleged,
does plainly show, that such men, for all their outward painting and
whiteness, are notwithstanding within full of filthiness. For where they are
said, to have the unclean spirit departed from them, and after his departure
to have swept and garnished their houses, Mat. 12. there it follows, verse
45: that, that unclean spirit, returns accompanied with seven fouler
spirits then himself, and enters, and dwells in those new swept houses.
And where they are said, to hear the word, and incontinently with joy to
receive it, Mat. 13. there it follows verse 21. that as soon as tribulation
or persecution comme^h because of the word, by and by they are offended. And
where it is said, that they have escaped from the filthiness of the world
through their knowledge in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 2. there
is it added in the same chap. ver. 20. that they are yet tangled again in
filthiness, and are overcome thereof. And where it is registered of them, that
they have been lightened, have tasted of the heave^ly gift, of the good word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come, and have been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. there is it also noted, verse, 6. that they fall away,
and crucify again unto themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of him.
And lastly, where they may farther seem to be commended, as having received
the knowledge of the truth, and as being sanctified with the blood of the
Testament, Heb. 10. there are they certainly noted with disgrace, verse 26.
for sinning willingly, and verse 29, for treading under foot the Son of God,
etc.

Confer we these places one with another, and each will expound the other.
Thus: whosoever yet lodges the unclean spirit within his house; whosoever,
when tribulation and persecution comes because of the word, is by and by
offended; whosoever is yet tangled again in filthiness, and overcome thereof;
whosoever falls away, crucifies again unto himself the Son of God, and
makes a mock of him: whosoever sins willingly, he treads under foot the
Son of God. And so on the contrary side; whosoever treads under foot the
Son of God, he sins willingly, he is fallen away, crucifies Christ again,
and makes a mock of him; he is again tangled in filthiness and overcome
thereof; he, when tribulation and persecution comes because of the word, is
by and by offended; he yet lodges the unclean spirit within his house.

Thus we may conceive what the holy Spirit here means by this phrase, to
tread under foot the Son of God. The word he uses, is (...), noting by
translation extremity of contempt: as it does more plainly Mat. 7.6. Give not
that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine (...)
lest they tread your pearls under foot, and turning again all to rent you.
And as plainly, Mat. 5.13. If the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? It is thence forth good for nothing, hut to be cast out, (...),
and to be trodden under foot of men So, well has Oecumenius expounded (...),
understanding by treading under foot the Son of God, a contemning and
despising of him. And such is the exposition of Theophylact, of Ambrose, of
Primasius, and others, grounded upon the consideration of such things, as we
care not to tread under foot. And what are they? Truly such things as we
despise and make no account of, abject things; things without profit. In which
number if we put the Savior of the world; if we reckon of him no better, then
of unsavory salt, justly may we be said, like dogs and swine to use so
precious a pearl, and tread it under foot.

The good Bishop of Iustinopolis, PRIMASIVS, whom but now I named, upon this
place makes this question: How we may be said, to tread under foot him, who
being ascended far above all heavens, now sits at the right hand of God
the Father? His answer is threefold:

First, when neglecting Christ's commandments, we disdain to obey them, that
then we tread Christ under foot.

Secondly, when discerning the body of Christ, we eat and drink unworthily,
that then we tread Christ under foot.

Thirdly, when living wickedly, we remove from out of the tabernacle of our
hearts, that holy one, who has promised to dwell among us, and walk here,
that then we tread Christ under foot.

These answers of this ancient Father, albeit I must admit with reverence, yet
give me leave to add a fourth, most fitting the nature of this place we have
in hand. De perseverantia Sanctorum. p. 176.
I take it of Zanchius Miscel. lib. 2. There he puts this doctrine (and it
may serve for an answer to the question proposed by PRIMASIVS) Reccare contra
conscientiam, seu peccare ex contemptu Dei, hoc est, conculcare pedibus filium
Dei: To sin against our consciences, or to sin in contempt of God, this is,
to tread under foot the Son of God. After him thus I expound it. A man
sins against his conscience, when knowing and willing, when wittingly and
willingly, he sins: as if a man, knowing, if he does this or that, that he
shall do against the law of God, is yet notwithstanding willing, even against
the law of God, to do this or that. But this falls not out alike in the
elect, and in the reprobate. Both of them do sin against their consciences;
yet diversely. The elect does it improprie, imperfecte, non plene, not properly,
not perfectly, not fully. He in the general and universal, knowing that to be
evil which he is about to do, does it notwithstanding willingly, induced
thereto by his corrupt affections. Willingly he does it, and he does it not
willingly. Willingly in part only, forced by the flesh, but for his souls
desire guided by the Spirit simply not willingly. Willingly, in as much as he
naturally inclines to that he does; but in as much as it is sinful that he
does, not willingly. Willingly, in that the thing presented to his will, seems
to be good, profitable, or delightful; but in that it falls out to be against
the Majesty of God, not willingly.

So of one and the same will in the elect, there may be two considerations:
one, as it is partly renewed by the Spirit, and so, it wills not sin; the
other, as yet it retains some relics of original corruption, and so it
wills sin. S Paul by his own experience shows this to be true in all the
faithful, whose condition he declares, Romans 7.15. to be such, as that they
do not what they would; but what they hate, and would not do, that, even that
they do; though they delight in the law of God concerning the inner man; that
yet there is a law in their members, that leads them captive unto sin.
Notwithstanding the truth of all this; although the faithful can find no
means to perform that which is good the law of sin working death in them,
and causing them daily in a sort to sin against their consciences, yet
because in mind they serve the law of God, and sin not in contempt of God,
they may not be said to tread under foot the Son of God.

As for the reprobate, when they sin against their consciences, they do it
in the highest degree; they do it most properly, most perfectly, most fully. I
speak not this of all the reprobate: I am persuaded, that, as there have been
many which never heard, so there are many which hear not, and there shall be
many which shall never hear, the preaching of the Gospel; no not so much as
the name of Christ.

St Paul told the Lycaonians, Act. 14.16. how that God in former times
suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. As much in effect, he
told the Ephesians, chap. 2.12. that before their calling, they were aliens
from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise,
without hope, without Christ, without God in the world. MOSES and the Prophets
are plentiful in showing this, that in former times the Covenant was peculiar
to the Jews. Among the rest DAVID says, Psalm. 76.1, 2. that, in Iewry God is
known, his name is great in Israel, that his tabernacle is at Salem, and his
dwelling in Sion. The like he has, Psalm. 147.19. God shows his word unto
Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. But in this latter place he
adds moreover; God has not dealt so with any nation, neither have the
heathen knowledge of his laws. Hence I say, I am persuaded, that, as there
have been many which never heard, so there are many which hear not; and there
shall be many which shall never hear, the preaching of the Gospel; no, not so
much as the name of Christ.

But such reprobats here I mean not: I name them only that live within the
bosom of the Church. Them I name, to whom God has abundantly granted the
outward means of salvation, as the word, prayer, sacraments, and discipline:
them I name, to whom God gives many worthy properties of faith; as, to
acknowledge the divine truth in the Law and Gospel, to assent unto it; with
joy of heart to hear and speak it, and outwardly for a time to profess it:
them I name on whom God bestows no small measure of repentance; as to see
their sins, to be sorry sor them, to confess them, to resolve for a time to
sin no more. These are the reprobats, I name to be such as do sin in the
highest degree against their consciences.

For albeit many notable things are spoken of them, in the sanctified writings
of the blessed Prophets and Apostles; albeit they are clad in a fair robe, in
show like to that of Adam; Adams robe of integrity, of holiness, and of the
grace of God, wherewith before his fall he was invested; albeit the vesture
they have put on, be as seemly to the eye, as was that vesture of needle work
wrought with diverse colors, wherewith the Queen was clothed, yet, because
they are not (as the Queens daughter was) all glorious within, those notable
things spoken of them; that fair robe covering them; that goodly vesture put
on them, can avail, or advantage them nothing at all.

If their hearts, which are open and naked unto God, could be seen with the
eyes of slesh, then would they appear even to us, as they are, very like the
hearts of those Jews, Act. 13.45. who, because they saw the graces of God
magnified by Paul's preaching at Antioche, were full of envy, and railed at, and
gainsaid all that Paul had spoken* then would they appear eve^ to us, as they
are, very like the hearts of those Pharisees, Mark 3.30. who, of set purpose,
disdainefully, spitefully, and maliciously, turned the light into darkness,
when they saw, that Christ by the power of God, made the blind and dumb, that
was possessed with a devil, both to speak and see; for they said, he has an
unclean spirit: then would they appear even to us, as they are, very like the
heart of the sorcerer Elymas, Act. 13.10. who, a child of the devil, an enemy
of all righteousness, full of subtlety, full of mischief, withstood the
preaching of the word, and sought to turn away Sergius Paulus from the faith.

Such men as these, harboring within them, hearts of such quality, hearts made
fat, have also ears and eyes suitable to their hearts; ears made heavy, and
eyes shut up: they see not, they hear not, they understand not. If you talk
with them of the Holy Scriptures, happyly they will grant them to be a well
devised story, and that is all. Tell them of their Baptism; they count it no
better then the washing of their hands; of the Lords Supper; they prefer
their own far before it: of the Resurrection; you make them then conceited;
as to think what manner of bodies they shall have at that day; of what
proportion and stature their bodies shall be, and the like; and for your labor
and good advisement, they will hold you to be, as the Epicures and Stoics did
Paul, Act. 17.18. (...), that is, as our English text reads it, bablers, or
if you would rather the marginall reading, triflers, or rascals.

These men (were they used for their deserts) the preacher should pronounce,
and the Magistrate proclaim, for the foulest leapers, that possible may be:
well worthy (shall I say to be excluded the host, and to have their habitation
alone? or which is more: to have no access either to court or country, to be
exiled altogether their native soil, which ever yet gave the^ nourishment? No:
all this were too little, but) well worthy, I say, to be expelled from nature
it self, which so unnaturally they strive to bring to naught.

See here. The Lord sends a flaming fire, if possible, to awake them from their
sleep in sin: he sends his Ministers, to call them unto weeping and
mourning, to baldness and girding with sackcloath; as once he did unto the
Jews, Esai. 22.12. But has this fire, though mightily flaming, stirred them
from their sleep? Or have they yielded obedience to the calling of God? Behold
(it follows in that text) with them is joy and gladness, slaying oxen and
killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine; eating and drinking, for to
morrow (say they) we shall die: they say, to morrow we shall die.

In the mean time, that is, to day, while it is called to day, they sin like
Elyes sons, 1. Sam. 3.14. such a sin, which (God has sworn) shall not be
purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever: they sin with a high hand, Number.
15.30. not only presumptuously, and in secret, but openly, but perversely, but
contemptuously, but maliciously: they sin (...), as it is in the beginning of
my text verse 26. purposely, wilfully, only because they will sin, neither
fearing nor regarding God nor man. These me^ thus sinning, sinning (as I have
showed) against their consciences in the highest degree, and sinning in
contempt of God, may justly be said to tread under foot the Son of God.

And this, if you remember, was the doctrine put by Zanchius, resolving the
question made by Primasius. Primasius asks: How we may be said to tread under
foot him, who being ascended far above al Heavens, now sits at the right
hand of God the Father? Zanchius thus teaches: Peccare contra co^scientiam seu
peccare ex contemptu Dei, hoc est conculcare pedibus filium Dei. To sin against
one's conscience, or to sin in contempt of God, this is, to tread under
foot the Son of God.

Hitherto of this first mark, by which men wallowing in that foul sin, the
sin against the Holy Ghost, may be made known to the world. The second
follows in these words,

And accounts the blood of the Testament, as an unholy thing, wherewith he
was sanctified. WE have heretofore heard, that the blood of the Testament is
here put for the blood of Christ, because as Theophylact and Aquinas have both
noted, the New Testament was confirmed by the blood of Christ: and we have
further heard, how far a reprobate may be said to be sanctified with this
blood of the Testament; namely, not truly, nor before God, but in the face of
the Church, and before men, as it were sacrame^tally. How men thus sanctified
do account of that blood, we may now see by the word which the Holy Ghost
here uses: they count the blood of CHRIST, the blood of the Testament,
wherewith they were sanctified, to be (...), The Vulgar reads it pollutum, a
defiled thing, an unclean thing.

The expositors following that translation, do give diverse constructions of
this place. One is, that then we account the blood of CHRIST polluted and
unclean, when we are unworthy receavers of his blood. Another is, that then we
account the blood of CHRIST polluted and unclean, when being washed in
baptism through the power of his blood, we fall to sin again. A third is,
that then we account the blood of CHRIST polluted and unclean, when we judge
it unable to cleanse us from our sins: and to this purpose they allege that,
Eccles. 34.4. Ab immundo quis mundabitur? Who can be cleansed by the unclean?
Of these three the last construction has the best show; and no marvel, if
the rest do pervert the true meaning of this place, since they are grounded
upon a corrupt translation.

I know that so^etimes (...) signifies that, which is impure and unclean. So
it does, Mark. 7.2. where the Scribes and Pharisees complain upon Christ's
disciples for eating with unclean and filthy hands. In the text it is (...),
with common hands, explicated there by (...), a word noting unclean and foul
hands, such as unwashed hands do use to be. And so it does, Act. 10.14. where
Peter, being commanded to kill and eat of those beasts, let down unto him in
a certain vessel from Heaven, made answer: Not so LORD* for I have never
eaten any thing, that is POLLVTED and VNCLEAN^: the text has (...), which,
though generally it signifies common, is there restrai^ed by (...), to note
that which is polluted and unclean.

But for this place; since it is not necessary, that every thing by and by
should be polluted which is common, we may content our selves with the proper
signification of the word, and read here for (...), vulgar, or common blood,
as it may be, the blood of any man; for so is it expounded in the Syriacke; or
profane blood, and this is the interpretation of Pagnin, Vatablus, and others.

The exposition then, that here I do admit, is the same that Beza has in his
greater annotations: where he says, (...) in this place, is as much, as, (...)
1 Cor. 11.29. As if he should have said, They do account the blood of the
Testament to be but a vulgar, a common, an unholy, a profane thing, whosoever
they be that do esteem the blood of CHRIST shed for sinful man's ransom, of
no greater price, of no better value, of no more efficacy, then they do the
blood of other men, or sacrifices.

Hence we may gather, the persons here noted, who they are: even such as were
before described, and found to tread under foot the Son of God: that is, such
reprobates, as in the highest degree do sin against their consciences, and
in contempt of God.

Gods elect, I am assured, have no part with them; it is not possible, they
should be so far seduced, as to have so vile a persuasion of the blood of
their Redeemer. Yet because many, who do think they do surely stand in the
state of Grace, may be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and so fall
away from the living God, let the elect here be admonished, to examine
themselves, whether they do discern the blood of Christ; whether they esteem
it, as they should; whether they do not account it common.

Is it true which St James has, that our faith must be shown by our works? Why
the^ surely, our seldom celebrating of the memorial of the blessed death and
passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, must be a witness against us,
that we put not that difference which we should, between the blood of Christ,
and common blood. A fault well worthy our amending, that so at length
discerning the blood of Christ, as meet is; and esteeming it according to the
worth thereof, we would not dare, as now we do, for every trifling, (not
cause, but) excuse, then absent our selves, when occasion is given us, to offer
up our selves, our souls and bodies, a holy, a living, and an acceptable
sacrifice unto God.

Touching the wise ones. Politicians of this age, who discern not at all the
blood of Christ, but do account it common and profane, I only wish they could
lay unto their hearts, the end of one of their chief captains, NESTORIVS
Bishop of Constantinople, if not for their amendments sake, yet for their
assured horror and astonishment. This NESTORIVS filling his heart with delight
to blaspheme the Son of God, among others very detestable, held this one
opinion; that the blood of Christ is but (...), common blood, such as the blood
of another man may be. Dan. in Aug. de haeresib. c. 91
I need not belong in telling you, how he was summoned to a counsel held at
Ephesus at the appointment of Theodosius the younger; was there convicted in
disputation by Cyrell; was for his error deprived of his Bishopric, lurked
after that four years in a monastery near unto Antiochia; was thence by the
Emperors commandment sent an exile to the uttermost borders of Egypt and
Africa: I need not, I say, be long in telling you of all this: the thing I
note is his end. In this his banishment, when he was full of years; that some
memorable example (as in Corah, Dathan, and Abiram) of his so great and so
impious blaspheming against Christ, might remain unto posterity, it pleased
God in justice, that first worms should eat and consume his tongue, and then
that the earth should open her mouth and swallow him up. -- (...): Even so let
all thine enemies perish, O LORD.

Now follows the third mark, by which men holden in that unpardonable sin,
the sin against the holy Ghost, may be made known to the world; in these
words,

And does despite the Spirit of Grace. The Holy Ghost, is here called the
Spirit of Grace, ab effectu, by reason of that it works in us. By it we
receive grace offered in Christ Jesus. It enlightneth our minds by faith; it
seals to our hearts the adoption of God; it regenerateth us into newness of
life; it engrafteth us into the body of Christ; in a word, by it, Christ with
all his blessings and benefits is made ours. Now if a man, that is made
partaker of this holy Ghost, shall greedily, wilfully, and purposely make the
good graces of God within him to be fruitless, who shall plead for him? Surely
no man. For he it is, that is here noted (...), injuriously, and co^tumeliously
to use, impudently to abuse, and to despite the Spirit of Grace.

Here may the faithful well be put in mind of their own estates, to consider,
whether they be not in peril of falling away from God, since it is a truth not
to be gainesaid, that the very faithful do oftentimes diminish and lessen,
the good graces of God within them.

I doubt not, should you be called to witness, but that every one of you,
taught by your own experience, would bear record to this truth. If not; that
exhortation of St Paul made unto the Ephesians, and that his other unto the
Thessalonians, do strongly confirm it. In the bowels of compassion, he
cou^selleth the Ephesians. 4.30.
EPHESIANS, not to grieve the Spirit, and the THESSALONIANS, not to 1 Thessalonians.
5.19
quench the spirit. Well knew the blessed Apostle, that the Holy Spirit uses
to be grieved, and the fire thereof to be quenched, whenever we put away
from within us, the care of Gods word, not regarding the sanctified motions of
our hearts, the sanctified words of our lips, the sanctified actions of our
hands, but entertaining the contra^y, corrupt thoughts, evil words, wicked
actions.

Now if there be no man that can truly say: Ever hitherto my thoughts have
been pure, my words undefiled, my deeds just; let this truth stand without
contradiction; The faithful do oftentimes dimin^sh, and lessen, the good
graces of God within them. And therefore, as I said, they may here well be put
in mind of their own estates, to consider, whether they be not in peril of
falling away from God

A consideration (beloved in the Lord) if we are chosen out of the world, if
in CHRIST we are anointed and sealed; if our building be of God, not made
with hands, but eternal in the Heavens, a consideration, I say, that must
needs make us, do our best, in working out our salvation, in attaining unto
faith, in dying unto sin, in living unto newness of life.

For when we see, that men sanctified with the blood of CHRIST, may, not only
tread under foot the Son of God, and despise him; nor only account the blood
of Christ, to be common blood, and profane, as it were the blood of any other
man; but also despite the Spirit of Grace, and use it with all injury and
contumely; will not our hearts burn within us? What are we, but men sanctified
with the blood of CHRIST? Let us then in all humbleness of mind, walk as it
becomes men so sanctified; and never give ear to such deceauers, as would
therefore persuade us to live without all care in this world, because, if we
are of the faithful, it is impossible we should fall away.

Touching the elect; I grant it to be very true; that though they may fall
grievously, and dangerously, yet they cannot fall finally in the end, nor
utterly at any time: though they may (...) Ephesians. 4.30. grieve the Spirit; yea,
though they may (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. quench the Spirit, for a time; yet can
they not like the sinners, whose marks I have now in some measure opened
(...), they cannot do contumely unto, nor can despite the Spirit. For by it
are they sealed unto the day of redemption.

What of all this? what if they, that are once written in the book of life,
can never be razed out thereof? What, if they that are once in the state of
grace, shall be in the same for ever? Shall we that are written in the book of
life, and do stand by grace, therefore not care how we commit sin? God
forbid. This truth, namely, that not one of the faithful shall perish, may be
a comfort to us, that have already sinned; but surely no encouragement to them,
that will sin hereafter.

But grace abounds above sin. Very true. Yet if we therefore sin, that
grace may abound, accursed are we. And how shall we that are dead to sin, yet
live therein? St Paul holds this for an impossibility, Romans 6. Know ye not
(says he) that all we that have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death? Why then, are we buried by baptism into his death,
that, as he was raised from the dead, so we also should walk in newness of
life? Are we not forbidden to do evil, even then, when we are assured good
may come thereof? How then dare we, make the mercies of God a defense for our
sins?

But there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
though they fall seven times a day. Neither is there. Rom 8.4.
For they being in CHRIST, do walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

But may not we repent hereafter, though now we live in sin? Thou fool, how
know thou, that this night, Luke 12.20.
they will not fetch away thy soul from thee?

What now remains? but that we all, take al possible heed; lest at any time
there be in any of us, an evil heart, and unfaithful to depart away from the
living God. And since we are sanctified with the blood of the Testament,
beseech we Almighty God, that he would perfect his good work begun in us,
and never suffer us through the deceaueablenesse of sin to be so far
seduced, as to tread under foot his eternal Son, to account his blood
common, or to despite the spirit of Grace.

SERMO NONVS.
HEB. 10.30. Novimus enim eum qui dixit, Meum est vlcisci, ego rependam, dicit
Dominus. Et rursum, Dominus judicabit populum suum.


DAbitis mihi veniam (Viri Patres and Fratres, in Christo charissimi) si ab
exordio longo, and alte petito fortasse etiam alieno, quo recreant se nonnulli,
prorsus abstinuero. Diutius vos non tenebo. Aggredior ad statum and principalem
huius loci propositionem. Sic habet: Hebraeis, adeoque fidelibus omnibus,
ideoque and nobis, non est a Christo deficiendum, sed in coepta semel
professione persistendum. Hac amicissima Apostoli ad perseverantiam in fide
Christi invitatione, si qui non tangantur, sunt illi in peccatis plane mortui.
Qui autem ex potentia Dei cum Christo vivunt, hac audita poenarum comminatione
mirifice percelluntur. Nec mirum. Hic enim apertis verbis ostenditur, certam
and severissimam futuram Dei ultionem in eos omnes, qui post acceptam veritatis
cognitionem ultro peccaverint. Qui vltro post agnitam veritatem peccaverit; qui
sciens ac volens gratiam, quam adeptus erat abiecerit; qui a Christi morte, non
particulari aliquo delicto, sed abiecta in totum fide discesserit; ei hostia
pro peccatis non est residua; horrenda judicii expectatio eum exedet; ignis
fervor eum devorabit. Haec habemus expressa versibus 26, 27.

Voluntatie peccantibus post acceptam veritatis notitiam, non amplius
relinquitur pro peccatis hostia;

Sed terribilis expectatio judicij, and zelus ignis, qui devorabit adversarios.

Propositio in se dilucida and certissima; utpote in cuius veritatem Inferorum
portae nunquam sunt praevaliturae. Attamen cum amentes simus, and tardi cord,
ad credendum omnibus, quae sanctissimi Christi testes sunt locuti, id, quod in
rem nostram sit, facit Apostolus; propositam veritatem duplici stabilit
argumento: quorum prius ductum est a minoribus comparatis; posterius a divinis
pronuntiatis: utrumque aptissimum, illud ad Iudaeos, hoc ad quoscunque
commovendos. Prius exponitur verse. 28.29. in quibus Spiritus ille veritatis,
quem mundus non potest recipere, fidelibus satis indicat, poenam minime dubiam,
mortem certissimam eis omnibus esse constitutam, qui MOSIS legem spreverint:
itaque deducit nos ad seriam meditationem acerbissimi illius supplicij, quo
sine omni controversia excruciabuntur, qui Dei filium pro nihilo habuerint.
Quid enim planius dici potuit? quid vehementius?

Qui irritam fecerit Mosis legem, absque misericordia ex duorum aut trium
testimonio moritur.

Quanto (putatis) acerbiore supplicio dignus censebitur, qui filium Dei
conculcarit, and sanguinem foederis, per quem fuerat sanctificatus, profanum
duxerit, and spiritum gratiae contumelia affecerit?

Posterius argumentum habetur verse. 30. Duobus nititur testimoniis. Virumque
legimus, Deuteronomy. 32. Primum verse. 35. Mea est ultio and retributio. Alterum verse.
36. Iudicabit JEHOVAH populu^ suum De testimoniorum istorum sirmitudine nihil
omnino detrahit, quod praemittitur; (...): scimus, Deum non esse, ut hominem,
qui mentiatur; scimus, eum sui semper simile^; scimus, eorum, quae dixit, ipsum
poenitere non posse.

(...), etc. Novimus eum qui dixit, Mihi ultio, ego retribuam, dicit DOMINVS:
and rursum; DOMINVS judicabit populum suum.

Accuratam hanc superioris doctrinae confirmationem illustri tandem exornat
Epiphonemate, vt illo, de horrenda divini iudicij seueritate been moniti, in eo
toti simus, vt ne simus apostatae. Verse. 31.

Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viuentis. Horrendum est: sed quibus? Number
fidelibus? Nihil minus. Fidelis David, cum ei a Gade Propheta Dei iussu trium
maloru^ daretur optio, incida^ obsecro, inquit, in manum IEHOVAE, quia magnae
sunt miserationes ejus. Sic horrendum no^ est eis, qui fide viuunt, vt in Dei
manus incidant. At quibus igitur hic horror incutitur? Incutitur sane omnibus
infidelibus and impijs; sed apostatis praecipue, a fide Christi defectoribus, a
pura religione transfugis, Evangelicaeque doctrinae proditoribus. At hi viuunt
tame^. Viuunt? Immo senescunt; etiam valent viribus: domibus eorum pax a pauore
est, nec est virga Dei super eos: in labor mortalium non sunt, and cum
reliquis hominibus non afficiuntur plagis. Superbia, tanquam torque, cinguntur,
and violentia, velut orname^to, vestiuntur. Attendite, o qui caelis os vestrum
opponitis, and crudimini: vel hinc discatis, Deum nostrum, Deum esse vivum;
Deum esse, qui virga sua ferrea vt vas figuli, vel eos qui collo sunt
durissimo, dissipabit; Deum esse, praeter quem nullus est; Deum solum esse, qui
and possit, and velit, cuiusuis contumacis and corpus and anima^ perdere in
Gehenna. Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei vivi, (...): rectissime habet
Epigramma.
Insuave est, quicquid nimium est; nam dicitur, olim
Mel quoque, si immodica est copia, bilis erit.


Dabo igitur operam, (Florentissimi Academici) vt, quae dicturus sum, minimo
dicam cum fastidio. In iteratione eorum, quae de propositione huius loci,
eiusdemque confirmationis argumento primo, ante hac exposui, nullus ero. Accedo
libentius ad alterius argumenti brevem quandam expositionem. Proponitur, Verse.
30.

Novimus eum qui dixit; Mihi vltio, ego rependam, dicit Dominus; and iterum,
judicabit Dominus populum suum.

Quo in versu tria mihi videntur praecipue esse obseruanda.

Primum, Deum in omnibus promissionibus suis, in omnibus dictis suis veracem
esse. Id colligo ex eo quod praemittitur; Nouimus eum qui dixit.

Secundum, Deum illatas non solum sibi, sed and populo suo, injurias vlturum.
Id verba volunt, quae statim subiunguntur; Mihi vltio, ego retribuam, dicit
Dominus.

Tertium, Deum etiam in populum suum severissime animadversurum. Id, quod
vltimo loco asseritur: DOMINVS judicabit populum suum.

Ab horum primo oration mea reliqua initium capiet, and in eo terminabitur.

Tritum est illud Scholasticorum: Deum non tantum verum esse, sed and ipsam
esse veritatem; veritatem in seipso, in operibus suis, in verbis suis.

Deus veritas est in seipso; tum quia id est verissime, quod se videt ac novit
esse; aeterna scilicet, ac perfectissima essentia; tum quia forma est and
species rerum omnium, quae extra ipsum sunt, ad quam, quaecunque sunt, sunt
conformata.

Deus veritas est in operibus suis; tam ordinariis; cuiusmodi sunt opera
creationis, and gubernationis mundi; quam extraordinariis; qualia appello,
opera miraculorum, and conservationis Ecclesiae.

Deus denique veritas est in verbis suis: veritas in verbo incarnato, vero Dei
filio, Deo and homine, vtroque vero; Propheta, Pontifice, Rege, veris singulis.
Veritas etia^ and in verbo scripto, ex quo non praeteribit apex vnus, donec
omnia facta fuerint. Coelum and terra prius praeteribunt. Tot modis Deus verus
dicitur, etiam ipsa veritas, sua ipsius veritas. Cetera nil moror. Vnica certe
doctrinae coelestis cognitio nobis est ad salutem necessaria; quae cum non sit
aliunde, quam e font divino, e verbo Dei scripto, haurienda, nobis quaerenda
non est in lutulentis Philosophorum lacunis. Purissimum habemus Dei verbum,
semen illud immortale, ab antiquissimis iam olim temporibus, ad haec nostra
deductum secula. Quid no^ eo delectemur? Quid non in eo consenescimus? O quanta
faex est in orb Christiano, ut nihil fere tam sit (...), quod non alicui
videatur venustissimum? Nihil dico, hunc in fructuosa vtriusque juris scientia
studium ponere; illum medicorum libris pervolutandis invigilare; alium artibus
ingenuis perdiscendis aetatem agere. Scio jurisconsultorum domos ipsa esse
Civitatum oracula, eosque, dum pro tribunali ius dicunt, a potentissimo rerum
omnium conditore Deos esse appellatos. Scio, medicos honor esse afficiendos;
Eccles. 38.1.
creavit eos Dominus. Quin and arts liberaliores suam habent laudem: rite and
loco adhibitae ita Dominam Theologiam non dedecorant, vt ei potius ancillentur,
et inserviant.

Hoc tamen liceat dicere, plerosque hisce studiis sic inflammari, ut tempus eis
non sit reliquum, quod verbi divini, aut auditioni, aut lectioni, aut
meditationi velint impertire.

Si istis hoc est dandum vitio; quid de illis dicendum, qui quantum in ipsorum
animis roboris est, and nervorum, id totum sine fructu sinunt praeterire; dum
edenda curant and pervulga^da, quae ipsi fecerint poemata, nugatoria,
scurrilia, lasciva? quorum ingrata senioribus dulcedine corruptelaque, mirum ni
sint iuniorum mores depravati. De libellis ipsis sic facile censuerim,
aptissimos esse, qui tunica sint scombris, and involucra thuri, odoribus,
piperi, ceterisque, quaecunque chartis amiciuntur ineptissimis: dignissimos
proculdubio, qui id patiantur, quod magici illi libri, quorum facta est mentio,
Act. 19.19. ut nimirum igni propalam dentur absumendi.

De libellorum istiusmodi confectoribus asperius nil dicam. Habebunt unde
erudiantur, si Cap. 12 12.
Ecclesiasten consuluerint. Ille, qua fuit coelesti sapientia perstrinxit eos
omnes, qui in posterum ludicra scriberent and inutilia. Quam modeste id fecerit
verba indicabunt faciendi multos libros nullus est finis. Non hic substitit
prudentissimus Davidis filius: addidit; and lectio multoru^ fatigatio carnis.
Quo dicto* etiam cultiori literaturae inussit notam dedecoris and infamiae,
nisi ad laudem gloriosae Dei gratiae referatur; tantum abfuit ut eos
approbaret, qui lectitandis scriptionibus profanis and impiis semet oblectarent.

At little tamen, aetas nostra peperit quamplurimos. Ita plerique sumus (qui
sumus Academici) ad quamlibet perversitatem ingenio proclivi, ut ad ineptias
quascunque malimus abire, quam ut reconditum sapientiae coelestis thesaurum,
nobis ipsis vel minimo cum sudore vel^mus comparare. Duo mala facimus,
scaturiginem aquarum viventium derelinquimus; Ierem. 2.13
and effodimus nobis cisternas, cisternas fractas, aquae capiendae nunquam
suffecturas, Quae certe minime faceremus, si nossemus unicum illum verum Deum,
acerrimum sui ipsius defensorem, acerbissimum hostium suorum vindicem,
iustissimum populi sui assertorem.

Eum si nossemus, non, perinde ac vivimus, viveremus; pia mente eum coleremus;
mandata eius servaremus. Nimium, heu nimium, mentes nostras intra pollutionis
humanae fines continemus: extra terram non respicimus; acuti ad ea, quae iuxta
nos sunt, dijudicanda, cum cogitationes nostras in coelum erigimus, hebescimus,
and obtundimur. Ita sumus homines natura comparati, nihil ut sciamus eorum,
quae Dei sunt.

Abscede a me Satana; offendiculo mihi es; Matthew. 16.23.
non sapis quae Dei sunt, sed quae hominum: dignus erat Petrus, qui haec
audiret a Domino. Iustissima est illa quorela Dei, Ierem. 4.22. qua populum
suum insimulat stultitiae, quod ipsum non noverint. De Ephraimo and Israele
pronunciat Hoseas, c. 5. 4. ipsos IEHOVAM non agnoscere. Admonetur Titus, illa
ad ipsum epistola, c. 1.16. esse, qui profitentur Deum se scire, cum factis
negent. Abominandi sunt and rebels, and ad omne opus bonu^ rejectanei:
polluta sunt and mente and conscientia: Deum profitentur se scire, que^ minime
sciunt, factis negant. Apertissime Johannes ep. 1. c. 2.4. Qui dicit se nosse
Deum, and mandata ejus non servat, mendax est; non est in eo veritas. Si haec
vera sint, tam certis sacraru^ literarum testata monumentis; certumque sit quod
de gentibus affirmat Apostolus, ipsas, et si Deo nec gloriam darent, Romans 1.12.
nec gratias agerent, Deum tamen cognovisse: nec ullius possit levitatis argui,
quod hoc in loco omnium fidelium nomine profertur; Novimus eum qui dixit: non
abs re facturus mihi videor, si quam varia sit hominum de Deo notitia, paucis
tetigero.

Extra controversiam ponimus, quendam inesse humanae menti eumque instinctu
naturali, divinitatis sensum. Hoc ipsum vel Ethnicis ipsis sic innotuit, ut
ipsorum non nemo affirmarit pro certissimo, nullam esse tam barbaram nationem;
nullam gentem tam efferatam, cui non insideat haec persuasio, Deum esse. Late
certe patet, nec obscura est is it haec in humana mente divini numinis impressio.

Si quis enim paulisper a terrenis curis and studijs vacuus, tota^ hanc mundi
machinam consideret, quae ut decore ornata est mirifico, ita legibus gubernatur
certissimis; certe fieri non potest, quin cogitet, esse aliquem, qui haec omnia
condiderit, condita sui^ legibus circumscripserit, circumscripta legibus intra
illaru^ fines continuerit, and contineat. Haec si cogitarit, incipit mox
videre, qualis sit DEVS. Quia enim ipsum esse rerum omnium creatore^, ideoque
rebus omnibus creatis priorem sentit, luculentum habet intra se de ejus
aeternitate testimonium. Si singularum mundi partium mirabiles motus and
effecta contempletur; haec illum de immensa Creatoris sui potentia admonebunt:
si earundem decoram, and per omnia sibi ipsi convenientem, dispositionem
expendat; illius sapientiam necessario admirabitur: si firmum, sibique semper
constantem, huius machinae ordinem videat, Dei veritas in oculos eius incurret.
Pergat porro; spectetque usum singulorum, and utilitatem ex iis ad homines
redeuntem, certus erit (nisi fuerit ingratus) de Dei bonitate. A coelis oculos
convertat ad terram, ad flores agri, ad volucres, ad minutissima quaeque
animalcula; eorum sive formam, sive agilitatem ponderet, velit nolit, etiam in
illis cogetur virtutem agnoscere, humana long majorem. In semetipsum
respiciat, consideretque membrorum corporis sui dispositionem and vsum, multa
perspiciet divinae potentiae, sapientiae, bonitatis argumenta. His denique
adiiciat exempla iudiciorum Dei, quibus aut cultores suos tuetur, aut hosts
punit, perspicua scilicet mansuetudinis and justitiae ipsius specimina
contuebitur.

Habemus iam apertum, and nobis ob oculos positum, librum illum physicum, quo
aeternus ille Rex Regum, potentissimus, sapientissimus, verissimus, optimus,
benignissimus, and iustissimus declaratur. Haec est illa divini numinis
intelligentia; haec illa Dei notitia, quam Paulus ad Romans 1o. firmiter
asseverat hominum mentibus insculptam esse, and vniversis inditam, ut ne quis
impietatem suam, and iniustitiam, excusatione ignorantiae posset defendere.

Praeter istam ex libro creaturarum perceptam Dei cognitionem, alia est long
perfectior ex libro legis capienda. Singular Dei donum est, quod ad Ecclesiam
suam erudiendam, non mutis tantum utatur magistris, sed and os suum
sacrosanctum aperiat, quo certissimos nos faciat, ipsum se solum esse and
summum Deu^, qui unice fit observandus, timendus, colendus. Haec Dei notitia,
qua ab ipsius ore, ex verbo ejus scripto instruimur; latissime diffunditur in
Ecclesiam universam. Cum Hierosolymitanis habitat Iebusaeus: una crescunt
urtica and myrrha; hoedi cum agnis ad eundem accedunt pastum; pisces tam mali
quam boni capiuntur; in agro Domini, ut florent inter spinas lilia, sic inter
spicas Zizania. Haec visibilis Ecclesiae sors est, haec facies, hic color. In
ea sunt Electi, fideles, pii; sunt and Reprobi, infideles, impii. Tam hi, quam
illi, ad verbum audiendum vocati, and admissi, ex eodem edocentur, non solum
esse Deum; sed and observandum esse, time^dum esse, colendum esse.

Sola superest notitia Dei perfectissima, ex libro fidei haurienda: qua sola
illuminamur in spem aeternae vitae; qua sola, qui mortui eramus, vivificamur;
qua sola Deum ipsum, non tantum ut mundi conditorem, omniumque quae fiunt,
unicum autore^ and arbitrum, sed etiam, ut nostrum in Mediatoris persona
redemptorem, confitemur and agnoscimus.

Tam varia est hominum de Deo notitia. Ex libro creaturarum scimus esse Deum;
ex libro legis intelligimus ipsum esse observandum, timendum and colendum; ex
^ibro fidei credimus eunde^ nobis esse Servatorem. Haec ultima and
perfectissima Dei notitia, unice vera and salutaris, in solis electis ex
Evangelij gratia residens and elucens, ea est, quam hoc in loco vult Apostolus,
dum ait: Novimus eum qui dixit.

Quibus verbis vis inest atque acrimonia quaedam ad movendu^. Ac si diceret:
quid non putamus fore; quid non credimus fore, ut Christi derisores, eiusque
sanguinis contemptores, gravi supplicio coerceantur? Novimus cum qui dixit, Mea
est ultio. Nos qui a patre Christo damur, qui ex mundo seligimur, qui a
potestate Satanae eximimur, vere novimus eum, qui dixit, Mea est ultio. Vere
scimus qualis sit Deus, quam zelotes, quam severus and incorruptus iniquitatum
ultor. Contemptum sui nunquam feret impunitum.

Dixit, Mea est ultio, ego rependam] Dixit? and non perficiet? Immo, inquit
BALAAMVS: Deus fortis non est homo, Number. 23.10.
qui mentiatur, aut filius hominis, quem poeniteat. Ardentius dictum quod
statim adiungit, an ipse dixerit and non faciet? an loquutus fuerit, and non
praestabit illud? Si iste* Bosoris filius, minus apud nos autoritate sua
possit, quod mercedem iniquitatis amaverit: at audimus 1 Samuel 15 29
Samuelem id ipsum confitentem; Fortitudo Israelis non mentietur and
poenitudine non flectetur, neque enim homo est, ut poeniteat eum: audimus Rom
9.19 Malac. 3.6.
Apostolum interrogantem, Voluntati Dei quis resistit? audimus ipsum Deum de se
dicentem, Ego Deus, and non mutor. Quod etiamsi dictum vult Hieronymus, ne
putemus, Deum divinitatis mutare naturam; AVGVSTINVS tame^ aliud mavult illis
verbis significari, nempe in Deo non esse mutationem secundum voluntatem, and
propositum. Aptissima sane interpretatio, and illi Scholasticorum regulae
convenientissima: voluntatem Dei, quocunque sese vertant creaturae, manner
se^per invictam, atque immutabilem. Ego Deus, and non mutor. Cu^ vos mutaverit
and in deterius culpa vestra, and in melius gratia mea, Ego non mutor. Plura
non urgeo.

Ex istis liquido constat, DEVM in omnibus promissionibus suis, in omnibus
dictis suis veracem esse, talemque agnosci a fidelibus Novimus eum qui dixit]
Dixit, and facturus est, Dixit, and praestabit illud: Dixit, Mea est ultio, ego
rependam. De quo eius dicto, si ipse voluerit, proxime. Nunc finis sit.

Illustra faciem tuam erga nos, o Excelse. Concede quaesumus, ut in tenebris
hujus mundi semper nobis praeluceat, quae elucet in verbo tuo, tua veritas; ut
in eam indies magis magisque intenti, convenienter eidem cursum nostrum
peragamus, donec tandem perveniamus ad fruitionem beatissimae illius quietis,
quam nobis peperit vnigenitus Filius tuus, Dominus noster, Jesus Christus: cui
tecum, and cum Spiritu Sancto, honor sit and gloria, in secula, AMEN.

THE NINTH SERMON, TRANslated into English by a learned student in Divinity.
HEBR. 10. VER. 30. 30 For we know him that has said, Vengeance (belongs)
unto me: I will recompense, says the LORD. And again, The LORD shall judge
his people.


I Nothing doubt, Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but ye will
pardon me, if I altogether abstain from a long, impertinent, and far fetched
entrance, wherewith some use to please themselves. I will not long hold you;
but come to the state, and principal proposition and sum of these words:
which is, that the Hebrews, as also all the faithful, of which number we are,
must not fall away from Christ, but firmly continue in that calling and
profession, which they have once undertaken. If there be any, which have not a
true feeling and touch of this the Apostles most loving invitation to be
constant in the faith of Christ, they are altogether dead in their sins. But
they which live by the power of God with Christ, are wonderfully affected, when
they hear such punishments denounced. And no marvel. For here we be taught
by plain express words, that God will certainly most severely be revenged of
those, who do willingly sin, after they have received the knowledge of the
truth. He that shall willingly sin after the knowledge of the truth; he that
shall wilfully cast away the grace which he has received; he that shall depart
from the death and blood of Christ, not by any particular sin, but by a total
renou^cing of the faith: to him there remains no more sacrifice for sins,
but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour
the adversaries. These things are plainly delivered in the 26 and 27 verses.

26 If we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins;

27 But a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries.

The proposition is in it self so certain and perspicuous, that the gates of
Hell shall never prevail against the truth thereof. But because we are dull and
slow of heart to believe all things, which the most holy witnesses of Christ
have spoken: therefore the Apostle does here apply himself for our good, and
does strengthen and prove the foresaid truth, with a double argument. The first
whereof is drawn from a comparison with smaller matters. The second, from Gods
own words. Both the arguments are very fit and apposite; one to refute the
Jews, the other to excite, and stir us all up.

The first argument is expressed, verse. 28, 29. wherein that spirit of truth
which the world cannot receive, does assure the faithful, that all they shall
certainly die, which despise MOSES law; and so the same spirit does as it were
lead us by the hand to a serious and earnest meditation of that most bitter
punishment, wherewith all those questionless shall be tortured, which tread
under foot the Son of God. What could be spoken more plainly? what more
forcibly? He that despises Moses law, dies without mercy, under two or three
witnesses, v. 28. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be
worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of
the Testament, as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does
despite the spirit of grace? v. 29.

We have the second argument, verse. 30. and it is grounded upon two
testimonies, which are recorded, Deuteronomy. 32. The first verse. 35. Vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense says the LORD. The second ver. 36. The
LORD shall judge his people.

The strength of these testimonies is nothing weakened by that which goes
before, (...), we know him that has said; we know, God is not as man that
he should lie; we know, he is always like himself; we know he does never
repent of those things, which he has said.

(...)] We know him that has said it; vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the Lord: and again, the Lord shall judge his people. The
proof of this doctrine the Apostle does elegantly conclude verse. 31. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. By which men being
warned of the fearful severitie of Gods judgment, may learn so to apply
themselves, that they never fall from Christ.

It is a fearful thing. But to whom? To the faithful? No. Holy David, when by
Gods commandment the Prophet Gad offered him the choice of three evils, I am,
says he, 2. Sam. 24.14.
in a wonderful straight, let us fall now into the hand of the LORD, for his
mercies are great. So then to them, which live by faith, it is not a fearful
thing, to fall into the hands of God.

On whom then falls this fear? Truly upon all the wicked, and unbelievers,
but especially upon Apostataes, those which fall from Christ, forsake the true
religion, and betray the Gospel.

But yet these live. Live? yea, live to be old; are lusty, and strong Peace
is in their habitations, neither has God laid his scourge upon them: they
toil not themselves as others do, Psalm. 73.5.
neither are they plagued like other men. They gird themselves with pride, as
with a chain, and cloth themselves with cruelty, as with a garment.

Harken now, and be learned, Psalm. 73.8.
ye that set your face against Heaven. Hence ye may learn, that our God is a
living God, that God it is, who with his iron rod will break the stifnecked,
Psalm. 2.9.
like a potters vessel: that this is the God, beside whom there is no other,
that it is he alone, who both can, and will destroy the wicked man, both soul
and body, in hell fire. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

(...): as the Greek Epigrammatist says.

Insuave est, quicquid nimium est; nam dicitur, olim Mel quoque, si immodica
est copia, bilis erit. Too much of any thing is unpleasant and distasteful;
neither is it good to eat too much honey, Prove. 25.27.
because it turns into choler. Therefore I will endeavor, Beloved in our
Savior Jesus Christ, to speak so, and such things, which shall not be
distasteful unto you. I will not repeat those things which I have heretofore
spoken of the Proposition, and of the first argument, by which the proposition
is confirmed. I will briefly declare the force of the second argument which is
contained in the 30. verse; We know him that has said, Vengeance belongs
unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD; And again; The LORD shall judge
his people.

In which verse I think three things especially worthy our observation.

The first, that God is true in all his promises and sayings, Which I gather
out of these words, We know him that has said.

The second, that God will revenge himself, not only of those injuries, which
are done to himself, but of those also, which his people suffer. This the
words imply, that immediately follow, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will
recompense, says the LORD.

The third, that God will most severely and sharply punish his own people.
This is contained in the last words, The LORD shall judge his people.

From the first of these I will begin my intended discourse, and therewith
conclude. It is a common saying in the Schoolmen, Deum non tantum verum esse,
sed and ipsam esse veritatem, that God is not only true, but truth it self;
Truth in himself, in his works, and in his words.

God is truth, in himself, both because he is most truly that, which he sees
and knows himself to be, to wit, the eternal and most perfect essence, and
being; as also because he is the form and beauty of all things, which are
without him, according to which all things that be, must be conformed and
proportioned.

God is truth in his works, both ordinary, such as are the works of
Creation, and government of the world; and also extraordinary, by which I
mean miraculous works, and such whereby he preserues his faithful Church.

Lastly, God is truth in his words; truth both in VERBO INCARNATO, that
incarnate word, the true son of God, God and man, vtroque vero, both a true
God, and true man; a true Prophet, Priest, and King: and he is truth also verbo
scripto, in his written word, of which one IOTA shall not pass, till all
things be fulfilled. Nay, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass.

So many ways God is said to be true, and truth it self, nay Sua ipsius
veritas, his own truth, and truth of himself. I pass over many things.
Truly, seeing the knowledge of heavenly doctrine, which is necessary for us
to salvation, is to be drawn only out of the divine fountain, the written word
of God, we must not seek for it in the muddie channels of heathen
Philosophers. We have the most pure word of God, that immortal seed,
delivered over to us from the ancient Patriarchs, and Prophets. Why should we
not take delight, and spend our days therein? The Christian world is so
corrupted, that there is nothing so improper, which to one or other seems not
most elegant. I say not, that one spends his time in the study of the Laws
another in Physic, a third in the liberal sciences. I know that Lawiers
houses are counted oracula civitatum, and that, when they sit as judges, they
are called Gods by God himself. I know the Eccles. 38.1.
Physician is to be honored, because God has created him. I know, that
liberal Arts and Sciences are praiseworthy, and of so great use, that they may
adorn and set forth Divinity. Yet this I will say, that many are so incensed
with these studies, that they afford no time for the hearing, reading, or
meditating, of the word of God.

If these deserve reproof, what shall we say of those, who spend the flower,
and strength of their wits in divulging wanton and scurrilous Poems? Which
though they be distasteful to men of grave and settled judgments, yet marvel
it is, if they taint not and infect young men's manners. The books themselves
deserve no better, in my judgment, then to be made cases to wrap in pepper,
and other spices, yea to be burned as were those magic and curious books,
mentioned, Act. 19.19.

Against such libellers I will not use bitterness; they may learn, if they
will, of the Preacher, who, being endued with heavenly wisdom, does check all
those which shall write vain things. Eccles. 12.12.
Hear how modestly he does it, There is none end in making many books; the
most wise son of David stays not here, but adds, Much reading is a wearines
to the flesh. In which words he has stamped a note of infamy upon better
learning, if it be not referred to the glory of God. So far is this wise
Preacher from approving those, which delight themselves in reading profane and
wicked books.

Our age is full of such. Most of us, students in the University, have so
prevented our wits, that we had rather run after vanities, then, with any the
least sweat of our brows, acquire to our selves the hidden treasure of
heavenly wisdom. We commit two evils; Ierem. 2.13.
we have forsaken the fountain of living waters, to dig our selves pits,
pits that can hold no water. Which we would never do, if we knew, that the
only true God, were a most earnest defender of himself, a most severe revenger
of his enemies, and a just judge of his people. If we knew him, we would not
live as we do, but worship him with a true heart, and keep his commandments.
The more is the pity, that we still hold our minds ensnared in the bonds of
man's corrupt nature. We look not above the earth: quick sighted we are in
earthly affairs, but blind and dull in the contemplation of heavenly things.

Our nature is so corrupt, that we know nothing of the things of God. Matthew.
16.23
Depart from me SATAN, thou art an offense unto me, because thou understand
not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men. God does most
justly complain Ierem. 4.22. that his people is foolish, and have not known
him. The Prophet Hosea, chap. 5.4. complains of Ephraim and Israel, that they
have not known the Lord. The Apostle does warn Titus, chap. 1. ver. 16. that
there are me^, who profess they know God, but by works deny him, and are
abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Their minds
and consciences are defiled. They profess they know him, who^ they do not
know, because by works they deny him. St John, speaks most plainly, 1. Ep.
chap. 2. verse. 4. He that says I know God, and keeps not his commandments,
is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

If these things be true, so surely sealed to us in holy writ; if that be most
certain, which the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Rom 1.21.
that they knew God, although they never gave him glory, nor thanks; if there
be no falsehood in this, which is spoken in the name of all the faithful, We
know him that has said; it will not be from the purpose if I briefly shall
show, how diversely men have thought of God.

There is no controversy, but that in the mind of man there is naturally a
sense and feeling of God, and his divine nature. This was so manifest to the
Heathen, that one of them affirmed for certain, that there was no nation so
barbarous, no people so rude, but were fully persuaded there was a God. Which
shows, that in the mind of man there is a deep impression of the divine
nature. For if any man would sequester and abstract his thoughts from the
study of earthly things, and consider the whole fabrique of this world, which
is both most beautiful, and governed with excellent laws, truly he cannot
choose but think, that there is some one, who has created all these things, and
to them created has appointed those bounds and limits which they cannot pass.
He that will thus bethink himself, will soon begin to know, what God is.
For when he shall know him to be the Creator of all things, and therefore to
be before all things created, he then has in himself an evident testimony
of Gods eternity.

The wonderful motions and effects of the several parts of this universe,
will give a man notice of the infinite power of it is Creator. The excellent
disposition, beauty, and conveniencie between the several parts, will
forceibly lead a man to the admiration of the Creators wisdom. The constant
course and order of the worlds frame will tell a man, that God is truth. Let
him not here stand amazed; but if he will consider the use and profit which the
several creatures yield to man, he cannot, unless he be ungrateful, but be
assured of Gods goodness. Let him look down from the Heaven to the earth,
consider the flowers of the field, the fowls of the air, and the least living
creatures that be, if he will but consider their form, and agilitie, will he,
nil he, he must needs acknowledge a puissance above man's. Let him reflect his
eyes upon himself, consider the disposition and use of his own members, and
he has matter enough of Gods power, wisdom, and goodness. Moreover, let him
consider the examples of Gods judgments, wherewith he does either defend his
faithful servants, or punish his enemies, and he shall acknowledge most plain
tokens of Gods mercy and justice.

We have thus seen opened, and have read in, the book of nature, wherein the
eternal King of kings is declared to be most mighty, wise, true, good,
bountiful, and just. This is that knowledge of the Divine power, that
knowledge of God, which S. Paul. Romans 1. affirms to have been written and
engraven in the minds of all men, lest they should hide their impieties and
wickedness under the cloak of ignorance.

Now, besides this knowledge of God, which we have learned in the book of his
Creatures, there is a more perfect knowledge to be learned in the book of his
Law. It is an excellent gift and blessing of God, that for the instructing of
his Church, he has not only used dumb masters, but opened his own most holy
mouth, to assure us, that he alone is the chief God, who is to be feared,
honored, and worshipped. This knoweledge of God which we have learned out of
his own mouth, and written word, spreads it self over the whole Church. The
Iebusite dwells with those of Jerusalem; the nettle and myrrh grow together,
the goats and lambs feed together, both good and bad fishes are taken in the
same net, in Gods field lilies grow among the thorns, and tares among the
wheat. Such is the condition, state, and form of the visible Church; wherein
are mixed with the Elect, faithful, and Godly, the Reprobate, infidels, and
wicked. Both these are called to hear the word of God, and are thence taught,
that there is but one only God to be honored, feared, and worshipped.

There remains, the only and most perfect knowledge of God, to be drawn from
the book of Faith, by which we are illightned to the hope of eternal life, by
which alone, we, that were dead, are revived; by which alone we confess and
acknowledge God, not only as he is the Creator of the world, and sole arbiter
of all things therein, but also as He is our Redeemer in the person of a
Mediator.

These are the sorts of knowledge, which men have of God. By the book of
Nature, we know Deum esse, that there is a God; by the book of the Law, we
know he is to be worshipped, honored, and feared; by the book of Faith, we
believe that he is our Savior. This last and most perfect knowledge of God,
the only true, and wholesome knowledge, infused into the elect only by the
grace of the Gospel, and illightning them, is that knowledge, which the
Apostle here understands, when he says, We know him that has said.

In which words there is a great power and force to move us: as if he should
have said; what? do not we think, do not we believe, that those, which
despise Christ, and tread his blood under foot, shall be grievously tormented?
We know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me.

We, that are given to Christ by the Father, chosen out of the world, delivered
out of the power of Satan, do surely know him that has said, Vengance
belongs unto me. We certainly know, what manner of God he is, how jealous,
just, severe, and an incorrupt avenger he is. He will not suffer himself to be
despised; he has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense. Has he
said it, and will he not perform it? Yea, says Balaam, The mighty God, is
not as man, that he should lie, Number. 23.19.
nor as the Son of man, that it should repent him. There is greater vehemence
in that which follows, Has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken,
and shall he not accomplish it? If this son of Bosor cannot prevail with us,
because he loved the wages of iniquity, then let us hear Samuel confessing
as much, 1. Sam. chap. 15. verse. 29. The strength of Israel, will not lie, nor
repent, for he is not as man, that he should repent: let us hear the
Apostle, Romm. 9.19. Who (says he) can resist the will of God? let us hear
God himself, Malach. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Which although S.
Hierome think spoken, that we should not think, that God changes the nature
of his divinity, yet St Augustine understands another thing by these words, to
wit, that in God there is no mutation of will and purpose. A very fit
interpretation, agreeable to the rule of the Schoolmen, Voluntatem Dei,
quocu^que sese vertant creaturae, manner semper invictam atque immutabilem:
That howsoever the creatures turn, and be changed, yet God is never changed. I
am the Lord, I change not. Though your wickedness change you to the worse, and
my grace, to the better, yet I am not changed. Cum vos mutaverit and in
deterius culpa vestra, and in melius gratia mea, ego non mutor. I say no more.
By that which I have said it is manifest, that God in all his sayings and
promises is true, and so acknowledged by the faithful: We know him that has
said] He has said, he will do it, he will perform it. He has said,
Vengeance is mine I will recompense. Of this saying in the next.

Let thy face shine upon us, O thou most high. Grant we beseech thee, that the
truth which shines in thy word, may give us light in the darkness of this
world, that studying it daily more and more, we may finish our course according
to the same truth, til we fully enjoy that most blessed quietness, which thy
only Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, has prepared for us, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost he all honor and glory, now and ever. AMEN.

THE TENTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 30. 30 For we know him that has said, Vengeance (belongs)
unto me: I will recompense, says the LORD. And again, The LORD shall judge
his people.


THis 30 verse yealdeth three notes.

The first, that God is true in all his promises, in all his threatenings, in
all his sayings, and is acknowledged to be such by all the fathfull: which I
gathered out of the preface to the testimonies, these words: We know him that
has said.

The second, that God will revenge all wrongs done unto himself and his
people: which arises out of the first testimony, these words: Vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD.

The third, that God will severely punish his own people also: which is plain
by the second testimony, these words: The LORD shall judge his people.

Of the first of these three notes, I spoke in my last exercise.

I proceed.

Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD. THese words
in so many syllables are cited by St Paul, Romans 12.19. in a sense somewhat
different from that, they bear in this place. There the Apostle following the
natural meaning of the words, as they are used in the song of Moses, by way of
exhortation unto patience advises us to give place unto God in all matters of
revenge, it being a thing only and properly belonging unto him. If it be
possible (says he) as much as in you lies have peace with all men. Avenge
not your selves, but give place unto wrath; for it is written: vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD.

It is written Deuteronomy. 32. where Moses, after that he had gathered together the
elders and officers of Israel, to speak in their audience; and had foretold
them, that after his death they would utterly be corrupt, and turn from the
way of the LORD, and that therefore evil should come upon them: at the length,
he sets down that his most excellent and spiritual song; wherein his doctrine
drops as the rain, and his speech stills like the sweetest shewers upon the
herbs. In which his song he first makes rehearsal of the inestimable benefits
powered down in great abundance upon that people; then he speaks of their
ingratitude. Laden with fatnes they spurned with their heels, and regarded not
the strong God of their salvation. After which he brings in God himself moved
to jealousy, and angry with their provocatio^, breathing forth threatening upon
threatening of plague upon plague to light upon so froward a generation. The
fire was kindled in his wrath: he threatened that he would make his arrows
drunk with the blood, and his sword to eat the flesh of rebellious ISRAEL.
Were it not for the fury of his enemies, who seeing the desolatio^ and
destruction of his people, would say: our high hand, and not the LORD has done
all this. Whereupon the LORD protests, that he reserueth revengement unto
himself, and that assuredly in due time, he will break in pieces every vessel
of dishonor, and will be a tower of defense, unto all that trust in him. This
his protestation we read verse. 35, 36. of that song: Vengeance and recompense
are mine: their feet shall slide in due time: for the day of their destruction
is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make have. For the LORD
shall judge his people, and repent toward his servantes.

Words of a double use: they yield matter of comfort to all the faithful, God
will revenge all wrongs done unto them, for the LORD shall judge his people,
and repent toward his servants. They yield also matter of fearfulness and
horror to all the wicked, who must know, that God is a revengefull judge: the
day of their destruction is at hand; the thing, that shall come upon them, make
have; their feet shall slide in due time. For the LORD has said, and his
sayings are immutable; Vengeance and recompense are mine.

Now we see the natural meaning of these words, as they are used, Deuteronomy 32.
and alleged, Romans 12. They confirm that constant and eternal rule of right
and wrong, well known to the wiser of the Heathen by the light of nature.
Homer in the fourth of his Iliads, Theocritus in his tenth Idyllium, Pindarus
in his Pythia, and generally the residue of profane writers, all do give
their assent to this, that God finds out the wicked man wheresoever, to be
avenged on him.

I will not hold you with any recital of their sayings; for it is not the
deliverie of a Latin or Greek sentence out of such authors, that will much
edify. The word of God I know, is lively, and mighty in operation; in it, is
this eternal rule of right and wrong stablished: mention whereof is made by
Iunius Paral. 24. lib. 2. to this sense: There is no cause, why men should be
careful to procure revenge against, or to take revenge upon such as have
wronged them; it is their part rather, to rest in God, and to commit all their
injuries unto him, that he, to whom alone vengeance belongs, may at length
show himself.

It is an axiom among Schoole-divines. Nihil obstat quo minus speciales
sententias transferamus ad doctrinam vniversalem. A particular and special
sentence may be a good ground to an universal doctrine. Albeit therefore it
was MOSES his purpose in using these words, and Paul's in citing them, to
dissuade, the godly from all private revenge, by assuring the^ that God will be
the avenger of all their injuries and wrongs; yet may they, well suting the
analogy of faith afforde this doctrine more universal, that it is proper unto
God to take vengeance upon all the wicked. Whereupon will follow that which the
Apostle drives at in this place: namely, that the impiety of such, as do
despite, and make a mock of God, shall not for ever escape unpunished.

Whosoever, having received the knowledge of the truth, shall sin willingly;
only because he will sin, wilfully, spitefully, and maliciously; and so shall
crucify again the son of God, shall count his blood profane, shall tread
him under foot, shall make a mock of him, and shall despite the spirit of
grace; that is, whosoever, having received the knowledge of God and his Christ,
shall fall away from God and godliness, from Christ and Christianity, his
root shall be rottenness, and his bud shall rise up like the dust, for the
mighty one of Israel, having put on the garment of vengeance for clothing, and
being clad with zeal, as with a cloak, will come near to them in judgment,
and will be a swift witness against them. For as the Prophet Jeremy, chap.
51.56. speaks to the confusion of idolatrous Babel; The LORD God that
recompenseth, shall surely recompense; so speaks our Apostle to the
astonishment of all back-sliders, We know him that has said, vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD.

Vengeance belongs unto me] In speaking of the vengeance of God our first
care must be, not to derogate any thing from his proclivitie and propensnesse
unto mercy. We must break out into the mention of his great goodness, and
sing aloud of his mercies; says DAVID, Psalm. 145.7. For the LORD is loving and
good to all, and his mercies are over all his works. The LORD strong and
mighty, blessed above all, yea being blessedness it self, and therefore
having no need of any man, is loving and good unto every man. Our sins have
provoked his vengeance against us; yet he, slow to anger, and of great
goodness, reserueth mercy for thousands, for all the elect, and forgiueth all
their iniquities, transgressions, and sins. His goodness here rests not,
it reaches also unto the reprobate, though they cannot feel the sweet comfort
of it. For he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends
rain, on the just and unjust, yea, many times the Sun and rain, and all
outward and temporary blessings are wanting to the just and good, when the
unjust and evil do flourish, and are in great prosperity. Thus is Gods
gratiousnesse and great bounty extended unto every man, whether he be a
blessed Abel, or a cursed Cain; a loved Jacob, or an hated Esau; an elected
David, or a rejected Saul. GOD is loving and good unto every man.

The Psalmist adds; and his mercies are over all his works. There is not any
one of Gods works, but it shows unto others, and finds in it self, very
large testimonies of Gods mercies and goodness. I except not the damnation of
the wicked, much less the chastiseme^ts of the godly. Gods mercies are over
all his works. DAVID knew it well, and sang accordingly, Psalm. 145.8. The Lord
is gracious and merciful, long suffering, and of great goodness. JONAS knew
it well, and confessed accordingly, chap. 4.2. Thou art a gracious God, and
merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and repentest thee of evil.
The CHVRCH knows it well, and prays accordingly; O God, whose nature and
property is ever to have mercy and to forgive, receive our humble petitions.
DAVID, JONAS, and the CHVRCH, all have learned it at Gods own mouth, who
having descended in a cloud to mount Sinai, passed before the face of Moses,
and cried, as is recorded, Exodus 34.6. The LORD, the LORD, strong, merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, and truth; reserving
mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin.

In which place of Scripture, although afterward there follow a little of his
justice, which he may not forget, yet we see the maine stream runs
concerning mildness, and kindness, and compassion. Whereby we may perceive,
what it is wherein the Lord delights; his delight is to be a Savior, a
deliverer, a preserver, a redeemer, and a pardoner. As for the execution of his
judgments, his vengeance, and his fury, he comes unto it with heavy and
leaden feet.

To which purpose learned Zanchius alleges that of the Prophet Esaias chap.
28.21. The LORD shall stand as (once he did) in mount Perazim (when David
overcame the Philistines) he will be angry as (once he was) in the valley of
Gibeon, when Ioshuah discomfited the five Kings of the Amorites; he shall
stand, he shall be angry, that he may do his work, his strange work, and
bring to pass his act, his strange act. Out of which words of the Prophet he
notes, that Gods works are of two sorts, either proper unto him and natural,
as to have mercy, and to forgive; or else strange and somewhat diverse from his
nature, as to be angry, and to punish.

I know some do expound these words otherwise, understanding by (...) and
(...) that strange work, and strange act of God there mentioned, opus aliquod
insolens and admirabile, some such work, as God seldom works, some great
wonder.

Notwithstanding this natural exposition of that place, the former may well be
admitted also; for it is not altogether unnatural, being grounded upon such
places of Scripture, as do make for the pre-eminence of mercy above justice.
Its true, God has one skale of justice, but the other proves the heavier,
mercy does overway. He who is ever just, is merciful more then ever, if it
may be possible. He may forget our iniquities; but his tender mercies, they
shall not for ever be shut up in displeasure; he shall never forget to be
merciful.

This our Lord, good, merciful, gracious, long suffering, has yet said;
vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense. The LORD has said it; and is
the 1. Sam. 15.29
strength of ISRAEL, as man that he Number 23.19.
should lie? or as the son of man that he should repent? is he not Heb. 13 8.
yesterday, and to day, and for ever the same? that Rev. 1.4. See Sermon 5. on
James 4. p. 136
was, that is, and that is to come. I mean not in substance only, but in will
and in intention is the LORD variable? are his words yea, and nay? are his
words as our words? No: all his promises, all his threatenings, all his mercies,
all his judgments, all his words, yea all the titles of all his words, are yea
and amen, so firmly ratified that they cannot be broken, so standing immutable
that they may not be changed. He has said vengeance is mine; and vengeance
shall be his: he has said, I will recompense, and he shall surely recompense.
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the LORD.

Vengeance, an effect of anger, belongs unto God as anger does. Some would
have God to be said to be angry, as he is said to be jealous and to repent,
giving this note; that these attributes, and all other like these must be
taken (...), as being used by the holy Ghost only for our easier understanding.

It is, I grant, a common thing, for God in his holy word to apply himself to
our capacities, and to attribute to himself such things, as are usual in the
course of our lives. For instance. Because men, for the exceeding care they
have to keep their wives chaste, do get to be called jealous; therefore God
caring in like sort to keep his spouse chaste, to preserve his Church spotless,
is called also jealous. Again, because men use not to change their former
purposes and intents, except it repents them, that they had before so
purposed and intended: therefore God also is said to repent, when he alters,
not his WILL, for that is unchangeable, nor his DECREE, for that cannot be
altered, but the thing which he promised, or threatened. So is it here; because
men use not to be revenged on others, except they be angry, therefore when God
revengeth our wickedness, he is also said to be angry.

To the truth of all this I willingly subscribe. Yet for further explication of
my text I add; that not only (...), but also (...) and (...), anger, and
vengeance the effect of anger, are ascribed unto God. The holy Ghost, speaking,
not only to our understanding, but also as things indeed are, ascribes anger
unto God in a proper, peculiar, and true meaning. I note therefore three
significations of the anger of God, often mentioned in holy Scriptures.

First it signifies the eternal decree, whereby God has purposed in
himself, to take vengeance upon all evil doers, such especially as shall do
wrong unto God himself, or to his Church: in which sense John Baptist uses it
in his doctrine delivered unto the Jews, Ioh. 3.36. HE that obeys not the
Son, shall not see life, but (...), the anger and wrath of God abides on him,
that is, he shall assuredly feel that just vengeance decreed against him from
all eternity. To like purpose is it used by St Paul, Romans 1.18. (...): the
anger and wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against al ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men. The meaning is plain: By Gods judgments wrought upon
us, the sons of men, its evident, that his everlasting decree is against all
iniquity.

Again the anger or wrath of God, betokens his menacings or threatenings.
Examples hereof are frequent. David prays, Psalm. 6.1. O LORD, rebuke me not
in thine anger, neither chastize me in thy wrath; as if he had prayed; O LORD,
let not thy vengeance overtake my sins, according as thou have threatened.
Jonas asks chap. 3.9. Who can tell, whether God will turn and repent, and
turn away from the fierenesse of his wrath, that we perish not? as if he had
asked, who knows, whether God may be entreated not to do accordingly, as
he has threatened. The LORD himself promises, Hos. 11.9. I will not execute
the fierceness of my wrath against Ephraim, as if he had promised: I, being a
God, and not man, the holy one in the midst of thee, having my heart turned
within me, and my repentings rouled together I, even I, will not do
accordingly as I have threatened. I will not hold you with more examples in so
plain a matter.

Last of all the anger of God, is put for the effects of his anger, for
punishment, and revenge. To such as despise the riches of Gods bou^tifulnesse,
patience, and long sufferance, Paul says, Romans 2.5. After thine hardness,
and heart that cannot repent, thou heapest unto thy self wrath against the day
of wrath. Thou heapest unto thy self wrath; that is, thou layest up, as
treasure, for thy self punishment against the day of the declaration of Gods
just judgment. To the Pharisees and Sadducees, which came to the baptism of
John, John said, Matthew. 3.7. O generation of Vipers, who has forwarned you to
flee from the anger to come? from the anger, that is, from the punishments
hanging over your heads because of Gods anger. One example more in so great
variety, and no more. To the children of disobedience it is warranted by Paul,
Ephesians. 5.6. that the anger of God shall come upon them. The anger of God, that
is, his vengeance, the effects of his anger shall assuredly light upon the
children of disobedience, such as excuse themselves, and set light by the
menacies and judgments of their God.

We see now that Gods eternal decree is, to be avenged on the wicked; that he
threatens as much in his holy word, and daily practices the same by punishing
of sinners; what remains but that we acknowledge and confess with fear and
humbleness, that vengeance truly and properly belongs unto God, and that he
shall surely recompense.

The consideration hereof may move our hearts to wisdom.

It may move us to beware of those crying sins, usually committed against the
first table: that we provoke not Gods vengeance against us, by Idolatry, in
worshipping the creature above the Creator, blessed for ever; by tempting God,
in making trial, whither his word be true or not; by murmuring against him, in
laying injustice to his charge, quod bonis male sit, and malis been, for
afflicting the godly, when the wicked live at ease; by rebellion and
contumacie, in taking counsel together against the LORD, and against his
Christ; by blasphemy, in doing despite to the spirit of Grace.

It may move us also to beware of those other sins, crying sins too,
usually committed against the second table, that we provoke not Gods vengeance
against us; by dishonoring our parents, and such as God has put in place of
government above us; by greiuing our children, and such as are by us to be
governed; by oppressing the fatherless, and the poor; by giving our selves
over unto filthy lusts. For the Holy one, that is in the midst of us, the
LORD of Heaven and earth, whose sayings must come to pass; he has said;
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense.

I might here take just occasion in many words to dehorte you from private
revenge, the sin that eats and consumes us in Colleges. But dictum sapienti.
You are wise; and touching this sore, which much molesteth us, you will common
with your own hearts in your chambers. Only I beseech you, attend unto the
words of the Apostle, Romans 12.18, 19. Give me leave to use them, as mine own;
Dearly beloved, if it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all
men. Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath; for it is written;
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompen^^, says the LORD.

Gracious Father, let thy word abide plentifully among us in all wisdom; make
us walk worthy the same, as it becomes the sons of so high a God. Give us
thy grace, good Lord, that thy word in us may multiply as seed sown in good
ground, and we may ever use it to the edifying of our consciences, to the
comfort of our souls, and to the kindling of good motions within us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 30. 30 For we know him that has said, Vengeance (belongs)
unto me: I will recompense, says the LORD. And again, The LORD shall judge
his people.


NOw are we to consider of the last branch of this verse, these words: The
LORD shall judge his people. Wherein we may note, 1 Who shall judge. 2 Who
shall be judged. 3 The kind of judgment.
(...) JEHOVAH shall judge his people. So sings Moses in Deuteronomy 32. calling him
that shall judge by the name JEHOVAH; the Sea my third Lecture upon Amos 1. p.
25.
honorablest name belonging to the great God of Heaven. Much might be spoken of
it, would I apply my self to the curiosity of Cabalists and Rabbis. I might
say of it, that it is nome^ Zanch. de Not: Dei Lib. 1. c 3.
(...), so reputed by superstitious Jews; a name not to be pronounced, not to
be taken within polluted lips. In which regard when, reading the Scriptures,
they meet with this name either they pass it over with silence, making
obeisance with their bodies in token of reverence; or else for it they read
Elohim, or Adonai, directed by the points it has: and when writing any place
of Scripture, they are to express this name, they meddle not with the proper
letters and characters of the word, but they express it sometimes by points,
3. or 4. disposed in some order, agreeable to their fancies; sometimes by 3.
Iods and one Camets under them, all included within a circle.

I might say of it, that it is nomen Tetragrammaton, a name in Hebrew but of 4.
letters, of 4. letters (...), as they say; for that the name of God in all
tongues and languages generally consists of 4. letters; and those four
letters in Hebrew are al letters of rest, whereout they gather a mystery, that
the rest, repose and tranquillity of all the creatures in the world is in God
alone.

I might say of it, that many have conceived it to be a powerful name for the
working of miracles, and that thereby Christ and Moses have done great wonders.
But my tongue shall never enlarge that which my soul abhors; their
braine-sicke, superstitious, and blasphemous inventions.

Yet sure there is some secret in this name. It is plain, Exodus 6.3. where the
Lord speaking unto Moses says: I appeared unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, by the name of a strong, omnipotent, and all sufficient God, but by my
name JEHOVAH was I not known unto them. I unfold this secret. First it
imports the eternity of Gods essence in himself, that he is Heb. 13.8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Apoc. 1.8.
which was, which is, and which is to come. Again it notes the existence and
perfection of all things in God, as from whom all creatures in the world have
their Act. 17.28.
life, motion, and being. God is the being of all his creatures, not that they
are the same that he is, but because Romans 11.36.
of him, and in him, and by him are all things. And last of all it is the
memorial of God unto all ages, as himself calls it, Exodus 3.15. the memorial
of his faithfulness, his truth, and his constancy, in the performance of his
promises. And therefore whenever in any of the Prophets God promises or
threatens any great matter, to assure us of the most certain event of such
his promise or threatening, he adds unto it his name JEHOVAH.

In steed of this name JEHOVAH, the most proper name of God, the 70. have ever
put (...), as does our Apostle also in my text: (...), a name of power, well
suiting with the living, true, and only God. For he has plenum (...). The
power and authority, he has over all things is sovereign, and without
controlement. He that made the heavens and spread them out like a Psalm. 104.2.
curtain, to cloth himself with light as with a raiment, he can again Esai.
50.3.
cloth the heavens with darkness, and make a sack their covering. He that
made the Sea to lay the Psalm. 104 3.
beams of his chamber therein, and placed the Ierem. 5.22.
sands for bounds unto it, by a perpetual decree not to be passed over,
howsoever the waves thereof shall rage and roar, he can with a word Job. 26.12.
smite the pride thereof. At his rebuke the floods shall be turned into a Esai.
50.2.
wilderness, the Sea shall be dried up, the fish shall rot for want of water,
and dye for thirst. He that made the dry land, and so Psalm. 104.5.
set it upon foundations, that it should never move, he can cover her again
with the deep, as with a garment, and so rock her, that Psalm. 107.27
she shall reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man. So powerful a
God may well be named from power, (...) the absolute LORD, ruler, and commander
of all things.

This name of power, (...), vulgarly translated LORD, is in the writings of the
Apostles simply and absolutely ascribed unto Christ. (if the Zanch. de Attrib.
l. 1. c. 17.
learned have made a just calculation) 1000. times; and may serve for
sufficient proof of the Deity of CHRIST. For it imports thus much; that
CHRIST the Heb. 1.3.
engraved form of his father, sitting at the right hand of the majesty in the
highest places, is together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, the author and
governor of all things, and in a very special manner, he is the heir of the
house of God, the mighty protector of the CHVRCH.

CHRIST the only begotten Son of God, he is the LORD; yet so, that neither the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost, are excluded from dominion. The Father is LORD, and
the Holy Ghost is LORD too. For in all the works of GOD ad extra (as some call
them) each person of the TRINITY has his operation: yet so, that a common
distinction be observed. For these works of God (so called) ad extra, do
admit a double consideration. For either they are begun extra divinas
personas, and ended in aliqua personarum; or else they are both begun, and
ended, extra divinas personas.

The works of God begun externally, and perfected in some one of the persons,
what are they? They are such as was the voice of the Father concerning Christ;
Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son. A voice formed by all three persons, yet uttered
only by the Father. They are such as was that Mat. 3.16.
dove descending upon Christ at his baptism; A dove framed by all three
persons, yet appropriate only unto the Holy Ghost. They are such as was the
body and soul of CHRIST; A body and soul created by all three persons, yet
assumed only by the Son of God. This is that obvious and much used
distinction in school divinity, Inchoatiue, and Terminatiue. For if we
respect the beginning of these works, they are the works of the whole
TRINITY, common unto all; but respect we their perfection and en^, they are no
more common, but hypostaticall and personal; for so, the voice is the Fathers
alone; the dove is the Holy Ghosts alone; the reasonable soul and humane flesh
are the Sons only.

Besides these, there are other works of God, as begun, so ended also, extra
personas, and they are of two sorts; either supernatural (such I call the
miraculous works of God) or natural, such as are, the creation of the world,
the preservation of the same, and the government of it. And all these works of
which kind soever, whether miraculous, or works of nature, they are common to
the whole TRINITY. The Father works, the Son works, and the Holy Ghost
works, as in doing of wonders, so in creating all things, in preserving all
things, and in governing all things, whereupon follows, that which I
mentioned, that not only the Son is LORD, but the Father is LORD, and the
Holy Ghost is LORD also.

Yet must I add, that this name of power, (...), or LORD, is most often and
very specially given unto Christ; for that he has received of God the Father,
absolute soveraigntie over all creatures in Heaven, in earth, and in the waters
to do with them all, as him lists; which his soveraigntie he has obtained,
in as much as being made man, and having dyed for us, and for the sins of the
whole world, he is become the mediator of the new covenant. In which sense
the Apostle in my text calls him the LORD; the LORD, who shall judge his
people. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto
the Son: so Christ himself told the Jews, Ioh. 5.22. Thus far of him that
shall judge, called by Moses, JEHOVAH, and by the Apostle here, (...). He is
the LORD Christ; Christ our LORD.

The LORD shall judge his people. His people] For there is a people, not his;
even in the midst of the Children of Israel, lineally descended from Gomer,
that wife of fornications. Her first borne son was by Gods appointment named
(...) Iezreel, to remember them of the house of Israel, that for the much blood
shed by Iehu in Iezreel, the chief city of the ten tribes under Ahab, their
kingdom should cease. They much boasted of their name, for that they were
called Israel, as if they could prevail with God: but they came to be, of a
base and unnoble lineage, to be called Iezreel a people disseminated, dispersed,
and scattered among the Gentiles: for the Lord brake the bow of Israel, in the
valley of Iezreel.

The next fruit of her womb was a woman child, called in like sort by Gods
direction. (...) Lo-ruchamah, to let the house of Israel further to understand,
that it was the Lords absolute resolution, to take no more pity up on them,
but to give them up into the hands of the Assyrians, by them to be led into
captivity, whereout they should not return at any rhyme.

She conceived a third time and bare a son, and called him as God has
commanded, (...) Lo-ammi, yet further to signify unto the house of Israel,
that therefore he will not be their God, because they are not his people.
Lo-ammi, you are not my people. This third imaginary son of Gomer, brought
for a type of Israel, Hos. 1. is by Paul, Romans 9. applied to the Gentiles
also. But how far forth it may be verified of either, either Israelites or
Gentiles, that may be considered. For of both, both Israelites and, Gentiles
says God, Hos. 2.23. I will call them my people, which were not my people;
and, Hos. 1.10. God says likewise: it shall be in the place, where it was said
unto them, ye are not my people; that there they shall be called, the children
of the living God.

To show therefore how far forth it may be verified both of Israelites, and
Gentiles, that they are, or are not the people of God, I must distinguish. To
be Ammi or Lo-ammi, the people of God, or not his people, admits a threefold
understanding.

First, A people may be, or not be Gods people in respect of Gods
predestination, that his immutable decree concerning the salvation of some, and
the damnation of the rest, set down by himself from all eternity. In which
sense there is among both the Israelites and Gentiles, Ammi, the Lords people,
and there is also among them Lo-ammi, a people not the Lords. As many of them,
as God foreknew ( praescientia approbationis, as the Schoolmen call it,)
specially, as to love and like them, them has he predestined and chose^ to
be his people: the rest whom so he foreknewe not (for otherwise to his absolute
prescience all things are naked) the rest, I say, whom specially he foreknewe
not, them has he ordained of old to be no people of his.

Again a people may be, or not be Gods people, in respect of the old
covenant; the covenant of desert, and of the Law: that covenant made betwixt
GOD and Abraham, and Abraham's seed after him in their generations. In which
covenant three things do concur: a condition, on Abraham's side to be
performed; a promise of God upon the condition, to be expected; and the sign
of covenant. The condition to be performed by Abraham is, Genesis 17.1. Walk
before me, and be thou upright. Gods promise is, verse. 7. I will be GOD to
thee, and to thy seed after thee. The sign is verse. 11. Ye shall circumcise
the foreskinne of your flesh, and it shall be the sign of the covenant
between me and you. In which sense the Israelites, the offspring of Abraham
according to the flesh, they were Ammi, the Lords people, chosen by God
himself to be a precious people unto himself. But the residue of the people,
that then lived upon the earth, far exceeding the Israelites in multitude,
even all the Gentiles, they were Lo-ammi, a people not the Lords.

Last of all, a people may be or not be Gods people, in respect of the new
covenant the covenant of grace, and of the Gospel, the new covenant made with
the house of Israel, and the house of Judah. Now no more division; the
separation wall is taken a way; all were made one Church. This new covenant is
registered Ier. 31.33. After those days says the LORD I will put my laws in
their mind, and in their heart will I write them, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. In substance this new covenant agrees with the
old; only it is called new, because of the manifestation of Christ, and the
abundant graces of the holy Ghost given to his Church under the Gospel. And
here also for this new covenants sake there is the Lords people, and a people
not the Lords. As many as are members of the Church, and live within her
bosom, Christians, whether true professors, or dissemblers, all are in this
sense Ammi the Lords people: but Turks and Infidels, a far surpassing
number, they are Lo-ammi, a people not the Lords.

By this tripartite division of such as are, or are not Gods people, we may
point at them that shall be judged. They are the people of God: his people, not
in respect of the old covenant, for that, being disanulled and abrogated, is
vanished away. Albeit they that then lived when that covenant was of force,
were also judged by the LORD. But they are the Lords people, both in respect of
the new covenant, and also in respect of Gods predestination, the LORD shall
judge the whole Church, and every member thereof, yea them whom he has
predestined to be heirs of salvation. The LORD shall judge his people.

Now a word or two of the kind of judgment.

Yet before I speak of the judgment here meant, give me leave to remove a
scruple touching the last judgment.

The whole world stands of believers, or of unbelievers. For the believers it
is plain, Ioh. 5.24. that already they have everlasting life, and shall not
come into judgment. For the unbelievers it is as plain, Ioh. 3.18. that they
are already condemned. Both are already judged; believers and unbelievers; the
believers are saved, unbelievers are condemned, what need then of any last
judgment?

I answer; very great need; even in regard of the justice and goodness of
God, whose property it is, to punish all wicked and godless men, and to
honor and reward, all that are religious and Godly. Which since he does not
fully do in this world, there must needs be a last judgment, when he shall
fully do it.

We see the course of this world; Malis been est, and bonis male. Good men have
Psalm. 73.4.
bands in their death, but the wicked are lusty, and strong. Good men are so
overlaid with miseries, that their words are even swallowed up; but the wicked
are in such prosperity, that Verse. 7.
their eyes stand out for fatness. Good men are even cast down into
desolation, but the wicked have more the^ heart can wish. Cicer. de not. ^^or.
l^b. 3.
DIOG^NES the Cynicke in his time, seeing one Harpalus a notable thief, living
a long time happily, was bold to say; Harpalum contra Deos testimonium dicere,
quod in illa fortuna tam diu viveret. Wicked Harpalus living long in
prosperity, was some argument to Diogenes, that God respected not man's
affairs.

The like experience has shaken even the very Saints of God. It made Job to
say, chapter 24.12. MEN cry out of the the city, and the souls of the slain
cry out, yet God does not charge them with folly. It made Jeremy to
expostulate with the LORD, chap. 12.1. O Lord let me talk with thee of thy
judgments; wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are all they in
wealth that rebelliously transgress? It makes the Godly, to whom ^^al. 73 10.
waters of a full cup are wrung out, many times to take into their mouths that
passionate complaint, Psalm. 73.11. How does God know it? is there knowledge in
the most high? Lo, these are the wicked, yet prosper they always, and increase
in riches. Certainly we have cleansed our hearts in vain, and in vain have
we washed our hands in innocence; for daily have we been punished, and
chastened every morning.

From this experience grew that disputation among the heathens; whether God
regards men, and their businesses? T^LAMON pu^s down the state of it in one
verse. Tully cites it lib. 3. de not. Deor. NAM si curent, been bonis sit, male
malis; quod nunc abest. Doubtless if God had any care of men, and their actions,
good men should be in good estate, and wicked men in worse. But now we have
experience of the contrary; Improbis optime, bonis male est; wicked men have
their hearts ease, but good me^ are in misery. TELAMON was no fit man to make
any construction of Gods proceedings.

We in Christianity for the thing, do know it to be true. Wicked Dives has the
world at will, whilst poor Lazarus is hunger bitten, full of soars, and
miserable every way. The co^struction we make of it is grounded upon diverse
texts of holy Scripture. Give me leave for mine own comfort, and the comfort
of the rest of you that are any way afflicted, to repeat for this purpose two
or three sentences well known unto you. It Is written, 1. Pet. 4.17. Judgment
begins at the house of God. It Is written, 1. Cor. 11.32. When we are judged,
we are chastned of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the
world. It Is written, 2. Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ JESUS,
shall suffer persecution. This being so, that the wicked flourish, and the
Godly are kept under, it remains of necessity, that there must be a second
coming of Christ, a last judgment, when the Godly shall receive fullness of
joy and glory, and the ungodly, fullness of woe and misery.

Now for the removal of the scruple, which I intended, I must explicate the
places, which it troubles. To that place. Ioh. 5.24. I say that by judgment
is meant the judgment of Condemnation. The believer shall not come into
judgment, the judgment of Condemnation; for already he is passed from death
to life, already he has everlasting life, non re, sed spe: non fruitione, sed
fide. We are already passed from death to life; spe, non re; for we are saved
by hope, as says the Apostle, Romans 8.24. We have already life everlasting,
fide, non fruitione; for we walk by faith, and not by sight; as the same
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5 7. The truth is; as long as this flesh encombreth
us, we cannot fully possess eternal life, yet in this flesh, we have a taste
and feeling of it. For in this flesh we know God, to be the only very God,
and whom he has sent JESUS Christ: and this is life eternal. It Is Christ's
assertion, John. 17.3. Whereto may be added that, 1. Cor. 13.9. We know in
part, and prophecy in part. And that, Coloss. 1.13. God has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear son. And that, 1. Ioh. 3.14. We know, that we are
translated from death to life. Thus already are we passed from death to life
by an assured hope; already we have everlasting life by a lively faith, and
therefore shall we never come into judgment, the judgment of Condemnation.

But there is a judgment of Absolution, then to be executed, when the Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
and with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God. At that
great day the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we, which live and remain,
shall with the^ be caught up in the clouds to meet the LORD in the air: at
whose right hand we shall be set, to receive, to the eternal joy of our
hearts, that happy sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world.

To that other place, Ioh. 3.18. I say, that the unbeliever is condemned
already in effect and substance, 3. ways; In the counsel of God, in the word
of God, and in his own conscience. He is condemned in Gods counsel and
purpose, before ever he comes into the world, as Esau was, Romans 9.11. He is
condemned in the word of God, wherein sentence is already passed against him,
Ioh. 1.9.
for that, light being come into the world, he yet loves darkness, rather
then light. He is condemned in his own conscience; the torment whereof like a
worm, ever gnaweth him, and never suffers him to be at rest. So many ways
are the unbelievers already condemned: already, that is, in this world their
condemnation is begun, but the manifestation and finishing of it shall be
hereafter, and therefore the meaning of the place is this: they that believe
not are already judged, in part; but the full manifestation thereof shall be
at the day of wrath. Then shall they see the Son of man coming in the
clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory; at whose left hand they must be
set, to receive to their eternal horror that irrevocable sentence, Depart from
me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

The scruple now removed, has remembered us of two of Gods judgments; his
judgment of Condemnation for the wicked, and his judgment of Absolution for
his chosen. Neither of them is meant in the present clause of my Text: for
which, I point at two other judgments of God, familiar unto him when he
deals with his own people. The one I call, his judgment of Protection, the
other his judgment of Correction.

His judgment of Protection is meant in these words, as they are used by
MOSES, Deuteronomy. 32.36. The LORD shall judge his people, that is, the Lord shall
keep, protect, and defend his people. For so does Moses expound it in that
place; The LORD shall judge his people, and repent, or change his mind toward
his servants, when he sees that their power is gone.

His other judgment of Correction is meant in these words, as they are used by
the Apostle in my Text; The LORD shall judge his people, that is, the Lord
shall chastise, correct, and punish his people. For he assumes this to infer
the overthrow of all backsliders; and his reason has force from the place, a
minore; If God shall judge and punish his own people, much more shall he deal
so with the Reprobate, such as fall away from the truth. The like argument Paul
uses, Romans 11.21. If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he
also spare not thee. The like is used by Peter also, 2. Pet. 2.4. If God spared
not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into Hell, and delivered
the^ into chains of darkness to be kept unto damnation, he shall surely
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.

This latter exposition of these words, contains the very matter of my third
note, which I commended unto you in the beginning of this exercise, namely:
that God will severely punish his own people also. I need not be much in
proving it, if you remember these few places, which but now I cited. Judgment
begins at the house of God. When we are judged we are chastned of the
Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world; All that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

The application of it, is this: We are the Lords people, his people in
respect of the new Covenant, This Sermon was preached in Corpus Christi College
before a Comu^io^ there March 1601.
the memorial whereof we are this day met together to celebrate (O let us
celebrate it together, as often as occasion shall be given) why will you turn
your backs unto it, as if you were unwilling to show your selves to be the
Lords people? Did Christ ever do you any harm? We are his people also (I hope
well of all) in respect of Gods predestination. We are his people, and
therefore shall we be judged of him, chastised, corrected, and punished. We
must be known by the badge of afflictions, of tribulations, of persecutions;
yet ought we not to be dismayed, be the burden we bear never so unwieldy,
be it never so heavy.

There is ONE in Heaven (and he can come apace, for he flies upon the wings of
the wind) who is able to master it, and to lighten it, and therefore though we
walk in the very shadow of death (a much lower estate then is the deprivation
of our ease, commodities, and preferments) yet must not we take disco^fort at
it. The LORD sits above the water floods; he commands the Heaven, the
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is; never will he forsake his children,
neither in health, nor sickness; light, nor darkness; in the land of the
living, nor in the land of forgetfulness. Only let us be patient, and stay his
leisure, and he will deliver us, not only from the death of our bodies, when
worms and rottenness shall have made their last prey upon us; but from the
death of our minds too; I mean from that death whereby the spirit is buried
under sorrows, and finds no creature in Heaven or Earth to give it comfort.
And this shall be the end of us: our mortality shall put on immortality; from
this vale of misery, we shall be carried to the City of happiness, JERUSALEM
that is above; our momentarie life must be laid down, and we shall be fully
possessed of life eternal.

THE TWELFTH SERMON.
HEBR. 10. VER. 31. 31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.


I Am now to speak of this Epiphoneme, or Acclamation; wherein at the first
entrance we meet with fear and horror. (...), It is a fearful thing. The
thing to be feared is in the next words manifested; it is, (...); even this, to
fall into the hands of God. Can 2 Kin. 23.13.
Astaroth the God of Sidon, or Melchom of Ammon, or Chemosch of Moab, or 2 King
1.6.
Beelzebub of Ekron, or 1 Samuel 5.7.
Dagon of Ashdod, or any other Idol-god of any nation, lay hands upon you to
your hurt? Fear the^ not. As are their ears, eyes, and feet, so are their
hands: They hear not, they see not, they walk not, they handle not. I note
therefore in the third place, that the God into whose hands we may well fear
to fall, is a living God. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

Of these in their order.

It is a fearful thing] I will not particularly examine the many kinds of
fear, much mentio^ed by the writers of Schoole-divinitie. Yet generally to
speak somewhat of them, give me leave to touch three kinds.

There is a fear, that keeps company with the nature of man: Arist. Rhet. 2.
cap. 5.
the Philospher defines it, to be a shaking or disquieting of the mind with
the expectation of some great evil at hand. The things which man naturally
fears, are either such, as may be his utter ruin and overthrow; or such, as
may much grieve and discontent him. His overthrow may be wrought, by
lightnings, by inundations, by the teeth of savage beasts, and by the invasion
of enemies. His grief may be caused many ways: by loss of parents, kindred,
and friends; by loss of goods; by slanderous, and lying lips; by
imprisonement, by banishment. All these, and such like, are to man, as man,
(...), fearful things; disquietnesse and vexation unto his soul.

This fear being such a passion, as is (...) (as Damascene calls it) that is,
a natural and a blameless passion, has not failed to assault our Savior
Christ, howsoever the Aphthartodocites, Gaianites, and Iulianists have taught
otherwise, namely that Christ from the very time he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost in the Virgins womb, was by reason of the co^junction of the word and
flesh, exempted and freed from al manner of passion. For he perceauing the time
of his suffering to draw near, began to be afraid: so speaks the Evangelist
S. Mark. chap. 14.33. He began to be afraid; TIMOR erat in anima humana verbo
quiescente, says Irenaeus; Christ according to his humane nature was afraid,
and his Divine nature did not hinder it. You see this first kind of fear,
this natural fear, how it seizes upon man, as man, and so leaves not
unassaulted the very Son of God.

There is beside, it a fond and a foolish fear: I give it no better a name,
for that the object of it is in a manner nothing. As for a man to be afraid of
every Arist de Repub. lib. 7.
small fly that passes by, of every little noise that a Idem lib. 7. Moral.
mouse may make, of his Cicero De consulatu petendo. Plato in Phaedone.
Plutarch. Symposiac. dec. 7.
own shadow, according to the old proverbes, or of meeting his own soul, as
Zenodotus.
Pisander was; or of some thing, I know not what, to fall upon him from above,
if he come forth of his doors, as Plutarchus ex historia Pontici Heraclide.
Pet. Crinitus De honesta Disciplina lib. 15 cap 11.
Artemo^ was; or of the rustling of the leaves of trees, as Io. Xiphilinus
Nero was. To fear so or so, what can it argue else, save degeneres animos,
faint hearts.

Yet were not the Disciples of our Savior Christ altogether exempted from
feareing so. Twice were they touched with such fear; once as they failed
toward Mark 6.45.
Bethsaida against the wind; a second time, as they were together at Jerusalem
in a certain house with the doors shut upon them. Sailing upon the water they
Matt. 14.26.
cried out for fear: being together at Jerusalem within doors they were Luke
24.37
abashed and afraid. But why so? The thing objected to them, should have bin
rather, a joy and rejoicing to their hearts, then any cause of fear. It was no
other then their LORD and Savior CHRIST JESUS, once walking on the Sea, and
again standing in the midst of them. But they supposed he had been a
spirit; and thence grew their fear.

It Is very true; such was their supposall, as its evident, Matt. 14.26. and
Luke 24.37. Yet hereby are they not excused. Christ himself rebukes their
fear, by telling them of their want of faith. And how can we imagine that
Christ's Disciples could be ignorant of the impossibility which a spiritual
substance has to be sensibly perceived? Neither had they (for any thing I find
in Gods word) at any time seen a spirit to move them to that conceit.
Certainly, illic trepidaverunt timore, vbi non erat timor; the words are in
the Vulgar Latin, Psalm. 13.9. and do somewhat vary from the fountain; yet is
the phrase retained in our English, Psalm. 14.9. you will give me leave to use
it; it may serve to note all such as have been holden in such fond fears:
There were they brought in great fear, even where no fear was. But I leave
them, and this second kind of fear.

There is a third fear, of as large an extent as any. The well known piece of
verse out of Statius speaks of it; Primus in orb Deos fecit timor; -- as if
in the mind of man, there could not be any opinion of the being of a God,
unless there were fear.

From this ground Gods have been multiplied, I say not, as the sands of the
Sea, but exceedingly. It partly appears, 2. King. 17.30. where we find that
the men of Babel had for their God Sucoth-Benoth, the men of Cuth for theirs
Nergal, and the men of Chamath for theirs Aschima. It Is added verse. 31. that
the Avims had their gods Nibchaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvims theirs,
Adrammelec and Anammelec, to whom for sacrifice they burnt their children in
the fire. I have already made mention of Astaroth for Sidon, of Melchom for
Ammon, of Chemosch for Moab, of Beelzebub for Ekron, of Dagon for Ashdod: I
might further remember you of Esai 46.1.
Bell and Nebo, for Babylon; of Number. 25.3.
Baalpeor for backsliding Israel; and of 1 Samuel 7.4.
Baalim, a multitude of gods (such as they were) for the residue of nations; I
may well say, a multitude; for that with the cost of but a little frankinsense
they have provided for the ofscowring of men, for drunkards, harlots, and
thieves, gods to protect them.

I will not disquiet your Christian ears with naming of the^. For though there
be that are named gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be many Gods,
and many Lords) as St Paul himself confesses, 1 Cor. 8.5. yet knowing it to
be true which he adds, (...), that an Idol is nothing in the world, we
must with him make our further confession, that unto us there is but one God,
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord, Christ Jesus,
by whom are all things, and we by him.

This one God, is the true object of the fear, which now I speak of. For he
is fearfully regarded by the eyes of al men; in some by the eyes of faith: in
the rest by the eyes of nature. By the eyes of faith, 1 Pet, 1.5
in such as are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation: by the
eyes of nature, in such as God has given up Romans 1.28.
to a reprobate mind to do things inconvenient.

The faithful fear God, and the faithless fear God, but not alike.

Aristotle in the 2. book of his Oeconomickes and 2. chap. to show what fear
a good wife should owe unto her husband, speaks of two kinds of fear; the
one accompanied with shamefastness and reverence; the other attended with
enmity and hatred. The first is such a fear, as wherewith a good son
honors his father, or a good subject his ruler; the other such, as wherewith
a lewd servant is affected toward his Master, or a rebellious subject toward
his governor. A distinction well known to every novice in the study of
divinity; it being so commonly and much used by such, as do either write, or
speak to this argument.

Wherefore to pass it over in few words, I note briefly touching the
faithful, that the fear of God in them, is such a fear as the good child
honors his father with; a fear waited upon with love, reverence, purity,
ingenuitie, freedom of spirit, ever beholding God in the gracious light of his
countenance, howsoever sometimes the clouds of displeasure may seem to hide
that grace away.

As for the faithless, the fear of God in them, is such a fear as is the
fear of malefactors, toward severe and righteous Magistrates: a slavish
fear; a fear full of hatred, malice, contumely, and reproach; a fear flying
and abhorring the sight of the LORD, in regard he is a God of vengeance, as he
is called Psalm. 94.1. He is such a God, as having put on the garment of
vengeance for clothing, and being clad with zeal, as with a cloak, will come
shortly, and Rev. 22.1^.
bring his reward with him, to give every man according as his work shall be:
to the faithful, who by continuance in well doing have sought glory and
honor, and immortality; eternal life; but to the faithless, who have
disobeyed the truth, and given credit to unrighteousness, to every such soul
indignation, and wrath, and tribulation, and anguish, a just and full measure
in the ever burning lake.

Now it is no hard matter to determine, as well of the persons, in respect of
whom, as of the true meaning, in which, it is here said, to be a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of God.

For the persons, it is out of doubt, they are not the faithful. For many
excellent things being spoken of them by the Holy Spirit in the word of truth:
as that Ephesians. 2, 19.
they are citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; the 2. Cor. 3.9.
husbandry of God, and his building; the 2. Cor. 6.16
Temple of the living God; a 1. Pet. 2.9.
holy nation; Ephesians. 5.8.
children of the light, the 2. Cor. 8 23.
glory of the Lord, and the Romans 8.29.
image of Christ; with all which, and other like beautiful titles, they being
gloriously decked and adorned, it cannot be, that they should fear to fall
into the hands of God. I may rather say they much desire it.

It was David's choice, and his choice was good, 2. Sam. 24.14 Let us fall now
into the hands of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into
the hand of man. Upon the mention of this chice of David, a learned and zealous
Dr RAVIS Deane of Christ-Chruch.
Professor not This Sermon was preached in St Mary's Church Dec. 2. 1602.
long since speaking out of this place for maintenance of your religion against
Iesuitisme, and the heat of the Popish or Spanish faction, made his prayer unto
the LORD, and I assure my self your hearts went with him, as he said, O LORD
let us fall into thy hands, and not into the hand of the cruel Spaniard.

You that live by faith, and have your building of God not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens, do you fear to fall into the hands of God? Why should
you fear it? You know know full well, that with him there is mercy and
plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130.7. that he has healed your rebellion, turned
his anger away from you, and now loves you freely, Hos. 14.4. that he is Zach.
1.14.
jealous over you with a great zeal, and tenders you as the apple of his eye,
Zach. 2.8. and therefore ye may be well assured, that his hand shall never be
sore upon you to destroy you, as it was upon the men of Ashdod, 1. Sam. 5.6.

For such indeed, as for all his enemies, he has a heavy hand, a hand to
minister severitie of punishment; but for you, whose sins though like
crimson, and red as scarlet, he has punished to the full in the death of
CHRIST, he has an easy hand; a hand sometimes of fatherly Correction, but for
evermore a hand of mighty Protection.

This protecting hand of God is spoken of, Psalm 37.24. Though a man fall, he
shall not be cast off, for the LORD puts under his hand. Though you fall
grievously, and dangerously, you shall not be cast off (either finally in the
end, or utterly at any time) for the LORD (whose Ierem. 31.20
bowels are troubled for you) he puts under his hand, he vpholds you. We see
now for the faithful, that to them it is no fearful thing to fall into the
hands of God.

It lights therefore of necessity upon the faithless. To the faithless, and
unbelieving man, to the unregenerate man, to man in the state of depravation
and corruption, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God.

Infiniti ad finitum nulla proportio. What proportion ca^ there be between
that infinite essence and a house of clay, that unlimited power and a
tabernacle of earth? that incomprehensible majesty and dust or ashes? Man is
no better in comparison of the ever being, Almighty, incomprehensible God,
then clay, earth, dust, or ashes, and that in the holy and reverend conceits of
Genesis 18.27.
Abraham, Job. 4.9.
Job, and 2 Cor. 5.1.
Paul.

The Prophet David in the like conceit of Gods supereminencie, and excellency
above all things, abaseth and discountenanceth man's nature and his whole race,
as in many other his Psalms, so in his 22. and 6. verse. where either in his
own name, regarding the misery and contempt wherein he was held; or in the
person of Christ, whose figure he was; he speaks, as if it were robbery for
him, to take upon him the name or nature of man: I am (says he) a worm, and
not a man.

Now who will set Esai. 27.^
briars and thorns in battle against the LORD? Did ever man harden himself
against him, and prosper? Is it possible that pitchers of clay should come to
encounter the unspeakable Majesty of God, and not fall asunder? Well, if the
Amos. 3.8.
Lion once roar, all the beasts of the forest shall tremble. And man,
unbelieving man, unregenerate man, corrupt man, let his courage be the
stowtest, and his prowess the manliest upon the earth; let him have girded up
his loins with much strength, and decked himself with greatest glory, yet, if
God at any time shall strike him, or but hold forth unto him the rod of his
indignation, it shall fare with him as it did with Belshazzar king of Babylon,
Dan. 5.6. his countenance shall be changed; his thoughts shall trouble him; the
joints of his loins shall be loosed, and his knees shall smite one against the
other. Such shall be the measure of his fear; and at that day wherein it
shall be said, Luke 23 25.
Blessed are the barren, and the wombes that never bare, and the papps which
never gave suck, then shall he in much more fear, fear mixed with hatred,
malice, contumely, and reproach, seeking to hide himself from the sight of
God, say unto the mountains, fall on me, and to the hills, cover me; his soul
and conscience bearing witness to the truth of this scripture; that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

You have heard of the fear and horror set before us in the first words of
this verse. I must now speak of the thing to be feared, implied in the next
words. It was my second note.

The thing to be feared is this; to fall into the hands of God. The letter
kills, See my 14. ^^ct^re upon A^os. 1. p. 153.
but the spirit gives life, says S. PAVL, 2. Cor. 3.6. St Augustine de
doctrina Christiana lib. 3. c. 5. upon those words advises us to beware that
we take not a figurative speech according to the letter. For (says he) when we
take that which is spoken in a figure as if it were spoken properly, it is a
carnal sense, neque vlla mors animae congruentius appellatur: neither is there
any thing more rightly called the death of the soul.

If a figurative speech be properly taken, or if the letter be urged against
the spiritual meaning, that which was spoken to give life to the inward man,
may subvert the faith, and endanger the soul.

A trope upon good reason to be admitted, not admitted, is a cause of error.

It caused the Jews to err: they took it literally, which Christ spoke in a
figure, touching his own body, Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up again.

It caused Nicodemus to err: he took it literally, which Christ spoke in a
figure touching man's regeneration, Job. 3.3. Except a man be borne again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God.

It caused the Disciples of Christ to err: they took it literally, which
Christ spoke in a figure touching the execution of his Fathers will, Ioh. 4.32.
I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

I hold it to be an error of Nicephorus and others, to take it after the
letter, as if Paul had indeed fought upon a theater with Lions at Ephesus,
because he faith, 1. Cor. 15.32. That he f^ught with beasts at Ephesus; for in
the judgment of Tertullian and Theophylact of old, of Beza, Baronius, and some
R^inold. de Idol. 2. 6. 6.
other very learned of this age, he spoke it figuratively, to design and note
that disordered assembly gathered together against him at Ephesus, upon the
complaint of the silversmyth Demetrius, for defense of great Diana.

I am assured, it is an error of all the Papists, to take it after the letter,
which Christ spoke, Mat. 26.26. This is my BODY. There is a figure in the
speech. For in all sacraments there is a great difference between the signs,
and the things signified: the signs are visible, the things invisible; the
signs earthly, the things heavenly; the signs corruptible, the things
immortal; the signs corporal, the things spiritual; and, as a reverend D
BILSON B. of. Winton of Christian subjection par. 4 p. 577. edit. Lo^d. in 8.
1586.
Father speaks in the person of Theophilus, The signs are one thing, the
truth is not the same, but another thing, and by plain Arithmeticke, they be
two things, and not one.

This is my body. There is a figure in the speech; He calls the bread his
body, by way of signification, by way of similitude, by way of representation;
after the manner of sacraments, in a sign; not according to the letter, but in
a spiritual and mystical understanding; and if you respect the precise
speech, improperly, and figuratively.

I will not hold you with other like instances; these few already spoken of may
serve, to make it plain, that the not admitting of a trope or a figure there,
where in great reason it ought to be admitted, is a cause of error.

I have been bold (beloved) to give this note in this place, because the
phrase here used (to fall into the hands of God) being spirit and life, has
been mistaken, and applied to a carnal sense.

From hence as from other places of holy Scripture, in which other the members
of man's body are ascribed unto God, as the Psalm. 34.10.
face, the Deuteronomy. 8.3.
mouth, 2. Kin. 19.16.
ears, Zach. 4 10.
eyes, 1 Kin. 8 42.
arms, Mat. 22.44.
feet, and some other; Tertullian living near unto the Apostles time. has not
doubted to conclude, GOD to be a BODY.

This his erroneous and false opinion died not with him. It was on foot many
years after him in the time of Arius, patronized by those heretics, who by
Epiphanius are called Audiani, and by De Haeres. cap. 50.
Augustine Vadiani; after whom also it was egerly maintained in the time of
Chrysostom by certain monks of Egypt, who were thereupon called
Anthropomorphitae.

But all these are dead and gone; their monstrous error lies buried with them;
there is no man of any knowledge now a days so blinded as to fall into error
with them.

It is an axiom in Divinity; Quaecunque de Deo corporaliter dicuntur, dicta
sunt symbolice: whatsoever is spoken of God bodily, that same must be
understood figuratively.

Bellarmine says as much: lib. 2. de imaginib. Sanct. ca. 8. Me^bra, quae
tribuuntur Deo in scriptura, metaphorice esse accipienda: That those members
which the Scripture assigns unto God, are to be taken in a Metaphor.

Thus far we are yours, Bellarmine. We maintain with you, that the members
attributed unto God in holy Scripture, are to be taken figuratively. But you
build hereupon chafe and stubble. Should we do the like, it could never
abide the trial of the fire.

To prove a non licet to be your Licet; licere pingere imagine^ Dei Patris in
forma hominis senis, to prove it to be lawful to represent God the Father by
the image of an old man, you draw one argument from those places of Scripture,
which do attribute unto GOD bodyly members. Your conclusion is by way of
question; thus: The Scripture in words attributes unto God all man's members,
while it says; he stands, he sits, he walks, and names his head, his feet,
his arms; and gives to him a seat, a throne, a footestoole: therefore why
cannot a picture be made to represent GOD? Why not an image in the shape of man?

Why? It Is easily answered. Because every such picture, or image, or stock
(call it as you will) is censured by Jeremy, to be a doctrine of vanity, chap.
10.8. by Zachary, to be a speaker of vanity, chapter. 10.2. by Habakkuk, to be
a teacher of lies, chapter. 2.18. and Gods express commandment is against
it, Deuteronomy. 4.16. You shall not make you a graven image, or representation of any
figure. A reason of this prohibition is adjoined, verse 12. and 15. by which it
is manifest, that God simply and absolutely forbids any image at all to be
made of himself: For ye saw no similitude in the day that the LORD spoke unto
you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: ye saw no similitude only yet
heard a voice.

The Prophet Esaie is plentiful in this demonstration, to show how unseemly
and absurd it is, Romans 1.25.
to turn the truth of God into a lie, as they do who forsake the blessed
Creator to worship the creature, to turn the Majesty of God invisible into a
picture of visible man; to turn the verse. 23.
glory of the incorruptible God to the similitude of the image of a corruptible
man. His vehement expostulation with idolaters to this purpose, is in the 40.
of his prophecy verse 18. To whom will ye liken God? Or what similitude will
ye set up unto him? The workman melts an image, the goldsmith beats it out
in gold or silver plats. The poor (see now the rage, fury and madness of
Idolaters, though they have not wherewith to suffice their own necessities,
they will defraud themselves to serve their Idols) the poor chooses out a
tree, that will not rot, for an oblation, and puts it to a cunning workman to
prepare an image, that cannot be moved.

The lik expostulation the Prophet ascribes to God himself, chap. 46.5. To
whom will ye make me like, or make me equal, or compare me, that I should be
like him? They draw gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in a balance, and
hire a goldsmith to make a God of it, and they bow down and worship it: They
bear it upon their shoulders: they carry him and set him in place: so does he
stand, and cannot remove from his place. Remember this and be ashamed O ye
Idolaters. Esai 40 2^.
Know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? has it not been told you from the
beginning? have ye not understood it by the foundation of the earth? God
sits upon the circle of the earth, and beholds the inhabitants thereof as
grasshoppers; he stretches out the Heavens as a curtain, and spreades them out
as a tent to dwell in. He measures the waters in his fist; counts Heaven with
his span, comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, weighes the
mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance. God incorporeall,
invisible, spiritual, passing all measure, there is nothing like unto him. No
thing. And therefore, O Idolaters, not your old man's image.

For the truth of your antecedent we stand on your side; It Is very true: the
Scripture in express words attributes unto God many the members of man's body.
It says of him, that he stands, he sits, he walks; it names his head, his
feet, his arms; it gives him a seat, a throne, a footstool. But al these,
and other like, bodyly offices, parts, and members being spoken of, as
belonging unto God, must be understood figuratively. It has pleased the Spirit
of wisdom to deal with us (...), to fit the holy Scriptures to our weak
capacities; to use known, familiar, and sensible terms, thereby to raise up
our conceits to some knowledge of the everliving God.

In this regard by the wisdom of the same Spirit, among many other m^mbers,
Hands are also ascribed unto God, and that in many p^aces; yet not in every
place to one, and the same sense, and understanding.

It Is noted by the Magdeburgenses out of Innocentius, that the Hand of God does
bear diverse offices among us. Officia creatoris, largientis, protegentis,
minantis, the offices of a Creator, liberal giver, protector and threatner.
Hands are ascribed unto God, sometime to show that he is the Creator of al
things, as, Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: sometime to
show his liberality to all living things, as Psalm. 145.16. Thou openest thy
hand, and fillest all things living of thy good pleasure: sometime to show the
care he has to protect and defend the faithful, as Esai, 49.2. Under the
shadow of his hand has he hid me: and sometime to show his readiness to be
avenged upon all the wicked, as, Esai 10.14. His hand is stretched out still.

But these and all other the significations of the hands of God, I reduce to
two heads, to the love of God, and his displeasure, under them comprehending
all their consequents, and effects. That the hand of God betokens sometime
his love, and the benefits redounding thence to man, man's being, and his well
being, it may easily be proved. Judge. 2.15. we read, that the Lords hand was
against the Israelites for evil. The collection thence may be, that the Lords
hand is sometime toward some for good. It Is made plain, Nehem. 2.8. where
the Prophet to show how ready Artaxerxes, was to do him pleasure, says, The
King gave me according to the good hand of my God upon me. I might by many
like instances out of holy Scripture give strength to this position, but it may
seem to be a needles labor, and therefore I proceed.

Now that the hand of God should betoken his displeasure and the effects
thereof, it may be proved as easily. When the Israelites, having forsaken God,
betook themselves to serve Baalim, the hand of the LORD was sore against them,
Judge. 2.15. His hand; that is his judgment, punishment, and revengement was
sore upon them: the wrath of the LORD was hot against them: he delivered them
into the hands of spoilers; they were spoiled, sold to their enemies, and sore
punished. When the Philistines had brought the Ark of God into the house of
Dagon; the HAND of the LORD was heavy upon them, 1. Sam. 5.6 His hand; that
is, his judgment, punishment, and revengement was heavy upon them. Psalm.
78.64.
The LORD awaked as one out of sleep, and like a giant refreshed with wine,
he smote his enemies with emrods, and put them to a perpetual shame.

In this rank I place the signification of the HANDS of God in my text. They
betoken, not his chastizements or corrections; for they* proceeding from the
love of God, are appropriat to the godly, to make them out of love with this
world; to work in them repentance for their sins committed; and to stir up
in them a greater care not to provoke their God by wilful sinning any more:
but they signify in this place the punishments of God, his judgments, and
revengements, wherewith he overtaketh all the wicked in their wickedness, but
especially, such of the wicked as are in verse. 26. of this chap. noted, to
sin willingly after the receiving of the known truth; such as are, Hebrews,
6.6. noted, to fall away after their partaking of the holy Ghost; such as
sinning willingly and falling away after their sanctification by the blood of
the Covenant, do count that blood profane, do despite the spirit of grace,
and crucify again unto themselves the son of God, tread him under foot,
and make a mock of him. Such must fearfully look for judgment, and the
zeal, rage, or violence of fire, therewith to be devoured.

For he whose words are yea and Amen, so ratified in the heavens, that they
cannot be altered, he has said it; we know he has said it; it is in the
verse next before my text; Vengeance belongs unto me, I will reco^pense. For
in his hand, in his might and power, there is a cup of red wine: we read of it,
Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the LORD there is a cup of red wine; a cup full
of mixture, and thereby the more hot and piercing; a cup fully mixed with
wrath, judgment, and vengeance; and God powrs out of it in great abundance and
plenty; surely (behold the certainetie of Gods plagues) surely all the wicked
of the earth, shall wring out and drink the dregs of it. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Now, if that monstrous brood of men, misshapen in the powers of their souls,
shall step forth with open mouth against the God of Heaven, as if there were
no such; or if any, yet such a one as is like to those Idol gods of the
nations, of whom I made some mention in the beginning of this exercise: such a
god, as is unable to answer when he is cried unto, or to deliver man out of
trouble: an epithete is here given to cross them; Our God is a living God. And
this was my third and last note.

I will not now enter into any long discourse of this attribute of God. The
profitable labors of the excellently learned Zanchius, are not wanting to this
point.

Wherefore to touch it but in a glance, let it please you to be remembered, you
whose lives are but a Job. 8 9.
shadow, and do hold your lives only at the good pleasure of your maker; that
he, your maker, the maker of Heaven and earth, God eternal, is (...), by an
excellency, and most properly said to live. Both the Testaments give witness
to this truth. In both he is often called (...), the living God. Our
forefathers did often swear, As the LORD lives. It was a protestation much
used by God himself, As I live. You may hence conclude; that God is life it
self, and lives of himself, and is the sole fountain of all life in all
things living besides himself.

Give me leave, to hold you yet with two or three words. You see, it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: and you see to whom
it is fearful; to all the wicked, but especially to such as fall away from
the known truth: How much then is the condition of many in this our day to be
deplored? I mean the condition of such against whom there has been much
complaint made out of this place and the like, for their going out from among
us, if not bodily, yet in heart and affection to adore that Romish Idol. For
the sin of Apostacy there is no sacrifice that can make satisfaction:
judgment and fire must be it is portion. Wherefore, leaving all backsliders,
revolters, or fallers away from the holy religion which you profess to the
secret judgments of Almighty God, suffer your selves to be put in mind of
your own estate.

You know there was a time when a cloud of blood did overshadow this land, but
God in his good time dispersed it. Then our most gracious QVEEN^ ELIZABETH This
Sermon was preached Dec. 1602.
Sovereign succeeded in the throne; and finding this our country to be but
brick, she turned it into Marble: finding it in the sands, she set it upon a
rock, and the rock was CHRIST: finding it a land of images, ignorances,
corruptions, vanities, lies; she has hitherto preserved it, a land possessed of
the truth, and seasoned with the Gospel of Christ. That so it be preserved
still, good Lord, if it be thy will, let the happy line of her life continue,
even as long as Sun and Moon.

O think upon the comfortable blessings wherewith you are blessed, under her.
I remember you not of your peace: yet, that is such, as your fathers never
presumed to hope for. The freedom of the Gospel is the thing I remember you
of.

Your consciences have hitherto been at liberty; will you now suffer them to
be enthralled to men's traditions? Your zeal has hitherto been rectified by
knowledge: can you now be content to have the eye of your knowledge put out?
the preaching of the Gospel hindered? and blind zeal fostered in your bosoms?
Your religion has hitherto been reformed by Gods ordinances, shall it now be
deformed by those impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto your grandfathers
were in bondage? Why should your last estate be worse, then your first?

(...), it is the conclusion to each of those Epistles written to the seven
Churches in the Revelation. He that overco^meth, not he that draws his sword,
nor he that fights the battles of the Lord, nor he that spends his bloo^,
much less he that faints, that flies, that sleeps, that stands, or
sits still; but (...), He that overcommeth, shall never be hurt of the
second death.

Be ye therefore of good courage, and faint not: your cause is Gods cause:
your quarrel Gods quarrel; your enemies Gods enemies. Do ye as you have your
gracious Queen for an example. She is the foremost in this fight, and has
given the first blow: the first blow, a great blow, powerful (I hope) to the
^ooting out from among us every Popish Priest, and Jesuit. It shall have the
better success, if you in your places will second it, and multiply strength
upon it, the Magistrate by his temporal sword, and the Minister by the sword
of his mouth, which is the word of God.

Gird up your selves with strength, and rush into the battle. Set together upon
the common enemy. Why should there be strife, or contentions between your
selves? Are ye not brethren? You shall find enough to do with the common
enemy, eve^ to the spe^ding of your best strength. They are grown to such
boldness, that they will not easily be quelled.

Parsons Colleton^s Defense p. 241.
statizing, or marchandizing of the Crown and diadem of England, is so
notoriously known, that even Pasquine in Rome speaks of it.

Their Archpriest BLACKWELL (if the secular Priests do guess aright) was he
bashful, when he put it in print, that Cardinal Allen and Father Parsons, as
Moses and Joshua, iam diu proculdubio occupassent promissionis terram, had long
since out of doubt possessed this Realm of England, had not the disobedience
of some secular Priests, and their most displeasing murmuring hindered it?

Wanted the Jesuits boldness, when they thus Preface to the Jesuits Catechism.
threatened the secular Pri^sts in England; The INFANTA of Spain shall be your
Queen, and that sooner then you look for?

You see their boldness: how they blush not to divulge and publish their impious
plots, practices, and designementes against the Lords anointed. It is the more
need then that our forces should be united. Let us join heart and hand
together in Gods holy cause against that wicked race, borne to the ruin and
desolation of states and kingdoms. Let us practice the word, and be instant in
season and out of season, if possibly, to restore to Christ the seduced by
Antichrist; to gather up the spiritual stones of Gods house already fallen;
and to give strength to such as are falling: that so having fought this good
fight, and finished our courses, and kept our faith, we may at the time of our
departing receive the crown of righteousness, which is laid up for us; and
not for us only, but for all the^ also, that love the appearing of the Lord.

Est Deo gratia.
The Table containing the particulers of this book.
AMbrose. 30 Ammi. 158 The Anger of God three^fold. 149 Anthropomorphitae. 173
Aphthartodocites. 166 Atheists. 50 Audiani. 173
B.
BAlaam. 5 Of sinning after Baptism. 28 50 The believer shall not come into
judgment 159. 161. he h^th already eternal li^e. 161 The blasphemy against
the holy Ghost. 19 Boldness. 15 We must love our Brethren. 81 Bribes, take
not. 74 Bribes taken in secret. 77 The Blood of the covenant. 96
C.
CAtharists. 29. 30 The rule of Charity. 80. 89 Christian Charity has three
branches. 81. 85. The bond of Charity. 70 The Child of God may diminish the
graces of God in him 34. He may fall into his old sins. 34 He may sin
presumptuously. 35. He may sin desperately. 35 The Chosen of God may fall. 32.
may rise again. 32 Christ his sanctity. 100. Christ has reconciled us to
God. 96 97 Spiritual builders of the Church. 6. An evil Conscience. 52.
Continue to the end. 7. 11. Corroboration. 12. 36 Corruption in elections. 75.
76 Old Covenant 158 The new Covenant. 159
D.
DAvid. 10 The Day of the Lord at hand. 59 61 62 The Day of judgment near. 59
Demas. 6 Our Defenses for sin. 75, 76, 77 Despair: not the sin against the
holy Ghost. 19
E.
ELection. 17 A warning to the Elect. 117 Election not to be doubted of. 17 The
Elect, how they may fall. 11. 12. they fall not finally nor utterly. 11. 49.
119. 122 Elias. 8 Elie his words, 1. Sam. 2.25. expounded. 30 Continue to the
end. 7 Love thine enemies. 83. Examine our selves. 6
F.
Faithful they may diminish the Graces of God 121 Falls of the righteous. 10 of
Gods children. 11. 49. of the Faithful, 121. Gods elect may Fall, 11, 12. 32.
49. Fear. 15. 17 Fear two kinds 168 Fear three kinds. 165 Natural Fear.
166 Fear in Christ. 166 Fond fear, 166
A Figurative speech not to be taken after the letter. 172 God forsakes his
children, how? 19. 20 Fire unquenchable. 54 Hell Fire whether corporal. 54
G.
GAianites. 166 The Galatians. 5, 92 Partakers of the Holy Ghost. 5 God: how
he is said to forsake his children. 19 20 God: his patience. 76 his presence,
78. his power. 155. his works, 155. 156. is merciful, 147 is true. 126. 127.
131. 136 148. is angry. 149. is ielous. 149 God is truth. 127. 136 There is a
God, proved by the book of Creatures, etc. 130. 131 God repents, how. 149
Gods; many. 165. 168 Gomer. 157 Good men in misery. 160 Grace abounds. 10. 11
never utterly lost. 35
H.
HAnd of God. 170. 176. his protecting Hand. 171 To fall into the Hands of God;
fearful. 126. 135 The joys of Heaven. 55 Hell fire. 54. Hell torments. 55. 56
Holiness in God. 99 Man is Holy by participation. 100
I.
IDolaters. 175 Jehovah. 153 Iezreel. 157 Ignorance excuses not. 42 Judas. 5.
6. 93 Judge: his terror. 52 Judgment of condemnation 162. of absolution 162.
of protection. 163 of correction. 163. The last Judgment. 159 Iulianists. 166
K.
KNowledge of the truth. 5
L.
Laws politic to be obeyed. 69 Laws humane: unjust 69 70 Laws humane to
be obeyed how far. 71 Light of Gods word. 3 Lo-ammi. 157 Lord. 155
Lo-ruchamah. 157 Lot. his incest. 10 We must Love God 81 We must Love Christ.
81 The Love of our brethren 81 How we are to Love our brethren. 81. 82 The
Love of our Neighbors. 83 We must Love our enemies. 83 Christ has Loved us,
and how. 82
M
MAn wholly sinful. 33 We should be merciful. 101 Moses law. 66 67 Mourning.
57
N
NAaman. 27 Man's corrupt Nature. 37 wholly sinful. 33. 52 We must love our
Neighbors, and how 83 Nestorius. 120 Noah. his dru^ke^nes. 10 34 Novatus. 28
O.
OBedience to God. 71 to humane laws. 71 Offenses not to be given. 70
Onesimus. 10. 34 He that Overco^meth. 11
P.
Paul's estate. 33 Paul fought with beasts at Ephesus, in what sense. 172 The
Patriarcks. 10 God is patient, 76 Gods People. 157 We should be Perfect. 101
Persevere. 7 Persevera^ce of the Saints of God. 91 An exhortation to
Perseverance. 92 Peter. his fall. 10 Pharaoh. 5. 93 Wanton Poems. 128.
Predestination. 17 Private reports. 69
R.
REbecca. 10 Repent. 10 Repentance. 9 Late Repentance. 10 Reprobates. 103. 115.
116 The Reprobate may be sanctified with the blood of the Testament 91. 95.
103 How far a Reprobate may profess the Gospel. 91 95. 104. The Reprobate
have glorious titles 103. 110. 115. Mockers at the Resurrection. 22. 116
Private Revenge. 151 Run. 9
S.
SAcraments. 173 Sacrifices: 2 kinds. 39 the bloody Sacrifice. 40 without
blood. 40 Saints. 102 Sanctity special. 101 General 101. 102
Sarah. 10. 34 Saul. 5. 39 A Scorner. 86 Simon Magus. 593 Sins hidden.
Small. of infirmity. 10 To sin willingly. 2 Presumptuously. 12. 35
The Sin against the Holy Ghost. 3. 15 the persons who fall into it 2. 3 46.
98. 117. with what mind it is committed 11 48 why it is mentioned 16. in whom
it is 18 19 six k^ndes of it the Schoolmen make. 18 one only sin is so called
19. it is not desperation 19 what manner of rebellion it is. 22 49 the name of
it 23. 24. 49 the object of it. 24 49 the punishment of it. 25 the degrees by
which men ascend to it. 26 it ca^ never be forgiven 38 To Sin against
conscience 113. 114 We may fall again into the same Sin after Repentance.
12. 34 Our excuses for sinning. 48. 75. Forsake your Sins 93 Man Sinful. 33
We are entered to Sin. 26 We delight in S nne 27 What progress Sin has made in
us. 27 God punishes for one Sin. 77 Secret Sins shall be mani^ested. 78
Beware of Sins. 151 Ma^ks of such as Sin against the Holy Ghost 109. 118.
120 Solomon his idolatry 10 The Spirit of Grace. 120 The Strengthening power of
Christ. 12. 36.
T.
TAle he^rers. 85 Tale cariers. 86 Tasting. 4. 6 Tasting of the heavenly gift.
4 Tertullian. 173 Thyatyra. 8 Topher. 40 Torments. 57 Torments of Hell. 58
Tropes to be admitted. 172
V.
VAdiani. 137 Vengeance belongs unto God. 149 The Unbeliever is condemned
al^eady. 162 The Unfaithful. 126
W.
Watches of the night. 60 Wicked men flourish in this world. 160. they have
their ways. 11 Witnesses two or three. 68 The Wo^d of God. 4 God Works by
contraries. 20 The Works of God. 155 The course of this World 160 The Worm of
conscience. 54. 55
Z.
ZIba. 8^
FINIS.

