CERTAIN Sermons of the right famous and excellent Clerk Master Barnardine
Ochine, Borne within the famous university of Siena in Italy, now also an
exyle in this life, for the faithful testimony of Jesus Christ. Faithfully
translated into English.

?*?

Psalm cxvii. I will not dye, but live and declare the works of the Lord.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day: dwelling over Aldersgate beneth S. Martins.

These books are to be sold at his shop in Chepesyde, by the Little Counduit
at the sign of the Resurrection.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septenium.

The Contents of this Book.
i. What shyng God is. ii. How to know God by his creatures. iii. If
Philosophi serve to true Theology or divinity, and in what manner, iiii. How
we ought to use the holy Scriptures, in at^aynynge the knowledge of God. v. Of
the inconveniences that are happened and daily happen by the abuse of the holy
Scriptures, vi, If to be good deuines it behoue us to have the humane science
or not. vii. How a christian ought to make his last will and testamente. viii.
How we should answer the Devil when he te^teth us, and namelye in the end of
our life. ix. How answer is to be made at the judgment seat of God. x. By
what mean to come to heaven. xi. How God has satisfied for our sins, and
has purchased Paradise for us xii. Whether predestina^^o^ ought to be
written, spoken, or thought. xiii. How excellent our eleccion is. xiiii. If
we may know in this present life whether we be of the elect and in the grace
or favor of God or not. xv. ^hether it be good to know or to believe that we
are elect. xvi. Whether it be necessary to salvation to believe that we are
elect or no. xvii. If it be good to know wherefore God has elect some and
some reprobate. xviii. Of the diverse effects it worcketh in manne to believe
that our eleccion is al in the hand of God and that of him only it depends.
xix. How it ought to be answered to them which lament that God. has create
the^ forseing their da^pnacio^. xx. Wherefore God has elected us. xxi.
Whether the elect can be dampened or not. xxii. Whether god do aggrauat,
harden, and blind the hearts of men and in what manner. xxiii. How God does
dispense his grace. xxiiii. If man have liberty or not, and in what manner.
xxv. Of y^ effect wrought by the spirit of God when it enters the soul.
FINIS
The Preface.
WHo well considers where unto we are created (good Christen Reader) shall
find that of al our travails there rests no fruit, as proves the holy
spirit of prophecy by the mouth of Solomon saying. I have looked upon all the
things under the sun, and have found none other but vanity. Only reserved
the Image of God in us, being the spirit that susteyneth not the natural life
alone, but also all the holy and virtuous thoughts, which God has created
immortal unto his own likeness, as thou may well parceyue, if thou consider
the substance of the natural body, that having the spirit is al lively, and
not only moves each finger hand, foot, eye and tongue materially, but also with
the thought penetrateth the heavens, and in manner conceiueth a substance in
the immortality of Gods everlasting kingdom, and wanting the spirit, rests
dead private of al those virtues, though well thou shall se that it lacks
nether hand, foot, eye, tunge nor other member. This I say unto thee (gentle
reader) to the intent that thou should know that the almighty creator is
served not of vanities, that is to say, of bodily or worldly exercises, but of
spiritual thoughts, which are the just and true sacrifyces unto God. And
thereby to draw the to remember the marvel of his works, and to think more
unto thine end the^ to thy life. Disposing thy self to learn the sciences
that this little book shall teach the, which treats of none other but of the
spiritual things, and bears in i^ the substance of the holy scripture with
so vehement reasons, and so good perswacions, that it suffiseth to draw from
the thy stony heart, and to reneu in the a carnal heart, if thou be one of them,
to whom God has determined to give his grace. One of the^ (I say) y^ with
lively faith confess Christ the son of god, to have suffered for their sins.
As the Author hereof sufficiently persuades the, who (being a man of great
years, and wonderful reputacio^) for the love of Christ and of the truth,
has rather chosen exyle and persecucion, then contynuaunce of wealth, honors
and frendshyp. A man of profou^d learning. The most notable preacher of al
Itali. Famous for the great example of his good life. Esteemed and honored of
all Princes, not ^or his age only (being a man of.lxx. years, or therabouts)
but also for his infinite virtues and modesty. And finally so beloved of al
people, that in what place so ever he preached, there has ever been found
great prease of audyence. All this notwythstandyng at length^because he
syncerely followed the true Gospel, and did not forbear to reprehend the
publyke abuses of the Romish church) he was persecuted of Paul the third, and
constrained to forsake Italy, and to flee into Germani. Where he has not ceased
with his pen to follow the virtuous exhortacyons, that before time with his
mouth he preached. And now God of his merci has brought him hither unto us,
and preaches in the Italyan tongue, w^yche all men understand not, I have
translated v^. of his Sermons out of his tongue in to Englysh. Intending to
translate the rest very shortly if these shal^e thankefully received) to the
intent that his ^atyue tongue thereby may be ma^e ours: and that the glory of
God may the better be set forth. Unto who^ al honor is ^ue world without end.

So be it.
Sermons of master Barnardyne Ochyne, borne with in the famous university of
Siena in Italye; now also an exyle in this life for the faythefull testimonye
of Jesus Chri
The first Sermon.
What thing God is.
Ignorance specially of the heavenly things, is the greatest lack that ca^ be
in man, and above all other the ignorance or lack of knowledge of god. For as
it is impossible to attain the science of Philosophye, Astrology, Geometry or
of any other like, without the ground or first principals. So without the
knowledge of God the true be ginnyng and princypall of true deuynitie is
impossible to have any light of the truth necessary and proffitable to the
ghostly health And likewise, as the knowledge of the first principals of one
science, depends ye knowledge of all the truth and conclusyons that that
science contains* So of the true knowledge of God, depends the knowledge of
all the circumstaunces and truth of Theology or Deuinite. Wherefore seeing how
much pestiferous and detestable the ignorance of God is, and how much
necessary the true knowledge of him is* I have thought it expedient, first to
consider what thing God is.

It is a most easy thing to know that god is, or that there is a God, since
that there is no Nation, so barbarous, but that it believes that there is a
God, being a general knowledge that God has so imprinted in ye hearts of al
me^, that if the man have any judgment at all, it behooves him with the heart
to confess that there is a God. For albeit there have been many wicked which
with their mouths have said, there is no God. Nevertheless the self same, when
they have fallen into any peril or necessity, have been enforced of that only
light and religion of god, to recommend themselves unto him, so that we must of
force repute him a very ydeote, Psalm. xi^i.
that denies God. And being therefore an evident and easy thing to know that
there is a God, we must now travail to know (though it be most hard) to know
what that God is. Many have been of opinion that it is impossible that we should
imagine what god is, because infiniteli above all proporcyons, he excedeth the
weakness of our understanding, specialli because our wits are drowned in the
body, occupied of fantasies, and shadowed by y^ dark veins of things
created, far of from god. We be weak of sight, and sick and impotente
through the fall of Adam and our own sins. Wherefore they say that we ca^
have none other knowledge of God, but the negative, that is to wit, we may
know that God is not material, nor form imperfecte nor yet soul of the
world, that he is not Earth, Water, Air, Fire, Wind, Sterre Moan, Son,
Corporal^ light nor any virtue spread abroad. He is not the beauty that we see,
the swetenes that we taste, nor other thing sensible, imaginable or
intellygyble of us, but that infinitely he exceadeth al creatures, and
althinges that we understand. In him there is an inaccessible light such as
they, which with their thoughts in manner have been raised so high, that they
have found what God is, have deceived themselves. Timo. vi
And they who imagine in their minds to have found God, do fabricate an ydoll,
out of all measure dystaunt from the true being of God, Exodi. xx.
as appears by his commandment to the Jews* when he prohibited the^ the
sculpture or g^auing of idols, understanding not of the materyal ydolles only,
but also of the imaginable. For our wits are extreme darkness, in comparyson
of gods inestimable first light. So that it behooves us with Aaron to enter in
Sa^cta Sanctorum and with Moses into the celestial cloud, if we will know, that
is to say, to know yt we know not, in such wise y^ the more feruentlye a man
will profess not to know so much the better he does know, and who presumes
to know, is farthest of from knowledge. And why? because God in his power and
^yght stands so hid in darckenes from us, that with blyndnes, we se him, with
ignorance we know him, Psalm.i.
with retyring or with going back we comprehend him, infleing we find him,
with scile^ce, we praise him. And it behooves him that will know what thing God
is, to study in the schole of simplicite and reast va^quyshed of that
inestimable, in accessible and in comprehensible light*

And I confess that we cannot comprehend God, in such manner as God
comprehends him self* That is to say, we cannot have an infinite knowledge of
him, as do the blessed saints, that is to sai, to have as they have the
clear, s. Corint. i.
naked, open and visible sight of him, to behold him in the fountain of his
bryghtnes, face to face in the very being ye he is. But we may very well attain
a knowledge what God is though not so perfectly as we shall know in the other
life. Nor it is not possible we should know what thing god is not, if first we
learn not to know what thing he is, and that his being is so perfect that it
repugneth y^ imperfections of those things y^ be not. Wherefore considering al
y^ negatiues y^ ar rehearsed of god, ar grounded upon one posptiue and
affirmative y^ we have, we must say of force yt we know God more perfectly, in
knowing that that is to be known, then in knowing nothing at al. And therefore
speaking of more high knowledge affirmative, that in this present life, the
elect communly and without special privilege and miracle had of god, I say
that first thou ought to consider that the creature has his being,
although imperfect. And God has his being without any imperfeccion. Yea his
being is infinitely perfect, wherefore to know what thing god is, it behooves
the to do as he does that will make an image. First he cutteth of many pieces,
before he parforme the form that he desires, and afterward paynteth and
apparelleth it.

So is it necessary that with the mind, thou first consider the being of the
creature And because thou shall find him repleate of imperfeccion, being
terminable create, temporal, corruptyble and other like, therefore it behooves
the to cleanse puryfy and take from him al those imperfectyons, and ymagyn him
i^finite, interminable, incorruptible and in effect abstract and lift up above
al imperfection. Nether yet does that suffice, but also it is necessary that
thou flourish and adorn him of al perfection possible, in such wise that thou
conceive to see him a terne necessary, simple, immutable and infinite. Neither
yet does all that suffice, but moreover it behooves the with thought to puryfy
and cleanse of al inperfection the will and mind created, the wysdom created the
justice, bounty, pity, power, charity, truth, beauty and all the other virtues
and perfections, to which imperfectyon is contrary, and consequently to enrich
him of infinite degrees of perfection, and so to behold him in God as a thing
purified, to be unto him divine and infinite. But because those powers, virtues
and operacyons with imperfectyo^ in manner rules in us, will not suffer our
wits to conceive that creature in his being and to cleanse and spoil him of
al imperfections, and so to make him infinite, we can not in our being se him in
God, in who^ there can be nothing imperfect, but it must suffice us to se him
in virtue and eminenci. So that albeit in gods proper being there is the
corporal vision, the imagination, credulity, opinion, discourses and other
actions essencially. Nevertheless it must suffice us to se them in virtue and
eminency. For to se God clearly it includes and contains all perfection,
like as the gold conteyneth the perfectyon of all other metals. He then that
sees that divine being with all perfection possible, sees what thing God is,
because he sees a spiritual light, most pure, most clear, most simple and
exellently fair, a terne, immutable, necessary and infinitely perfect, replete
of celestial felicite, justice power, bounty, veryte, wisdom, mercy, charity
and of all the other perfeccions and virtues, infinitely perfect and that in it,
in virtue and eminenci be all the colors, odours sauoures, sonndes, songs,
swetenes, fairenes, honors, dignities, treasures, pleasures and felicities of
the world, infinitely and without proporcion, more perfect then they be of them
selves here.

And moreover it behooves the to know that the being of the creature is a
shadow and a most slyght vanite in comparison of gods being, and the difference
more. then is between our shadow and our selves. Exodus, iii.
It is to be said of God, that surely he is only the thing that is. Likewise
I say of our powers, beauty, truth, charity, justice, wisdom and of al our
other virtues, that compared to the divine they be as most vain images and
shadows infinitely distaunt from the^ of God. Also it behooves to know, that
god is not idel, Ihon, v.
but that he continually works as (Christ says) in such wise, that he has
not only given unto the world his being, but also continually conserueth all the
things created, and all the virtues, that of al ye miracles and strange
effects, we knowledge only God to be author and to him we give al thanks honor
and glory. So likewise ought we to knowledge of him all the natural effects and
operacions, and not to extol or praise nature but God only, who gives and
preserves the being and virtue to all things* Neither ought there any other
chance or fortune to be named, but al to be confessed of god, and he only to
be thanked even as he continually works for us. And as his power is never
ydel, but contynual working in all creatures. So his wisdom continually sees,
disposes and ordeineth al things most best, and his bou^ty likewise
continually communicates unto us his benefytes and graces. Furthermore it is
necessary thou know that all that God has wrought, works or shall work in his
creatures, is al for man, for whom they be created and preserved. For all the
gifts and benefits that from the beginning have been made or shall be made to
the creatures, man is bound to knowledge the^ as made to him and accordingly
therefore to thancke God* And especially the chosen or elect, to whom al
creatures do serve, both the predestinate and reprobate. Yea the angels and
the devils, even to the very sins. And because God does here manifest and
discover himself, with his omnipote^t wisdom, truth, justice, bounty and his
other virtues and perfectio^s, not only in his creatures, but much more in his
scriptures, and especially in christ on the cross, chefely to them y^ by faith
conceive him with spirit. Therefore it behooves him yt will know what thing God
is, to behold him particulerly in Christ, and to beseech him to give him liueli
and clear light to know him not only in his creatures, and scriptures but
specially in Christ crucified to the end that in him and by him, understanding
ye great bounty of God, we may render unto him all honor and glory by our
Sauyoure Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The second Sermon
How to know God by his creatures.
GOd in his majesty apparelled with his perfeccions, and in the well of his
brightness (as says Paul) is a certain light inaccessible and hid. i, Timo. vi.
But here he some what discovers him self by his creatures, as who will
enter into Rome must of force know by ye pillars, sepultures images and by the
great ruins that he shall find there, that the Romans in times past hane been
of great power, dominion and wisdom. Esaias. xv.
So he which enters into this world seeing this great engine must of force
know the maker thereof to be the God omnipote^, And beholding the order of his
creatures must not only se but also marvel at ye wisdom of God. Psalm. i* iii.
And with David cry and say. Lord thou have created al things in wisdom. And
moreover it behooves him to say that God is best, seeing that continually he
dysposeth new gifts unto his creatures. And saying that by due means he
leads them to their end, he is forced to confess gods divine providence, and
so in conclusion by the things created, to come to the knowledge of god, and
of al his perfeccions, as far forth as they appear in his creatures, and that
because the creatures be united so to gethers that each one hangs on other,
and al of god, in such wise that they make a ladder to the understanding of the
natural, by the which they clime and ascend even to God. They see that this
inferyour world, is governed of the heavens, and that the heavens keep their
courses uniformly, by contynual moving, and thereof be constrained to consider
that the virtue which moves them, being ^faticable and never weary, is
spiritual, for if it were corporal, it should end or at the least wax weak. And
so going farther, they consider that that spirytuall virtue, not being the
supreme, is governed by an other. And because they can not attain the
infinite everlasting, they are forced to come to a first supreme intellygence,
the which moves without being moved, and to a first cause independent, and so
they ascend to ye knowledge of God. Moreover, by the beauty of the creatures,
they ascend to the knowledge of the beauty of God. By the order, Armony and
consent that appear in the creatures they attain the consyderacion of gods
infinite sapyence or wysdom. And so by the visyble works of God (to the regard
whereof David calls us, Psaim. lv.
saying come and behold the works of the Lord) they attain to consider the
inuisyble perfeccyons of god, his everlasting power and Deuinitie as Paul
writes. Roma. i
There is no creature so bace nor so vile, in whom there shines not the glory
of God, in which thou may see his great power, wisdom, bounty, beauty and
the other perfeccyons. And by how much the creatures be more noble, high,
worthy, and excellent, Psalm, viii.
by so much the more do they discover God. Like as the heavens which
particulerly do show the glory of God. And the more perfectly we know the
creatures. Yea God in them, so much the more we rise to the knowledge of God,
and by so much the more our understandings who ly and with perfect light is
united and copulate unto him. It is true that many consider the creatures in
them selves, without respect to him that has created them, and so conserueth
and governs the^. But those are of more gross condition then is y^ owl,
which, because he can not behold the son, forces him self and takes
pleasure to behold him in the sterres. And they, not seeing God in his glory,
seek not at y^ least wise, to se him in the mirroure of his creatures.

But know thou first that this ladder of the creatures to clyme vuto God is
peryllous, because that God having put in them a certain beauty and swetenes,
to the end that man's understanding of the taste of the sweet running water
should be provoked to seek the fountayn or spryng, and thereby to seek god with
more vehemeucy. Many stai or rather fix them selves in the degres, and never
arrive to the heygth.

And some of the sight of the beauty created, fall into vile, base, unclean
and fylthy thoughts. And other swell in pride of that their vayn science,
without climing to taste the swetenes of gods bounty, fyxe them selves in the
degrees, and there show them selves contented for reward to be seen and reputed
for learned, of the blind folysh and fra^ ^yke world.

Furthermore, this ladder is very hard and imperfect because that by the sin
of our first parents we are so blinded of sight, that with great difficulty we
may se god in the darkness of things created, specyallye because the wise of
the world, couetyng to search all the properties, virtues and qualityes of the
creatures, have entangled them selves with their curious thoughts to the vayn
shadows of the world, that first they are attrapped of death or ever they are
a little elevated their minds toward God.

It is also a very long ladder, for the great distaunce that is between the low
sensyble creatures (at the which, as at the first step or degree it behooves to
begin to clyme) and God* For it requires extreme labor to arise to the
knowledge of the materyall substaunces, and much more then to clyme with the
thought to the knowledge of the in material. And when thou art arrived at the
perfect knowledge of ye supreme creature because between that and God there is
infinite distaunce, before that with y^ thought thou arrive at God, thy wits
shall be in manner so weakened that in the end thou shalt attayn none other but
a weak, inperfect and dark concept. Therefore to have suffycient light of God
to the knowledge of him by y^ creatures, suffiseth not to our salvation*

For though wythal natural light we did arryue by the creatures at the knowledge
of God, yet ca^ we be none other but good Me^aphisici or natural theologiens,
and not therefore good and supernatural divines, because the world should always
have more operatyon in us and in our hertes the^ god. We might well leave our
goods for pleasure, and one an other for honor, as in times paste certain
Philosophers have done, which left one vice perceiving other. But no man can
willingly forsake the world, him self, and al thing, and have God for God,
and for his only last end, but he alone to whom the bounty of God is
dyscouered, in such wise that he may more in him, the^ all the rychesses,
pleasures and dygnytyes of the world. Roma. i.
Whereunto suffyseth not the bounty of God dyscouered in his creatures, nor all
our natural light, as Paul writes to the Romans. Whom he shows that the
natural light, which leads to the knowledge of God by the creatures, was
not enough, because there of they had no light to gloryfy nor yield the due
thanks unto God.

Wherefore they are not to be excused which thinking the natural light to
suffyse, and trusting in their proper forces, or strengthes, demand none
other light of God, but are to be reputed wicked. For as much as we al have
need of the deuyne grace and light to know God suffycientlye. Neither is it
enough to behold him in his creatures. But it behooves with the spirit and
supernatural light to understand him in Christ, where he dyscouereth him
self with so great excessyue bountye, that he rauysheth and draws unto him
the hearts, in such wise, that delyuerynge them of the world, he saves
them* Let us therefore fyxe our eyes in that deuyne spectacle, to the end,
that feelyng in him and by him the bountye of the father, we may render unto
him all honor and glory by our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The.iii. Sermon.
If Philosophi serve to true Theology or diuiniti, and in what manner
THere be some the which denying al supernatural light think that in yt world
there is none other Theology or diuitite but yt natural, which they call
Metaphylica. And because that a man can not be a good Metaphysicus, unless he be
first a good philosopher, therefore they be constrained to say that Philosophy
serves to Theology or deuinite. Some other, not being able to deny Theology or
divinity to be super^aturall, say that it is grounded upon the natural, in such
wise that (after their saying) as yt knoledge intellectiue requires the
sencytyue, because thereof it has original, grows and hangs or depends,
so has Theology or diuinitye need of Philosophy, because of it it takes
beginning, grows and is established

Philosophy then after their opinion, is the guide that leads unto Santa
Santorum, to behold the celestial things. The ladder by the which it behooves,
to clyme to true Theology or divinity. And man's reason is the rule to the which
(according to their judgments) resort all the knowledge of the deuyne light.
And in so much they do allow them, in as much as they agree, not with the holy
scryptures nor with the spyrite, but with their blind humayn judgment, which
they hold for the scepter that shows al, even to God.

But I say, that as our humain reason by the sin of our first Parents, is
weak, blind, frantyke and folysh. So is likewise their Philosophy. And that
because that albeit after the sin, God left unto a man a light of the natural
things, necessary to the human life and convenient to our miserable state.
Man nevertheless, in whom rests a ^ertayn pride and curiosyty, would not
content him self with so simple a knowledge. As whether a certain Philosopher,
giving him self thyrty years to study the knowledge of all the propertyes of
the Be could never perfectly attayn his desire. The others have given the^
selves to search the knowledge of all the propertyes, qualytyes, virtues and
operacions of every sensible thing and not only of the base and corruptyble but
also of the celestial bodies. Yea (and which is more) they have enterprised to
speak of the sonie, of the angels, of God and of the things supernatural. In
such wise that (passing the limits of their small light, and walking blindely)
each one has fabrycate in his mind his own fantasye, and to the purpose have
so spoken and written every one according to his proper frenesy, whereof is
grown so great variete of opinions, so many confusyons, errors sec^es and
heresies, that (as saint Jerome justly calls them) the Philosophers are ye
Patryarkes of the heretykes, and the first begotten of Egypt. And it is an old
proverb a great Philosopher a great heretic.

The natural reason therefore, that is not healed by faith, is frenetyke and
folysh, as thou may well think when thou consyde rest the presumptyon, in
that it pretends to be the guyd, foundation and ladder of ye divine
knowleges. Whereas it f^rneth not to raise the man to the knowledge of God, but
much less gives him cause to confess with Socrates that not only he knows
not, but also that without the divine grace he can do nothing. Albeit that that
Philosophy is now so proud, that with the suppressyng and persecutyng of
Christ, the gospel, the grace and faith, it has always magnifyed the carnal
man, his light and his powers. And is become so frenetyke, that onles it be
healed by faith, it will believe nothing to be true, but that it thinks good,
nether is it possible to persuade him in any truth if first declared unto him
by his frenetike reasons, it be not conformable to his blind judgment.
Conclude therefore, that Philosophy lies low in the dark vale of
understanding, and cannot lift the head to ye high and supernatural things, in
respect whereof, it is utterly blind, and knows not, nether by experyence nor
reuelatyon, so that in it, it is impossyble to establysh the foundacyon of the
faith. For as ye feling passes not the region of the sensyble things. So
likewise cannot humayn reason nor Philosophy pass the regio^ of the natural
things* The natural man (as writes Paul) understands not the things of the
spirit and because he is not capax, that is perseneth it not, he mocketh and
scorneth it. Yea he persecuteth, banisheth with stands, denies and repugneth
the miracles, reuelacyons, prophets, the grace, faith, the holy scryptures,
God, Christ and his members. If they hear the Gospel preached of a faithful
man, Ihon. x.
they say he is mad, furyous or possessed of the deuel, Mark. v.
as was said of Christ, If of a learned man, they say his great study has
brought him out of his wyts, which also was laid to Paul. Ace. vii.
If of an ignorant how say they can he be learened that never studied letters.
And if of a pore wretch (as touching the world) they say to him as was said
to the borne blind man. Ihon. ix.
Thou wast borne in sin, and will thou teach me? And so in effect can in no
wise abide to hear the things of God. Go read the holy scriptures, and thou
shall find that the carnal wisdom and humayne reason has always rebelled
against God. She is the same that fygured by the serpent, persuaded our first
parents to taste of the prohibited apple, and that believed not the word of God,
and that afterward taught them selves. That made Cain to slay his brother
Abel, and that persuaded the world in the time of Noe, that the general diluge
or flud should not come. She caused the building of the tower of Babel. She
provoked Pharao to resyst God. She induced the people of God to murmr against
him, and to worship the golden calfe, and moved the Gentiles to ydolatry. It is
that harlot yt made Solomon, loose his wits, and stirred his father to kyl
Vri^. And fynallye, she is the same that persecuted the Patriarckes, prophets,
Apostles, Martirs, and saints of the old and new testamente. Behold whether
she be a wicked fool or not that put Christ on the cross, and where as Christ
crucified is the right wisdom of God she accounts it for a mere madness.
Sureli there is no thing that has so much favored the kingdom of Antechrist
as she which has introduced all the supersticions, hipocrisies. Idolatryes and
euyls that have been committed under color of holiness. The faith has not had
a greater ennemy then she. The church of Christ was a paradyse whiles ye simple
faith reigned. But taking in hand the Scepter of humain reason, it is become a
confused Babilo^. And whereas the clear, sure, and infallyble faith, by geuyng
light of the truth, magnyfying Christ, his grace and the Gospel, does
adnichilate or bring to naught the fleshlye man, and makes the parson, simple,
pure, immaculate, virtuous and holy. The dark, blind deceitful frenetyke
foolysh and heretical carnal reason, wisdom and Philosophy, condem^neth and
oppresses the truth. And to prove and extolle the erroures, persecuteth,
crucyfyeth and buryeth Christ, the grace and the gospel, and magnifieth the
carnal man eue^ to the heaven. All the harlots together have not so much
corrupted the world, as this only carnal reason, prudence and false
Philosophye. No nor the simple ignorance has not so much confused the world
as y^ humayne science, wisdom and Philosophy, which makes men bold,
unshamefast hoote, liars, proud, contencious, frenetike folysh and wicked.
Collos. iii.
Wherefore Paul exhorted the Colossions to beware of her deceyt because (as God
says by the Prophet Esaias) she begyleth the parsons. Esaias. xlvii.
For the wise of the world be ye most deceived, most foles most wicked and most
contrary to Christ. And it requires a special miracle to convert one of the^.
Read the christian histories and thou shall find that those be they which
evermore have been the first to persecute ye gospel. And they are very wicked
and folysh that will ground Christ upon Aristotel even like unto them that will
b^ylde a Iowre upon a wheaten straw. Christ and not the Philosophy is the only
true foundation of his church and of the true supernatural divinity of the
which he is the only workmaster and not Aristotell, I pray the what has
Aristotle to do with Christ. Many have enforsed them selves to agree Aristotle
with Plato, but they could never bring it to pass, because Aristotel,
beginning at y^ lowest of the sensible things, ryseth in the end to as high
as may be. And Plato begins whereas Aristotle ends. Consider now how it is
possible to agree him with Christ, though many will make him a pillar of the
gospel and a ladder to clyme to heaven. Let us therefore repute the sciences of
the world as vain being like unto the harlots, that with their flattering
words and deceites corrupt the minds. And let us consider that if the
priests of the old Testament were prohibited to take a commune woman for a
wife, how much more the Christian that is al wholly consecrate and dedycate to
God ought to flee and eschew the vain scyences and only serving him self of
them as of most vise handmaidens, to knit himself in spyryte and with heart and
mind to apply him self to that pure and immaculate virgin of the holy Theology
or deuinity? To the intent that everlastingly we may render to God al laud
honor and glory, by our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The.iiii. Sermon.
How we ought to use the holy scryptures in attayninge the knowledge of God.
THe knowledge of the holy sc^^ptures is not enough to prove that we have
sufficyent light of God, because it is possible that a man may by his prompt
me mory attayn the holy scriptures and their interpretacyons in his mind, and
by force of his natural wit, naturally understand them, and be nevertheless
for all that without faith, spirit and lively light of God. Luke. xxi^
For thereto it behooves him to have the spirit and supernatural light that God
with his favor do open and penetrate yt mind by his deuyne grace. So that
therefore we must not account the holy scriptures for our last end, or for our
supreme Queen or Emperesse, but for means that serve to y^ faith to the
spirit and to the true knowledge of God, much more then the creatures. And we
ought to serve our selves of them in diverse ways, for that they first incyte
and teach us to repair to God, saying in him is the chief bou^ty, go to him,
for he is faithful, and has promised to make you taste al virtue and goodness in
him. Yea, though they do not make the lively to know God, yet work they,
Iohu. v.
as the Samarita^e did, yt sent the Samaritanes to Christ, who other wise made
them taste and feel that which the Samaritane had said of him unto them in
such wise that when they returned, they confessed, saying: we believed not at
all by thy words, we our selves have heard and know, that this is truly the
savior of the world. And so the holy scryptures do send the to Christ, to the
end that he may open thy heart, and make the in spirit lively to understand
that which al ready thou have red in the dead letter, that thou may sai unto
y^ scriptures, we never believed by thy words the which, being without spirit,
could not make us taste fin^ly the great bou^ty of god. It is true that by thy
words, we have been provoked to go to Christ, who speaking unto us in spirit,
has made us to feel in the ha^t, a more clear, hy^h and deuyne effect of
that thou have spoken. They err therefore that fedyng the^ selves of the letter
and not of the spyryte do fire them selves in the holy scripture^, and seek
none other light but that. Yea I say that for one hours study, they ought to
prai a thousand, and to demand of God the true understanding of them* And
like as the Pa^tonistes heald opinion that the sensyble things gives us
occasyon to study in the book of the mind in which (they say) is imprynted all the verity. So must we cousyder that the holy scryptures do call us to Christ,
in whom (as Paul says) be hyd all the treasures of wysdom and knowledge. This
is no less then true, that like as if thou had a friend whom thou have not
tried (though always thou haste trauayled to prove him) thou would not
inwardly know him for a frynde (though he were ever in thyue eye) because the
proof has not roted him in thy mind. So albeit the holy scriptures do call and
exhort the to seek God in spyryte, it is yet impossyble yt thou should find
god in truth in ye scryptures, if first by spyryt, thou have him not at the
heart.

They serve also an other manner, that many times happens. As where god makes
the in spyryte with lively faith to feel a ^euyne truth. Afterward readyng
the holy scryptures thou fyndest that crudulyty written that thou haste so
conceived. And thereof restyng contented, thou con^yrfmst thy self in the faith
of that truth, notwythstandyug that it ought to suffyse the, of the first
inspyracyon of the holy ghost. And so moreover because that in Christ is ye
end of the law, Roma. x. ii* Cor. i.
all the promyses fulfilled and al y^ Prophecyes veryfyed the shadows, fygures
and scryptures of the old Testament he that reads it and sees all fulfilled
in Christ, is forced to satysfy him self of the truth, and to establysh him
self in faith. For Christ sent the Jews (that would not believe him) to the holy
scryptures, as to the^ that wytnessed of him. Afterward, albeit that in the
church of God, to be satysfied grounded and establyshed in the deuyne,
celestyal and supernatural veryty, it behooves in effect to come to the inward
witness of the holy ghost, without whom we can not know which scryptures be of
God, be holy and which not. Nevertheless, after y^ our holy scriptures be of
god, we ought to serve ourselves of them, as of a certain infallyble and
supreme outward rule to teach reprehend, correct and exhort the others and to
conuynce the^ that speak against it. For (as Paul writes) amongst the
exterior things we have not a more sure, i, Timo. iii Titus. i
clear, perfect and steadfast rule, then this, with which we ought in spyrit
to rule al our words works, deeds and life.

The holy scriptures moreover show unto us (though far of) our country. By
her we have light of God of his promyses and also ^hys threatenynges. Roma. ii.
And they nourysh in us, the faith, hope, charity fear and other virtues. They
comfort us in our trobles, and in prosperyty exhort us to be temperate. They
discover the va^ytyes of the world, our myseries and the bou^ty of god* And who
that studyeth them must of force retire or wythdraw him self from ye worldly
thoughts, and settle his mind to mortyfy his vices, inordinate desires and
affeccions. So that the study of them is very profitable to them that duly use
it, But it behooves not to study as the Jew (who fyxeth him in the vtermost
rynd of the letter, which as Paul says) kylleth, and beholding Moses with
the face covered, and not enteryng into San^ta Sanctorum, but as the true
Christian, to whom is given the knowledge of God celestyall Reygne or
Kyngedome, without parables, that with the lively taste and feelyng of God in
Christ, beholdynge him with lyuelye faith in the face discovered, and entering
into Sancta Sanctorum, to se with clear supernatural light, the high
resplendente secrets of god To whom be given all laud, honor and glory by
our Sauyoure Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The.v. Sermon.
Of thin conueniences that are happened and daily happen by the abuse of the
holy scriptures.
THe holy scryptures of them selves be the good gifts of God and of the holy
Ghost. Nevertheless they may be used of us well or evil, as by experyence it is
manifest. For whereas gods elect serve the^ selves of it to Gods honor, the
reprobate contrarywyse serve them selves of it to his dishonor, through their
own fault and not of the scryptures, in so much that in respect of their wicked
maligniti it has perehau^ce done hurt in some ways to ye world, though At
length, God of his infynyte bounty reduces al things to his honor and
glory. For first the scryptures annoyed them who have been diligent to gather
together many books, and neglygent to study them. Thinking them selfs fully
learned when they have had their lybrary full of books. Other some studying,
have not attained to imprynte the truth that they found in their minds, and
therefore have written it in papers, so that rea^^yng most ignorant, al their
learning consysteth in their wrytyngs, and losyng them, they also lose their
science. Which was one of the arguments that caused Plato to condemn letters,
saying that before scripture was found, the men were much better learened
then since, because they were forced to write in their minds that that
afterward they have written in paper. I pass over that many have consumed
their time in the dishonor of God, in reading and writing of things
curyous and peruycious to the health And that many transported of Curiosity,
have wylled to se so many books that in the end they remained co^fused with out
fruit. As does the fyelde whereon they cast overmuch seed. And of some that by
those means have lost their wits. But that which imports much more is that
they think the true knowledge of Theolegy or deuynyty consysteth in letters,
which is utterly false, because they give not true and lively light of the
supernatural things, y^ cannot otherwise be known of us but by spyryte,
reuelatyon, faith, spyrytuall taste, lively understanding and sure experience.
For like as the Philosopher without experyence can have no knowledge although
he bear in mind all that is written, and not having practysed, he must reast
only in opinion grounded upon Arystotle, Plato and the other Philosophers,
which moves him to believe their writing to be true, being nevertheless in very
deed more ignorant then is the poor paisaunt or husbandman, that by labouryng
of the earth, without seeking letters, fyndeth the operacion of many natural
things, that proves his science to be somewhat and theirs none, though well
they study forever and want experyence. So likewise one simple ydeot without
learning, if he have faith, lively taste and spyrytuall understanding of God,
is a greater deuyne then all the learened men of the world that be without
spirit. Yea he is a deuyne and they none. For that of ye heavenly supernatural
things he knows so much as he tastes, and experime^teth by faith, and the
learned man has only a barrayne, idle, cold and dead opinion which
stands without faith in desperacyon and accompanied of every vice. Now
therefore it appears that of this error, by thinking that true Theology or
deuynyty consysteth in learning, there are innumerable inconveniences grown,
and chefely that many, wantynge letters, and not having time to study,
thynkyng that by other ways it is impossyble to become dyuynes, have not
dysposed them selves to demand of God with meke heart and fervent desire the
light of the deuyne things. And moreover they have fled and wythdrawen them
selves from the intellygence or understanding of the holy scryptures, as from
aterryble ruin, because their wise learened and holy men have persuaded them
y^ no man may understand it but they only y^ are learned. Condempnynge them y^
write in the vulgar tongue, as if the true divinity depended of the Hebrew
Greek or Latin letters, or of that wit that has well studied the^* Behold now
therefore whether this be not a most raw and wicked opinion, being the very
cause that has moved me thus to write in my natural tongue to thin tent that
(knowing the true Theologi to be open to every language and to the simple) our
own nation should not be pryuate, who have none other but the mother tongue.

There be many that studying the holy scriptures without spyryt, lively faith
and supernatural light, have not only not attayued the true knowledge of the
bou^ty of god and their own proper myseryes, but the more they have studied,
the more, by the dri and dead letter, they are become blind of God and of
them selves. Yea unfaithful, unkind, proud arrogaunt presumptuous confencious
and repleate of al othervices. Whereas the supernatural true Theology or
deuynyty, showing the great bounty of God, and declaring in our selves our own
miseryes, makes us faithful, thankful, just, humble, modest, gentle, quiet and
conformable

And moreover they be so blind that not knowing their own wre^tchednes, they
not only forbear to humble themselfes before God, and of him heartily to
demand help light and grace, but also leaving prayer for their study, and
the spirit for their learning, they presume to be masters of the others as
Paul writes, Roma. ii.
and so inflambed of their science, have s^anndered the world whereas charyty
edifieth. And being consequently without spirit, ^i, Cor. viii.
they study and understand the holy scriptures according to their own
judgments, diuersli as their wits and study are variable, and every one
according his fantasy expounds them, thinkinge he has perfectly and justly
couceiued them, Whereof are grown infinite sects and he resyes. In stead of
y^, if they had been good and true deuines, and had had the spirit of gods
gift, they had understand the^ in truth and veryty, whereof follows none
other ^nt v^you of faith both in spirit and charyty.

Many also beleuyng by the study of the holy scryptures, to attain true
Theology and perfect knowledge of God, and consequently the chief felycyty
possible to the living man, have given them selves to study the scriptures,
and walking by them to ioyn to the supreme felicity of gods knowledge, because
they wanted the spirit, they nether ca^ arryue at the true and lively light,
taste and spiritual understanding of God nor yet to the true felycyty. Whereof
it grows that they fall to the bottom of infidelyty, in such wise, that they
believe that there is none other light, faith or deuinity then that their barrein
and dead opinion, nor other felicity the^ that their misery, and so, seming to
have at tayned the heygthe of virtues, before they have once tasted of them,
they despraise the^ These and such other inconuenyences are grown and
contynuallye grow through them that know not how they ought to use the holy
scryptures in such wise, y^ by their default, and not of the scripture, they
have perchance done hurt to the world, But for that we ought not to condemn
the letters (as many have done) but the men y^ know not to use them as they
should be used to the honor of God. To whom be al honor and glory by our
savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The.vi. Sermon.
If to be good deuynes it behoue us to have the humain sciences or not.
THere be many that think it is not possible to attain the perfection of
Theology, if first a man learn not Gramer, Dialectica, Philosophy and
Metaphisica, Yea Scotus Thomas Bonauenture and such other. I confess my self
to have been in that error, and therefore am now moved to compassyon of them
that reaste blinded wythal. If it were as they say, we should be most bounden
unto the inuentours of those scyences, syns that by the^ we may be good
deuynes, and without them not. And then I pray you if they happened to peryshe
or those authors to be lost should it not follow that also the world should
lack deuinity? And likewise if the learned men i^ those scyences be only
the good deuynes, and consequentlye saints (the contrary whereof is clearly
seen) then might well the simple and unlearned people despair of al ghostly
health and the true and necessari divinity hang upon humayne scyences. So by
that reason it should behoue us to say that the Apostles and in manner all the
saynctes. Yea and the blessed virgin Mary were not good deuynes, not
withstandyng that they have taught others. No nor Christ never learned those
humayne sciences, and yet was he the most excellent deuyne. Ihon. iii.
Therefore we must know that one humayne science leads v^ to cly^e to an
other, much unworthy of the name of Theology or deuinitye, but rather to be
called Metaphisica, y^ which neither has nor gives so much ^yght of God as
can suffyse to our salvation, being a knowledge, that by force of man's wit
climinge the degrees of humayne reason, may be attained. Whereas the true and
superuatnral Theology or deuynyty is a science of the spirit, a gift and light
yt by grace comes from God above, in such wise, y^ not he that has the
pregnaunt wit, has most studied and is best learned, is greatest divine,
but he y^ has faith, lively light and understanding of god, that lives
better and more christianly. And because faith is a gift of God, Ephe. ii.
and the true deuinity a supernatural light, not attaynable or can not be
attained of us, but given of God to his elect. Therefore every simple ydeote and
ignorant of the humain scyences, may by the grace of God, Act. viii.
suddenly become a perfect divine, and Christian, as in the acts of the
Apostles it is red of the ^unucho. It is possible then, that a simple old
woman may have more of the true Theology or deuinity, then all the learned me^
of the world. For the humayne sciences do fyl our minds of smoke and pride,
and occupy them in such wise (that distract with Marta) they be not attentyue
with Mary to receive the knowledge of God It is seen by experyence that rather
and more lightly the simple have accepted the gospel then the learned men of ye
world. Yea where the simple, the ydeotes, the little children and the
Samarytanes magnified Christ, the learned scrybes and Phariseis persecuted him
to the death of the cross. And when the world conuerteth, seldom the learned
men come to the faith, but have been ever the last. There could none enter into
Sancta Sanctorum by the old law but the high bishop. But Christ dying on ye
cross, Collos. ii.
has overthrown the veil of the temple, so that the resple^de^t treasures of
gods wisdom hyd in Christ are manyfested so openly, that the simple and
ideotes, yea the Publicanes and commune women have vnderstauded them. Psalm.
cxviii
Whereof David speaks saying. Thy words be open, they lyghten and give
understanding to the little ones. That high and deuyne wisdom is become so low
and open in Christ, that every simple may understand. For that Christ is not
come as an humayne man to teach us letters, but is deuinely and spiritually
descended to kindle the spirit, light chariti and grace in the hearts of his
elect, and so has he made them to understand, even to the children which
magnifi him, Math. xxi.
saying: Blessed is he that is come in the name of the Lord. And Christ
reproved his Apostles when they let the children of coming to him though
now their be many that will not allow the holy scriptures to be had in the
vulgar tongue, Luke. xviii
nor red and declared to ye simple, as if they could not understand the^, no^
were not bound to know that which is contained in them. And yet it is certain,
they conteyne none other but profitable and necessary things to the health, and
that being of the holy ghost, those divine verities be in manner so expressed,
that in what tongue so ever it be written, so it be truly declared, and with
pure heart herd and vnd^rstand, they must needs edify without offending. Christ
thanking his father, said unto him. I praise the (father and Lord of heaven
and earth) that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, Math. xi.
and opened them unto babes, not for that they have studied, but because it
has so pleased the* Iere. iii.
In this is fulfilled that that God promised by his prophet Jeremy, that eue^
to the least of al they should know. Now behold if they be blind or not, that
will buyld the true Theologye upon Philosophy, and upon the humayne sciences,
whereas Christ is the true foundation, and upon him it behooves to build, not
wood, straw or hay, but silver, gold and precious stones, ^. Cor. iii.
that is to say, not the inuencyons of man, but the only true reuelacio^s of
God. Saint Iho^ Baptist, and not Aristotle, was the precursor or forerunner of
Christ. It is not possible with ye light of a little burning candel to aug^ent
the great light of y^ Sun, and likewise Christ cannot be clarified by the
humain sciences. Ihon. v.
He him self says that he has taken his beauty, not of men but of his father,
who said unto him: And the I have glorified, Ihon. xiii.
and the I shall gloryfy And will thou then that Christ, which is y^ light of
the world, should have need of the light of Aristotle? That their dry, cold
and dead Theology serves to make the^ proud, Ihon. i.
to presume of the^ selves, to contend and to deceive the blind ignorant people
with persuading the^ falsely to reput^ the^ for divines yea and to begile them
selfs, that albeit yt they be darkness in deed, yet they^ think them selves
to be the light of the world, and therefore humble not their hearts to pray
unto God to give them light. I will not say that we cannot serve our selves of
all the humain sciences in the honor of God, yea and of our sins, inasmuch
as of them we may take occasyon of virtue. But I say in deed that they be not
necessary to make us good deuynes. For to that it behooves a supernatural light
of God, with clennes and purity of heart. And this light we ought evermore to
dema^^d of God with fervent prayer, we ought also to seek the hearing of
gods word, and with humility to exercise our selves iu studying y^ holy
scriptures, to the intent, that as true and good dyuynes, we may render unto
God all honor and glory by our savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
The.vii. Sermon.
How a Christian ought to make his last will and testament.
IT is commonly the custom of men in their testame^tes, and last wyls to sai:
I leave, I bequeath, I give, without once saying I take or cari with me
wherein certes they be far deceived because they take that, which they ought
to leave be hynde the^, and go without caryinge that which is very behofeful
and necessary. Wherefore to the intent they should no more err on yt behalf. I
would we should consider and weyghe how a true Christian should make his will.

Men that be either fools, mad, phrantyke, neither (...), nor yet know how to
make a will, by reason they have not wit to descerne good from evil, what is
theires, or what is not, what to take, nor what to restore or be queath, nor
yet to whom nor in what manner. And if happily they go about to make their
testament, it should be but vain and of no force God allows it not as a thing
made of a parson witles. Wherefore he that is willing to make a testament
effectual (as expedient is to him that will be saved) behooves to have very
good spiritual judgment, a liueli faith in Christ, and an understanding and
light above a natural man, he must also be the son, and lawful heir of God.

And then he may say: I sound of mind, and ready of spirit and remembrance,
albeit as touching my flesh syck make my testament, and ^equeath first of al my
being and substance to god: he gave it to me and also preserved it, and of him
I recognize to have it, and for it I render him thanckes. I leave to him like
wise the gifts, graces, benefits temporal, bodily and gostly, that I have
had, or shall hear after receive: for they ^e his, and from him by grace I
acknowledge to have received all, as Paul says, what have thou, that thou
have not received at gods hands. Yea for as much as all the slanders,
misreportes, persecucio^s, sickness, and misfortunes, which I have already or
shall from hence forth suffer, and even death self, I confess (by the
understanding that the Lord has given me) that they have beue and shall be his
gifts and graces given and granted of a great love for my wealth and profit:
wherefore as his deuyne rewards I grant to have had the^ of god, for them I
thancke him, and as his own I leave and restore them to him.

And for so much as I cannot but acknowledge that I have gone always backward
from him so often as I would rule my self by my blind judgment, folyshe
wisdom and deuelishe spirit, nether did so much as go one step forth
toward God, but when I was moved, driven, and thrust forward of his holy
spirit. Wherefore I commit to the highest God my most dear father, and to his
governance, all the world and specially my self, in him (as I may) I will help my
self with mine own wit, and fredome, namely by making it obedyent to him*

Moreover if ever I have spoken or shall from hence forth utter any word, if I
have done or shall do any work, that is to him pleasant, if I have had or
after this time shall have thought desire or will, that good is* I give it to
God, and at his hands I profess that I have had al my goodness, so that if it
were gods will, to take from me all that he has given me, there should in me
remain nothing but only sins: those are mine own, and al other things he
his.

Thus be my sins if I should go before gods presence. I were but dampened, if I
were minded to make satisfaction I could not, no nor yet any sayncte that ever
was, there is none whose love is so great to take my sins upon him and
satisfy for them, and appease gods anger save Christ alone, wherefore to him I
bequeath my sins. I leave to him my pride, unkindness, unbelieve, mistrust,
arrogance, envy, wrath, ambition, and al my innumerable wickedness, I give to
him my evil thoughts, affections, and desires: to be short I make one faggot
and boundel of al my offenses present, past and to come, and give them to
Christ having sure faith, and steadfast hope, that he will accept them for his
own, and has even already taken them, and for them has satisfied on the
cross, his father laid them on his neck, Esaye, lii^.
and he did not ones again say it, but of great love allowed them for his, and
to consume and burn them in the flame of his divine love, he bore them on his
innocente shoulders upon the cross, i. Peter. ^i.
(as Peter writes) and so was offered a sacrifice for us. Now seeing I have
left al my sins to Christ and given to God my substance, and being, withal
other gifts and graces, that he bestowed on me, I remayn naked without either
good or evil, and truly to say, I am rather nothing. In that I have restored to
God my being that I had by creatyon and birth.

But for because it is impossible that he should save me without being, and so
it is y^ he will save me, therefore first I carye with me Christ him self, which
is my life. God has so loved me, that he has given himself to me. Ihon.
iii.
For so has God loved y^ world that for their syns he has given us his only
begutten son. I carry also with me his spirit, that was of his eternal father
given me of his most roi^l liberaliti, as well declares Paul, where he says,
God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts whereby we cry and call
father, Gala. iiii.
father.

And in that he has given me him, he has restored me to myself and former
being. With a new substance and nature spiritual, so that for the possibility
of my salvation. I have a being: but yet lack I treasure to discharge my great
dets, and to appear rych in gods sight, in consideracio^ where of I bear
with me Christ's watching, abstinences, trauayles, prayers, persecutions,
slanders, I take with me his tears, his swet, his blood, and all that ever he
did or suffered in three and thirty years is mine every deal, and with lively
faith I embrace it as for mine own, I carry beside this with me his pacyence,
mekenes, love, and al other his denyne virtues, his gifts and graces, his
treasures, and all that he has mereted and des^rued, his life, passion, death,
resurreccion and assension be mine, ye all yt ever he has done or shall from
henceforthe do is mine, and what needs more to say, if God have given us his
own son, how has not he with him given us al things wherefore with faith
I embrace my sweet Jesus for mine own, Romans viii.
he is my rightwysenes, wysdom, i. Corin. i.
ransom, and holiness, he is my strength, he is my spirit, my light, life,
hope, and al my goodness, even Christ him self in hyslaste will bequethed me all
y^ he had of the father, Wherefore he says: I entertayne you at my table as my
father has used me, Luke. xx^.
as my father has made me his heir so now I ordein you. I will that as you be
my brethren so you shall be my folowers. And in another place he says: I have
loved you, as mi father has loved me sithen I am now through Christ so rich
of treasures, virtuous, and graces* I shall be hable not only to satisfy for
my dettes, but also to purchase infinite paradise, when soever they shall be
soulde.

Who shall be now either to accuse or condemn me, after that Christ has thus
clothed me with his innocensy, rightwisenes, holiness, love, with all his
vertuse, graces, treasures, merits, and with his own self. I may with no
less boldenes and suretye, then Christ, appear before God, I am his son, as
he is, and heir of heaven, semblably I am innocent as Christ is now that he
has satisfied for me, and paid my ransom, and rewarded me with his
innocence, Christ said: I hallow my self that they also may be holy, even
he is our holiness and we be his members. Wherefore it is as possible for God
not to love me, as it is possible that he should not love Christ, by reason
whereof Paul says: Roma. viii.
who shall divide me from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus. It must
needs be that he be saved which with living faith embraces Christ for his
own. And consideringe that the treasures, and merits of Christ are infinite,
and able to enryche a thousand worlds, I entende not to carye with me any
other merits, nor spiritual riches save those that Christ has provided for
me, for they be not only sufficient for me, but also over abundance and
unmeasurable.

Then should I do no small iniurye to Christ, if I should search to store my
self by any other mean or shift, although I might do it never so easily, nay
rather with Paul will I reckon al other things as mire and dyrt so that I have
Christ, Philip, iii.
with whom alone I will appear before God, and of and by him will I glory and
make boaste, Galath. vi.
yea God for bid, that I should make my auau^te of any thing, save of the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom only hangs al our health. And albeit all the
saints be rich by mean of Christ, nevertheless, if they had merytes of their
own most plenteouse, and would give them to me, yet would I none, my Christ
is inoughe for me, with him had I rather suffer, then take pleasure and joy
without him. It would be a thing pleasant to me, if every man should make
prayer to God for me, not because I might purchase or have any other treasures
then those that I have of Christ, but that I might by lively faith every day
acknowledge, possess and embrace those y^ I have received of Christ and
count them for mine and so inform my self, I my self were it not by
Christ, should not know what to ask, for in him is al and without him al
other things be but mere vanity, only this peticion I make to him, that he
vouchsafe every dai to give me light and understanding, that I may have wit to
accounte and take his treasures for mine own. Wherefore if any man will pray for
me let him not tarry till I be dead, for then I can no more increase in
light and grace. Let him pray now, that I may grow in faith and more and more
instruct my self of Christ's riches. I am well assured that in purgatory I
shall not come, both because there is found no other purgatory but Christ
in whom at the full be purged and punished all the sins of the elected, and
al so because in case there were one, yet Christ not by my merits, but by his
mere goodness does satisfy for all my sins, trespasses, and pains, and for
as much as hope never made any man ashamed, nor confounded any person, Romans
iii.
that had it in his heart (as Paul wrote) therefore am I sure and secker that
he will save me without other purgacion. We cannot promise our selfs to
much of gods goodness, no we never can be h^te us so much, but he will
recompense much more, I will not suffer therefore that after my life any good
be done for me.

Truth it is that if I have any goods them must I leave to the poor flock of
Christ, not because they should pray for me, that am al ready saved, but
for the use of other that live, Ihon. vii
and shall be borne, as Christ did and also because the rather they may live
godly, and know that they shall never lack that be his, and put their trust in
him. To whom be always, honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

The.viii. Sermon.
How we should answer the deuel when he tempts us and name lie in the end
of our life.
THe Deuel (as Peter writes) seeks always to devour us but chefelye he is
busye at the hour of death, i. Peter. v.
by reason then it stands him in hand so to do for his own behooue, and our
greater endomage and harm. Then uses he al might, power sleyghte, deceyte,
and malice: wherefore I think good that we should search how to make him
aunsweare and by the assistence and aid of gods grace to understand him and
get the upper hand of him.

He is constrained specially when we aproch nere to our death, to throw us
into a bisse and pit of desperacion, or else to set us in pride and presumpcio^:
if he shall perceive that thou either put trust in thy self, or confidence in
thine own worckes, he will not ^oo in hand to make the despair and mistrust
gods mercy, but rather stablishe the in that erronyouse opinion of pride of thy
deeds, on the other side if he feel that thou have all thy hope in God: then
will he show the on the one party the multitude and wickedness of thy sins,
and on the other party gods wrath and severe justice, he will tell the how
thou art in a maze and perplexity not able to be shaken of, or wonden out of,
and by making the to feel thine offenses, otherwise then ever thou dyddest in
thy health will go about to take out of thy heart the passion of Christ, and
all the great goodness, mercy, and love of God, and finally to prove the damued,
he will bring for his purpose, even the holy scriptures.

But I will that al his temtacions serve the to the honor of God and salvation
of thy soul as they do serve the turn of the elected, to whom all things
work to gether for their wealth, Roma. viii.
first of all I warn the, that thou maintein not thy self for good but admit
and grant all the evil that he shall rehearse of the and think, that he has
not said so much, i. Ihon. ii.
but that it is much more and thank God that now at last he has been so
favorable, to make the consider thy sins, wherein he uses the deuel for an
instrument, to the intent that by the knowing of them, thou should take
occasion to humble thy self, and to call Christ to thy remembrance, which to
scour and cleanse them has not only reputed them for his own, but also dyed
for them upon the cross, grant thou hardely that thou art a great rybalde
and noughtye without excusing thy self in any wise, and that thy sins are
innumerable. Confess that thou could never satisfye for one alone, and that
thou were the most damned sinner of the world if Christ had not delivered the,
and still prompte thy self with those matters, which may further the to come
into desperacion of thy self

But if the deuel wait to bring the to despair of Christ, thou may in no wise
consent thereto, but steadfastly put thy trust in him. And my mind is that thou
say to him thus: If it were good for me to mistrust Christ, you never would
have persuaded me thereto but rather have drawn me from it, wherefore in that
thou would put me in mind to mistrust Christ, thou make me stronger in
my hope and trust.

Thou shall say to him, that when he caused iniustly Christ to dye, which was
an innocent, he lost al his interprise and inrisdiction, that ever he had or
possible might have over man. And if he proceed forth to induce the to
despair, by setting before the thy great sins. I will the to say to him.
Go to Christ, ^, Ihon, ii.
which (as Ihon writes) is mine attournei and advocate, he can make the an
answer for me, reason there with him, if thou have any claim or title in me,
as thou say, do thou not know that he has taken my sins for his own,
and has for them made satisfactyon most plentuously, therefore have thou no
right in me at al.

If he chance to say his death is not enough to sane the, answer him: if Adam
by tasting one apple with one only sin was hable to damn me: how is it that
so many holy works of Christ, which tasted for my sake of great love the most
bitter death, be not sufficient to save me. If the disobedience of Adam had
power to condemn me, Roma. vi.
much more the obedyence of Christ is strong enough to save me, yea the gift
of Christ is above and excedeth the sin of Ada^, Christ has more auayled and
helped us, then Adam annoied and harmed us, by reason the light of Christ is of
more force and effect then the darkness of our first parent, the goodness of
Christ's surmounteth and passes y^ malice of man, and his virtue prevails
above our frailty: one tear of Christ has been more pleasant to God, the^
all the sins of the world be displeasaunt, Christ has be able to do more to
appeace him, then we to provoke him to anger, Christ's living was more formal
and ordinary, then ours was out of order and frame. Christ has done more to
the honor of God, then we have done to his dishonor. Wherefore I may well
say, Christ that is my wisdom, right wisnes, holiness, and redemption is
sufficient enough to save me. i. Corin, i.


And if happily he should say, it is not sufficient for thy salvation to believe in
Christ, the be houeth to keep his commandments, thou must love God wythal
thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self, and desire nor covet any thing
worldly, which things because thou do not, ergo, thou art dampened, if faith
only were enough I also and all the deuels should be saved, because (as it is
written) even the deuels believe and fear. Jacob. ii.
They believe that God made and created heaven and earth, and that Christ came,
dyed, rose, ascended into heaven, that he sent the holy ghost, and that he shall
come to judge the quick and dead, and yet are not we therefore saved, and that
because we observe not his divine precepts. Wherefore thou also art but lost,
he will thus labor to bring the under the law to think that thou must be
justified not by Christ, but by perfourminge and fulfillinge of the law, to
the end yt thou should despair.

But I will that thou make answer and say: if thou did believe as by gods
grace I believe: that is, that God for thy wealth has created the world, and
semblably preserves it, in such sort that thou could feel in the creatures
the love of God, and likewise would believe firmly, that Christ came and dyed
for thy sins, for to save the, and for thy sake and profit, and in like
manner of the other articles, thou also should be saved, and then, when thou
had a lively feling of the goodness and love of God thou would love him,
and thy neighbor likewise, and being rauyshed into God would begin to
set little store by the world as al good Christen men and women do. If it
fortune that he say: Deu. xxvii
he is cursed that keeps not and observes the law, wherefore thou art one of
mine, Galath. iii. Roma. vii.
say to him again, for that cause Christ dyed on the cross, for to deliver
me from all curses, and in so much as I am already of Christ, I am dead to
the law.

Again if he replye saying: where be thy works, whereby thou trustest to be
saved? answer, I trust not to be saved by mi works for they be such that if I
should have regard or respect to them. I fear me to be damned yea I were surely
acertained of my damnacion. I hope only to be saved by Christ, and his works,
Romans viii.
which be mine own, and so much rather mine, then they I did myself as that
the spirit of Christ given to me is more entyer to me then mine own life or
any other thing.

Further if he should endeavor to prove the to be none of the elect, by reason
of the innumerable, and outragiouse sins that thou have committed, for
prosperites, or adversities thou have had, for the great euylles wherein thou
art found at thy death, or for the temptacyons thou haste sustained, saying,
that God preserves his elected from the like euyls. Romans viii.
Make him answer and say: rather does God practyse them in diverse such
manners, albeit of euerything they be certified to the honor of God, thou
shall moreover say to him thus. I give more credit and trust to Christ,
which when he was dead for me on the cross, told me I was saved, then to
the, that art always a liar and father of erroures. I will thou tell him, how
thou geuest more faith to Christ alone, then to all the reasons and authorities
of the world: thou may by side this say to him, the spirit of God bears
witness to mi spirit, that I am the son of god and to him must I rather
trust then to the. When he shall say, if thou were the son of God he would
not leave the in such punishments, as thou art in, but would give the son
release and easement, answer him: In case it were as thou say Christ should
not have been the son of God, sithen on the cross he had no comfort, nor
sensual taste or feling so that he said: my God, my god why have thou forsaken
me: Mark. xv.
it suffices to me that he shows me so much favor, for I am contented with
all that pleases him, as Christ also was, yea in his sufferinge, he felt
excedingly the infinite love of the father.

Beside these if he say: thou art the son of Adam, Ephesi. ii.
ergo thou art accursed, Answer thou thus: I am blessed again by bring borne
of God, Ihon. i.
and by mean of that blessed sede Christ as God long agone promised Adam when
he said: In thy sede al nacyons shall be blessed, Gene. xii.
thou shall tell him: how thou art despoiled and bereft of the old Adam, and
clothed with Jesus Christ as Paul teaches and aduertiseth the, Roma. xiii.


What time as he shall declare to the that Christ is wroth, angry and sharp:
make him answer how Christ is not such one, for he is the health and hope of
sinners, and whylest we be in this life present he is uttered to us, pitiful,
sweet, and our Jesus, that is, our sauiour^, and al be it he seem to speak
sharp, and cruel words to the woman of Canany:yet in heart he gave her
confidence and boldness, Math. xv.
and showed him self to her full of swetenes and love. In deed at the day of
judgment to the damned shall he be showed angry, and wrathful but in the mean
time till that day while we be here in this present life, he is showed pitiouse
to al, and pryncipally to the great sinners.

And if it so were that he would say thou art not truly confessed, nor have
rehearsed al thy sins, and the circumstaunces of the same, ne have examyned
sufficiently thy conscience, nor yet haste no^ that pure perfect great and
vnsayned sorrow for thy sins that thou of duty should have, thou haste not
satysfyed for those so great an innumerable dettes, that thou haste toward
God, make him this answer and say: thou art a servant and not a judge: or to
say more truly, thou art al ready judged and condemned, seeing thou beleuest
not in Christ, Ihon. iii.
and would thou judge me? trouble thy self no longer in proving that I have
failed in all, for sure I am, and fully I believe to be saved, not by works by
reason they be imperfect nor yet by the worthynes of my faith, for in that also
I am not perfect, because I believe not with so great a faith as I ought, but I
believe I shall be saved by Christ, and not by my works.

He will say: thou art not worthy to be saved, say thou to him for a full answer:
the unworthy be saved so often as they acknoweledge their own unworthiness, go
hartelye for healpe to Christ, by whose mean they be come worthy.

Where as he shall lay to thy charge that thou art one of the worste of the
world, say to him on this wise: our infyrmytyes be but small in comparision of
the infinite merits of Christ, and of the incomprehensyble mercy of God: and
the more great that my sins be and without number, so much greater shall be his
glory in delivering me, and I with so much the greater trust pray as that if
he will hear me, it shall be more to his honor and glory. And when I
consider and call to remembrance, that my sweet and louinge brother Jesus
Christ the son of God, which for my sake dyed on the cross, and would
again innumerable times for me, if need were, and that I am his own for so
many causes, and that he may determyne of me after his own mind. For so much
as his father has given him full power in heaven and earth: when I consider
this, I say, I can in no wise doubt of my salvation.

If he efte soones reason thus: thou haste done no penannce for thy sins,
answer on this manner: that can I never do, if I should always stand in
the fire, Christ has done that for me on the cross moreover Christ is
mine, the father has given him to me with al his merits, all the good
worckes, that ever he did are mine, wherefore I may with his divine riches,
and tresures satisfy for all.

After this manner I would thou should answer him, when so ever he sets
before the thy sins, and infinite dettes, that thou ought to God for the
benefits, thou have received with diverse and sundry vices while he tempte
the, but specyallye with desperacion, wherewith he tempts even ye saints he
will put the in mind and mystruste that Christ has forsaken the: but make
answer that he never forsook person that trusted in him, but because he would
for sake none of us, he was myneded to be forsaken him self on the cross, and
if he should at any time forsake and refuse us (the which is a thing
impossible) it should be for more glory of God, and we ought not on lie to
be contented, but also to take it for a synguler privilege and prerogatyue. It
be houeth us to stand strong in the faith, and think that before God the
passion of Christ can do more to cause him to love us, then our sins can
procure his hate to ward us, we had need to bewel armed with spirit, faith,
and grace, for learning suffices not to know how to answer, and wite thou
well that Christ was tempted, and specyallye at the end, Ihon. xv.
wherefore he says: the prince of this world is common, but he has gotten
nothing of me.

And if he can not with these armoure hurt the, he will turn over the
leaf, and say thus, and al because to deceive the* Go to thou haste all
ready vanquyshed me, I was myneded to bring the into desperacio^, but I could
not. Thou art saved: and by and by will y^ angels come to fet the. ii. Cor, xv.
He will appear to the like an aungel of light, and say to the as he did to
saint Hilarion. Haste thou served God so long, haste thou done so many good
deeds so great penance, given so many good ensamples, saved so mani souls
and albeit thou haste committed sins? yet art thou confessed of them, thou
haste done penance, thou haste taken pardons, thou haste gone for indulgences,
thou kepeste the commandments, and beside these done many voluntarye works
that thou wast not bonnden to do, wherefore why shuldeste thou fear. Thou
shalt be safe and sure, if thou be not saved, then shall none be saved. Yea
thy good works be over plusse, more then suffices, The Devil is a liar.
which thou may sell or give to other, which if thou do not the church of
Rome shall be the heir, and thou shall enrich their treasury of indulgence.
Ihon. viii.
What ferest thou therefore: have thou happily gone another path or way. Albeit
thou have admitted sins, yet see thou not how thou art well dispose^ at the
last, only stand stoutly in the trust of these thy great and many good works
suffer this sycknes, and death for the remission of thy sins, and thou shall
be more then saved, only often remember thy self. Of thy good works. Then it
is expedient for the to say thus, Thou would that I should trust in my
works, and I have no fear of being dampened, were it not for my works, I give
thanks to my Lord Christ Jesus, which has given me the grace to count my
works for a thing of naught, and for such, that every one of them I deserve to
be punyshed, thou magnifiest my works, to draw me back from the confydence of
Christ, but by gods grace, thou shall not be able to do it, I find that I am
upon a little bourd in the sea tossed with mighty wynds and have embraced and be
clepped a strong pyller or rock, and thou councelest me to leave it, and to
stick to the rotten things which I should do, the winds would carye both me
and them into the sea* Rather I will perish with Christ which is a thing
impossible I then live without him, no I can not put my trust holy in Christ
unless first al together I despair of my self and mine own works. Wherefore it
is necessary that we despoile our selfs of al trust in our own works, and by
faith and hope, clothe us and arm us with Christ and in him put our hope, and
although we have not that great faith, yet in no wise ought we to despair,
because if at the first he do not, yet at length he gives it to his elected at
their death, as the Prophet Abacucke told a fore hand, when he said, Lord when
they shall be near to the death at the latter end, between this way and the
other, thou wylt make known to them Christ and his great benefits, and wilt
open to them the bosom of thy graces by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The.ix. Sermon.
How aunsweare is to be made at the judgment seat of god
A Felon or gylty person, that can not fly, but of necessity must appear at
the sessions assise, or law day afort yt bar, pycketh out and c^oseth him for
his ayed and succoure, attourneys, protectours and counselors, and goes
devising how he may be detended, namely in a matter touching life and death:
which thing it stands us in hand more to do. In so much as, that we being full
of sins, must appear before the high judgment seat of gods justice, and when
judgment by definitive sentence is given against us, we shall lose paradise,
soul, grace, God, and al goodness without recovery, and be thrown into the
deep pit of hell thereto remain and abide in fire ever lastingly* Wherefore me
seems it were expedient to imagine what way to take, what answer to make, with
what reasons to arm us, that we may have the matter to pass on our side.
Roma. v.


First of al an undoubted matter is it, that we al have sinned in Adam and
beside the original sin have innumerable actual, ne can be saved, onles
first we be absolved and forgiven, and that must needs be whilst we be in this
life for afterward is no more redemcion at al. Luke. xvi.
To the glotten was denied one drop of water.

Wherefore necessary is it to know ye there be two judgment seats of God: the
one is of ryghtwisenes, the other of mercy, grace, pity, goodness, love
swetenes, and liberaltty: as Paul speaking of this last faith: Let us go
boldly to the troue, Heb. iiii.
and bench of gods grace at the first bench sits God, and Christ keeps
residence at the second. Now as for the sinners, if they will be saved they must
go al to the bench of mercy to ask and call for pity, and not justice, for
favor and not strayghte reconyng, because we have al ben unjust, and withal
our rightwisnes, and good works be not hable to withstand gods rightwisenes,
Psalm. cxliii.
wherefore David said, Lord none can be justified in thy sight, if there thou
will see a reconinge, and in another place. Lord if thou will punish our
iniquyties, Psalm. cxxix. Job. ix.
who shall be hable to abide? and Job says I know that man can not be justified
if he stand face to face a fore God. And in another place, what thing is man
that he should be clean? Job. xv.
the heavens be not clean in his sight. And Ieremye writes thus: If thou
wash the with Nitrus thou shall nevertheless be stained. Ieremi. ii.
And Esaye says: our right wisenes be like the clothes of an unclean woman:
and Solomon witnesses the same, saying who is he that can say my heart is
clean. Prouer. xx
I am pure and innocent from sin wherefore says God by Jeremy, why will you
strive with me in judgment: As though he should say you are fools, if you
think your self hable to wythstande the justice of God, saying your
ryghtwysenes is unclean and that so much vnclener, as that not only the
woorckes, but also the very inward thoughts, affections, and desires shall be
exammed, and tried. Therefore says God, I will search, Sopho. i.
try and prove Ierusalem^ with lanternes, it is most profitable to go to the
benche of mercy. And say with David, Psalm. xv
Lord I shall come a fore the, not with the multitude of my works, but of thy
mercy, and in case thou be somemoned and called to the throne of justice.
Appeal to the other benche of mercy, for as from the iudgmente of a Lord
subject to the Emperor a man may appeal to Cesars judgment seat: so may
a man appeal from the bench of justice to the trone of merci as to the higher
court, James. ii.
In as much as James writes mercy excels justice: it is seen that
Ezechias, after sentence was given upon him at the benche of justice, iiii.
Reg. ii
because he appealed to the other trone of mercy had granted to him, that he
should live fiftene years longer And David by appealynge to mercy caused the
sentence to be revoked, ii. Reg. xi.
which was given that he should dye. And what time that servant, Math. viii.
of whom the gospel speaks, said, have patience with me and give me
respyte: he appealed to mercy and was herd In like manner is it and has be of
al sinners that be saved.

Now must we do in the same wise, I mean when we be cyted to the court of
justice to render and yield an account, then must we appeal to mercy, and
say: we be dead through Christ to the law, and therefore to justice also,
Romans vii.
which judge after y^ law are we dead, then has justice no jurisdiction
upon us at all, no though it were the greatest sinner of the world, say
thou to God, I am Christ's, thou gave me to him as Christ says, they were
thine, and thou haste given them to me. Ihon. xvii.
Moreover Christ has redeemed me, therefore am I his for many causes, I will
therefore stand to his judgment, thou haste given him all power in heaven and
in earth as he him self says, Mat. xviii.
to me is given all power in heaven and in earth, wherefore he may do with
me the thing that lyketh him, and as to him seems good, he is my judge as
Christ him self says, the father has given all iudgmente to the son,
Ihon. xii.
it is therefore his duty to judge me. But as in another place he says he came
not to judge but to save the world, say therefore to Christ, do thine
office, save me, for thou cammeste, and thy father did send the for that
intent, I feel all ready thy voice, and in my heart thou sayeste to me,
that because I trust in the, thou will save me, all ready by thy grace have
I put in the my confidence and hope, and he that believes in the, Exodi. xii.
can not be dampened, save me therefore according as thou art bounden by a
covenant made. And al be it thy conscience accused the, and all the deuels
beside laid to thy charge, yea though judgment were given against the, yet so
long as thou art in this present life, it is always lawful to appeal to the
mercy of God.

And if it were so, that by force thou should he drawn to the court of justice,
cry out with Esaias, and say to Christ: O Lord I suffer violence, Es. xxxviii.
make answer for me, healpe me, forsake me not, I chose and will have the for
my attorney and speech manne: not because thou should defend my just accomptes,
and true reckenynges, for I have none such, but to the intent thou should take
my sins for thine, and reward me with thine innocence holiness and
ryghtwysenes. Thou have all ready satissfied for me on the cross and
appointed me by adopcion to be the son of God, wherefore I cannot be damned,
no not one shall be found that dare accuse me, Romans viii.
being one of gods elected.

Moreover if thou be myneded and willing to appear without danger at the
benche of gods ryghtewysenes dyspoyle first thy self of the old Adam, and
apparel the with Christ (as Paul exhorts us) and thou shall be safe. Colloss.
iii.
For in so much as thou haste embraced him for thine own, thou can not be
damned although thou had committed all the sins of the world. As a woman
great with child cannot be punished no more can thou, Apoca. iii.
if thou have Christ in thy heart, Ihon. iii.
or rather (as Christ says) he that be leueth in the son is not judged he is
so assured of his salvation, that there needs no examinacion to be had of
him, he is one of Christ's members, and has his spirit, wherefore he can no
more be dampened then Christ because he is knit to him by liuelye faith.

If it be so that God would make there with the a reckenynge, say to him how
thou have made it with Christ, Esaye. liii.
for as he put on Christ al our iniquities and sins (as Esaye says) and
with great love accepted them for his own, and bound him self to make
satisfaction for them. Wherefore thou shall say. Lord if thou haste any
reconing or matter against me, make it with Christ he knows well how to
answer and can declare that he has satisfied for them.

In case be that any must be dampened for the sins I have done, it is
Christ, that must be dampened, and not I good Lord, for albeit I am he that
committed them, nevertheless Christ bound him self to satisfye for them, and
that by consent and good will of his father, wherefore who so ever believes
lyuelye in Christ is all to gether safe and sure.

Beside this if God would needs make the audite and account with us, and would
say: I am not content with Christ's satisfactyo^ for you. I will that your
selves make recompense for that you have offended (which is a thing
impossyble) all ready from the beginning he is contented, and has accepted
that divine sacryfyce of the undefiled lamb Christ Jesus, which dyed on the
cross to be obedyente to his father (as Paul has written) al ready is the
right wysenes of God satysfyed up Christ more then suffycyente, Phillip. ii.
and made his sons, and so consequentlye his hepres he has already given us
paradyse, Roma. xi
and when God has once given a gift it never repents him: wherefore the
gift can not be called again up reason God is not chaungeable, I
nevertheless although (as I said) he should say: I will that thou thy self
satisfye. Answer him on this wise: Lord if I were as dear beloved to the, as
is Christ, and had done and suffered lonynglye for thy honor. All that
Christ did and suffered, in this case woldeste thou not hold thy self
sufficiently satisfied for me: in case he granted thereto. Thou should make
him this answer. Then is it all ready done. Form that Christ suffered I myself
suffered. By reason I am changed into Christ. Yea the true Christians, yt have
Christ in their hearts (as Paul says let Christ dwell in our hearts) may
pitiouslye lamente and complain to of God, Romans viii.
and say to him: thou have punished us more bytterlye then we have deserved,
considering that we offended and not Christ, reasone would thou should have
punyshed us, our will, and our life and soul, and not that innocent and
undefiled lamb Jesus Christ and thou have punished Christ which is the life of
my soul. The heart of my heart, the spirit ^f my spirit (as David says) God
my flesh and my heart. Psalm. lxxiii
God of my heart. Thou should, if my death had not been inoughe for my
sins, turned me into nothing, and letten a love that innocent, and just
Christ more dear and intier to me then mine own soul wherefore I feel more
that, that he suffered for me, then I should have felt, if I had suffered al
y^ torment possible on mine own body, but well wist thou that I could not by
reason of my fraylty, abide and suffer al, that I had deserved for my sins,
and therefore thou chose y^ mighty and strong Christ to suffer for them in
misteade, and moreover have set him in my heart to the intent that I should not
only feel that he suffered also, but also that he might give me strength to be
able to suffer,

Thou may also say: Lord albeit I have sinned. I am regenerate and bo^n
again by Christ, I am no more yt man that sinned, but I am a new creature:
wherefore thou cannot iust^y punish me, because that spirit of mine that sinned,
Galath. ii.
is dead, and Christ lives in me, I live no longer my self, but Christ in me.
Punysh, kyl, and turn to naught that spyrite of mine, that will of mine,
spoil from me that old Adam, that sensuliality, and all that in me has
sinned: and punysh not me, sithen by the new spirit, that I received of
Christ I am his most innocent creature.

Moreover thou Lord have given me Christ withal his divine treasures and
graces, Romans viii.
and that to be more surely mine, then I am my self, and in so much as he is
mine entyer I am able to satisfy for all my dets.

What fear thou then O synful soul. ^eb. ii.
See thou not that as the blud of Abel cried for vengaunce, so this blood of
Christ calls for mercy and he ca^ not but must needs be heard, one depenes
calls on another I mean the bottomeles abisse of my sins has need of the
abisse of Christ's passion and the abisse of Christ's passion calls to the
abisse of the mercy of God. Psalm, xli.
Say therefore to Christ, Psalm, x.
O Lord make thy marcye marvelous and wonderful, thou sauest them that trust
in the, cry save me for thy mercy sake, take and embrace thine ye right
wysenes of Christ, and then can I be contented thou say. Psalm. vii
Judge me Lord according to my rightwisnes. Let every man therefore go to the
court of the mercy of God, and if we be called to the bar of justice, let us
appeal always to mercy, and see that never a man appear before the throne of
justice except first he be clothed with Christ through faith and then he may be
presented boldly, as he that is armed with innocence and truth may be presented
a fore any place of judgment. And God shall accept them for ryghtwyse. To whom
be all honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.x. Sermon.
By what mean to come to heaven.
Experyence proves that every creature has naturallye a desire and appetite
to resort to it own proper place and mansyon, and namely man, because he is the
most souerein creature of al other.

And for so much as our natyue country is not hear upon the earth, Heb. xv.
Collossi. i.
but in heaven is our place of reast (consideringe that al men have this desire
to go to heaven) I take it to be expedyente to weigh and po^der how we may go
together.

God has given us Christ for an only^ mirror, glass, squier, Master, and
guide, wherefore who^so^is willinge to walk thither I mean to heaven, must go
the same path, that he has gone and trodden before us, because he knows ye
way most perfectly, and taught it to us without any gile as well by his
examples, as by his words, therefore he that ente^deth, to go to heaven must
follow him. And first as he being in the shape and form of God was not
proud, nor an arroga^t usurper, nor ascribed to him self that he might
conveniently have done, Phillip. ii.
but contrariwise, was lovely humble, of no reputacion, and to ke upon him the
shape of a servant, or rather of a sinner, and God laid on him all our
wickedness, Esaias. liii.
ye and most lovingly admitted and allowed them for his own, as though he had
committed them him self.

Now in like manner, a Christen man being al ready regenerate and born again by
Christ, and graffed into him by a living faith. Comes down from heaven, that
is from his own pride, and false excellency, for (as Christ says) no man
goes up into heaven but he that comes down, Ihon. iii.
that is the son of man and his members. Wherefore by and by as a Christen man
has a lively taste and feling of Christ, and his great been fyt he is humble,
counts him self of no value and nothing in his reputacion, for when he sees
by divine influence, the mekenes of Christ, his liberality, patience, love,
goodness, innocency, with other of his virtues, he is of force constrained to
feel his own pride, unkindness, vnpacientnes, wyckednes, ungodliness, and his
other iniquities. And as God put upon Christ al our sins, and he with most
tender love received them: so will this Christen man ascribe to him self all the
offenses of the world: by reason that he perceaueth, that if God had with
drawn from him his grace and had not born him up, but ministered to him
occasion and opportunity to offend, there had not ben a syn in all ye world but he
had don it wherefore he will attribute to him self al, as though he had committed
them in deed so that albeit in Christ, and by Christ he perceives him self
innocent and safe, not withstanding of him self he takes it, that he is most
damned, and greatest sinner of all the world and is forced to say that (which
Paul spoke long a go) Christ came into the world to save sinners, i, Timo, i.
whereof I am one of the chief.

The second act of Christ was, that, after he was thus humbled, clothed with
our frail nature, borne, and showed forth to ye world, he lived al together
for his neighbor, and sought only y^ glory of his father and salvation of his
brethren, without any regard or respect to him self (and cause why is) for
that he was so full of love, Ihon. i.
grace, favor, truth, godliness, and all light, virtue, and perfeccion,
wherefore considering he had no need to enrych him self, he lived holy to the
wealth and benefyte of others, as Paul says Christ has not pleased him self
he was inflamed in such wise with a fervent desire to save the world, Collossi.
i. Romans xv.
for the glory of his father, that he being clean swalowed up in God, had no
mind nor consyderacyon of him self. Now in semblable forte that true Christen
man, that sees him self the son and heir of God, as Lord of all studyeth,
not to live to his own use, but is holy ben^ to the benefitinge of his brethren
for gods glory, and being as it were changed into their nature feels al
their good, and evil as Paul did.

Next ensues the third act, that like as ye world persecuted Christ, so it
pursue him and that because in saving his neighbor and sekyng the glory of
God, he auaunceth and set forth the grace, the gospel, and the great mercy of
God: thrusting down submittyng, throwing down to the ground, and making
nothing of man: and because the world repyneth at this, therefore immediately
follows persecutyon, in like case therefore as the hoole life of Christ was
one contynual persecution because it was godly, so chau^ceth fytly and agreably
to a true christian, that magnifieth the great benefyte, which we have
received by Christ, Acts* ix.
which thing is open and manifest in sundry places of the Acts of the
Apostles. For immediately as the Apostles had preached the gospel, they were
pursued, and so the case goes in this our time. More over as Christ was done
on the cross, from whence, he would not come down, although in scorn it was
said to him, Mat. xxvii
that if he were the son of God, he should come down of the cross, and
they would believe him, but because he was the son of god, he would not come
down, but adyde there, and with his own death make perfect our salvation, in
like manner also a Christen man must be transformed and changed into Christ
crucified, so that with Paul he may say I am crucified with Christ, Galath.
ii^
in such wise also knitte to him on the cross, that nothing is hable to part
me from the love of God, Romans viii.
which is in Christ Jesus.

Furthermore as Christ dyed on y^ cross so a Christen man, that lives in
Christ, dies to the world in such sort, that he passes not of riches, honor,
dignity, kindred, friends worldly pleasures, or prosperity considering that he
sees by faith that he is safe, happy, and son, and heir of God, yea even as
Christ was buried, so is he, so that y^ world counts him not only for a thing
dead, Romans vi.
but rotten, stynkyng and loathsome, wherefore he must say with Paul, Galath. iii
the world is crucified to me, and I to the world. He beside this must rise
with Christ in newnes of life, lintug after another manner then be did before
that he was regenerate by Christ, Romans vi.
because he is be commen spiritual he lives to the glory of God.

And thus finally with Christ he asce^deth Colloss. iii.
into heaven standing, as touching his thoughts affeccions, and desires, above
in his celestial country, so that he say with Paul our conversation is in
heaven, Phillip. iii.
where he enjoys and takes pleasure and comfort in God. To whom be always
al honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xi. Sermon.
How God has satysfied for our sins and has purchased Paradyse for us.
GOd by his absolute and free power might have saved us without any
sa^isfaction at al: In as much as the justice of God is contented and pleased
of all that is liking his good will: nevertheless he has appointed from
everlasting by his deuyne mind and wisdom, never to save sinner, onles first
he were fully satisfied, and sethen he perceived that we could not do it our
selfs, he was minded to send into the world his son to make for us
satisfaction and laid on him the iniquities of us al, as Esaias wrote, Esaye.
liii.
And he right lovingly, although he were a very innocent, took them for his
own, and was contented to satisfy for our offenses, to suffer that we had
deserved, and dye upon the cross, according to his fathers will, as Paul writes
he took our infirmities for his own and he has borne our iniquities and
miseries, by reason he came into the world as though he had been an offender he
took a similitude of sin to serve our turn on the behalf of our sins and as
though we had been most innocent, and he committed all the sins on his will was
to go alone to the death, Esaias. xliii.
and therefore he said to his disciples in the garden: stand there in peace,
rest, and without care, Mat. xxiiii
and suffer me alone to enter into the battle, and abide on my boones that
you have deserved. And metynge the multitude he said to the^: who^ seek you,
they answered, Ihon, xiii.
Jesus of Nazareth as though they should have said, we seek for him, which has
upon him all the sins of the world, And Christ made answer* I am he, I have
taken on me all the sins, love has laid them on my shoulders, therefore if
you seek for me as a man in whom be all the sins let my dysciples and my
elected pass as innocents, ease, satisfy revenge, and do your wurst to me
which am contented to suffer for all one cause also, wherefore Christ being
accused at the judgment seat of Ierufalem, made no answer was to show that
they had against him all actyons, in so much as he had e^braced for his own
al our sins. It pleased him also to be crowned with thorns, as king of al
miseries, and set between. ii. thefes as the starkest errand thief of all,
likewise was he contented to be stricken and beaten for our sins, as (Esaias
says) he was smiten for our infirmities and bruised for our iniquities, and
offenses: Esaye. liii.
God has chastised and beaten him for the sins of his people and by his
wounds, and passions we be made hole, he paid that he owed not, (as David
said) I have paid those things that I took not. Psa. lxviii
And Esaias also did say in the parson of Christ, Esaias. xliii.
you have put me to trouble for your iniquities. He was contended that upon
him should come al those infrmies, slau^ders and rebukes, which we have deserved
for our syns, which thing David singnified in spirit in the parson of Christ
where he says, Psa. lxviii.
the rebukes, and reproaches, wherewith they slaunderd the, fell al upon me, yea
and those curses also, that were due to us fell upon him, (as Paul says) he
has redeemed us from the curse, Galath, iii
in that he became a cursed for us, And like a godly shepherd having on his
back the lost sheep (for he has his kingdom upon his shulders) has he born
our sins on the cross, Esaias. vi.
(as Peter says) he has born our sins in his body upon the cross and
tree. i. Peter. ii.
Upon it as it had been an altar, to condemn our sins, with the syn that
was imputed to him, was he offered as a sacrifice to be burned in the fire and
flame of gods love, and to the Corinthians Paul writes, he that knew no syn
was made syn for us. ii. Corin. v.
It was gods will and mind, that he which was most innocent should be don on ye
cross as though he were not only a sinner but eue^ lyn it self and thus (as
Daniell prophesyed was iniquity consumed) and in one day god took it out of the
world, according to ye prophesy of Zachary, Zachar. v.
wherefore saint Ihon says he appeared to take away our fyns, Ihon. iii.
and saint Ihon Baptist says of Christ that he is the lamb of God yt takes
away the sins of the world. Heb. i.
Therefore when Christ suffered most lovingly all that, which we have deserved, he
satisfied for us, and purged us from our sins. He after the manner of the
prodygal son, of an excedyng love, yt he bare to the soul, when he had given
his deuyne treasures of grace to the very open sinners and harlots and had
taken to him self our sins, as if he had done them him self, he made prayer
to his father that he would pardon them to him, and to him he pardoned them, for
we were not worthy: nether would he yield up his spirit till first he had bowed
down his head that is until he had moved God, which is (as Paul writes) his
head to pardon us to Christ therefore were our^ sins ascribed so that justly he
meryted that death for his syns, i. Cor. xi.
not because he committed them, but because he admitted them for his own and so
has he satisfied for the^, not only sufficiently, but also more the^ was
requisite. For to God is one tear of Christ more pleasant, then all the sins
of the world dyspleasaunt, and that life and death of his were more to the
honor of god, the^ our life was to his dishonor, yea he has not only
satisfied for our sins, but has purchased for us life ever lasting.

But happily wylt thou say, then need I to take no pains nor trauail to
satisfy for my sins, nor to deserve paradise, I may take mine ease, or do what
evil that likes me giving me to pleasure, and good chere, for if it be as thou
say, I cannot but be saved. I answer thus. First I say yt truth it is thou
ought not to labor thy self for the intent to satysfy for thy syns nor yet
to deserve paradyse: for that is only Christ's office, nor thou can have any
such intent without doing great iniurye and wrong to God, but whereas thou
say, yt thou would live idelye or do euel, after that Christ has now
delivered the from al evil, and purchased the the greatest felicity: I make the
answer on this wise. If case were that one were led to the gallows for his
rybaldry and noughtynes, and his Lord or master of mere favor and good will
should deliver him, and count him for his son, and yet would say: My Lord or
master has delivered me from al evil, and taken me for his son and heir
therefore will I go my way and be idle, and in following mine own lusts, and will
do him wrong: how think you, in this case, be not these wicked words? even
the like say thou, Christ has delivered me from hell, and made me the son of
God, and heir of heaven, wherefore I will stand like an idle parso^, or rather
do more evil, Christ certes died not for the, nor satisfied for thy dets nor
yet merited for the paradise to the intent thou should stand idle, commit syn,
and become a stark rybald, but that thou, seeing his great love, and how
greatly sin dyspleased him seeing he was willing to dye because to take them
out of the world, should no more do syn, but honor him, love him, thank him,
put thy trust in him, and work virtuous and good works plenteously, not as a
bond servant to escape hell, sythen Christ has delivered the, ne yet to get
paradyce, the which Christ has purchased for the, but as a uatural son for
the glory of God, moved thereto by mocion of faith, love, and spirit, not by
man's wit, sensuality, or thy behofe or commodity. More over either thou
beleuest that Christ has satissied for the or not, if thou believe not, that he
has delivered the from hell and gotten the Paradise, if thou be wise, thou wylt
search to healpe thy self, and so wylt thou not be yble, muchles wylt thou
commit sins: but rather enforce thy self to make satisfaction for thy self
and to deserve paradise, which is a thing impossible, but if thou believe live
lie, that he had so loved the, that to save the he died on the cross, thou
should be constrained to love him again, and to do for his glory, marvelous
works plenteously and redily to believe that we are saved by Christ makes not
us negligent and naughtye but feruente and holy.

Let us therefore render thanks to our Lord God, saying he has with so
great love saved us by so high rych, happy, and glorious mean. To whom be
always all honor, laud and glory through Jesus Christ out Lord.

Amen.
The.xii. Sermon.
Whether Predestynacion ought to be written, spoken, or thought:
THere are many that would not ^eare predestinacion spoken of, nor once
named, and if they might ^et it, it should never be preached, and that is
because it seems the^ to give offense and engender confusion among the
people, I cannot deny, that many curiouse persons with their darcke natural
light (willing to se things supernatural that cannot be seen but by faith) do
fall into thousands of errors, and cause other to fall into the like. All that
they may imagine by force of wit, pleasynge to their own corrupt reason (of
that high secret) they thyncke it to be true, without other testimonye of
holy scripture. And thereby have entangled their brains, darkened their
minds, and offen ded their consciences. Curyosytye is an insatiable beast, it
would pearce through all things, and yet cannot get out of his dark and
intricate laborinthes, nor once lift vpthe head to deuyne secrets. And if we
suffer our selves to be guyded of it (in things specially supernatural)
neither will it at any time be satisfied, nor we shall never perceive the
truth. For immediately after it passes the borders of the natural light, it
goes always blinded and at adventure. Therefore it must be put aside and
(bringing his insatiable will to an end) walk by faith to deuyne secrettes
honoring them without further dyscussion. And if we be provoked to search them
out by the wantonness of humayne wit: we ought to remember that, Prove. xxv
which is written: He that searches the majesty of God, shall be overcome with
the glory thereof. It is our office, to be co^te^t, with as much as God has
vouchsafed to open unto us in the sacred Scripturs, in the which, he has given
us light sufficyently, But note, that as it is euel to be curiouse in willing
to know more then that which in the scripture is contained, and to us reveled,
so is it also evil, to be ignorant and not to seek to understand as much as
therein is: for that in them speaks the holy ghost who gives none offense but
edifyeth In them is written nothing pernicious, unprofitable, or vain, but only
commodious and necessary. Neither ought it to offend any man, when it is
spoken of, in the manner that Paulle speaks of it. And we neither may nor
ought, Galath. ii.
to be more circumspecte in speaking thereof then Paul, ye then God, that spoke
in him. Thynckest thou haplye that Paul (yea rather Christ that lived in him,
and moved him to write) did err in yt he wrote of it in such sort, as he did?
The holy ghost would never have given understanding thereof in the holy
scripture, if it had been evil. Thou will say, the preaching of it in such
manner as Paul wrytteth: gives offense, as it is euidente. I answer that
Christ crucified, was an offense to the Hebrews: i. Corin. i.
therefore the Apostles did evil to preach it, The gospel seemed folyshnes to
the wise of the world: And therefore it should not be taught. The truth is
dyspleasaunt to the false christians, they find offense of the gospel, and
Iustificacion by Christ, should it then be kept in silence?

Wherefore wilt you that we hold our peace of that thing which Paul writteth?
How can the words of the holy ghost offend, that have been pronounced and
written only for our salvation? If thou be offended therwyth, it is not
because it gives the occasion but for that thou take it without any gift.
Neither ought we thereof to cease, more then the Apostles left preaching,
though many were offended therwyth. Thou wylt say, to preach the Gospel is
necessary. Wherefore that ought not to be left for offense: and I say that
predestinacion is a great part of the Gospel. Would thou not think this a
goodlye Gospel or glad tidings, that God from without beginning, had by his
mere grace, and by Christ crucified, elected us to be his children, and that we
be sure in his hands? It is a thing most necessary, to preach those good
news, in the which there is discovered unto us the exceadynge goodness of God,
that above all other things does move us to be ennamored of him. And he that
is offended with predestinacion, preached in the manner it ought to be, is also
offended with the Gospel. ^uowest thou (that which in deed does hurt,
although it appear not to the blind and frantyke world) that any man
preaches it after yt humayne doctrine? But it may be thou wylt say, let us
come therefore to the particulars. Does it not seem to the offense, to preach
that god has elect some and not other some? He that hereth these words, will
thyncke God to be parciall. I answer and first I say, that God cannot err:
nor will otherwise then justly: Yea his will is so right, that as he always
wylleth any thing, it is even by that willing most just. Therefore none should
be offended with his works, for as much as he may dyspose us after his own
way, and show his pleasure upon us more then yt potter upon his pottes: and al
with justice and equite. For what bond has god with us? Moreover, Roma. ix.
by the sins of Adam we are al lost, and he might iustlye damn us al, but
he saves as many as him pleases: and yet we complain, where we are not
worthy by sufferyng al punishmente to set furthe the bryghtnes of his glory.
Yea it ought to be preached that God has elected some, and not other some:
for to smite to the earth the wisdom of man, and to make him al humble and
subject to God. Roma. iii.
Now is it not necessary to be known that we shall not all be saved, and that
many shall be damned? And consequentlye God has many elect and many rejected.
Thou wouldeste say, this should give no occacion of offense, if it were
preached, that those that he has chosen, are chosen for their merits, and
those he has forsaken, are forsaken for their wickedness but they say yt those
he has elect, are elected by his mere grace, without works, and that our
election and salvation depends hollye upon God. And this gives the offense
to the world. Ephesi. i. Roma. ix.
I answer. If this be offense, Paul has given it him self, because it is the
doctrine of him ye rather of the holy ghost. Wylt thou be offended if Paul
magnify y^ fre mercy, Romans viii. Ephesi. i.
seeing God has elected us to the laud of his glory, as he wrytteth? We cannot
magnify it sufficiently. But thou fear it should be lauded and exalted to
much. If it were told thee thou were elected by thy works, then would I thou
should be offended, for that it would make the believe thy salvation, to
depend upon thy self, whereby thou should be begiled. Ose. xiii.
For of thy self comes thy damnacion, and of God thy salvation, Yea as often
as thou thynckest thy salvation in any part to depend upon thy self, it
drives the, either to dyspare or to be exalted in presumptyon. And in such
case thou cannest never put in God al thy hoope, nor all thy love, neither have
perfect quietness of mind, nor of conscience. Thou would say, that who so
knows that God above is resolved upon all things: wareth cold in well
doing, and says, what need I more to travail, God has immutably determined
and resolved all that is to be, I may pass my time in pleasure, for if I be
elect I shall every way be saved. And if I be reprobate, I cannot save my
self, though I never ceased to axe it, on my bare kuees.

Thou perceyuest not, that he which says so, does dyscouer him self showing
that he never did good works, and yet he would his salvation should depend
upon him self. This sort of men, if they do any good (as they call it) it is
to win heaven, and not for the glory of God. Therefore if they should believe
that their salvation and elec^yon did not come of them selves (as men that were
not moved with the zeal of the honor of God) they would dwell in Idleness,
yea, give them selves to live lycenciouslye, and ungodly, without respect
of the dyshonoure of God, they are fearful Servants and hirelynges, and not
sons of God, they serve them selves and not God, and them selves they
worship. The elect do never become cold, but are the more fervent, by
hearing that their election and salvation is only in the handdes of God, they
know by fayeth, that the Lord loves them so much (specially since Christ
has dyed for them on the cross) that they are sure of their salvation. Yea
they feel so much the goodness of God in Christ, and by Christ, that if it
were possible (while that spiritual feeling did remain in them) that they
could believe them selves to be reprobate (for as much as by this, i. Re. xxvl^
god is no less good) they would not any thing the less love him, or travail
to honor him, even as Saul ceased not most coragyously to fight for yt glory
of God, although it was foretold him of his death. The elect understand in
spirit y^ they are the children of God. Heb. xii.
Wherefore they are forced by strength of love and learn to have conditions
convenient to their so hye estate: and are also a shamed to do a wicked work,
not seem (...) setting to y^ ^ewty of their dignity. And so much more the^ the
other, do they fear to sin, by how much more they know y^ god does in this
present life, punyshe his legittimate children, more the^ the basterdes. If an
As trulogyer should tell an ambycious man that he should be pope, although
he did put undoubted trust there in, yet for all that he would not be Idell,
but would set furthe him self by all means possible to come to yt dignity.
Even so y^ sons of God the suerer the^ are of their eleccio^ so much ye more
they understand the great goodness of God. They are always forced therefore
more and more by good works, to make certain to them selves the knowledge of
their eleccion. ^i. Peter. i.
Every one will travail for the things of the world. There is none that
says I will (...) Idle, or I will not eat for always I shall live, and be
rych and happy in the things of the world, if God have for seen and determined
it? Only in those things perteining to the soul, predestinacion hinders them
by making it ashylde to their wicked life. But know thou that those which of
such a benefit take occasion to become worse, (though already with their heart
they did the same things and would have done it in work if they had thought
them sure of their salvation) show the^ selves to be reprobate, ii. Cor. xi.
and not to feel in Christ the great goodness of God. Satan is he that being
transformed into the similitude of an Angel of light, trauayleth to persuade
that our eleccion depends upon us. This was the opinion of Pelagius: and the
Pelagians are they that be offended with this great mercy of God: they think
that God nether may, can, or will do other then reason. Then of force must it
be good to be preached, Esaias. lx.
to the end it may be known, yt the time is already come of the covenant and
promised peace that he which has ears to understand, may understand, as have
ye sheep of christ yt hear their pastor, It is also good to be spoken of to
the end yt that be not hyd but declared, Ihon. x.
which (by ye will of God and for our profit) is written thereof in holy
scripture: and yt the special cure yt god has of us, may be known, and how we
should serve him freely as children, and not as timorous servants and
hyrelinges. Yea and that it may be understand, that God (being absolutely the
Lord) may do all that he will, and what he wills is just, and to ye end also,
ye in our election may be discovered to us, in superabu^da^t manner* his fre
mercy, and that it may be seen how we are prevented by innumerable benifites,
and also yt man may know yt he is only vaniti, and ever an vnprotitable
servant. Ps. xxxviii
Paradise were little worth if with our works we could win it, but it is the
inheritance of sons, and not a reward for servants. I would know what
men would say, if God should say to them: choose whether ye will stand to my
eleccion and ye which I have determined for you, or yt I disanulling (if this
were possible) all that I have purposed to do with you, should resolve me holy to
put it in you. And to save you if ye do good works and persevere in them, and
if you do ye contrary to damn you. I am sure the^ men should know their own
frailtye, ignorance and malice. And on ye other party y^ exceeding vo^^ty of
God, and remit it holy to him again, and much more if they loved him, for the
greater glory to God, yea and also for their own proper commodity, for it
should never be done, if it be depended upon them selves And therefore for every
respect, every one should stand to gods determinacio^, it it were but to do
honor to him. It is a thing more magnificent, and to God more convenient, to
give paradise by fre mercy, then if he should sell it: his liberality is thereby
most discovered. Then for his greater glory I would always say, God has
given me this. And also for my own commodytye, that whereas now I hold my
salvation sure (for that I know it ha^geth only upon god) I would think me
damned, or at the least presuming on my self, stand indoute, if in the least
point it did repend upon me, because God in comparably does love me more the^
I can do my self. Yea, I am the greatest enemy and traitor to my self y^ may
be. Therefore me^ ought by every consideracion to content then that their
salvation does stand in the hand of God: yea in taking y^ whole cure of us, he
has showed us most dear love he has wylled us to be sure of it. And
therefore he would not trust to us, knowinge we are so vnpefect, yt if we had
paradise in our hands we should let it fall to the earth where now we are sure
knowinge that al our syns can not let the divine eleccion, neither quench or
diminish the divine charity. Yea, here of our sins took occasion to be showed
with excess of more love. Romans v.
We are not by this invited to more Idleness, nor to watch when we shall have
Manna from heaven, nether to be wickedly occupied, but we are drawn and moved
so much more to love him, as he is discovered to us by more bounty and
charity. But those that are not by Christ regenerate, ar of so base and vile
a mind through sin, that they cannot think God to be so liberal as to
give heaven without our works. But they ought at the least to think, that to
bye it the blood of Christ is sufficient without adioyninge thereto their works
to hoote: which surely are rich iuels to be mingled with his. God is so fra^ke,
that he has given us Christ, and in him al things, and can thou not think
he has given the heaven? Romans viii.
It is also our greater glory, that God has loved us so much, that his own
self has willed to take the care and charge of our salvation. And so to that
end has wylled his only son to die upon the cross, so that if with all
our travail we might enter into heaven by our selves: the glory only of the
cross is a far greater glory then any other which by our selves we could
attain. Yea, there is no other true glory, then to glory to be so much loved
of God, that he has to save us, put his son upon the cross. He may not
dwell in his own love, that wills to be happy, and only glory in God. If we
might glory of our selves, we should have whereof to ware proud and prefer our
selves before our brethren, where otherwise we should have occasion to be
humble, and give to God all honor and glory as to him it apperteineth. i.
Timo. i.
And further such as believe the^ selves to be by grace elected, saved sons of
God, heirs and sure thereof, not only because there remains no more to get
(God in Christ having given them all) but also by the great understanding they
have of the goodness of the Lord: they are constrained to work as children for
the glory of their father, and not for their own gain, and so also sure of
their salvation, with Christ they turn them withal their force, to seek the
salvation of their brother: they demand also grace with a bolder spirit and
confidence, sense they are it not for their own lucre, but for the honor of
God, Ephe. i. Romans vi. Psalm. xxxii.
and to his laud and glory: so that in the worlds to come, may be seen the
abundant riches of his fre mercy. Moreover such hoope to be heard for that
they think not to deserve grace, nether put their trust in their own works,
but in the goodness of God, being inspired and moved there to by the holy
ghost. Such also as feel that our salvation depends not upon us, but our
damnacion, and that it stands wholly in the hand of God: are forced to turn
their backs to the^ selves, and their faces to God, Where as the contrary
belefe, would make y^ contrary operacio^, they would withdraw them from God, and
seek to rest with hope in them selves: also if God had elected us with this
condition: If we would do well, we should be under the law contrary to Paul,
Ephesi. i.
neither we should be saved, for the law saves not but works wrath, and is
the minister of cursing and damnacion. Let him therefore that lusts have
Christ for his judge, for I will none of him, but as a savior. If our election
by fre mercy did harm us, he would not the^ have elected us so. But note them
that think to have their eleccioon in their own hands, and thou shall se that
they are in their own love and trust, presumtuous, and full of vice: and yet
for all this they be so blind and arrogant, that they will have heaven by
justice.

But let us pray to the Lord that he give them knowledge to the end they may
render to God all land, honor, and glory, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Amen.

The.xiii. Sermon.
How excellent our eleccyon is.
PAul magnifieth our eleccion, first in his behalf that has elected us,
saying We are elected nether by man nor Angel, bnt by God: Hyer can not he go.
Then concerning him that elected us, our eleccion is most excellent. And
likewise concerning the circumstance of time, although above there is properlye
no course of time. He elected us (as Paul writes) before the constitucion of
the world: Ephesi. i.
meaning from without beginning, sooner could he not elect us.

And moreover he says, that he elected us which are most base, most vile, most
abject, worms in comparison of him. By the sin of Adam we were all defiled,
infected, in firm, frail, blind, malignaunte, full of venum contrary to god,
enemies and rebels* so that a thing more miserable could not have binne
chosen. Paul does also magnifye our election, in respect of the dignitye, to
the which we are elected, and says, he has not chosen us to be his
servants or friends, but to be his children, nothing to god ca^ be more
nyghe, entire and dear, the^ his children, nether is it possible to imagine a
greater dignity. It does include al other virtues and goodness, it is so high
and excellent. Being then elected from so miserable an estate, to be the sons
of god. He has also chosen us to be the brethren of Christ and thereby with
him coheires of god: Romans viii.
yea the world is ours. Christ with all his gifts, all that is the fathers is
the sons, therefore al is ours yt is gods, whose goods we may dyspose as
children their fathers. And because we should shame to be the sons of God,
not having the manners, graces, and virtues convenient to such a dygnitie,
therefore not only our heavenly father, has chosen us to be his sons, but
has blessed us, not with words only, but with effects, not as Isaac blessed
Jacob or Esau* but with all spiritual blessinge in things celestial. Ephe.
i. Collossi. i.
And so according to Paul, has made us mete to be partakers of ye feloweship
of light, and delyuering us from the power of darkness, has led us into the
kingedome of his beloved son: God then without beginning did determyne to
iustifye, glorifye, Roma. viii
and magnifye those that he had elect, and even so he has done: as Paul
writes, who also exalts our election for that cause, sainge: that it was not
our good worckes, which God forsawe without beginning, that were the cause of
our election, but he chose us by mere mercy, according to the decreed purpose
of his own will, to the laud and glory of his mercy, we were not then chosen
because we were Holy, but because we should be holly by his election, and to
show in the worlds to come, the abundaunte riches of his grace. Ephesians. i. ii.
Paul also shewyth the worthiness of our election, by respect of the dignity
of the person by whose means we are chosen, and says, he has willed, that
between us and him there should be our mediator, nether he would it to be an
angel, i. Timo. ii. Ephe. i.
but Christ the son of God. He means not only a mediator with words but
with his own blood, and death Paul does exalt our election as concerning ye
end. For because he has elected us for his sons, to the end we may taste
(not only in the life to come, but also in this present) things so high,
happy, rych, and pure, that the eye has not seen, nor the ear has not
heard, nor into the heart of man (being carnal) has at any time enterd, i.
Corin. ii.
he has then elected us to the end (that regenerate by Christ Jesus) we should
walk to God by good works, y^ we may be holy and inreprehe^sible, Ephe. ii.
before his presence. Our election is also excellent by the suerty thereof, for
that the elect are in the hands of God. Ephe. i. Ihon, x.
Therefore shall not they peryshe, as Christ says, yea they can not peryshe,
even as they can not be pluckte out of his hands. Therefore our election is
most happy, so that nothing ought so much to be reioysed in, as to be
the elected and chosen of God. Therefore it is read, the disciples returning to
Christ, and reioisinge with great gladness, that even the very deuelles were
subject to them, Luke. x.
Christ among the rest of words, bade them they should not rejoice of the
subjection of the deuels, but that their names were written in heaven: by which
words, he did show, that we ought to make a synguler Joy of our eleccio^, for
that includes, and brings with it the sin of all our wealth, since then
that our eleccion is so excellent, rich, sure, and hapy. Let us pray to God to
give us light and grace, to perceive it, to the end, that tasting in it (with
the spirit) the myghtie goodness of God, we may render him al laud honor: and
glory, by Jesus Christ our lord, Ame^

The.xiiii. Sermon.
If we may know in this present life, whether we be in the grace of God, and
one of his elect or not, and in what manner.
IT is not to be douted that God sees all things, ii. Tim. ii. Ephe. i.
specially his legittimate children, ^ence he him self has chosen them to that
dignity. Christ also knows, and knew the^ always, This hole sermon must be
warelye red, and well vnderstan^ Ihon. xvii. Ihon. vi. Mat. xiii. ded, or else
it must be taken but as persuasiue not as doctrine.
that which was very convenient since his father had given them to him for that
he should be their governor, shepherd, and brother, and that he should save
them with his own death: he knew the^, and does know his sheep even as him self
said, yea from the beginning he knew who should believe. But it is not now
convenient, that we may or ^an deserve distinctlye, the elect from the
reprobate, to the end we may be more fer^ent in exercisinge charity, withal
men, as if they were brethern with us in Christ, the which we would not do
toward the reprobate if we knew the^ distinctly: But in the end, the fares
shall be separate from the good wheat: none then being in this present life
knows cert^nly of his neighbor, if he be of the ^lect or not, nor also
whether he be in the favor of God: we may only have there of an obscure,
confused, uncertain and faylyng knowledge by conjecture of ye outward life and
works, of whom Christ speaking, said. Math. vii.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. But for as much as we see not the hertes
of men, i. Corin. ii. Luke. xvi.
which oftentimes (although within they are ungodly and abhominacion itself in
the sight of God, nevertheless coueringe them with the veyle of hypocrisy
maskinge therein) they appear to be saints. Therefore without special oracle,
we can have no certain knowledge thereof. But I say yt every elect, while he
is in this present life, being come to the years of discression, may, and
ought to know it of him self, not by natural light (by means whereof things
supernatural can not be perceived, as the excellent divine will toward us) but
by faith, without other special privilege. And this not with having respect to
them selves, where is nothing seen but worthy damnation, neither with
co^sideringe or beholding the^ selves in God without Christ, for in yt case he
must show himself to us a just iudgful of wrath, then we neither se our selves
his sons, nor in favor. But with lively faith beholding both our selves, and
God in Christ, we se our selves to be in the favor of god, and his elect
sons, and god to be pacified with us in love and our only father. Such then
as lively believe, yt Christ for the^ has died upon ye cross, have the holy
ghost within them, and are in the favor of God, because that faith does purify
the heart. And further I say, that al they which in this present life do believe
liuelye in Christ (yea were it for a moment of time) shall be saved. They are
elect and sons of God, and may be sure and certain, of their salvation. And
y^ this is true, the words of saint Ihon ought to suffice, which says, that
he is the son of God, therefore elect and saved, who so believes Jesus
Christ to be the son of God. i. Ihon. v.
And also Christ said who so believes in me has life everlasting
nevertheless it may clearlye be proved that none believes liuelye in Christ,
but he that believes Christ to be wholly his rightwisenes and that he is saved
thorowlye by him, and he that sees this with supernatural understanding
having no respect to him self nor his works, but only to the goodness of God
discovered in Christ upon the Cross, cannot by any means be disceiued,
because that light which he has to be in the favor of God, elect to salvation,
can not grow but only of the bountye of God, considered in Christ, whereof can
spring no false nor deceitful knowledge. Full well may he be be giled and
shall be, that does behold his works, and by them thincketh that he is in the
favor of God and his son. But seeing him self in Christ saved, chosen and in
the favor of God, it must needs be said, that he sees the truth, and that
which is once true although it were but for the twincke of an eye must be
said to be ever true, he then which believes in Christ, were it but a mynute
of an hour, in perceiving of him self elect by Christ, sees that which is
true, therefore shall it ever be true, that he is one of the legitima^ sons of
God, so that the same his faith, be not in any manner founded upon him self,
nor his own worckes, but in christ, and the divine excellence, and that it be
not a certain trifleinge, light, baren and dead opinion, but a lively
faith. It must be said then that Judas had never perfect faith, nether was
elect to salvation, although he was chosen to the apostelshippe, and the like
say I of al y^ reprobate: al such the^ as have had at any time lively belefe to
be saved by christ may be sure of their salvation. And so also they, which
have once at the least been perfectely given to God, and committed to his
governance, upon the couenaunte, that he shall serve him self of them
according to his own purpose, and with trust that by Christ and his mere
goodness he has accepted them for his own, they may also believe that they are
saved, because that he shall be no less God to them, then they shall be promised
of him.

Therefore having had in that couenaunte lively faith, This is not spoken too
declar yt it is possible for gods elect to be holly given to sin, but if it
were possible, yet should the^ recover yt pestileuce.
that God will forgive them as his Children, in such sort, that he will
conducte them to salvation, although they (as much as lies iu them) were
contynuallye prompte to all evil: yet is it necessary to say, that sense God
has taken them for his (as they know by the lively faith that they have
had thereof) that they shall overcome that wickedness and have honor
thereby. For his goodness passes their euelnes he would not have inspired the^
to give them selfs, if from without beginning, he had not elected them and
taken the^ for his own. Some peradventure will say, if we were only ones sure
to have been for a little time in the favor of god to have had his spirit in us,
and lively faith in him, that we did believe surely to be his elect: yet we know
not if it have been a perfect faith or not, we fear it to have been a
certain cold opinion and least we were begyled in believing to be in gods
favor and elected of him. I answer that this is an evident sign, that ye
never had hitherto lively faith and knowledge of Christ. For as it is
impossible to have fire within the breast and not ^ele it, so is it impossible
to have in the heart christ, the holy ghost, ardent charity and the fiery light
of faith, and not to perceive it, and this is, for that his light is so clear
and effectuous, that not only it makes them to se, and lyuelye to feel with
the spirit, that Christ is dead for them upon the cross, that they are
elect and saved, but also it does make them know, that it which they see,
is by divine inspiracion, that it is the holy spirit which testifies unto
their spirit, that they are the sons of God. Roma. viii.
Whose testimonye is more clear, open, firm, and certain, then all the outward
oracles and miracles of the world, which without the inward testimony of the
spirit, can leave us none other the^ doutful. Now, yt he that has in him
Christ and the spirit of God, does feel, know, and perceive it: it is clear by
Christ which said that the world knew not the holy ghost, but that he was
known of them in whom he was. And by saynct John, which said also In this we
know that Christ is in us, i. Ihon, iii.
even by the holy ghost which he has given us. Therefore said Paul, ii. Cor.
xiii.
try your selves, make some proof of your selves, is it possible that ye
should not know Christ in you, if ye be not reprobate? And in an other place*
know ye not how ye are the temple of God, and that the holy ghost dwells in
you? The holy spirit goth searching throughout, i. Corin. ii. Esai. xxxii.
Romans xv. Luke. i.
and judges every thing, and faith is so clear, yt it shows us the
profu^ditie of god: and thou will that it be blind of it self. Yea Paul
says, that the holy ghost is given to us, to the end we might know those
things that have been given us of Christ. i. Thessa. i.
The kingdom of God is peace (as writes Esai and Paul) without servile fear,
in much certentie. Therefore as Christ saw, that he was in the favor of his
father, and his beloved son, so also do the elect se them selves, all
though not with so clear light and certenty, but that they goo sometime
doubting, stumbling, and wavering, Bnt they ought with the Apostles to pray
Christ to augme^t their faith And seek with their good works continually to
make known to the^ selfs more perfect their salvation and vocacio^, that
thereby as by the effects or fruits they should come in to the full riches of
certain perswacion, and understanding of their election and salvation. i.
Thessa. i. ii. Tim. iiii. Romans viii. Galath. ii,ii. Cori iiii.
Paul also knew he was in the favor of God, in faith, hope and charity,
elected the son of God, safe and sure, and that he had the holy ghost and
Christ within him, when he said that he was one of them that Christ was come to
save, and that he knew in whom he believed, that he looked for the Crown, that
nothing could separate him from the love of God, which had elected him before
the constitution of the world, that he had the spirit of adopcion of the
sons of God, and that Christ was he, who lived and spoke in him. Saint Iho^
also said: we are sure we know God, and that we live in him, worldly and
carnal beasts are they, which know not God in the holy ghost, nor those
things which be his, Galath, ii. Ihon. xiiii. i. Cor. ii.
even as me^ not regenerate, they are rustical paysau^ts of so abiecte and base
a spirit, that they can not believe that God has loved them so much, that by
the death of his only begotten and most intierly beloved son, he would save
them, take them for his children, and make them his hepres: But astonished of
their sins, they are ever afraid of hell. Where the regenerate feel in such
sort the charity of God in Christ, that they know them selves to be saved,
Neither can they once thyncke that Christ (who has all his fathers power
and shall be their judge) will refuse, lose, or dampne them, and give sentence
against his brethren and members, for whom he dyed on the cross, mat. xxviii
and would dye again if it were necessary. They have in them also the holy
ghost for an earnest of their salvation. Ephe, i.
But if God had given us nothing but our being, should not we for that only
benefit, feel so much the great goodness of God, that we might be sure and
certain of our salvation? And now he in every creature does sparkle toward
us love, with innumerable benefits, yea in Christ upon the Cross, casts he
the flame of perfect charity, and shall not we feel so much the goodness of
God that we should believe to be his elect? If one only should be saved I
would trust suerly to be he, if all the men and angels would tell me that I were
dampened. I cold not believe them, although they did allege all the reasonnes
possible, but I would ever give, more trust to Christ alone, who upon the
cross, with his blood and death, does tell me I am saved, the^ I would to all the rest, for he alone, has more power in me, the^ all the reasons and
authorities without him. Provided only yt I se him with lively faith, dead for
my salvation. Yea in that case seeing my self, by Christ, to be the son of
God, I would with Paul excommunicate the very angels as superior to them,
Galath. i.
if they would sai the contrary, or gainesaie the gospel, and y^ great love and
benefit, which in that case I should feel by Christ. Paraduenture you will say
it seems me not, that I ca^ be sure of my salvation, because I am fre to do
evil, so may I sin and be damned. Our life is in such sort variable, y^ to
give a certain judgment, we must tarry the end, for every one would have
thought, that Judas should have been saved when he was called of Christ, and yet
it is seen, that it is contrary. I auswere, thou begilest thy self, in
thinking thy salvation depends upon the lykelyhode of thy worckes. Ephe. i.
Paul affirms, that God has ^ected us by his mere mercy in Christ, not
because we were holy, or for that he fore saw our good works, but because we
should be holy, and should do good works, and perseueryng in the^, we should
dye in his fauonr and grace: Inwardlye does God call his elect, gives them
knowledge of him, and does justify and glorify them. Romans viii.
Therefore does Paul add and say, if god be with us, who ca^ be against us? And
he meant if we be once elect, we can no more lose our selves: meaning, there is
nothing that can let the eleccion of God. Yea every thing serves to salvation,
even sin. Therefore where thou saieste, thou may sin, it is true, and
peradventure thou shall syn. Nevertheless if thou be the elect, thou shall
algates rise again and be saved, whereof thou may be certain and sure, so
that once at the least thou have perceived thy self in Christ, and by Christ
saved, neither thou ought so much to despair in thy self, as that thou
should not muchemore trust in the goodness of God, knowing that the Gospel
is not the law, but mercy, and know thou that when the elect fall in any
sin (which God does not permytte but for the benefyte of them, and the other
elect) whilst they are in that error, they feel in them selves, a certain
hydden virtue, which with holds and refrayneth them, from doing worsse, it
biteth, nyppeth, and reprehendeth them of the euel fact, and does enduce and
spur them to convert. There remains ever a certain hate of sin,
although they be some time overcome of frailtye. So that they are never turn
from God with all their power nor run wholly to vice with a lose brydell. God
has them ever for his own, and governs them as his lawefull Children.

And speaking often in their hertes he says y^ which he said to his Apostles:
Luke. xii.
fear not little flock, for it has pleased your father, to give you his
kingdom of his mere goodness although you be vnworthi. And if thou would bring
in Salomo^, who says, none knows whether he be worthy of hate or love, I
answer. It is clear (chyflie by the words which follow) that he meant, that man
were he never so just and wise, was so blind in this world, that he cannot
know by the worckes of God, y^ is by prosperity or aduersiti, whether of him
self, he be worthy of hate or love And this is because God gives his gifts so
indifferently, to the good and evil, to theelect and reprobat. Thou will say
yet, Paul said: mi conscience does not reprove me yet am I not thereby justified
before God, i. Cor. xiiii.
therefore it can not be known. But I answer, that thentent of Paul was to
say, that though by grace of the Lord he had ministered the Gospel, in such
sort, that his conscience did not rebuke him of any error (which was imputed
unto him for a sclaunder of false christians) nevertheless he held not him self
just for this, neither was he just, he judged him self just by Christ, and
not by preaching the Gospel irreprehensibly in the sight of man, but yet not in
the presence of God, for that he has not preached it with the whole force of
spirit, faith, and love. So y^ here Paul did condemn the opinion of them which
judge the^ selves just by their own works, but he does not reprove the
judgment of those, which judge the^ selves righteous and saved by the bounty
of God, and death of his only begotten son: but does approve it. With Paul
also a greeth Job, when he said, Job. ix.
that although he were just, he durst not judge him self so, that is, he
durst not hold him for ryghteous, by his own proper ryghtuousenes and
worckes, but by the justice of Christ.

Sense then that it may and ought to be known of us, that we are in the
favor of God, and his elect, let us force us continuallye to increase in
more knoweledge of the goodness of God: so that firmelye established in the
lyuelye faith of our salvation, we may as children render him all honor,
laud, and glory: ^y Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xv. Sermon.
Whether it be good or evil to believe that we are elect.
SOme say that it is evil to believe that we are elect, because, that as the
belief to be reprobate, brings men in dispeyr so y^ belief of eleccio^, is
cause of presumpcio^ But the just and the holy fly both ye one and the other
extremiti. They are not exalted in presu^pcion, believing to be elect: nor
fallen in ye bottomless pytte of dyspeyre, with belief of dampnacion, but keep
the mean way, ever standing between both. And I say that it is true, that
none ought to dispeyre, or (...) to presume, but assuredlye to hope and believe
to be saved and elected: Mary by our own worckes, this is an evil vice, and
ought to be fled, But to believe to be elected and saved by the liberality of
God, by the death of Christ upon the cross, and his works: this is no
presumpcio^, but a hope which has regard (as divine and theological virtue)
not to our merytes, but only to God by Christ. And as we ca^ not love him so
much, but y^ we ever lack of y^ perfection so can we not to much hope and
trust in him. Yea we lack ever because we do not promise of god so much as we
should do, he y^ believes to be saved, becomes not proud nether magnifieth
him self, nor his works, but the goodness of God, and the grace y^ we have by
Christ. Therefore is it not euel. Per adventure you wilt say one ought to stand
in fere. I agree thereto, in the reure^d and so^nelike fear, y^ which imports
obseruau^ce of reuere^^e to God, but now not so vile: for we are no more
servants but sons, Romans viii.
not Hebrews but Christians, we are not under the law but grace, we have God
for our father, and not only for a Lord. Therefore our office is to love him
like children, Romans vi.
and not to fear him, as servants, sense that we have the spirit not of
servitude but of adopcio^, Romans viii.
of y^ sons of God. If our salvation did depe^de in any part upon our selfs:
I would say we ought to fere our da^nacio^ yea to be sure thereof: but sense
it is al in y^ hands of God. therefore beholdinge not our selves, i. John. iiii
but his goodness discovered in Christ upon the cross we may be sure and certain
of our saluaon. Perfect chariti chafeth away al servile fear, and faith never
douteth if it be perfect the fear then of our da^nacyon grows of
imperfeccio^ of our charity, faith and hope. We ought never to frare the
mercyfulnes of God, but our own wyckednes. Thou would say, if we were
wholly confirmed in grace, we should not need to fear, but we sin daily,
therefore it is necessary to stand in doubt, I answer that yet thou ghost
about, to build my hope upon my works the which should be no hope but a
presumpcion. If we should hope with condition if we do well, and persevere
therein, my hope should stand with desperaciun, for of my self I know I ought
to despair. If I had the sins of the whole world, yet would I most steadfastly
believe to be saved without any fear of da^pnaciou, neither may this be said
to be evil, for that I would not build my hope but upon Christ. If thou
would say, y^ fear of d^mpnacio^ causes me^ to abstain from sin, therefore
it is good I answer, that it causes men to refrain in their own love, as
does the fear of death whereby they become daily more sensual in them selves,
and therefore truly, worse inwardly. Fear works wrath in God, even as the
law does: and although it cause the abstain from some evil outward work
uenerthelesse the venime remains within the which is so much y^ worse, as it
is more united to the inward parts, yea that fear given to the ungodly, is
the scorge of God The elect (knowing that God in this present life does
punyshe more the legittimate children then the bastardes) abstain also by this
fear more the^ the other. But truly the love of God, the quycke feelynge of
his great goodness, to believe firmly by Christ and his grace to be the sons of
God, elect and sure in deed, are those things which mortify us to the world
and to our selves, and makes sin displeasaunt to us, even from the botome of
the heart, Therefore where y^ service fear makes Ipocrites, y^ sonlyke love
makes true christians. If you would say to believe, so is a thing very
perilous because y^ hereof they take occasion to live idle yea to give the^
self to alvice, saying I will make my paradise in this world, for every wai I
shall be saved, se^ce y^ alredi I am elect. I answer that when one believes to be
elect and perceives in spirit the mercifulnes of God in Christ, then God
tasted in Christ has in the heart such efficacy and strength, that he cannot
offend, but is forced to dyspraise the world, and is rapt to so high estate
that he falls to oblivion of the world him self and his paradise, setting
only God be fore his eyes. Ihon, iii.
Therefore says saint John. Who so has this faith, sanctyfyeth him self. So
as the^ of chariti springs but goodness* even so is it, of this faith and
hope. Know thou wherein is the paril? In believing to be elected, by their
works, and by beleuynge in Christ not sted fastly, but to have only a
certain barraine, idle and a dead opinion thereof, the which stands in y^
worst life, in such sort that of that cold and unfruitful faith, they may
take occasyon to give the^ to Idelnes, and al vice. But now not of that
perfect faith, the which is effectuous in doing worckes by love, being an
enflamed light, Galath, v.
the which is never without burning. If also thou would say in beleuinge
to be elect thou should peradventure be begyled, therefore it is evil. I
would yet answer, that I would sooner give faith to the holy ghost, which
testifies in ye hearts of the elect, that they are the sons of God (as
Paul writes) then to the that would put me in doubt of it. Rom, viii.
The elect to hear inwardlye in their hertes a spiritual voice, quycke and
deuyne, which bids them not doubt, and that they are sure of their
salvation, and that God loves them, and has taken them for his children,
Ihon. i.
and that they cannot perish: the testymonye of God is greater then man's.

Therefore not only he is to be believed before man, but he deseruethe to have
given unto him undoubted credit, If thou would sai it might be, not the
spirit of God but their imagynacyons. I say, that what so ever it is they
know better then thou, for that (as Paul says) none knows what is in man
but the spyryte of man, i. Cor. ii.
that is within him Farther I am sure, that the same spyryt which says to me,
I am elected is the spyrit of God because the faith I have of the eleccion,
spryngeth not of my worckes, but only of the goodness of god, understand in
Christ and for that of his goodness can grow nether gyle nor falshod, therefore
am I sure to be in the truth. Deceites and falshedes, may, and do come, of the
belefe to be saved, by works, and elected: Moreover the light which the
elect have of their salvation, is so clear, that they do not only se them
selves sure thereof, but they know also, that the light and knowledge they
have, is supernatural and deuyne. But we suppose as thou say, that in
beleuynge to be elect only by Christ and the goodness of God, I might be
begiled (which is false and impossyble) yet would I still say, let me be
deceived for it is good to be so begyled, sense I can find nothing, that so
much does kyndel me into a sincere and pure love of god, as to believe to be
elected by his mere goodness. Therefore vsinge it to make me inamored of God, I
ought not to be wythdrawen, chifely for y^ I am happy, only by that faith, of
ye which whosoever is void, is not yet entered in to the kingdom of God, where
is nothing but ryghtuousnes peace and Joy. Romans iiii.


Finally Paul believed to be elected as in many places he says, yea he gloryed
therein (nevertheless in God) and so to believe he induced others, the which,
if it had been euel, he would not have done. Therefore if it be not euel, let
us also with Paul, glorivs by God in Christ, Luke. x. Math. xv. Math. xvi.
who likewise induced the Apostles, to believe y^ their names were written in
heaven, that their heavenly reward was ple^tuous, and that they should judge
the xii. tribes, and thereby brought them to believe they were elect, and that is
also sure, that if that belefe had been evil, he would not have caused it. Thou will say, thou ought not to compare thy self, equal with the saints. I
say it is true that I ought not to presume to be like them, or holy by mine
own worckes, for while I presume of my self, I must of force become a deuell,
but it is not evil to compare with the saints in verity for they were
humble, and in believing that they were elect, they gave to God all laud and
glory because they did not believe to be of the elect for their merits, but
for Christ's. And would to God, I might believe y^ firmelye and with steadfast
faith, the sacred scriptures are full, that we ought not to despeire of our
salvation, but that we ought to hope and believe to be all ready saved, and
daily to certify our selves thereof by doing good worckes, ii. Peter, i. i.
Ihon. iiii.
which are a testimony to us of our election, and that we should also
increase in charity, to take from us all fear of our dampnacio^ to the end
we may serve God without fear, in righteousness and holiness as Zachary
said. And likewise we ought to demand perseuerau^ce in the good with faith to
obtein it, Luke. i.
Therefore to trust to be saved, and of the elected and to hope and believe to be
saved and of the elect, is not euel. Paul al so says: our hope was never
confounded nor did shame to them that had it.

And likewise that faith, was never begiled. Wherefore then is it evil that I
bleue steadfastly to be saved by Christ? Let us behold then with open eyes of
lively fayeth, Christ upon the cross, in whom we se presentelye the goodness
of God in the face in such sort, as we may being pylgrimes, to the end we may
render to him al laud, honor and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

The.xvi. Sermon
Whether it be necessary to salvation to believe that we are elected or not,
Faith is very necessary, Heb. xi. Mar. xvi. Ihon, iii.
because that without it, not only God can not be pleased, but he that
believes not shall be condemned, and is already judged, But it is also
impossible, that one that does not believe to be elected should believe as he
ought to do any of the artycles necessary to salvation. And to prove that this
is true, if thou beleuest not that thou art on^ of the elect, thou beleuest not
in god, in the manner that thou art bound, because that it suffyseth not to
have a certain dead opiuio^ that God is, but thou must effectuouslye believe
that he is thy God, yt he loves the, that he is propiciatory to the, yt he is
continually beneficial to y^, that he has most special cure of the and causes
every thing to serve the to salvation, and therefore that you art elect. Yea
who so believes not that he is elect, does not feel in spirit, the benefyte
of Christ. Therefore being without Christ, Ephesi. i. Galat. iiii.
he is with out God, and knows him not as Paul writes. Then how is it
possible that thou may believe perfectli that he is thy father if thou do not
believe that thou art his son, and therefore his heir and saved. Gala. iiii.
Thou can also never earnestly believe that God is omnipotente, if thou
understand not, that continually he uses his omnipote^cy toward the, in
doing the good. Which when with the spirit thou did prove, thou should of
force believe thy self to be his heir, if thou believe not thou art elect, how
canste thou believe that God has created the heavens, and the earth, and that
he susteineth and governs all to thy behofe having of the most singluler
cure? it is nedeful, that with lively faith, embrasing all the world for thy
own, thou perceive effectuallye the goodness of God, in every creature. And
when that is, thou shalt be enforced to believe, y^ thou art the son of God.
Thou canste not also believe in Jesus, that is that he is to the Jesus and
savior, if thou believe not that thou art saved, neither canste tho^ believe
that he is thy Christ, that is to say a Prophet king and priest, if thou
feel not in spirit, that he does illuminate and lyghten the, as a prophet,
rule the as a king, and as an only priest is offered for the upon the cross.
The which if thou dydst believe thou should also believe to be elected. How
shall you believe yt Jesus is the only bego^te^ son of God, thy Lord come into
y^ world to save the, and genen to the, with al his divine treasures and
graces, if thou do not believe, thy self to be one of his lambs? y^ canste
not believe (as thou art bound to do) that he dyed for the, nor perceive his
excessive charity, so that with Paul you may say, Romans viii.
nothing can separate me from the charity of God. It is necessary to believe,
that Christ upon the cross has satysfyed for thy sins, and that he has
reconciled the, satysfyed to his father and saved the, and therefore that you
art the son of God: he that believes (as he ought) y^ Christ is ryse^ to
instify us, does also know him self saved, and so he y^ perfectly does
understand that Christ our head is ascended into heaven and entered for us in
possession of paradyse, Phillip. iii.
perceives him self risen with Christ, and already by hope being ascended into
heaven, Ephe. ii.
practices with y^ mind in Paradyse, where Christ is sytting in peace able
possession of things celestial: he says with Paul, Romans viii.
we are made safe by hope, it suffices not to believe y^ he shall judge the
quick and the dead y^ which also ye devils believe, but that the sentence shall be
al in thy favor, having to thy judge, him y^ died upon y^ cross forth, We
cannot lively believe y^ se^ding of y^ holy ghost, if we feel it not in our
selves: and if we do feale it, we shall be forced with Paul to say, the spirit
of God rendrethe testymony to our spirit that we are the sons of God,
therefore heirs and saved. Neither is it enough that there is a church of God,
Romans viii.
but thou must believe to be a portion thereof, and one of the lively stones,
and therefore one of the elect. And to believe the communion of saints, thou
must feel, that as a member of Christ, he does perticipate his grace with the,
and y^ thou art thereby saved, you must also be leave ye remission of syns, y^ is
not ouly that he does pardon sins, but that he has pardoned the thine, and
so elected the. Eue^ so thou must believe, that thou shall rise glorious, and
have life everlasting, The^ there is no article of our faith, y^ can be
believed in such sort as it ought to be, of those which do not believe they
are elected. To the Christian it is then necessary to believe that God is his
God, and father: that he works all for his benefit* and that Christ is
come, was borne, has lived, dyed and risen again for his salvation, so that
with lyuelye faith he e^braceth Christ wholi for his own with all his treasure
and grace. And likewise al his life, death, resurreccyon, assention and glory,
and perceives the charity of God in Christ, as if there had been no mo but
only him self in the world, and that Christ for him only, would have wrought
and suffered, no les then he has done, The which when thou do believe, thou
shall perceive thou art elect. Yea he that believes not he is elect, can not
pray as he ought, being without faith, without the which (after Paul) we
cannot effectuously recommend us to god, Roma. x. Iocob. i.
because y^ we must ask in faith, if we will askin veriti and be hard, now if you
believe not to be his son and heir, how can you (as Christ taught) say our
father, and as a son with co^fide^ce ask him grace? Prayer may well be made,
of inside ls and Ipocrits, but like folishe scoffers and mockers. When you
say, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thou must have in the, the
spirit of a^ opcion of the son of God. And as ye son is moved of vehemente
love, pure and sincere, to desire the kingdom and glory of ye father: so must
thou (seeing the, the son of God) with a deuyne spirit, by the force of love,
ask and desire that thy heavenly father be honored, and reygne in his elect
with out rebellyon. Likewise shall thou never thank God with all thy heart, if
thou believe not to be one of ye elect: yea if you shalt doubt therein, or
think to be dampened in thy heart, and in thy life, and paradnenture also with
thy words, thou will dysprayse him, that he has given the a being, that he
has create the world, sent Christ, and so the rest his benefytes, and wilt
say. If I am not saved, what do these things profit me? it had been better for
me, y^ I had never ben as Christ said of Judas. If I shall be damned, Mar. xiiii.
the death of Christ serves me not, but does inflame and burn, with al ye rest
of his benefyts: you can not in perfection the^ tha^cke god, if you fear
da^pnacio^. But who so believes he is one of ye elect and thereby y^ al things
serve him to salvation, ^om. viii.
even the very troubles, he holds for a special grace and benefyte, in
them perceiving the good^es of God, he gives him thanks with all his heart.
Who shall he be that commits him self holy to the governance of God (as
every one ought to do) if he believe not that God is his father, that he
pardons him, and does take of him most singular cure? Otherwise they shall
never trust in God, but with Adam shall fear him, and fly, seking to hide him
self from the face of God, nether is it possible to love God in veryty, honor
him as he ought to be honored and approve for just and holy all his works, and
so delight wholye in him, if he feel not in Christ so much the goodness of God,
that he se him self his son and also heir. Galat* iiii.
If he know not him self to be a son he shall fear as a servant, and in all
his works have respect to him self, his pains, displeasures, incommodytyes,
dyshonoures and hell, or else to this paradise, and not to ye glory of God. As he
y^ sees him self a son, lord of al and heir and sure thereof: such a one
works only by strength of spirit and veheme^ci of love to the glory of god,
to who^ he has turned his whole intent, and to that end ordreth his whole
life. Also it can not be possible, to love thy neighbor as thy self, as a
brother in Christ, and member with the of the same body if thou do not believe to
be in the number of the sons of God. And finally there cannot one good work
be done, but of them that are regenerate, sons of God, members of Christ,
and have in them the holy spirit which testifies in their hertes, that they ^e
the sons of God. And may parteli be seen how false and ungodly, is the
doctrine of the antichristians, that where as it is cheifelye necessary to
believe that we are elected, and also above all things most commodious they
force the^ selves to withdraw every one from this faith, persuading them to
stand in doubt, as though they had wherein to mistruste the goodness of God,
upon whom only depends our salvation, Ose. xiii.
as our da^pnacion does of our selves. But let us pray to God to open our
eyes, to the end they may no longer blaspheme, but render to God all honor,
land, and glory, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xvii. Sermon..
If it be good to seek to know wherefore God has some elect and some
reprobate.
THy desire may be wicked, as it is in many, to whom it appears that it
should have been better, if God (who being of power as he is) had elected al
me^* and seems them, that in this God has lacked of charity, yea in their
language, they say in their heart secretly. If we had been God, we would
have elected all, and would have had more charity the^ he. Now behold, whether
this be ungodly, folyshe, proud plasphemy, or not. They Imagyne to have more
love to the souls, then he, that for to save them gave his only begotten and
dearlye beloved son upon the cross, i. Ihon. iiii.
There are some other, to whom it seems on the one side, that God can not
err: and on the other parti, hearing that he has reproved many, they think
the contrary. They are not certain by faith, that God can not err, and that
all that he wills, must needs be just. Therefore to make it clear, they go
searchyng, wherefore he has not elected all men, and they would find a cause
where is none. If such were godly, they should quiet and satisfy the^ selves,
and should have their felicity in the divine pleasure, without searching to asse^d
anyhier. It is evil the^ to seek wherefore god has elected some, and other some
not if this grow of the suspicion that God may or have erred. The godly knows
certeinli by faith yt he cannot err, and hereupo^ rests. There are some that
ask after it of arroge^cie and presumpcion. They would be answered, that god
had elected them for their good works, to have wherein they might glory of
them selves. And when they hear sai that God has elected them by grace, it
displeases them, they gainsa^e it, seming them there rests nothing to glory
in. And they perceive not that this is the whole glory of the humble and true
christian, to be saved by the mere grace of God, and Christ crucified, and to
glory only in God by Christ and in them selves not to see, but things
worthy to be a shamed of, to thend y^ to god only be honor and glory. It
grows also to many of irreverence, i. Tim. iiii.
for if they could se how inaccessible the majesty of God is how
irreprehensible is his will, and how inco^prehe^sible is his wisdom, they
would not set them selves to dispute with god, specially if they knew how
blind, dark, fra^ticke and folishe they be. Roma. ix.
And who art thou said Paul, that wilt dispute with God, answer and contend
with God? Paul was returned from the third heaven, where he had heard secrets,
so high that it was not lawful to speak to man. Nevertheless doing reverence
to the divine secret judgments he said: O profou^d riches of the wisdom and
science of God, how inco^prehe^sible are his judgments? And man, blind,
folyshe and ungodly, is so high minded, that he will do wrong to God,
conde^pning him, and reprove his holy, just, and irreprehensible judgments.
And how many are they that seek to know, speak and write of it, and he
commended therefore? And all that they can Imagine by force of their own wit,
and natural knowledge (which can not perce so high secrets) they put in
writing. And they are as arrogant, as if they were in goodness and sapi^nce
superior to God: to be adored of the world, they condemn the works of god.
There are mani which are not co^te^t to know as much as God has vouchsaued to
open to us, but they would know also a great deal more, But it is not the
office of a good ser^aunt, to will to know all the secrets of his Lord: yea the
son ought to content him with the secrets of his father, and to know of it
only, as much as is reveled to him and to be sure and certain, that he will
not fail, to manifest all that shall be expedient for him, even so we ought to
content us, to know that which God has, and does reuele us, knowing that he
does love us in such sort that we have not wherein to doubt, that he will
fail to manifest unto us, all those secrets, the knowledge whereof shall be
profitable and necessari. Yea Christ him self said that he had made known,
Ihon. xv.
all that he had heard of the father, our office is to seek, to taste and
feel with the spirit, that which he has opened to us, and we may also desire
to know all that pleases God to reuele us, forth benefit of our soul, and
his glory now for that God (to beat down carnal man, to the end that to
him, be given al honor, laud and glory) has vouche safed to open in the
holy scriptures, wherefore he has elected some, and other some he has not
Therefore we may and ought to seek to know it that we may so much ye more honor
god: but we ought to believe it to be so, as God has declared, and to content
us with that way God has taken, in electing and reprobating, neither to think
nor suspect, that god has erred, nor ought to despre any other way, but to
be satisfied and pleased, with so much as pleases the lord, without being
curious in wyllyng to know more then that which pleafeth God to reuele unto us,
and all that to the end by Jesus Christ we may render him al honor, land and
glory. Amen.

Th.xviii. Sermon.
Of the diverse effects that it works in man to believe that our eleccion is
al in the hands of god and that of him only it depends.
IT is seen by expeience, that of one self cause, does grow sometimes
contrary effects. And is euydent by the sun, which hardneth mire, and melts
wax: and this is by their diverse disposicions. Even so of the belief that our
eleccion is wholye in the hands of God, does spring in men contrary
effects, by their contrary disposicyons. The ungodly perceyuyng that in the
deuyne mind is resolved their being, to be saved or dampened, they are wroth
with God, they blaspheme him with their heart they call him parcyall and
unjust, they give them selves to do evil enough, saying every way: that
shall be which God has infallyblye foresene, and immutably determined, yea
their faltes they cast in the face of God, thinking that he is the cause
thereof, many also despair of their salvation and presume more of them selves,
then they hope in God, they believe that they should be saved, if their salvation
did depend upon them selves, and therefore if they could disturb the deuyne
counsayles, and make that their salvation should not be in the hands of God,
they would do it. And this is for that they know not their own great
myserye how blind, infirm, frail and unprofitable, they are to God impotent
of them selves to goodness, and full of all wickedness, and that they did never
work (if it were put in ye bale^ce of divine justice) that merited not to be
punished, and so like wise they feel not y^ great goodness of God, nor the
benefits of Christ but think him to be Irefull, reuengable, disdaineful,
proud, parpetual, unjust and malignaunt, as them selfs are, There are some
which have not perfect faith, but they are not so ungodly as the first. Now
these when they here say, or think yt their salvation is all in the hands of
God, they remain confused and evil contented. And this is also for want for
knowledge of the goodness of god, they trust partly in God, and partly in them
selves, they love not God, nor trust nor hope perfectlye in him they remain
doubtful, and know not whether it be best to depend al upon god or not, and it
seems them that it should have been best that in some part it should depend
upon them selves: and yet they thyncke it well being al in the hands of God,
troubled in such sort, that they can not tell which to choose: Therefore they
live in a great perplexiti. They consult sometimes with the holy scripture or with
the^ yt have yt knowledge of y^ truth and they find that it is al in the hands
of God, ^ they judge (when their eyes are somewhat opened to the goodness of god
and their own miseries) that it stands well, and that so it is best, but
then harkening to humane prudence, the which not being wholye mortyfyed,
would have part of the glory to it self (so proud it is.) And as that, that
is blind, and sees not the impotencie and malignitie of man, it persuades him
yt man might in some part be saved by him self, where else he may despair, if
it stand al in yt hand of God. Therefore it concludes, that it were better if
it did depend upon us, and chiefly for that men become negligent, in thynkyng
that it depends whol^ upon God, where they would stir them selves to be
fervent, if they did believe that in any part it rested in the^. And although
such find the contrary in the sacred scriptures, nevertheless they forcethe^
with ye obscure light of their blind prudence, to draw it out of the text,
expounding it as may best serve to their purpose. But y^ godly perceive on the
one side, in such sort their own proper ignorau^cy, fraylty, impotency. and
malice: And on the other party the great bou^ty of god in Christ crucyfyed, yt
it contenteth them to be so, al in the hand of God, not only for yt it has so
pleased god, but also for their own commodity, because that whereas if in the
least jot it depended upon them, they should hold the^ selves damned. Now
they feel so much the excellency of god, that certified of their salvation,
they know the^ selves elected, and hold it to be sure seeing by faith that it is
al in the hand of one their so mighty, sapye^t, excellent and loving father.
Wherefore by this benefit, they ar stirred to love him singularly, to thank,
laud, and serve him as children for his mere glory without respect at all to
them selves, their hell or heaven. And if god would set in their hands, although
he would be bound that they should be able to do al things with ease toward
their salvation, yet they would not accept the bargayne: and that is because
they know that they are contrary enemies and traitors to them selves: so that
if they had para^yse in their hands, then they should let it fall to the
ground. And also for yt, they do make experiment and prove so great charyty of
god in Christ, that it certifieth them of their eleccyon. They cannot think
that Christ being their judge, and dying upon the cross for them, should give
sentence against them: yea they know, that who so be leueth in him shall not be
judged, Ihon. iii.
but shall be so certain of his salvation, that he shall not need to mak^
disscussion of his life, for there shall not be any to accuse him, nether should
it be convenient that those which have the spirit of God, and are his sons,
the brethren and members of Christ, Romans viii.
should be examined and judged. But with Christ they shall be judges of the
other. Therefore the elect, sure of their salvation, would not change Christ
their udge with any in this world, Math. xix.
although it were their dear frynd or ^ere parent. Yea if God did put in their
arbitrament to have Christ for their judge or else to be their own judges of
the^ selves, with full power to give sentence in their favor although it were
not just, yet to be approved, they would for all this, choose Christ to be
their judge, for that they trust more in him then in them selves. Also they
love god so much, that they would not glory, but only in him by Christ, And
this is al there true glory. Yea if they could let or disturb the divine
counsel, or if it were necessary to be dampened they would choose, rather to be
in pain for the will of God, then in all the pleasures, disagreinge to the
divine will (if it were possible) they count them selves unworthy to suffer for
the will of God. They hold themselves happy to honor him with sufferynge,
and with being where it pleases to their lord, they lamente only of the
iniuryes they have done to God, but of that which God will do of them with the
spirit, they are content, although yt flesh be repugnaunte and would not
suffer. This should be a hell to them, when God (if it were possible) would not
dispose them to his glory but to use them to his honor they would satisfy
them selves withal, and content the^ to know it so to be the deuyne pleasure:
now those are in a continual paradise by faith al ready they have had the
sentence given in their favor, by hope they are ascended into heaven; saying
with Paul: we are made safe by hope, Rom, viii.
and by love they enjoy God. In them the^ of y^ belief, that their eleccio^ is
all in the hands of God, grows firm (...) and hope to be saved, the love of
god, lei^^e (...) pure, and christian virtues, with the fruits of good works. I
would have pity on the first sort, but their desperacio^ grows of an
ungodly mind, yea it is most imp^^tye, to despair of the goodness of God,
most perfect, showed in Christ crucified, as in one his Imeli image. I have
compassion of the second, and envy at the third. The second may easelye be
cured with showing them their frailtye, ignorauncy, and malice, and on the
other party the omnipotency, infinite sappence, perfect goodness, pity, mercy
and charity of God, showed in Christ upon the cross. Of the first, I do not
despair utterly, but I know well it is very difficile to cure the^, but God is
of power, Math. iii.
of the stones to raise up children to Abraham, they have need to be prayed
for, and that the Lord take from before their eyes, such veiles of
ignorauncye, and make them see their own great miseries, and the
incomprehensible goodness of God, to the end y^ reknowledgeing al their wealth
to come of God, they may render him al honor, laud, and glory, by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xix. Sermon
How it ought to be answered to the^ that lament that God has created them
forseyng their damnacyon.
THere are many the which although of God they have had their being, and many
other benefytes, nevertheless they thank him not, but are ungrateful. They
are sorye, and lamente of all the wealth they have had of him, saying: Lord if
the being where thou have given us, with the rest of thy gifts, did serve us to
saluacico^, we should tha^k ye therefore, But because they serve us not, but to
da^pnacio^, therefore we cannot but complain us of the. Now to these ought to
be of answered thus: Either you believe to be yt elect or not. If they sai yea:
it ought to be said to the^, ye should tha^k God of so much grace, that he has
showed to you already, in choosing you from so base a being, to so high an
estate, and you lament your selfs: behold if your ingratitude be great. And if
they would sai we are not sorry for our selves, for we believe to be elect, but
for co^passio^ on those pore ons y^ reprobate. Then I would to be said, it is
no true pity to have compassion upon them, yt are vu godly, against the divine
goodness showed chiefly in Christ crucyfyed. Think you happelye, to have more
charity the^ God? take heed that your demand, wherefore God hoth creat the
reprobate, grow not of the doubt, that God can do them any iniustyce. Do ye
fear yt God, being very righteousness, Ephe. i.
yea charity it self, ca^ do the^ any wrong? But if you lively and verily
did believe to be elect by Christ, by mere grace and mercy of God, ye should
feel in such sort the divine goodness, that there could not enter into your
mind so ungodly conceyts. They are in good custody, being in the hands of
God. They are in the power of one which never did, nor may do one of ye least
cruelties, yea he never does justice, but it is with great mercy. Will ye know
more of the divine secrets then Paul? which rapt to the third heaven, i.
Corin. i.
heard things so high and so secret, that to man it is not lawful to be
spoken of? ioCor. i. It suffised him only to know Christ crucified. Is it not
think ye enough to you to know Christ crucified, in whom are hydden all the
tresures of the wisdom and science of God? And if that suffyce you in Christ
is seen none but the elect, the reprobate are without Christ, and in Christ
only ought we to contemplate and behold our eleccion, your office should be to
attend to your selves, to encrese daily by Christ in greater knowledge of the
bounty of god and to make certain to ye world with good works, i. Tim. iiii.
your vocacion and eleccion, and not to be so curyous of other, forgetting
your selves. And if they would say, we dout and fere also least we he
reprobat, ii. Peter. i.
and therefore we complain us, and would know why he has created us, forseyug
our dampnaciou: now these must be exhorted not to despair, but to contemplate
and look in Christ in whom they shall se them selves elected. And so they shall
not have whereof to take occasion to lament, after it must be said to the^ for
as much as ye do not believe verily yet to be of the elect, it is a sign that
ye have not lively light of Christ, nor of his great benefit, and not knowing
Christ, it behooves to say with Paul that ye know not God iu veryty, Galat.
iiii.
and that ye are without him. And how is it possible then that you being with
out God and without the true knowledge of him, Ephe, ii,
should understand and know his high secrets? It is not possible to know
sooner the divine judgments then God. Ye be therefore without faith, and I prove
that it is true, because that if ye had faith, ye should se so clearly that God
does every thing well and can not err, that you would ask none other reason.
And for that who so is without faith, is frantycke concerning the deuyne
things, it must needs be said that you are even so, and now is it a frausy*
your demau^dyng a reason of the creacyon of the reprobate, neither should it be
possible to satisfy you, till such time your reason were healed by faith. Yea
while that ye are so without light supernatural, being thereof not able to
conceive, he that should search to quiet you with reasones, should also enter into
a fransy with you. Humble then your selves to God and ask him faith and not
reasous, because that things supernatural, can not be seen but by faith.
Insatiable is the gift of folish and frantic curiosity, the godly odo^e, the
high and iuco^prehensible judgments of God and with humility, they are
content to taste in them by faith, some drop of the deuyne sapience and
goodness: where the ungodly presumyng without faith, have a will to perce to the
iuaccessible counsayl of God, and remaynyng in darckenes become mad and
folish: ye perceive not that ye want the true conceiuyng of God. If ye think
that God may err or do anythyng unjustly: you will perhaps add light to that
perfect light rule the divine sapyence, correct that infyuite goodness, judge
that iudgeles justice, and condemn that supreme mercy and charity. If thou
dyddest see the hyghnes and magnificence of God, and on the other side, the
baseness and vanity of man, and how in all things he depends upon him, ye
should se that he never punished them in such sort yt they deserved not to have
a greater punyshme^t, being so fra^tycke and proud, ye are not capeable nor
worthy to have light of the high judgment of God, yea you deserve to remain
so confused. And for that it is the just judgment of God, that for the earnest
pain of your hell, ye should go ever with your troublesome thoughts, co^passyng
by such dark and in extricable mases. Therefore although I could give you a
reason of all the works of God. I would not do it. Humble you the^ to God, and
ask him faith, for with y^ only ladder, we asce^d to ye intelligence of the
secrets of God. And the^ when ye shall have faith, saying with clear and
supernatural light, that god does al things well, ye shall no more care for a
further reason. And if also thou should seek it, it should be with a godly
mind to be so much the more able the better to behold God, in his just and
holy judgments. And then I would say to you, that God might have saved al,
but he has not wylled it, yea foresing the damnacyon of the ungodly* he
created them, not for to save them, Romans vi.
or to the end thep should be saved, but to serve him self of them, so much
the more to be showed bright and glorious, Pro. xix.
to the world. The which is a more beutyfull, more rich, more happy, and more
wonderful ordinance, then if sin had never ben in the world. And this is
because Christ and his elect (of sin) have taken occasyon, to honor God
more then if the world had never ben innocent, and god with greatest sapience,
did reduce all the dysorders, into a more marvelous order, then if the world
had never heue disordred by sin If sin had not been, the saints had never
been persecuted, imprisoned, and slain, no more Christ crucified. Where then
should have been their vyctorye, their Palm, triumphs and crowns? And if the
reprobate would say: we are forced to confess yt God has done well to permit
the sins of the elect, that after as the prodygall son, of his error and
miseries, took occasion to open his eyes and know him self, yea, and to return
to his father, to humble him self to repent with heart, and axe him pardon and
thereby to taste the fatherly charity, when he pardoned him, in more perfect
manner, then he had done before: so the elect, of their sins take occasion
the better to know themselves, and the bounty of God, and it is no small
benefyte of God, that he suffer him self to be wounded of his children, and
bear with it, to the eude that some day, opening their eyes, they may se
their great ingratitude, and the excessive love that he bears them. God also
of these, may be afterward surely served, at every noble and great
enterprise, as of them that are altogether his, not only for y^ he has created
and preseruedthe^, but much more because that by sin being lost, with the
blood of his only begotten son, he has recovered them. And so was Christ
served of Paul, and of his other mighti cha^pions, we must of force confess
also, that God does well to permit the sins of the reprobat to exercise the
elect in virtues, for the greater tryumphe of Christ and his glory. But it
seems that it should have been better, y^ after that God had served his
turn with them, he should touch their heart, and give them his knowledge,
and his grace, so that they also of their sins should take occasion, to
reknowledge their vice, and the goodues of God, so that they might be saved, to
them ye ought to say: sen^e ye confess, that God has done well, to permit
the sins of the reprobate, ye can not deny but that for the^ they deserve to
be dampened. Ye are also forced to sai, that god dampneth them iusth, fence that
they have sinned: God then does well to permit them to sin, and when they
have sinned, he may iustli damn the^ because that voluntarily they did sin,
and the fa^te was theires and not Gods. Ye can not then complain you of God,
if he dampne you, but are constrained to say he does well, And if they say it
is true, but yet it should seem us to be better, and with h^s greater glory, if
after he were ferued of the^, he would save them. To these I answer first that
is best, which pleases God, and because it pleases him to dampne the^,
therefore that is best. Then if God in the end of the life, should give light to
al. And so at last every one should convert, they would do many more enormious
sins the^ they do. For the ungodly would say, we may do every evil, let us
take our pleasure and live freely, without any fear, for every way in the end
we shall be saved. And for that one only sin is worse the^ all the peines of the
dampened, therefore it is best, that they be dampened. Their dampnacion serves
also to the elect, in as much as that sernauute which when he sees justice
done to his fellow servant that before would have strangled him, knows the
goodues of his Lord, and the malignity of the man: so the elect by saying in
the damyned the justice of god do come to more knowledge of his mercy and
justice, and also of their own miserye. God is served then of the reprobate,
to illustrate and set forth his glory, and uses the^ for instruments, not
only while they are in this life, but in death and in hell. His glory also is
more dyscouered (as Paul writes) by having in his great house vessels of
gold, of silver, of wodde, and earth, of mercy, and of wrath. But let us
thank God that he has elected us, and pray him that he give us so much
light of his goodness, and so much feruencye, that although he would never be
angry with us, not only we should be content, but that we hold it fora
synguler pryueledge, that he will vouchsafe in such manner to serve him self of
us, to the end that in every state, and for ever, we may render him all
laud, honor and glory, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xx. Sermon.
Wherefore God has elected us:
IT should be no less then a very folyshnes when one entendynge to speak of
couloures, should bring in the opynion of one that is borne blind, and not
illumpnate by miracle. So is it madness in the thing supernatural, to
allege the judgment of them that are not inspired but with natural
understanding. And by adventure have talked, of high, hid and divine
secrets, even as it has seemed well, in their own blind and darcke
understanding, having thereby their eyes ever open, to magnify man. Now
because that of the supernatural matters, there is so much known as is reveled
and opened to us. Therefore loking in the holy scriptures, Ephe, i.
I find that god has elected us by Christ, that is, that God lokinge in the
progeny of Adam, saw nothing there that was worthy of our election: but
tourninge the regard to his own goodness and Christ's, Math. iii.
in whom he was so well pleased, that by him he did elect us, Ephe. i.
he therefore chose us not because we were holy, but because we should be, so
that the divine grace found no saints but made saints. Therefore did Paul
give thanches to God, that had made us mete to the enherptaunce of saints. He
chose us then because it pleased him so, for he loved us frelie without saying
in us anythynge worthy thereof. He elected us (as writes Paul) after the
decreed purpose of his own will, Ephesi. i.
to the laud and glory of his fre mercy and not for our worckes. So that not
because we were just and worthy in his sight, he did elect and call us, but (as
Paul says) because he has elected, Romans viii.
therefore he does call, iustifye and glorifpe us. In such sort* that he
willed not the end for the beginning sake, but the beginning for ye end sake.
He has saved us after Paul not by the worckes that we have done, but by his
mercy. In another place he says, y^ he has delivered and called us with his
holy vocation not after our worckes but according to his purposed mercy,
given already to us before the creacio^ of the world: i^. Tim. i.
so then, as of the secrets reveled to the litel ones and hidden from the wise
and prudent Christ did give none other cause, but for y^ so it pleased the
father, Math. xi.
so of our election there may no another cause be alleged, but only because it is
the pleasure of God. Paul wylleth that the purpose that God has made us,
may not depend upon our works, because it should not be firm as it is, nor
we sure, as Christ says we are, and Paul also. If thou would sai, that Paul
to the Romans spoke of the eleccion of Jacob and Esau, Romans ix.
concerning the first birth, John. x.
and not co^cerninge the heavenly inheritance. Romans viii.
I would answer that Paul with that trope, Romans ix.
does declare the manner of the eternal eleccion to paradise, other wise the
eleccio^ of Jacob, should be in vain, in the which is seen (touching the things
of the present life) nothing but calamiti and trouble. But the principal
intent of Paul is to prove that although the carnal Hebrews be not saved, it
rests not therefore, that Jesus is not the Messiah, for yt the promises were
made to the spiritual Hebrews, the which in faith do imitate and follow Abraham,
and they are y^ elect. Mala. i.
When God also in Mala. shows to the Iues that he has loved the^, because he
loved Jacob of whom they descended, and hated Esau: His reason had been
vnuailable if God did love and chose by works. For the Jews might have
answered: if thou did love Jacob and the Hebrews, it was because thou dydest
forese their good works: and in like case thou would have done to Esau and
the Gentiles, Romans ix.
if thou had foresene and good works in them. But Paul shows that the
Messiah is come also to ye ge^tils, because God gives his gyfts with out
having respect to works. If thou demand wherefore he has elected the^. Paul
answers, because it is written: I will show mercy on whom it pleases me.
Romans ix.
Therefore Paul does in far and bring in, that paradyse is not his that will,
nor that runnethor laboreth by him self to get it, but his that God will show
mercy unto. He might also have answered, that although God hated Esau before
he was borne, and before he did sin, he is not therefore wicked, for he had
him not in hate or he did forese his wickedness. But he says that he does
indurate who^ he will, to set forth the brightness of his glory. And to his
purpose he does allege the example of Pharao. Now tell me how it is possible
that God can forse in us any good, if he determine not to give it us. Thou will
say, he saw that some could use well frewil and some not* therefore he chose the
first, and refused the second, they could not use it well, without his grace.
Wherefore then did he determyne to give yt grace of well vsyng to the one and not
to the other?

It behooves to return to the divine will, and say, because it pleased him
not: for the using well of fre will is the effect and fruit and not the cause of
election. Peradventure thou will say, he did determyne to give grace to all,
but he saw that some would use it well and those he chose, and some euel, and
those he forsook. But tell me, the use of that grace is also the gift of god,
wherefore did he not determine to give that grace to all, and also to use it?
Thou must needs sayat last also, because it pleased him not. If you will say,
those that used it not well, was not because they lacked y^ grace to use it, no
more then the other, but they did not occupye^t when they had it, the defalt
was theirs and not of God, nor of the grace. If it were so, we should have
wherein to glory in our selves. But Paul is in the contrary, and wills that
to God ought to be rendered all honor and glory, i. Cori iiii.
so as from him comes al goodness. We might also of our selves, Romans iiii.
separate us from the reprobate, i. Timo. i.
and so our hope should not be al wholly in God, our salvation could not be
certain and sure, Jacob. i.
as Christ said: nor the cause of our eleccion so hid, Ihon. x.
as Paul says it is, To. viii. vi ix, and. xi.
yea fre mercy should be no more fre merci, if we might be saved by worckes and
paradise should be a reward, and not a gift clean against Paul. The Hebrews
did mo worckes the^ the gentiles, and never theles he did chose the gentiles, and
reproved the Jews, that sought to be justified by their works. God from the
beginning for saw in us nothing but repugnancy and rebellion against his
grace, being by the sin of Adam, Ephesians. ii.
the childrene of ire, prone and inclined to all evil. Gene. viii.
Paul calls our election the eleccion of fre mercy. Roma. xi.
David says: he saved me, Psalm. xvii. ii. Reg. xxii
because he loved me, and because it pleased him. He saves then his elect
because he delyteth in them, Psalm. xliii. i. Cor. ii.
and dystrybuteth his mercy, after his own will. The^ he has begotten us
voluntarily by mere mercy, Jacob. i.
and not by our works: Ihon. xv.
so that the, xii. Apostels did not chose Christ, but he chose the^ to the
Apostelship. So we be not they that have chosen God to save us, but God is he
that has chosen us to salvation. Even as Paul was called without works by
free mercy, Acts. ix.
because it pleased God: so he was elected to show his mercy, Galath, i, i.
Tim. i.
and the aboundaunt riches of his glory. It is humility it self, Ephesians. ii.
to believe that we are chosen by grace This opynion gives al glory to god, and
to us only confusion. And because we can not err in glorifying to much the
fre mercy and bountye of God, and a batinge the pride of man. Therefore it is
most sure, yea, although it stood not with the holy scryptures as it does. And
the more it displeases the carnal man, becauseit co^foundeth al his glory, so
much the more it is pleasing to the spiritual because it magnifieth God, Christ
his fre mercy, and the gospel. And to say my opinion it pleases me best, to be
all wholly in the hand of God. Yea if mine eleccio^ were in my custody, I would
(if I might) render it unto God, in whose hand it must of force be better and
more sure. Yea woe to us if in the least point it did depend upon our selves.
Sethen what becomes of them that imagine (although falsely) that it dependith
only upon the goodly works that they do, to make the^ selves elected again,
where on ye other party, you shall se that those which with lively faith, believe
to be by the mere mercy of God, and by the death of Christ, in the noumber of
the elect, and sons of God (for that they feel in Christ and by Christ, the
great charity of God) are by strength of the spirit and love, forced to do
worckes to be wondered at: not servile, for they see them selves heirs, but
the works of a son sincere and pure to the glory of their lively father,
being prevented by soue. If thou would believe, we ar^ not worthy to be so
elected by fre mercy, I would answer, nether that Christ should suffer for us
upon the c^osse but did he not therefore die? Christ has not elected us,
because we were worthy thereof, but for the glory of his goodness: Ephe. i.
The cause of our eleccyon is not theu to be sought, but at the deuyne will.

Of the reprobat, I entend not to dyspute wherefore god has cast them of,
because it is nether nedeful to us nor profitable to know It serneth to humble
us, and to know better ye great goodness of God, that we are elected by his
grace, and not by our works. The Christian ought to believe to be one of the
chosen, Ephe. ^. i. Cor. ii. v.
and it ought to suffice him to have Christ for his book, in the which he
sees himself elect, and to know that that apperteyneth to him. And
although Paul to the Romans spoke a word thereof it was but incidently or by
the way, for it does apeare it was not his pr^ncipal intent to seek the cause
wherefore God does reprobate and cast them of. It is inoughe for us to think
y^ the omnipotencyye of God, being infinite, has neither limits nor bo^des
therefore may he do with his creatures with out contradiccion: and the divine
will may do of them, determine and will all that, that with his whole power he
may do, being the whole ruler, and necessarily most right in all his will,
yea the very ryghtuousnes it self. Wherefore honoringe the bright and light
judgments of God, let us believe that God does not condemn, but with just
and irreprehe^sible counsel, albeit the justice of his judgments be to us
incomprehensible, and that none is in hell, but by his own wyckednes: Our
office is then to humble us, Romans xi.
and content us in the divine will, reknowledgyng that we be not worthy,
although we suffer al punishment, to setforth the brightness of the glory of
god, to whom, for all his works, is due all honor, laud and glory by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The.xxi. Sermon.
Whether the elect can be damned or not.
AS it is written, Baru^. iii. i. Ihon, iii. ii. These. ii.
god sees from ye beginning and forever al things, and has of alcertein and
infallible science, and particularly knows his elect, their life and their
end So then as god, by the necessiti of his being cannot be corrupted, nether
diminish nor augment, being infinite and without end, nor be altered, being
most simple and pure, nor change place, being unmeasurable, fyllyng al
places: so also may not his determinacions be changed: Roma. ix.
neither by ignorance for lack of foresight and consideracion, neither for
defaulte of power, since he can not be let or weakened, nor his will
resisted. Neither may he change by malice, or for want of ple^tiful goodness,
for his purposes are most good and fyrme. Mala. iii.
God then is immutable in all his doings, changes not as children, nor like
old men, but as David says. The counsayl of the lord shall stand for ever:
that must needs be that god has determined, neither is it in our power to
change his purpose, disturb the divine counsayles, destroy dyuyne
ordinances, nor let his will, which is Empress, and ours of the hand
maiden. Therefore what God wylleth, must be, and not y^ he must will after our
phantasye. Now because we are not to be elected, Ephe. i.
but (as Paul writes) God has elected us before the constitucion of the
world, and is in his determanacions immutable, it is of force therefore to be
as he has determined. So like wise he sees and knows all things from the
beginning, with cerreyne and infallible knowledge: it is therefore necessity
that, that be,which he has foreseen, or else it must needs be that God
may change, and that of our lyte and eude he has no perfect knowledge,
but a doubtful opinion, where in also he may be beguyled, and that saying were a
most wyckednes. Thou will say to me, thou art deceived in imagining that
above is time, and succession of time, and that God has foreseen and
determined all that is yet to be, so that his determynacyon and knowledge is al
ready passed, in such sort, that he can not other ways, know, nor will,
without his change which is impossyble. And therefore thou iudgeest it
necessytye, that all that come to pass, which he has foreseen and
determined, But it is not so, for above there is no end or succession of time,
night nor day, neither was nor shall be, as there is here underneath the
heanens, there is only all the present time, and only one most clear day of
one inseparable instaunte, the which by his eternity extends to the
succession and process of all time. And I answer, that I know right well,
that to* God every thing is present, although being under this celestial
Shpere, where is following of time. to make us better understand, we use with
Paul to say he has elected us: but tell me, do thou believe that the
eleccyon of those that are in this present life, and like wise those that shall
be, is now in being in effect and present before God, or not? If thou
say no, the^ shall it never be, for with him is no time to come. If thou sai
yea, then may it not be without mutacion in God, sense thou grauntest it once
to be.

If thou would say it might be no being, yet it could not be no being,
but in the instaunt of the godhead, in which thou graunteste all things to
be, for as much as above is no succession or course of time, and so iu that
self instau^t in diuisible, thou would have it possible, not to be any thing
and yet a being: for as much as it is not so. Therefore if thou consent that
God (I say not has seen) but does se and determyne al things, sense that God
is immutable, and his science infallible, and that there is no course of time,
by all means, likewise it is to be said, that, that must needs be, which God
with parfect infallible knowledge does for see, and steadfastly determyne.
Because that (if with God there were any time past) eue^ as that could not be
which God had foresene by his infallible precence, and immutably determined:
no more ca^ that thing not be, which he does presently se and determyne. Thou
wylt say, I grant that all that shall be, which God does forese and ordeyn and
so God shall not be begyled, nor yet change, but yet nevertheless it might be
yt contrary although it shall never be. But thou ^eest not how thou art
deceived, thou grau^test that all the elect shall be saved, nevertheless thou
say they may be dampened: And whereto serves this, may be, if in effect they
shall not be dampened. Therefore this argues but in words, it is courtouse and
unprofitable. Now as if thou would grant that an elect could be damned,
thou should be forced to say that God may change. Therefore thou say,
that all may be saved which argues yet that the elect may be damned, and so
thou must needs confess, that god may also be begyled, and vary in his
ordinance, which is impossible. That the elect then may be dampened, it is a
thing false, heretycal, and impossible: it can not be verefied by no sentence
compound nor deryued sense that in God ca^ be no mutacio^ nor succession.
Therefore if he be elect, he must needs be saved, and it must needs be said;
that the eleccion of them that shall be saved (I will not say has been but
standing in that eterni is in being becaule that it is were not now should
not be hereafter, sense there neither is, nor can be with God, but always the
present time. Then God having in his divine mind given us paradyse from the
beginning, and when he gives never repe^teth (as Paul writes) it is of
necessirye to say that the elect be saved. Roma. xi
Paul writes that the eleccio^ of God is firm, and the divine purposes
steadfast, and that the Lord knows his with perfect infallible knowledge,
Roma. iiii.
which ought to be to us a sure foundacyon, Roma. ix.
whereupon we may stablyshe undoubted faith of our salvation. To this purpose
Paul said, that those that God has known for his, and therefore elected and
purposed to save them, those he has predestynate to be conformable to the
Image of his son, and those having them after created, he does call with an
inward calling,in such sort, that they answer again, for because they are
the sons of God, therefore they heard his voice, and believe by being ordained
to eternal life. Yea he draws them, and gives them a new heart, and these
that he calls he iustifyeth, he gives them Christ, and the ^yght of him,
faith, hope, and charity, and all other christyane virtues apparelynge them,
he does enriche them with many gifts, treasurs, and graces, and afterward does
happily glorify them Therefore from the first to the last it follows, that
the elect must needs he saved. Paul added and said: if God be with us, who
can be against us: meaning, if God has elected us, and determined to save
us, he being omnipotente, and has taken up on him this enterprise to save
us, who shall let him? Yea he would have said, no man, because that Christ
said, Ihon. x.
none can take them out of the hands of my father: it happens not to God as
to man, which many times does will a thing, seeks and can not find,
Roma. xi
as the Hebrews which sought their salvation, and could not atchieue it, and
that because they fought it not by Christ, by fre mercy, nor by faith but by
works. It is not so with God, because that he, when he wylleth any thing, it
comes to pass, and his eleccio^ (as writes Paul) comes to effect.
Moreover God has given his elect to Christ, Ihon. x. xi. and. xvii.
and braweth them to him, and those that go to him drawn of the father, he
chaseth not away, as him self said: he loses them not, but knows them for
his sheep, he calls them to him, they hear his voice, he prays for them
most effectuously, and is ever heard. For them he shed his blood, and gave
his life, Math. xvi
even as for them only he was sent, and came into the world, to them he does
manifest God, gives them life, and makes them happy. They are then in good
hands, being in Christ's, out of the which non^ shall take them, as him
self has said. They may peryshe that are the sons of perdicion, Ihon. xi.
and. xvii.
as Judas, but not the children of eleccion. The elect are sure, for there was
never one of them that peryshed nor never shall, Mat. xiii.
yea it is impossible, for christ speking of y^ falls prophets which should be
in y^ kingdom of Antichrist, said they should seduce the very elect, if it were
possible, for to show that it was nor ^ossible, yea for their sakes, those
days shall be shortened.

All that God has wrought and shall work is for his elect, for whom he did
create the world, and preserve the same, sent Christ into the world, and
wylled that for them he should dye upon the cross, for them he has most
special care. If God made such account of yt Hebrews, Deuteronomy. xv.
yt to thend their name should not be forgotten on yt earth, he did ordeine, yt
if y^ first brother died without child the second was bound to raise up sede
to his brother: think thou yt he will not make rekning of his elect whose
nams are written in heaven? Yea, I will thou know, that although Christ be he,
Luke. x.
by whose means all ye elect are saved, nevertheless not by his impote^cy,
being given to him all power, Mark. x. mat. xxviii
but because the thing of it self is impossible. Christ ca^ not save a
reprobate, nor dam an elect* Now much less is it in our power, if we be
elect, to da^pne our selves, or if we be reprobate to save our selves, yet
ought we not to cease to work well, because yt if we are sure to be dampened,
we are yet bound every way, for his infinite goodness, most highly to honor
him. Let us then give tha^ ^ses to god that has not only by mere mercy elected
us for his, but to thend we might be sure of our salvation, has ordained yt
our dampnacion shall not lie in our own power (being his elect) and with this
gives us such grace, that we may in this present life, render him al laud,
honor, and glory by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xxii. Sermon.
Whether God do agrauate, harden and blind the hearts of men or not, and in
what manner.
IT is read in the holy scriptures, ii. Reg. xvi iii. Re. xxix ii, Re. xxiiii
that God put in Saul a wicked spirit to vex him and a liyng spirit in the
mouth of ye prophets to begyle Achab, Exodus i. vii x. xi. and xiiii Esaias.
xliii. Ihon. xii. ii. Cor iiii. Romans ix. xi Galat. iii*
and that by Satan he moved ye heart of David to number the people against his
precepte. And moreover he does harden, blind, and make gross ye hertes of
persons, and gives them over into a perverse mind. And Paul writes, that he
has shut up al me^ in unbelief and sin. And although many held for
ungodliness this manner of speaking, and therefore they do not only abstayn from
pronou^cing such like words but also go about to expound and make the^ better,
eme^dinge them, forcecyng the^ selves to bring them after their phantasye, to
such a way, yt they have a kind of godliness therein. And I think they are
moved to do this, to thend yt of these things men should not take occasion to
think that God were the cause of sin, or else to imagine with the Maniches to
be.ii. first beginnings, the one good cause of the good, the other evil cause
of ye evil* Nevertheless I will not, ought not may not will to be more holy
then God, that speaks in holy scriptures. And it is more wyckednes to will to
correct the tongue of the holy ghost, because that none speaks nor can speak
more circu^spectlye then he, nor with greater thyrst of our salvation, with the
zeal and honor of God. With all this every one ought to know that we are the
cause of sin and not God: yea it can not be thought, that God is a God, if it
be not thought, that he is without fault, without evil infinitely good and
just. Therefore as to us is due all coufusion, ignominy, dishonor, reproach and
euel, so to God al honor, laud, and glory. It is not euel then to pronounce
these words, to the manner that they are written, saying that God does
agrauate, harden, and blind, but it is good.

Thou will say, tell me how these words are to be understand, that God
does harden, blind, and such syke: so that thereby I may not take any occasion
of offense. I answer, that after the opinion of some, God does harden, and so
blind the heart of a person, in as much as he forese^th and fore preaches
his hardenes, as he did forese and foresay the obstinacye of Pharao. But know
thou, that when he said to Moses, I will harden the heart of Pharao, he would
not only say, I forsee that he will be hard hearted, and I tell it the before,
for then the words which he spoke after, should not have agreed therwyth,
which were: for to show my power, that my name may be declared throughoute
the whole world.

But with those words he threatened to punyshe him, as it is read that he
punished mo people for their sins, with blyndyng them, Dent. ii. Esaias. vi.
Ihon. xii. Psalm. lxxx. Roma. i,
hardenynge them, with lettyng them do after their desires of their own hertes
geuinge them over into a froward mind, in passions and shameful effects.

Therefore there are some which say that God many times does harden and
blind sinners, when suffering, yea giving them prosperity, and distributyng
his mercy and benefytes, when they ought to open their eyes to so great
be^ignityes of him, and be invited thereby to repent and change their life,
they, of this bou^ty of God take occasion to become worse, every day more
blind and indurate. But I say that the virtue and also the vice stands not
in prosperity nor yet in aduersytye, but in the men them selves. So that as to
the elect every thing works to salvation, Romans viii.
and by the special grace that they have of God serve him in adversity as in
prosperiti: so to the reprobate, every thing serves contrary, and hurts,
yet by their defalts as not only prosperity and adversity, but also yt preching
of ye gospel, and the miracles do hurt and hinder them. Therefore Paul said,
yt as to ye elect Christ was the odor of life, so to the reprobate, he was
the odor of death. ii. Cori. ii.
It is needful then to say that God does harden and blind the hearts of the
reprobate, not because he gives the^ aduersiti or prosperiti, nor because he
suffers the^, and shows them many benefits, but for that he gives them not
grace to use them, and the commodyte thereof, to the glory of God: It may be
truly said that he does hurden and blind the hertes of the sinners, when he
takes from them, or gives the^ not his grace, nor the understanding of his
will because that in such case, it is force that man will remain blind and
indurate, and that every thing serve them, to the dyshonor of God, where as if
they had that inward grace eue^ of their sins, they should ta^e occasion to
honor him, god does blind men, when with drawyng his light, he hydeth his
face, Deu. xxxi.
and as Moses was vayled, so spredeth he the veil of ignorance over the heart
of the reprobate: ii. Cor. iii.
so that god in with drawing his light of his grace, blyndeth the heart of
infydels, in such sort, that not only the gospel is hyd from them (as Paul
writes) and they err, but standing in that darckenes, they cannot believe,
And so also does he harden, ii. These. ii.
not for that he gives prosperity or adversity (of the which the elect also
are partakers) nor because he withdraws not the grace, Ihon. xii.
but the swetenes and the sensual felyng thereof, of the which many saints were
void: nor yet for that he moves their hertes to evil, or cause in them any
obstancye or evil qualite: Ezech. xi.
but only in wythdrawynge his grace, which molifieth a heart of stone and
makes it flesh, it is of necessitye yt the heart remayn hardened. And so
likewise he chaseth away yt sinner, when he does not call him, and draw him to
him before, Yet for all this god sins not, for he is not holde^ nor bound to
give us this grace, he may harde^ and mollify after his own pleasure, yea the
sinner meriteth not only to be punyshed with pain and priuacion of paradyse,
but also with priuacion of his grace: and that this is true, judge, if God had
killed Pharao, when he caused all the Hebrews children to be cast into the
floude: would thou have said that God had been unjust? Surely no And yet if
then he had dyed, he had been damned, and remained obstinate for ever. Where
fore might not god execute justly, the same sentence, as concerning blyndyng
and hardening, upon others with wythdrawynge his grace? And on the other party
(as they are preserved) that shall be not amiss to preserve him in life for a
few mo days to be served of him, as of an instrument of wrath prepared from
the beginning, to exercise his people in virtue, to the end that delyuering
them so diuinelye, Romans ix.
they might know the great goodness, power, and justice of god. And so being
his name celebrate throughoute the world, Exo. xxiiii.
he might be feared and loved. And finally all to his own glory, Psalm. lxxi.
as waxteth Paul and Moses. The judgments that we give upon the secrets of
God, are very madness, Romans viii.
if by faith we do not enter into his santuarye. God does inwardlye call the
elect, as Paul writes, and they believe that god, as their only father, will
never forsake them, but shall endue the^ with such grace, that al things shall
serve them to salvation, even sin, in the which god will never let them
fall, but for their benefyte. They art not offended to hear say, Romans viii.
that god by abstaining his grace from the ungodly does blind and harden their
hertes, but understanding by fayeth to be in the number of the elect, and
knowing that god saves not but by mercy, and dainneth not but justly, so much
the more are they moved to live in pure fear, to humble them selves, and
render thanks to god, to whom be ever all laud, honor and glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The.xxiii. Sermon.
How God does dispose his grace.
THere are many which thyncke that god to every one co^tinuallie does offer
his grace, and that it is in the power of man to accept it or not, as though^
they had it in a boudget, and were in their arbytrement to open and take at
their own will. And that of this their dead, false, and erronyous opinion,
grows yt they live most wickedly, thynking and saying: god never fails with
his grace, and it is at our choice to receive it at our will.

Therefore we may take leisure and live a vicious life after our own way, for
we shall be saved always, a moment of time is enough for us to repent and be
saved, sense it is in our power. Therefore for to fly such an evil, I have
judged it good to show yt it is not so It is no doubt yt God has created y^
world for his elect, so that if god had forsene that none should have been
saved, he would not have created it. Hebrews. i. i, Corin. i. Romans viiii.
For the^ also he did preserve it, to them he has given the Angels for kepers,
and of them as a father he has most singular care and providence. God will not
suffer yt they be tempted above their power, yea every thing works and
serves well to their salvation. Seven times in a dai y^ just shall fall and rise
again, Pro. xxiiii.
because God is with the^, and helps them in such sort, that the more they
are in great perils and necessity, so much the more is god beneficial to them.
For the^ god gave the law to the world, sent Moses and the Prophets, them he
calls inwardly in such manner, that they hear his voice, and answer him of
them he mollifieth the heart, and draws them to Christ, as the adama^t does
Iron: If they err, he does correct and chasten them as children, as it is
read of David, Psa. xxxi.
to them he does not impute their sin, Ihon. x.
he does quicken and glorify the^, and finally all that god has wrought, Ihon.
ix.
and shall work for him self, is for the elect, for them he sent Christ, and
when he came, for them he took upon him their sins, only for the^ he prayed,
for them he wept, preached, and did miracles, for them he shed his blood,
dyed, rose, ascended into heaven, sent the holy ghost, and shall come to judge
the quick and the dead: yea all that he has suffered wrought and shall
work, is for the elect, whom he loves in so excessive manner, that he does
atribute to him self all that is done to them, Ihon. x.
God then being gratified with the elect in Christ, does give unto them his
spirit, the linelye light of him, faith, hope, with all the rest of virtues
and graces essencial and necessary to salvation. And moreover he gives them
grace to use in the honor of god, and be served in his glory, of all the
gifts and graces which may be commune both to the good, and to ye euel, to be
used well and euel, as riches, honor, dignitye, health, long life, children,
frindes, science, the gyfts of the tongue, to do miracles and such like. Of
them in part, Paul made mencyon, writing to the Corinthes. i. Cor. xii.
And also gives them grace to use in his glory, poverty, ignommie, in fame,
infirmity, with al adversity, and the priuacion of like gifts, even to the
death, god gives them such grace y^ with every wind, they sail to the port,
and they know that they are no less bound to thank god when they are without
such gifts, and in all adversity, then when they have such things with the
prosperitye of y^ world, sense that by the grace which god gives them, al
things work to good.

Therefore they are ever contented to be in the state which pleases the Lord,
neither would they change it, if they might (with out the will of God) and only
for that they feel the divine goodness, no less in adversity then in the
worldly prosperity. In thend when they are fallen to any sin, god opens
their eyes, and makes the^ se, not only the evil yt they have done, but also
y^ he has so permited (...) for then benefit, to the end they may the better
know their own miseryes and the bountye of God. But spekyng of ye reprobate, I
say that it is enough for us to know that god is not bond, nor necessited to
give them his grace for their good works: because that the grace finds no
good worckes, but does make them to be done, with his creatures The bonds are
all ours with god, and so much the more as that we being all loss in Adam,
he might justly, not only oba^don us, but damn and punyshe us. He is not also
compelled of his perfect goodness, mercy and charyty to not have created the
world, he might now bring it to nothing, and dyspose all creatures after
his own way being still most perfectelye just, as he is now, and was from
without beginning, before he did create the world. God may give of his grace
as much as it pleases him, when and to whom he thincketh good, yea, and not
to give it without being unjust, or doing any injury. Math. xx.
God also has been of power without doing any unrighteous to creat the
reprobat, fore seeing their dampnacyon to serve his own turn, and to use them
for in strumentes, or exercise the elect in virtue, to the end that their
victories and triumphs, and likewise Christ's, might be the more glorious, and
finally al for his own greter glory.

And moreover I say, Ihon. vii.
that Christ hydeth himself and his grace many times from persons, Prou. i.
so that although they seek him, cry after him, and recommend them selves to
him, they find him not, nor he hears them not, notwythstandynge those such
as are not moved to seek him, or commit them selves to him, by the spirit, nor
for the zeal of the honor of God, but for their proper interest, yea and many
times he does blind and indurate the people, and all is most justly done. And
although it be written y^ God has ^ure of al, calls al, would save all, dyed
for all, does illumynate all, does rain and power his grace upon all, and
like sentences: I say, it is to be understand, that he has cure of al
ingeneral, but of the elect in special, and so he calls al, with a vocacion
universal, but the elect with an inward and singular. When Paul said also,
that he would save all, he understood that, to be of every sort of persons. His
death also was sufficient to save al, but it is not effectuous but to the
elect, and so where it is written, y^ he does illuminat and give grace to al*
it is understand of ye elect of those that are illuminate. Therefore said
Christ to the Apostles, to you it is given to know the misteryes of the
kingdom of heaven, Math. xiii.
Paul said likewise, Ephe. ii.
that the faith which is the gift of God, ii. These. ii.
is not al men's. It is well true also, that God does illumynate al, in as much as
there is no person that has not had some light and knowledge of God. Let us
then give him thanks, sense that of his mere goodness, he has co^numerat us
among the elect, and pray we him that he give us so much light of his goodness,
that in every place and time we may render him perfect land, honor and
glory* by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The.xxiiii. Sermon.
If a man have lybertye or not and in what manner.
SOme might think it superfluous for a christian, to think whether he be fre
or not, but that it is inoughe to force him self to make al possible
resystence against evil, and his best power to do well, geuynge all honor
and glory to God, because that in such a case they walk to god surely,
neither falling into the depth of idleness. But herein consists the
difficulty, in geuinge all the glory to god. Yea it is not possible that man
while arroga^tly he presumes of him self (thinkyng to do that which he does
not) can give all the glory to god. Therefore have I judged it necessary to
show what man can do, to thend yt being hable to know and discern between
that which in deed is his, and that that is gods, he can and may render all
praise and laud unto him to whom of duty it belongs. First, al though the
being of the creatures, compared to the being of god (by being infinitely far
from the perfeccio^ of the divine essence) is but a shadow, Roms. iiii.
yea rather no being, so that truly it may be said that God only is that
which is: Exodus iii.
nevertheless with al this, it can not be said but that the creatures have a
being, although imperfect, in comparyson of the divine. And so is it true,
that they have virtue, during the which they work, although principally in the
virtue of God.

Therefore when the Lord had created the world, he commanded the earth to
spring, and the waters to bring forth. Then false is the opinion of them
that Imagine that god, and not the sun does give light, and god not the fire
does give heat, and so of all the rest of things created, that God does
work in the^, and not the creatures, but every creature even to the most
vile, has his proper virtue, duringe the which, it works. True it is, that
in the creatures inferior to man, there is no liberty at all, because that
being not let, they must of necessiti work according to the virtue that they
have in the disposition of things possible or sufferable directlye set before
them as it is fene in burninge, and so it is necessary, they move according to
their virtue, strength, and apetyte, the which is seen in the waters, that
run to the sea, nether it is in the power of living souls unreasonable, to
move or not to move weaklye or strong lie, to the obiectes that they appetyte
or desire. Take away the impedimentes, they must of necessitye move them
selves there unto, after the measure of the strength and apetyte they have.
Therefore in them is no liberty at al, as there is in man, in whom I consider
five sorts of mouynges and operacyo^s. The first are mere natural as if a man
sh^ld vol^ntarrlye throw him self down, it should not be in his liberty to
withholde him self, but should be by his weighte, compelled like a stone to
discende even to the earth. True it is that the same faul was in his liberti,
in as much as he might not have thrown him self down at all. The second
monynges that I consider in men, are vegatyue, as y^ ^rowynge when they are
children, and noryshyng and such like, the which also does plants. And
speaking of chose, I say that they are not in the lybertye of man, saving
that he may kill himself, and depryue hymof that life which he can not do.

The third are operacions animal, as to see, hear, and taste, and such
like, of the which speaking, I say that albeit it be in the power of man not
to hear a voice that is present without closing his ears, and so of the
other like operacyous, nevertheless it is in his lybertye to shut up those
se^ces, in the presence of the obiectes or present things y^ delyght him, and
to wythdraw him self from them, and so not to move, or to move to one side or
another, softlye or strongly as he will, the which the other anymalles or
living souls can not do, being necessytate, to move according to their
apetytes. But speaking of the four operacyons which are humayne, as to think
one or an other thing, to speak or not in this manner or (...) yt, to learn
this or that science, to govern him self or others in this way or in the
other, yea not to do, or else to do always more or les to this or that person
(in case he have goods in power) to fast watch, pray, to hear the word of
God, to communicate or not, and so of all the other like operacions, I say,
that they are in the power of man, that is that men (without other special
grace and miracle but only duringe the general influence of God) have in their
power to do them, and also not to do them, and always they shall do them, if
they effectuouslye shall will to do them, not being let of God, or of some
other stronger the^ they, and so also shall they not do them being not forced,
and not willinge to do the^, men are not images. Yea that they are free in
things humane, it is so clear, that it can not be declared by a rule more
known, but speakinge of the last worckes, that are holy, spiritual and
divine, the which are gratfull and acceptable to God, as to have lively light,
and spiritual knowledge and understanding of god, to have in him fyrme faith
and hope, to love him, honor him, and reverence him, wythal thy heart, to
order all thy life to his glory, to obey and commit thy self wholly to his
governance with mortifying and denying thy self, the flesh and his own
prudence, and to love thy neighbor as thy self, even to thy enemies for the
love of god, with the heart to pray for the^, and do them all the good
possible: And finallye to do such worckes to the glory of god is not in the
lybertye of them that are carnal, and not regenerate by Christ, because that it
is not in their power to have the supernatural knoweledge of god, sense it is
above all their might.

It is not also in their power to have lively faith in God, hope, and
charity, for as much as they are the gifts of god, divine virtues and
supernatural. Therefore it is not in their liberty to honor god in any wise as
is due to him, and that this is true, let the^ prove to make experience in them
selves, in deuoringe them to have more knoweledge of god then they have, to
have in him greater faith and hope, and to love him more, and they shall
perceive that it will not come to effect: whereof it follows that being not in
yt power of infidels, and not regenerate by Christ to love God with al their
heart no nor above al other things, that also it is not in their power, not
to love the things created, but in Christ and by Christ, nether is it in
their power, not to love them selves dysordynatelye, or their parents,
fryndes, dygnyty, honor, goods, pleasures, and the reaste of things that
are to them profitable, commodyons and delectable, and more over it lies not
in their power, not to hate their enemi^s, so yt thou may se^ how it is in
their power to love them specially spyrytuallye in Christ: and to the glory of
God such like passions and effects are not in our power, as every one has
experyence contynuallye in him self.

A wicked man might absteyn from kyllyng his enemy, when he might do it, yea
and do his best to healp him, but it should not be in his power, to love him
in his heart, and much less in Christ and to God.

Therefore all be it, it is in his liberty not to kill his enemy and so to do
him good, nevertheless it is not in his power, to refrain from killing him,
or to do him any benefyte for the glory of god. The ungodly might, with all
his connyng and power consider all those things that serve to the dysprayse of
the world, to the mortifyinge of them selves, to the loving of their neighbor
and also god: yet by no means should they come to such light of the goodness
of God, of their own myseryes and vanyty of the world, that they should love
God to the hate of them selves, and dysprayse of the world, as he is bound
to do.

It is not then in the lyuertye of the carnal man to do worckes spyrytual, he
has need of the grace of God, of faith, and knowledge supernatural, nor it
is not (...) his power to get, neither in all nor in part any gift of God,
grace or spiritual virtue. Yea before that by Christ he be regeuerate, he can
not neither with thinking, desyring, or working, nor by any other means
dyspose or prepare him self neither whole nor partelye, to one of the least
graces of god: so that by those his thoughts, desires or worckes, he may be
worthy, or have i^ all or in part deserved that grace.

And moreover I say, that as before his regeneracion he is ungodly and wicked,
even so is sin al his thoughts, desires, and works and this is, because that
while he is carnal, being the servant of sin and concupyscence which
reigns in him, he is dead to God, and a live to him self, he neither does
work nor can work, to the glory of god as he is bound, for want of y^
lively light of him, but being as he is carnal and in his own love he is moved
to woorcke, only for his own interest, he sins then, not for doing almosse
and like woorckes, but for that he does them not for the glory of God. And
although the ungodly abstain some times from robbinge and killinge, with
such like wicked iniquities, yet alwais he sins (although not so much) not
in absteining, but that he absteineth not for the love of God as he is bound
to do, but for his own proper account intereste and vtylitie. And so is it
true in carnal manne, while he is carnal, sin does ever reygn, for that he
cannot but sin, Romans viii.
yea and ever does sin contynuallye, Romans ix.
because that although he absteyne from homicide, Roma, vii.
theft and committing such like iniquities, nevertheless he sins ever
continually, in leaving behind him the love of God wythall his heart, as he
ought to love his neighbor as him self, to work for the health of his
neighbor and the glory of God as he is bound, absteining for his honor
from all sin. Their sins are then innumerable, and yet they think in
confession to number them al being then all the worckes of the carnal, sin and
worthy of punyshmente: see how they can by any means be worthy to be
rewarded, and how they may be true preparacions, or dysposycyo^s to grace?
Therefore as a dead man cannot raise him self, or work toward his
resurreccyo^, nor he that is not, work to his creatyon, Ephesians. ii.
so the carnal man, that in Adam is dead, Rom, iiii,
and as though he were not can not work toward his regeneracyo^ and
creation, yea even as a humane body without the soul can not move but
downwarde, so the dead soul without the spirit and Christ, his life, can not
lift him self up, but must of necessity descend ever down, in regardinge
his own interest. Ihon. iii.
Therefore he cannot but sin, he must be borne again to do worsies spiritual
and holy, and by our selves we can not be regenerate by no means, for it is
only the work of God. It is nedeful then that God creatinge in us a clean
heart do given us a new heart, Psalm, l.
as David did pray and God did promise by his prophets, with out me, says
Christ, ye can do nothing, that is spiritual, holy and grateful to God.
Christ then is wholye our righteousness, and this is the more rich noble and
happi righteousness, the^ if we were just by our selves, yea none should be
just, if our justice did in any part depend upon us nor our own glory
excluded, i. Tim. i.
as Paul and Moses wylleth it to be. Roma. iiii.
There are many that think that as me^ chose to serve a Prince, Deuteronomy, viii.
so we chose to serve god, but he him self in the contrary where he said, you
have not chosen me, but I you. Likewise they think, as they that best serve
obtein most favor of their Lord, and those yt have lost it, the more they
humble them selves, the sooner they recover it: so they think of us with god.
Thus they build their good life, Galath, v.
not upon Christ, but on them selves, and fall from the deuyne grace. And also
it is clean contrary: for not for that we repent humble us, and do good
worckes, therefore he gives us his grace: but because he gives us his grace,
therefore we do worckes that are holy. So that, not for that the good thief
upon the cross did confess Christ, therefore he did illuminate him, but for
that Christ did illuminate and touch his heart, therefore he did confess him:
and the like happens of all us.

And what good work did Paul when Christ converted him? He was most strongly
against his honor, even as we were before he called us. These that are not
regenerate, be with Saint Peter in a dark prison, bound with many cheynes,
in the power of the Deuell, a sleep in sin, and will thou that they be
saved by them selves? No, the Lord him self must needs awake him, the evil
tree can not bring forth good fruit, Math. vii.
as Christ said, no more can the ungodly good worckes. Before we are by
Christ regenerate, we are flesh and that which spryngeth of the flesh, is
flesh. Ihon. iii.
Therefore can we do no spiritual worckes, yea even as Paul says, all the
effects and desires of the flesh are death, unclean are all our worckes
which proceed of our corrupt nature, and finallye he that is not with Christ,
is against him.

God at the beginning made man free, but in synnynge he was made in such
sort the servant of sin, y^ not only he can not, neither in all nor in
part, merit before god any grace, but he can not in his light do otherwise
but sin: yet not for this he should leave to hear the word of God, to pray,
to take counsel, to seek to be corrected, to do alms and like woorcks, not
for that he doothe deserve grace but punyshmente, even as he that by force is
compelled to humble him self, and are pardon of his enemy, for that feigned
humilitye, he meriteth not to be pardoned, but should merit so much the more
to be punished, as that, having unjustly offended him, he ought with his
heart, to have humbled him, and asked pardon, and has not done it, Now so
the ungodly, in askinge mercy of God, does sin, for he that asks not for
his glory as he is bound, but for his own gain, nor therefore he ought to
cease from asking help of God, for that he sins not in prayinge but for not
prayinge in spirit, for the glory of God, and withal due circumstances in that
case he did partlye obey God, for if he did not pray he should sin much more
greuouslye. The Samaritane not only deserved not to have grace of Christ, for
asking him water, but for that her demand she deserved to be punished, because
she did it not in faith, and to the glory of God.

Nevertheless Christ would that she should ask, and that it should pass by
those means. Now so he will that sinners ask grace, and do those worckes that
he has commanded them, albeit they do them not to the glory of god, being
blind to divine things, yea darkness it self, as writes saint Ihon. But
after the sinners are regenerat by christ the^ as children of god, Ihon. x.
Ihon. viii.
they are free, and not the servants of the deuell nor of sin because that
although in them remains the concupiscence of sin, nevertheless they do not
consent to it, Romans vii.
they obey not unto it. It does not reign in them, but they have so much
light of god, and so much spirit (which helps their infirmity) that they are
stirred to the glory of god, Romans vi.
though not wholye as they would, for because of the repugnaunte flesh.
Therefore said Paul, I do not ye good that I would do, Romans vii.
but the evil that I would not. Psalm. xxxi.
But such defectes are not imputed to them, Romans viii.
for that they are by faith graffed in Christ. The regenerate by Christ are
prone and ready to the good, god has illustrate their mind and toutched
their heart, in such manner that with all their soul, voluntarely freely and
gladly, they do holy worckes, to the glory of god, so that as god counsayled
the souls of them that did elect David to content the^ selves in their heart
to have him for their king, fo he moves the heart of the regenerate, willingly
to have god for their god, to commit them to his governance, and to delight to
be governed of him, with hounoryng him as a celestyal father. So the^ as yt
sons of Adam, before they be regenerate are the servants of sin, for that
they ca^ not but sin, and therefore because they can not work, will, desire,
nor stir in any way to the glory of god, as they are holden, but only for
their carnal commodity, by yt which al men not regenerate, are called flesh,
not only the body, but the soul, the will, desires and thoughts, wythal the
rest, so after that they are regenerate, they be fre from sin, (for that they
can work to the glory of god) and are servants of ryghteousnes. Therefore
although, as concerning the substance and being of the body and of the soul,
they remain the same: nevertheless, where before they were called fleshly men,
and flesh for that they sought not but their own proper things, afterward they
are called spiritual men and spirit, in as much as they seek the glory of
God, the which they may do, for that God has given them by mere grace lively
light and spiritual feling, and knowledge of his goodness, yea during in them
that perfect light, not only they at fre from sin, for that they be able not
to sin but also they can not sin, for that they ca^ not but love god and
work to his glory.

And this is the perfect lybertye, the being fre from the power to sin,
and being not of power to sin, is not to sin, Otherwise, neither the
saints that are in the other life, nor the Angels should be perfectly fre,
nether Christ nor god, for they ca^ not sin. It is very true this, yt god
some time does let his elect and holy men fall, with drawing his divine light
for a time (yet for their benefits) therefore we are not absolutely and wholly
fre from the power to sin, as we shalde in the life to come, but they are fre
from power to sin with this co^dicio^, during in the^ the lively and actual
light of god. So the^ as the carnal, before their regeneracion are in such sort
the servants of sin, that they ca^ not but sin, not therefore absolutely
and without condition, but so long as they have not the holy light of god, so
there generate are in like manner fre from sin that they ca^ not sin, yea
they can not chose but work well, yet not absolutely, but during in the^ that
lively and actual light of god. And with all this, neither the will of the flesh
is viole^ted to will euel, nor the will of the spirit to will well. And this is,
for that the will ca^ not work, but of will (therefore willinglye) but if it were
possible that of any outward power it were forced the^ by that violence, it
should work not voluntarilye. And on the other side, it should work willingly
for yt it could not work but of the same will yt it is: therefore it should
work unwillingly and willingly the which in a manner is impossible, and
implies co^tradictio^ and gainsaying. So the^ as if one being a sleep were
thrown down from a high place, and in the falling should awake, perceiving
his fall, should wyllyngly content him self, and have pleasure so to fall down
to the botome, when he were at the ground, he were well worthy to have shame
and punishment, not for that he might in his fall with hold himself, for it
was not in his choice nor lyberty, but for that he did so delight and content
him self with that fall with his full will, and would it with the heart in such
sort, that al beit he might have had the power to restrain that fall, he would
not have done it. Even so the like becomes of all the children of Adam, that
being fallen in him, although when they come to y^ years of discression, and
begin to discern the good from the euel, they perceive the sins that they
do, every way they do the^ volu^tarely, delighting therein, so that although
they be not of power, not to do the^, they are nevertheless worthy of punishment,
for yt they insport commit them willingly, that if they had power not to do
them, yet every way they would do them, being their will so malignau^t, as it
is. Their will then is not vyolented or forced to do euel of any outward power,
but of his own proper and entiere or inward malice: And so the other party,
the regenerate by the gladsome, entier, lively, and enflamed light that they
have of the bou^ty of god, they are forced to eleuate the^ selves, with an
amorous violence (Therefore volu^tarily, and with perfect lyberty) to god, to
whom for ever be all laud, honor, and glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The.xxv. Sermon.
Of the effects wrought by the spirit of God when it entered into the soul.
EVen as Christ entering into y^ holy city of Jerusalem, Math. xxi.
the whole citi was moved so moves the city of the soul when Christ eutreth
therein, specially, sense from that as from a fort and strong municioned rock
he has the great devil to chase away. And if in the lunatycke son, Luke.
xi. Luke. ix.
there was a great commocion, when Christ out of his body would have drawn
the malignaunte spirit yt had possessed him: thynck what commocion there is,
when he chaseth him from the soul, in the which he dwells more wyllyngely.
And know, that it makes a co^mocion not only outward in ceremonies, as do
commonly y^ false christians when it is near Easter, but there is a co^mocion
within the very bowels of the soul, and inward part of the heart, there is
nothing that so ca^ perce the soul, as does the spirit of god, when it
enters into it by special slidinge. Not only it spoileth us of the old Adam
with his concupisence, Romans xiii. Ihou. iii.
and does cloth us with Christ with all his virtues, but also makes us to be
borne a new, that as if a poor man were suddenly made an Emperor, he should
be wholly changed, so he that of a vile sinner, is made the son of God
chau^geth thoughts, effects, desires and will, changes frenshipes,
practices, words, worckes and life, and of humayne, beastly, carnal, earth,
and deuelyshe: he becomes heavenly, spiritual, angelical, and divine as did
Paul going to Damasco, when Christ did enter his heart. There was a mutacion,
from the right hand of God. Acts. ix. Psa. lxxvi. i. Regu. xi. Math. xii.
When the spirit of the Lord enters in a person, he is changed into a
another man, for that diyng to the world, he begins to line to him self, And
if when Christ did enter into the temple he purged it from those that bought
and sold, thyncke if when he enters into the spiritual temple, he cleanses it
from every uncleanness of sin, Romans viii.
there rests not in it any thing of dampnacion, he heals it most
perfectly, so that if the unclean woman was healed, at the touch of the hemme
of Christ's garment, you may think what it is when Christ in spirit entryng
into the soul, and the person with lively faith, imbraceth him wholly for his.
Also as when the son beams enter into thy house, thou perceiuest in the
air, eue^ to the smalest mote which you could not se before, so when in the
soul do enter the beams of light of the divine grace, the sins are
perceived in more clear manner. Yea, as the prodigial son never knew nor
perceived truly his own error, Luke. xv.
til with such pity he was embraced of his father, and had proof how great
was ye fatherly goodness and charity which he had offended: so the sinner when
he conuerteth and begins with the spirit to taste the divine goodness, he
begins also to know his malice, pride and ingratitude with the rest his
unlawful sins. Luke. xvi.
He restores with Zacheus that which is not his, if Christ enter into his house
and dyspenseth the superfluous things, yea being rych with the treasures of
Christ, he leaves al with unmeasurable love. He can not participate or take
part of the bountye of god that does not communicate and distribut to others.
The lyuelye flame must needs break forth, Ihon. vii.
or else being smoudered it que^cheth and the fountaynes that contynuallye
receive running water must of force over flow: so they that have in them the
holy ghost, Romans viii.
by the testimony whereof they are sure to be the sons of God, have
contynuallye one such and so entire, sincere and pure gladness (which grows
of the lively knowledge yt they have of the great goodness of god) that they
ca^ not express it, nor they cannot co^prehe^d the^ selfs. i. Peter. i.
Therefore not being able to wthold the^ selves, they spring and leap for joy
with John Baptist, with his mother they make exclamacio^, Luke. i. Exodi. iiii.
Acts. iiii. Math. vii.
and as to Zacharye, so are their to^ges losed: so yt although in praysyng of
god they perceive with Moses that they stammer and are of an unlearned to^g,
nevertheless with the Apostles, Math. vii.
they can not keep scilence of that which they have herd, seen, and felt, with
the spirit, they must needs speak by the superabundau^ce of love, that they
have, they desire with the woman of Samarye, that every one should taste that
which they them selves have had experience of. Ihon. iiii.
And although for preaching the gospel they be persecuted, for all that they
do not desiste and leave of, but triumphing in all, they persevere and go forth
even to the death, Roma. v.
they feel in such sort in the heart the charity of god, Acts. v.
that not only it is sweet to the^ to suffer for his love, but with the
Apostels they rejoice therein. And for that they participate of that great
charity of Christ, by being his members. Therefore with him they pardon al
men, being ready to shed their blood and put their life for their enemies,
Roma. ix. Acts. vii.
and with Paul also to be accursed from Christ. And this because that as to
Stenen, so the heavens are opened to them, in such sort, that in spirit with
clear and supernatural light of faith, they se the glory of god, in having
given his only begotten and dearly beloved son for them upon the cross, they
rest also quiet as the ship when Christ entered into it, they have the peace of
conscience, Mark. vi. Roma. v.
knowing with certain faith, that god by Christ and by his mercy, has
pardoned them. They have also quietness of mind, in such manner, that though
they were in all the perils and necessyties of the world, yet always aprouing
for just, the iudgemen^es of god knowing that he is their only father, that he
has most singular cure of them, and that every thing serves them to
salvation, they stand most surely, quiet, in peace and tra^quility. These such
for that they walk according to the vocacion of god, have honor of every
enterprise that they take in hand, they can not be let or resisted, no more
the^ God. Yea it is force that every one fear them, as Herod feared Saint
John Baptyste, Ge^e, xxi. Ge^. xxvi.
for that he had in him the spirit of the Lord, and as Abimelech did Abraham
and Isaac. They are daily more firm and stablyshed in good purposes to do
ever better, being lyfted up co^tinualy to a greater perfeccion with Paul,
although their mind be conuersaunt in heaven, nevertheless descendyng by
Christian pytye, i. Cor. i.
to feel the miseryes of their brethren, they labor also to draw them to
Christ, and move the^ to have the spirit, and to be in veryty Christianes and
not Ipocrites. As ye very grape does move the birds to taste thereof, and not
the pyt fall. And finally although with the Apostels, they never remain with
Christ and with the Canauite, which would not depart for his ungentle
words, nevertheless they are prompte and ready for his honor and glory, to
leave with the Samaritane his sweet presence.

And what is more to be said when the spirit of God doothe enter into a
soul, Ihon. iiii
he suffers it not to sleep, nor stand in idleness, but makes it work
things merueylous and inexplicable, for the love of God: to whom be ever al
la^d, honor and glory by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth Saint
Martyns, and are to be soulde at the shope by the little Coudite in Chepesyde.


