Short questions and answeares, containing the sum of Christian Religion.

Deuteronomy. 6.6. 6 These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart:

7 And thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou tariest in thy house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Imprinted at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson. 1579.

To Christian parents, and Householders, grace, and mercy in Christ.
THe blessings of God powered upon this Realm, in so great abundance, as the
preaching of the Gospel, peace, prosperity and wealth, under the rule and
government of our merciful Queen, causes me in thankesgeuing to joy. But the
contempt and abuse of these blessings, mingleth my joy with grief and causes
Gods children for sorrow to mourn and lament. And this greeuing of Gods Spirit
in his children, shall fathers of children, and masters of housholdes (though
many other do grievously offend) especially answer for before GOD. The great
blessings sent of God, the laws made by the Prince, the word preached by
the Ministers, take small effect, and bring forth little fruit: because
parents and masters show such examples of loose liberty in them selves, and
throw the raines of licentiousness into the necks of others. They remember
not the honorable calling which they have of the Lord, that he has placed
them as it were in his own room, and given them his own names, that they
might govern, teach, and direct others, to honor and serve him, upon whom
their preeminence does wholly depend. But (alas) they do not their duty in
governing, they apply not themselves in teaching them that are committed to
their charge: and therefore youth not governed, nor taught, nor praying at
home, can not pray, nor learn in the congregation. But as the devises of men
are ready to find excuses, so seek they up fig leaves in this, to cover their
shame. First they will say, We give the^ meat and money for their work, what
should we do more? So do you bestow upon your beasts, in buying and feeding
them: but your servants are more precious in the eye of the Lord, and you are
charged in the fourth commandment, to see that they serve GOD. Some say, they
send them to the Church on the Sabbath, and so answer that charge: But the
Lord commands you your selves also to rehearse his laws to your children
and housholdes. Deu. 6.7. If they plead ignorance, it will be but a weak
answer to the Lord. Some say, they are ashamed to teach and pray with their
housholdes. I say, because it is good, they are ashamed, else every thing they
are ready to perform with brazen brows in open places. Some say, it is
hypocrisy to perform their duty: let such pray for new hearts: for if their
own consciences condemn them of hypocrisy, God is greater than their
consciences. Some say, it will let and hinder their servants from work, as
Pharaoh objected to Moses. Exodus 5.4. But our Savior answeareth such, in his
answer to Martha, Luke. 10.41. (This I speak, not to nourse any in
idleness, for such should not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.) Some say, they shall be
scorned by worldlinges: If you seek to please men, you are not the servants
of Christ, Galat. 1.10. Yet this was Christ's portion, and they are but faint
soldiers that flee for a word, for we must buckle with the devil hand to
hand, who will not leave us, till death, except by Apostasy we yield to him
both bodies and souls. Some say, that they cannot bring the unlearned in
letters to this knowledge: but they do not remember, that God gives knowledge
of his mysteries, eue^ to the simple that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. And in
four months space, I have seen these principles and answeares learned by
Gentlemen, Yeomen, Horsekeepers, Shepheardes, Carters, Milkemaides,
Kitchen-boyes, and al in that household (where these orders were observed)
excepting three or four whose capacity was but mean and simple, and yet the
simplest went not without some profit. Some say, youth are so stubborn, that
they will abide no such orders: I say, better is the room of such then their
company, for if admonitio^s appointed by the Lord, win them not, avoid
them: and so shall thou avoid the infecting of the rest of thy householde by
them, so shall thou make others to fear, so shall thou by making them ashamed
of their sins, drive them to repentance, and principally thou shall avoid
Gods judgment against thee and thy household. If thou know that thou keep
an ignorant and superstitious Papist, a blasphemous swearer, a disobedient
subject, to God, Prince, and Ruler, a licentious and loose liver, which gives
his body to fighting, whooring, and stealing, and his tongue to quarelling,
filthy talking, and lying, and thou seek not to refourme him by the order of
God, do thou not make thy house his stews, and thy self his bawd? Remove
such, lest God remove thee. Is it written in vain, that the plague shall never
go from the house where the swerer is? and that it shall be full of plagues?
Will not the Lord perform that which he has spoken by his prophet Zachary.
5.5. That there shall remain a plague in such houses, to consume them with the
timber and stones thereof? I would they would consider what God said to Elie in
the like case, Thou honor thy children above me, therefore I will cut thee and
them off. The comfort he had of his youths in the end, was this, the Arc
(the witness of the Lords pre^ence) was lost, thirty thousand of the people
slain, his two sons killed, this lived he to hear, and so in sorrow fell
backward, and brake his neck: then his daughter in law fell in travel, and
in travel died: the remnant of his house were glad to crouche and beg for a
small piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, If our Englishmen could behold
these plagues, the removing of Religion to a people that shall bring forth
fruit of it, the taking away of our Queen, the wayling of their wives, the
murdering of their children, and the cutting of their own throtes by
strangers: they would look better about them. O Fathers of children and
housholdes, if you would before hand arreigne your selves before Gods judgment
seat, and there find your selves endited ready to be condemned, for sending
your posterity to beg at strangers doors, for spoiling your children of
their lives, this realm of religion, Queen, and peace, and that you should
see there your children, wives, country, Church of GOD, and Queen, accusing
you for murderers, and traytoures, what will you answer? what can you say?
Turn your music to mourning, your feasting to fasting, your riotting to
repenting: and say with David, and with Daniel. 2. Sam. 12.13. Dan. 9.5. We
have sinned, and committed iniquity, done wickedly, and have rebelled against
thee, O Lord: righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame and
confusion of faces. Say with the men, Acts. 2.37. and with Paul, Act. 9.6.
say, Lord what shall we do? And you shall be taught to join amendment to
repentance, you (I say) which were wont to ask how you should pass the long
Winter euenings without gaming, shall learn to turn your playing at Cards,
and Dice, and Dansing, to singing of Psalms, teaching your household, and
praying with them. It is enough (as Paul says. 1. Ephe. 4.3.) that you have
spent the times past after the fashion of the world: and how ill, mad, or
strange, ^hey account of the matter, that you run not with them to the
former excess of riot, say you and perform with. Joshua. 24.15. We and our
households will serve the Lord. And you O Ladies, Mistresses, and Dames, say
every one of you with Hester, I and my maids will do the like. Hest. 4.16. And
howsoever the world condemn you, the Lord will reuele himself unto you, power
his blessings of knowledge, of peace, of religion, of good rulers, and will
continue the same unto the remnant of our children and posterity, which shall
come after us, which he grant for his Christ's sake. Amen.

These are the orders which I have seen observed in a Christian Gentleman's
house, to the profit of his household, example of others, comfort of Gods
children, and honor of God.
WHile they had a Minister, the whole household met at the Church twice every
Sabbath, and once every week day: but since the restraint of their Minister,
they meet every morning in the week day in the Parlor, where their Master
kneeleth down with them, and prays, using these prayers following,

The confession of sins, with morning prayer for private housholdes, for men
before their labor, for the Church, the Realm, the Queen and Magistrates,
the Lords prayer, and Confession of faith, all which prayers are in the book
of Common prayer.

If he be from home, or sick, then does his Steward, or some such like of the^
say those prayers.

After prayers, the household departs, either whether necessity of their
Offices call them, or whether delight in honest exercises for recreation does
carry them.

Before prayer meditate of these places.

Prou. 1.28. They shall call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me,

26. Because they hated knowledge, and did not chose the fear of the Lord.

Iam. 4.3. You ask, and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you might
consume it on your lusts.

Romans 8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray
as we ought: but the spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs which
cannot be expressed.

27. But he that sercheth the hearts knows the meaning of the spirit, for
he makes request for the Saints, according to the will of God.

At meals, the Master says grace, both before and after.

Prayer before meals.

GOod Lord bless us, bless al thy creaturs, send down thy holy spirit into
our hearts, so to direct us, that we may look for the spiritual food of our
souls: and finally, everlasting peace, through thy son Jesus Christ. Amen.

In meal time some one of the servants reads a Chapter of the Bible
distinctly and reverently, first praying thus.

O Lord whose word is a two edged sword, to cut down all things that shall
rise up against the same, the majesty whereof shakes the heavens, and the
earth also: grant that our proud and vain affections being cut down, we may
with reverence read it, and humbly in obedience submit our selves unto it,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

Or this.

O Lord, which have provided these earthly creatures, for the feeding of our
natural bodies, direct us carefully to seek, with delight to taste of thy most
holy word, that we may by that immortal seed, be begotten to be thy
children, and thereby be nourished and fed, until we become perfect men in
thy son Christ Jesus. So be it.

A sentence to be said after the Chapter.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

After meals, be careful for thy self, as Job was for his children. Cha.
1.5. And in meditation of thy words, thy behavior, and use of Gods creatures,
say:

O Lord, if thou markest what is said, or done amiss, who shall be able to
abide it? Forgive us our sins, and amend our imperfections, and grant us the
grace of thy holy Spirit, as thou have fed us plentifully, that we may
serve thee faithfully. Preserve the Queens Majesty, save thy Church
universal, grant thy Gospel a free passage, confound Antichrist, and all
heresies, finish soon these days of sin, and bring us to everlasting peace,
through thy son Christ Jesus our Lord. So be it.

The Seruingmen likewise have grace before and after meals, and a Chapter read
before they rise.

AFter they have supt, and the Officers have done in their offices, they come
together into the Parlour or Hall, and there spend one hour in singing
Psalms, learning, and answearing some few of these points of Religion, and
praying:

Remember to sing David's Psalms, with David's spirit.

1. Cor. 14.15. Sing with the spirit, and sing with understanding.

A prayer used in the Evening, before Catechizing.

O Lord, prepare our hearts to prayer, for if we pray with our lips only,
our prayers are abominable. Teach us by thy holy spirit to pray rightly,
according to thy will, and give care to our calling,

We heartily thank thee (O merciful father) for all thy blessings bestowed
upon us from the beginning of the world, to this time, for our election, our
creation, our redemption, our sanctification, and continual preservation:
namely, for that thou have kept us this day from all perils and dangers both
of soul and body, and have given unto us health, food, apparel, and many
other blessings, which many of thy dear children do lack, being
notwithstanding as preciously bought with the blood of thy dear son, as we
are, and yet lie in misery and calamity, oppressed with woe and wretchedness,
in imprisoment or banishment: in which case (dear Father) thou might have
left us, save that in mercy thou have dealt otherwise with us, than with them.
We beseech thee to direct us (in considering thy mercies) to acknowledge and
confess our sins, which should provoke thee rather to curse, than to bless
us, to confound us, rather than to preserve us. We have sinned against thee
both in deed, word, and thought: grant us, that we seeing the horror of our
sins, and fierceness of thy wrath, may without hypocrisy and dissimulation,
be ernestly sorry, and heartily repentant for our former wickedness: grant us
that in sorrow for sin we fall not with Caine Saul, and Judas, to despair: but
that in bitterness of our grief with David and Peter, we may have comfort by
faith, in thy son Christ, that our offenses are forgiven. And as thou have
brought us hither together at this time (for which we heartily thanck thee) so
we beseech thee to direct us, that we may have joy and comfort in the presence
and company one of another. and that our words and hearts may so be ordered
at this time, that we may truly utter, and reverently receive the principles
of thy holy religion, to the strengthening of our faith, to the comfort of our
consciences, to the amendment of our sinful and lewd lives, and to the
glory of thy most holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Question.

WHo made you?

Answer. God. Genesis 1.17. Job. 31.15.

Q Who redeemed you?

A. Jesus Christ. John. 1.29.

Q. Who sanctifies and preserves you?

A. The holy Ghost. Genesis 1.2. Romans 8.9.10.

Q. What is the Father?

A. God. Deuteronomy 4.35.

Q. What is the Son?

A. God. Mat. 1.23. John. 1.1.

Q. What is the holy Ghost?

A. God. Math. 28.19.

Q. How many persons are there?

A. Three persons, and one God. 1 John. 5.7.

Q. Wherefore has God made, sanctified, and preserved you?

A. To seek his glory. Romans 11.36.

Q. In seeking to set forth Gods glory, how many things ought you
principally to be careful for?

A. 2. First how to escape Gods judgment. Matthew. 16.26.

Secondly, how to serve him. Luke. 1.74.

Q. How will God be served?

A. After his will reveled in his word. De. 12.32.

Q. How many things does the word teach us principally?

A. 4. Obedience to the commandments.

Faith in Christ. Heb. 6.12.


Sacraments.

Prayer.

Q. Into how many tables are the commandments divided?

A. Into two. Exodus 31.18.34.1.

Q. What does the first table concern?

A. Our duty to God contained in the four first commandments. Matthew. 22.37.

Q. What does the second table concern?

A. Our duty to our neighbors, contained in the six last commandments.
Matthew. 22.39.

Q. In this order of the tables, that the duty to God, is set before our
duty to our neighbor, how many lessons do you learn?

A. 2. First, I learn to serve him before all things, and not to regard
substance, no nor life it self, in respect of his glory. Matthew. 6.33. Exodus
32.32.

Secondly, if I render my duty to God, I must do my duty to my neighbor,
for if I neglect it to my neighbor, who^ I see daily, it is evident, that I
do so to God. 1. John. 3.14. and. 4.20.

Q. How many commandments are there?

A. Ten. God spoke these words, and said, etc.

Q. Is this a commandment?

A. No, it is but a preface or introduction to the commandments.

Q. How many lessons learn you out of it?

A. 3. First, in that is said, God spoke these words, and said, I learn
that God is the author of them.

Secondly, in that he says, I am the Lord, I learn that he is of might,
majesty, and power to punish the offenders.

Thirdly, in that is said, Thy God which brought thee out of Egypt and
bondage, I learn his mercy to them, that love and seek his will.

Q. What is the first commandment and sum of it?

A. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. wherein I learn to worship God,
and him alone.

Q. In how many points stands this worship?

A. 4. First, in loving God above al. Mar. 10.37

Secondly, in fearing God above all. Mal. 1.6.

Thirdly, in praying to God, and to none but him. Matthew. 6.9.

Fourthly, in acknowledging God to be the guider of all things, and therefore
to trust in him. Act. 17.25.26.

^. How many things do you learn in the second commandment? Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, etc?

A. First, that we make no image of God. John. 1.18.

Secondly, that we make no image of any other thing, either to worship the
image, or any other thing by it. Exo. 34.13. Iere. 2.27.10.8

Thirdly, that we worship not God after our fancy, but as he commands.
John. 4.24. Matthew. 15.9.

Q. What is the third commandment and the sum thereof?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord, etc. which su^marily teaches me
to use the name of God with most high reverence, both in tongue and thought.

Q. How many lessons learn you in this commandment?

A. 3. First, it is sin and blasphemy to apply the name of God, to
enchauntment, sorcerie, cursing, or perjury. Deuteronomy. 18 10.

Secondly, to swear by creatures is a setting of his name at naught, Psalm. 16.
Iere. 5.7.

Thirdly, in our ordinary communication we must never swear. Matthew. 5.34.
Iam. 5.12.

Q. Tell me by whom we must swear?

A. By God: for it is a part of his glory, which he will give to none other.
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Psalm. 63.11.

Q. In what causes, and where, is it lawful to swear?

A. Where the glory of God is sought.

Or the salvation of our brethren. Iere. 4.2.

Or before a Magistrate. Heb. 6.16.

Q. Which is the fourth commandment, and the sum thereof:

A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Wherein the Lord
appoints, that his creatures should have a time to rest and serve him in.

Q. What must we do upon the Sabbath day?

A. Holy things.

Q. What are those holy things?

A. Hearing and learning the word of GOD preached, praying, receiving the
Sacraments, and meditating upon his creatures,

Q. What things must we not do?

A. Those things that necessity does not compel, nor holiness command.
Isa. 58.13. Matthew. 12.3.5.11.

Q. Who must keep holy the Sabbath?

A. Thou, thy Son, thy Daughter, thy man, thy maid, thy cattle, and the
stranger.

Q. In the fifth commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. What is
meant by this word Honor?

A. To honor, is to love, fear, obey, and relieve. Matthew. 15.4. 1. Tim. 5.17.

Q. What is meant by father and mother?

A. Our natural parents, the fathers of our country, or of our houses, the
aged, and our fathers in Christ.

Q. How is the blessing of long life given, when the disobedient live long, and
the obedient and good for the most part die speedily?

A. The wicked live to their further vengeance, and the godly enjoy it so
far as it shall be well for them. Deu. 5.16. Isa. 57.1.

Q. How many lessons learn you out of this commandment? Thou shall not kill.

A. 4. First I learn to tie my hands, tongue, and countenance to peace, from
fighting, quarelling, and mocking. Matthew. 5.22.

Secondly, it condemns all anger in heart. Leui. 19.17.

Thirdly, he commands to prese^ue life. Matthew. 25, 35.

Fourthly, he commands to love one another, even our enemies. Matthew. 5.44.

Q. Which is the seventh commandment, and the sum it?

A. Thou shall not commit adultrie: wherein he takes order that his
institution of Matrimony might be maintained.

Q. How many lessons learn you out of it?

A. 4. First, God forbids all adultery and uncleanness in our bodies.
Leuit. 18.24,

Secondly, all vnpure thoughts and lusts of the heart. Matthew. 5.28.

Thirdly, all unchaste behavior, talk, songs, apparel, and pastime, that
might entice us to such uncleanness. Ephe. 4.29. Ephe. 5.3. 1. Thessa. 5.22.

Fourthly, he commands us to keep our bodies chaste, as the temples of the
holy Ghost. 1. Cor. 6.15.

Q. How many things are forbidden in the. 8. commandment? Thou shall not
steal.

A. 3. First, all stealing and robbing. Leui. 19.11.

Secondly, all desire of any man's goods wrongfully. Ephe. 5.5.

Thirdlye, all unlawful getting. 1. Thessa. 46.

Q. How many things are we commanded?

A. 3. First, to be content with that portion which the Lord has lent us. 1.
Tim. 6.6.

Secondly, that we labor for our living, 2. Thessa. 3.10.

Thirdly, to be helpefull to them that need. 1. Tim. 6.18.

Q. How many lessons learn you out of the. 9. commandment? Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor.

A. 4. First, we are forbidden to speak falsely in witness bearing. Prou.
19.5.

Secondly, to lie, flatter, or dissemble. Ephe. 4.25,

Thirdly, that we never backebite any man Psalm. 15.3.

Fourthly, in private offenses to say nothing of our brother, if by private
admonition he may be won. Matthew. 18.15.

Q. Which is the tenth commandment, and what learn you out of it?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, Thou shall not covet, etc.
Whereby I learn that the motions of our heart separate from the love of God,
or our neighbor, though we never yield consent to it, is sin. Romans 7.7

Q. Is any man able to keep the commandments?

A. No. Romans 3.10. Job. 4.18. and. 15.15.

Q. What is the breach of the law?

A. Sin. Romans 7.7.

Q. What is the reward of sin?

A. Eternal death. Romans 6.23. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gala. 3.10.

Q. Shall I escape this death by the works of the law?

A. No. Luke. 17.10. For the law is the minister of death.

Q. Since the law does not justify but condemn what profit has a Christian by
it?

A. First, it is a way for Gods children to walk in. Psalm. 1.2.

Secondly, it teaches man not to trust to his own innocence. Romans 3.4.

Thirdly, it pulls down the pride of man, and humbles him before God. Romans
3.19.

Fourthly, it is a scholemaister to Christ. Gal. 3.24.

Q. As you have showed me the profit of the law, so tell me why we should do
good works, since they do not save?

A. First, to show our love to God our Father, in walking as becomes his
children. John. 14.15.

Secondly, to show our love to our selves, making thereby our election certain
to our selves. 2. Pet. 1.10.

Thirdly, to win our brethren to Christ by our godly life and conversation.
Matthew. 5.16. 1. Pet. 3.1.

Q. How many things are principally to be considered in good works?

A. First, that they be ruled by the line of Gods word. Ephe. 2.10.

Secondly, that they proceed from a heart purged by faith. Rom 14.23.

Q. By what means shall I escape death?

A. By faith in Christ. Romans 3.28.

Q. What is faith?

A. A full persuasion and steadfast assurance. Romans 8.38.39.

Q. Where is it planted?

A. In the heart. Romans 10.9.

Q. Upon what is it grounded?

A. Upon the promises of God. Romans 4.3.12.

Q. By whom is faith wrought in man?

A. By the holy Ghost. Ephe. 3.16.17,

Q. Upon whom must faith be settled and stayed?

A. Upon Christ Jesu. Gal. 3.26.

Q. What profit have we by this?

A. I am assured that all the benefits of Christ's passion, and his
righteousness, is as surely mine, as if I had wrought them my self. 2. Cor.
5.21.

Q. How many articles are there of the faith, and which are they?

A. Twelve. I believe in God the Father. etc.

Q. How many things do the articles set down?

A. First, concerning God the Father, in the first article.

Secondly, concerning God the Son, in the six articles.

Thirdly, concerning God the holy Ghost in the eight article.

Fourthly, concerning Gods people called the Church, in the four last.

Q. How many things do you learn in the first article? I believe in God the
Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

A. First, that God is my Father, and I am his child. John. 1.12. Gal. 3.26.

Secondly, he being almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and I his child,
shall lack nothing. Romans 8.27.

Q. What learn you out of the second and third articles?

2. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,

3. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost,

Borne of the virgin Marie

A. First, in these words, His only Son our Lord, which was conceived by
the holy Ghost, I learn that he is God, able to bear whatsoever is due for
our sins. Luke. 1.35. Ioh. 3.16.

Secondly, in that he was Borne of the virgin Marie, I learn that he was
ready to suffer whatsoever was due. Romans 1.3. Heb. 2.14.

Q. What learn you out of the fourth article? He suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified dead, buried. He descended into Hell.

A. First, the passion that he suffered in body for the redemption of my
body, namely that under Pontius Pilat, he was nailed to a cross, died, and
was buried. Matthew. 27. Gal. 3, 14.

Secondly, the passion that he suffered in soul, for the deliverance of my
soul, namely that he descended or humbled himself unto the torments of hell
for our salvation. Isa. 53.10.11.12. Luke. 22.44. Matthew. 27.46.

Q. What learn you out of the fifth article, The third day be rose again from
the dead.

A. First, that he is risen, and has overcome death and hell for my
justification. 1. Cor. 15.57. Romans 4.25.

Secondly, I learn to rise from sin, and to delight in righteousness. Romans
6.4. Col. 3.1.

Thirdly, by his rising, I am assured that my body shall rise again. 1. Cor.
15.16.

Q. What learnest thou by the sixth article? He ascended into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God the Father.

A. First his ascension is a pledge to me, that I likewise shall ascend after
him. John. 14.3.

Secondly, he being ascended, makes prayer for me. Romans 8.34.

Thirdly, by his sitting at the right hand: (which signifies the power of
God) I believe that all power is given him, Matthew. 18 18. Ephe. 1.20.

Q. What learnest thou out of the seventh article? From thence, etc.

A. First I learn to my comfort, that he that is my Savior, shall be my Judge.
Job. 19.25. Matthew. 19.28.

Secondly, to the terror of the godless, that he shall be their Judge, whom
they have refused and despised. Matthew. 25.41. 2. These. 1.8. Leu. 1.7.

Q. What learn you out of the third part, being the eight article? I believe
in the holy Ghost.

A. First, I believe the holy Ghost to be God, who does assure me, that I am
Gods child, and that all Christ's benefits are mine. Romans 8.16.

Secondly, he makes sin to die in me, and stirs me up to holiness of life.
Ephe. 4.23.

Q. What learn you out of the. 9. article, the first of the fourth part? The
holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

A. First, that God has an universal Church in all places of the world, and
at all times. Matthew. 28.19. Act. 10.34. 1 King. 19.18.

Secondly, that in the same there is a fellowship of Saints, of true faithful
people, al which the Lord knows, of which number I believe my self to be
one. Ephe. 5.26.

Q. What learn you out of the tenth article? The forgiveness of sins.

A. First, I believe that Christ has suffered whatsoever was due for my sins.
1. Ioh. 22

Secondly, my sins being freely forgeuen, shall never be laid to my charge
again. Iere. 31.34. Luke. 5.18.

Q. What learn you out of the. 11. and. 12. articles? The Resurrection of, etc.

A. First, that my body shall rise from the earth 1. Thessa. 4.14.

Secondly, it shall rise a glorious body. 1. Cor. 15.42. Phi. 3.21.

Thirdly, my body being risen a glorious body, shall live with Christ for
ever in his kingdom. 1. Thessa. 4.17.

Q. By what means or ways do we attain this faith?

A. First, by an ordinary and plain way, the hearing of the word preached.
Romans 14.17. Gal. 3.2.

Secondly, by the wonderful and secret infusion of Gods spirit.

Q. By what means is this faith maintained and strengthened in us?

A. 4. First by the word preached.

Secondly, by the Sacraments.

Thirdly, by discipline.

Fourthly, by Prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A sign that may be seen, of grace that can not be seen.

Q. How many sacraments are there?

A. Two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. In Baptism, which is the sign that may be seen?

A. Water. John. 1.26.

Q. Which is the grace that cannot be seen?

A. The washing away of sins by the blood of Christ. 1. John. 17.

Q. In the Lords Supper, which is the sign that may be seen?

A. Bread and wine. Matthew. 26.26.27.

Q. Which is the grace, that cannot be seen?

A. The body and blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16

Q. To the strengthening of our faith, how many things do you principally
learn by Baptism?

A. First, as water washes away the filthiness of the flesh: so the blood of
Christ does wash away sin from my soul. Mark. 1.4.

Secondly, I am taught to rise to newness of life. Romans 6.4.

Q. For the strengthening of your faith, how many things do you principally
learn in the Lords Supper?

A. First, as by the hand and mouth, my body receives bread and wine, so by
faith my soul feeds of the body and blood of Christ. John. 6.35.

Secondly, all the benefits of Christ's passion, and his righteousness, are as
surely sealed by it to be mine, as if my self had wrought them. Romans 4.25.

Q. Is the bread and wine turned into the body and blood of Christ?

A. No. For if you turn or take away the sign that may be seen, it is no
Sacrament.

Q. Going to the Supper of the Lord, what ought a man to do principally?

A. Examine himself. 1. Cor. 11.28.

Q. Why ought a man to examine himself?

A. First, because the unworthy receiver is guilty of the body and blood of
Christ. 1. Cor. 12.25.

Secondly, because he provoke the Lord to wrath, and so eats and drinks
his own damnation. 1. Cor. 11.29.

Q. Whether may fools, madd men, or children be admitted to the Supper of the
Lord?

A. No. For they cannot examine themselves 1. Cor. 11.28.

Q In how many things ought a man principally to examine himself?

A. First, whether he has faith or no.

Secondly, whether he be sorry for his sins, and does detest and abhor them.

Thirdly, whether he has sought reconciliation with them to whom he has given
offense.

Q God knows before we ask what we need, so that he need not to be put
in mind, he is not slothful that he need to be stirred up, he has appointed
in his providence what he will bestow, how, and when, therefore why should we
pray?

A. First, to stir up our selves to seek him.

Secondly, to exercise our selves in meditating upon his promises.

Thirdly, that we may discharge and vnloa^e our cares into the bosom of God.

Fourthly, that we may testify our selves, and others, that we hope and ask
for all good from God alone.

Q. How many things ought we to be careful of in prayer?

A. 5. First that we pray to God through Christ. John. 16.23.

Secondly, that we be inwardly touched with that we pray for. Romans 8.26.

Thirdly, that they be grounded upon Gods promises. 1. John. 5.14.

Fourthly, that we be not weary of prayer, Luke. 18.1.

^^ftly, that we pray according to that rule, which God himself gives.
Matthew. 6.9.

Q. What needs the rich man daily to pray for daily bredad, who has enough
in store for many years?

A. First, he is to pray for the poor as for himself.

Secondly, his substance and dainties shall do him no good without Gods
blessing.

Q. How many things do you pray for in this petition? Forgive us our, etc.

A. First, that God would forgive us our trespasses.

Secondly, that we may be directed by him to forgive one another.

Q. How many lessons learn you out of it?

A. First, that all men are sinners.

2. Man must seek for forgiveness, for he cannot satisfy.

3. None can forgive sins but God.

4. To the envious man there is no forgiveness,

Q. In this sixth petition, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil, What is meant by Led into temptation?

A. To be delivered body and soul to Satan.

Q. What is meant by evil?

A. The devil and sin.

Q. What pray you for in this petition?

A. We pray that we be no further tempted than ^ God gives gs power to bear.

Q. What learn you in this

A. First, that all Ch^istians are in wars, (...) have need to watch.

Secondly, we are all weak, and have need of help.

Thirdly, that Satan can do nothing, unless God give leave.

Fourthly, the Lord is our deliverer from all temptations.

Q. How many things learn you out of the conclusion? Thine is the kingdom,
the power, and glory, for ever and ever.

A. First, these words do kindle our hearts, to desire the glory of God.

Secondly, to ground upon none but God.

Thirdly, that his kingdom is mighty and everlasting.

Q. What means this word Amen?

A. It signifies, So be it, or, So it shall be: first showing a fervent desire
to have that I ask.

Secondly, it is an assurance to my conscience, that I shall have that I ask.

Q. Where find you the like examination of the people after they have been
taught.

A. I find that our Savior Christ, after he had taught, did again examine
them, how they had profited, and in examination did teach them further, in
Matt. 13.51. and the.16.13 14.15.17. and the.17.25. John. 6.5.

FINIS
A Prayer used after Catechizing in the Evening.
WE heartily thank thee, O merciful father, for that thou have bestowed the
inestimable treasure of thy holy word upon us most vile and sinful
wretches. And since it is not in him that pla^teth, nor in him that waters,
but in thy merciful hand to mortify our sinful lusts, and to create new
hearts in us, we beseech thee so to order and direct us, that we prove not like
the green fig tree flourishing without fruit, nor be of the number of those
hypocrites, which with tongue can say Lord Lord, in thy name can prophecy,
cast out diuelles, and do many great works, and yet are condemned for wicked
because their hearts are not right: nor like to them, which are swept and
garnished, but empty, whereunto the unclean spirit returns with seven worse
than himself, and so our end be worse than our beginning. But govern us with
thy spirit, that in heart we may love and seek thee, and in body and soul obey
and serve thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. And
here we offer up unto thee our selves, our souls, our bodies, our lives, and
all that we have, in assurance, that that cannot perish which is committed to
thee. Take us into thy hand, and keep us this night, that our bodies may
sleep, and our souls may watch for the coming of thy son Christ, that so
both our bodies and souls may be the more apt and the better able to serve
thee, in that estate and calling, wherein it shall please thee to place us. As
we pray for our selves, so we beseech thee to look with favor upon thy
whole Church, increase the number of thy children, grant thy Gospel a free
passage, comfort the comfortless, raise up them that are fallen, and
strengthen them that stand, that they fall not: have mercy upon this Realm,
long continue thy blessings of peace and quietness toward us, and remove
far from us al let^es and hindrances of the same. Govern the hearts and
the swords of all Magistrates, that they may not lift up themselves in vain
glory to please them selves, but that they may apply the authority which
thou have given them, to the advancement of thy glory, for the comfort of thy
Children, and the terror of thine enemies. And since the continuance of our
peace (in these our days) next under thee, consists in the preservation of
our Queen, bless us with her, and bless her with all gifts fit for so
high a calling, and whosoever shall atte^p, devise, or conspire ought against
her majesty's person, crown, dignity, and royal estate, we beseech thee in
mercy to

(...)
