Gods rebuke IN Taking from us that worthy and honorable Gentleman SIR Edward
Lewkenor Knight, the first day of May this present year 1618. he being at that
time high Sheriff of SVFFOLKE: Whose Christian life and comfortable end are
here faithfully recorded.

Together with diverse profitable and necessary instructions; Delivered first
in a Discourse at his Funeral, and now enlarged, and published, for the
benefit of others not then present.

By T.O. alias P. Minister of the word of God at Denham in Suffolk.

ECCLES. 12.5. Thus man goes to the house of his age; and the Mourners go
about in the streets.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin for John Parker at the sign of the Ball in
Pauls-Churchyard. 1619.

FLECTAR NON FRANGAR


ME list not scatch the hidden mystery
Of Garters Art, or fetch thine antique stuck
From Trojan, Greek, or Norman gentry,
Such pride I leave to the vainglorious flock,
Amongst whom vain titles bear the greatest stroke;
Yet some morality these seem to yield
Three Cheurones AZure, in an argent field.
Argent the badge of spotless purity,
AZure heavens die: Cheurones a constant mind
Three is the number of Divinity.
These in thine arms most sweetly are combinde
What good in heaven or earth we erst can find;
Flectar non srangar, this his Motto speaks,
Although perchance he bends he never breaks:
Not by the reckelesse stroke of dismal Fate,
Which has but made this moralls verity,
Thy purest white has got the purest state,
Thy constant mind the place of constancy.
The swiftest Creature will may be the crest,
Grayhound.
To show how soon thou gain'st this blessed rest.
TO THE FAIR, and hopeful Branch, of the renowned FAMILY of the LEWKENORS in
Suffolk, Edward Lewkenor Esquire.
SIR
IT has been my continual desire, ever sithence it was the Almighties
pleasure, to take from us, unto himself, your worthy and honorable Father,
that some skillful hand, would have enterprized this work, thus rudely by me
both begun and finished. For the more beautiful the face is, the more
exquisite is the Limmer that it challenges. ( Let the Cobbler meddle with his
slipper, and let Apelles only draw the picture of that great Alexander.) If
such a one would have undertaken it, how happy should I have thought my self
if as his servant, I might but have ground his colors. But seeing none would;
I as you see have done it; Plainly I must needs confess, howbeit as near
the life as possibly I could. And to you, his only son, do I deuote this
Image, of so rare and only a father. Your tender years perhaps, will for a
time dim your eye, that you shall not be able so clearly to discern, that
deal of worth that is here pourtraied, and shadowed out. But Pictures, are
always best discerned some distance off; and therefore my comfort is, that
although, not now, yet in time you will: The which time being once come, let me
desire you, that whatsoever excellency you find here expressed, you would be
pleased, to embrace, and follow; shaping your self and all your actions,
according to so noble, and excellent a Pattern. So, whatsoever honors, your
Father in his life possessed, you his son after him shall be sure to inherit,
and the same blessings that attended him, shall questionless, be doubled upon
you. The which I shall not whilst I live cease begging at the hands of our
heavenly FATHER. Always resting

Your poor friend, Timoth: Oldmayne, alias Prick.

CLARISSIMIS ILLIS viris, D. Laurentio Chaddertono S. Theol. Dori, and Mro
Collegij Eman. Cantabr. D. Samueli Wardo, S. item Theol. Dori, and Collegij
Sidneij in eadem ACADEMIA Praefecto. NECNON Guilielmo Bedello, de Horninger,
Iohanni Heyleio de Buria Sti Edmundi, Thome Turners de Ousden, Iohanni Plaifero
de Debden, and EZechich Edgaro de Halstead: Pastoribus vigilantissimis,
Theologis dignissimis, Amicis suis multis nominibus colendissimis, TIMOTHEVS
OLDMAINVS alias PRICKVS (...).
MIrabimini sat scio (viri dignissimi, praestantissimique Theologi) quae me
noua ambitio impulerit, vt quem hactenus (...), illud (...), a publico omni
hominum conspectu secluserit, nec passa est blandiens illa, and amica animi a
forensi strepitu remoti quies (quam ab ineunte aetate studiose sum sectatus)
for as prorepere, nunc derepente, nescio quibus aestris agitatum videtis, in
ambitioso hoc, scripturientium theatro versantem, vbi censorum, cum spectatorum
multitudine, contendere videatur. Nullum me (credit) anteactae huius
solitudinis, coepit fastidium, nulla conditionis nouae erexit affectatio,
nullus gloriolae tumor inflauit, vt inter neotericos scriptores (in leui hoc
praesertim and vmbratili scribendi genere) nominis splendorem ambirem. Nusquam
mihi magis volupe erat, paterna spectare rura, and proprij camini fumum. Satis
mihi est, abunde satis, minutuli huius, quod Dei Opt. Max. munere concessum
est, imperturbata possessio. Quaerant sibi (si Dijs placet) naminis and famae
perpetuitatem, quorum animi superbioribus gloriae statibus intumuerunt. Agant,
and furtiuis aliorum pennis, vbiuis loci volutent. Volutent (inquam) illi; ego
satis mecum praeclare actum putauero, si possim humi repens, eorum and
obseruare insipientiam, and irridere vanitatem. Nunc vero (viri clarissimi) eo
loci res nostrae positae sunt, vt (vel vobis iudicibus) nequeam me diutius
continere; ex illo (quem dixi antea) quietis nido, excussus, cuiusdam Theologi
nimis sedula diligentia. In illas etenim angustias me adegit huiusce hominis
intemperies, vt vel scribendo leuitatis, vel ingratitudinis non scribendo,
notam mihi inuri patiar. Nimirum illud est quod inquit Comicus, Lupum auribus
teneo, cuius sieve detinuero, sieve dimissero, morsum non sum effugiturus. Haec
dum mecum penitius, and diuturna adhibita deliberatione perpendo, quod potui
vnicum, elegi (e duobus malis iudicio meo minimum) acerrimam potius, cuiusuis
homuncionis censuram subire, quam vel minutilam, erga dignissimum hunc virum,
liberalissimumque Patronum, ingratitudinis maculam, feram mihi aspergi. Deum
interea testor, nisi crebris amicorum eruditissimorum, quorundam Theologorum
efflagitationibus, propriaeque existimationis (quam date veniam, si integram
and illibatam conseruare cupiam) defensione pertractus fuissem, nusquam me, ne
somniando quidem cogitasse, tractatulum hunc nostrum (quem etiamdum typis
indignissimum iudico) typis euulgare. Ita mihi semper in delitijs fuit quod de
Galba Tacitus, Famae nec incuriosus, nec venditor. Esto tamen, (quandoquidem
non possunt mea vota) necessitas obtineat and vincat. Est siquidem vel in
minutilis hisce (neque enim sine hoc cadit passerculus) ductus diuinae
prouidentiae; quem ego libenter sequor, si haec tantum duo, quae ardentissimis
votis efflagito, exorauero. Primo igitur a Deo Opt. Max. supplex peto, vt
conatibus hisce nostris, vtut tenuissimis, fauste and foeliciter aspiret, vt
cedant in nominis sui gloriam, and Ecclesiae vtilitatem. Nimirum vt dignissimi
huiusce, generosissimique Equitis vitam (rudiori fortasse Minerua elucubratam,
and festinante descriptam calamo) in exemplum sibi proponant, cuiusuis
conditionis homines, Virtutis, Pietatis, Religionis. Deinde autem, vt
subitaneus huius stellae occasus, languidam illam, and torpentem, qua sopiri
quamplurimos videmus, securitatem discutiat. Exempla morientium (vti ferunt)
sunt documenta viuentium; Futurique mali praesagium semper fuit, bonorum
interitus. Perspicimus, etiamdum, miseri perspicimus, seuientem vltricem
Omnipotentis dextram. Vixdum illo defuncto, Dom. Calthropum (...), and Edn.
undu^ Baconem de Shrub Armigetu^.
geminos insuper, Reipub, fulera, Ecclesiae columnas, summae inte^ritatis, and
religionis firmamenta, quantiuis pretij viros, efferri videmus. Enimuero, dum
igneam illam nuperrime impressionem obseruaui, comantes spargentem iubas, and
coeli palatia occupantem; nulla mihi in mentem venerunt delirantium
Astrologorum placita; quin suspicatus sum (si liceat (...)) ex beatissimis
hisce Animabus, aliquam potius, ardentissimo flagrantem zelo, nostraeque
salutis desiderio incensam, poenitentiae praeconem, nonaeque vitae monitorem de
coele splendescere.

Alterum est, quod a vobis efflagito (viri praestantissimi) vt dignemini
nostrum hoc (...) in clientelam vestram placide suscipere. Qui eo tantum
nomine, sub auspicijs vestris prodire gestit, quod ex conferto illo
beneuolorum, choro, nullos inuenerit noster hic (...) famae suae studiosiores:
Nullum vos (expertus loquor) doctrinae vestrae, and pietatis amantiorem. Hac
ego primum spe fretus, sub amoris vestri vmbraculo delitescere cupiebam. Nec
poteram apud me cogitare, non futurum vobis gratissimum, quod ad memoriae cius
perpetuitatem cons^ruandam, vel tantillum faceret. Valete (viri granissimi) and
mendas omnes Typographicas, calamo emendate; Authoris autem, sub amoris
tegumento velate; Clamidemque vestram, quod olim Eliz aeo Eliae mihi
circumijcite. Deus conatibus vestris sanctissimis iuxta, and pijssimis foelicem
successum praebeat.

GODS Rebuke.
Psalm. 39. verse. 11. When thou with rebuke do chastise man for iniquity,
thou as a moth make his beauty to consume: surely every man is vanity.


AS often as I have considered with my self (since this heavy accident befell
us) of the worth and dignity of him whose body we have now committed to the
earth; so often has the consideration thereof made me (though in vain) desire
either a longer time, or more days for the better fitting of our selves for
the solemnizing of those his Funerals: or seeing that necessity drives us
within the compass of one: that then we could with Joshua lengthen this our day
making of one, two; yea if it might be, of every hour of the same, a day, that
so nothing might have been wanting in the least respect; for the further
adorning and setting forth of these his Funeral solemnities. For shall we
indeed suffer so fair a star as this, thus fatally to pass away without any
more remembrance? But it is the hand of God that has done it, Ps. 39.9.
let us be silent, it cannot be avoided, let it therefore with Apo. 13.10. Heb.
10.13.
patience be endured. Neither do we despair at all of the favorable censure
of wise and virtuous men, for our more then ordinary have (as may be thought)
in this his burial. Especially when as they shall understand that it was the
mind of the deceased in his lifetime, that things should be thus ordered. Often
times in his health desiring, of his dear Wife and now desolate Lady: often
times of his dearest friends, that if God saw so good that he should end his
days before them, that they would be pleased as to see his body in a decent
and comely manner committed to the earth; so in doing of the same that all
needless and superfluous expenses should be aauoided: He deeming the money
laid out upon the same of all other worst bestowed, considering that usually
such assemblies were rather meetings of not and excess, then of any true
humiliation. Well then let others have their pompous Obsequies, neither he nor
we do envy them; And let them if they please hire Trumpets to sound out and
proclaim to the world those their virtues, which till then the world never
took notice of. Only let the world but speak what it knows here, and it
shall be sufficient for the honor of this worthy Gentleman, though none speak
for him, nor he now a word for himself. Bury not therefore in oblivion, oh
forgetful and ungrateful world,

1. His Piety and Devotion to Godward.

2. His Integrity and uprightness toward man.

Two things indeed principally deserving our consideration here on earth,
especially standing as they do upon record in heaven, being written (I make no
question) long ago in a book of remembrance before the Lord: there they were
recorded, and there they are now rewarded. And these likewise are the two
things that I purpose to insist principally upon in passing through the life of
this worthy person: the which being done, and something spoken likewise of his
death: then will I by Gods favorable assistance proceed on to lay forth such
principal instructions, as that portion of Scripture, which according to the
few hours allotted me, and I had leisure to think of, will afford unto us.

But before I come to any of these I must here crave pardon: First if I shall
more hastily and with a drier foot pass through things, then is of the
greatest part of this Assembly either expected or desired: ingenuously
confessing that at this time I am not at all mine own, neither will Passion
and Sorrow once free my heart, or suffer me by any means possible to enlarge
my self: my greatest comfort being this, that the virtues of this so rare a
Jewel are so well known, that the Jewel it self needs nor greatly my
commendation: neither does this Blessed wine desire an Iu^girland. Let me hold
my peace and the dead speaks sufficiently, in the place of silence, he is not
silent, he cease only from his labors, and his works they follow him.

There is a second thing likewise (which if it be a fault) then as for the
former crave favor, so for this only a favorable construction: And that is
for seeming as perhaps I shall this whole discourse of mine thorough, with too
dim, and careless an eye, to neglect and ouer-looke such external things
which notwithstanding, in the veiw doubtless of many here (sure I am of the
most part in the world) are held and reputed, of highest esteem and reckoning.
And these are Antiquity of Family: Generositie of blood: Fair Lands: Large
possessions: together with Natures richest benevolence, those Gratuita dona (as
the Scholemen term them) all which I confess in no wise ought to be
neglected, much less contemned of any. For in doing of the one, man shall not
discern two things in God which are indeed most remarkable.

First his absolute power in disposing of these glittering things here in the
world according to that (...) or good pleasure of his. Secondly his infinite
wisdom in this his disposition whereby things thus forted serve most
excellently not only for order, but likewise for ornament.

And then secondly, in doing of the other he shall not give Honor her due
according to that Romans 13.7. Cui honorem, honorem, and honor to whom honor is
due. Neither would I have any ignorant (but where is he that heard of this
Worthies name that can be ignorant) how the worlds great Benefactour was no
Niggard at all in bestowing even of the fairest of these his favors upon him.

For first can that Family, trow you, be of yesterdaies beginning that has
brought forth so many? Or an ignoble stem that yields especially in this
fading and decaying time of ours (inleed our winter) so honorable a branch?
Descended of that ancient Family, as Cambden terms it, of the Lewkeners in
Sussex. His mother a Coheire of the Heighams; a branch of a noble Family in
France vid. Mount his Esaies. lib. 2. c. 16.


Or secondly, can it be an empty or beggarly Fountain which being seated
under so rich and glorious an The Church so compared, Isa. 4. and Psalm. 68.
Judge. 8.2.
Hill was fed continually with three such pleasant Rills, namely, Prudence,
Fortitude, and Temperance: whose waters never failed until at the last this
cruel and unmerciful East-winde dried up, as you see, and quite cut of the
pleasant spring and sourse thereof. But in this so great variety let it be
sufficient for me to gleane (the gleaning of this Ephraim, being a great deal
better I make no question then the whole vintage of many an Abieser) though not
every thing that may happily make either for his greatness or goodness, yet
at the least some one or two, the most principal which may serve a little to
eleuate these drooping eyes of ours, too much I fear me fixed upon his
outward loss, to the due consideration of his present gain, and instant
happiness.

And these shall be no other but those two things before mentioned, and whereof
I desired the world to take special notice.

1. His Piety to Godward. 2. His Integrity toward man.
The which as they are in themselves things most excellent, so do they by
reason of this their excellency, more grace and beautify him in whose breast
they are then all the gifts either of nature of fortune. For the best of those
do but reddere virum: but the least of these do reddere Diuum: By the others
help a man may perchance go beyond brute creatures, but by the help of these
beyond Being changed into the Image of Christ 2 Cor. 3.18.
himself. But to speak briefly of these things (as I may, not as I would) and
the dignity of the person deserves. First for his Piety to Godward: who more
pious and religious then he? Witness those Sacrifices of his, the fruit (as
may be judged, if a man may judge (as indeed he ought) the tree by the fruit)
of a true and lively faith. Matt. 7 17. Luke 6.44.
That we may understand what those Sacrifices were the better, we must here
consider, 1. Their Nature. 2. Their Number.


Their nature: they were Evangelical, such as the Apostle Peter mentions in
his first Epistle and second chapter, verse 5. terming them (...), spiritual
sacrifices, in way of opposition to those carnal and ceremonial rites,
abolished and removed altogether by the brightness of the Messiah coming.
Vsitatis est Paulo, quicquid est in fidelitus; and a fidelibus proficiscitur,
and eorum fide^ testatur Sacrificioru^ nomine intelligere, Beza.


Secondly, for their number, they were these three principally.

1. The Sacrifice of Prayer, Praise and Thanksgiving.

2. The Sacrifice of reading privately, and of hearing the word of God both
read and preached publicly.

3. The Sacrifice of Alms and releeuing the poor.

For the doing of all which as he had his specia I warrant, so in doing of the
same none that I know more frequent.

And first for the Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving, he had his several
Altars where he offered the same continually.

First his private one where he offered a special sacrifice twice at the
least, or thrice every day.

Secondly, he had his Altar more public, where his morning and evening
sacrifice were constantly performed.

For well did he consider, that as prayer is a sacrifice to God, so is it a
succor unto man. It is that wherein God is much delighted, and Satan most
terrified, wherewith blessings are procured, and plagues prevented. In
prosperity Jacobs Ladder whereby the soul of a Christian has a sweet
society with God: and in adversity Noah's messenger, never ceasing coming and
going until at the last it returns with an Olive lease in the mouth, the
sign of peace and reconciliation. This made this honorable Gentleman so
careful as he was for the performing of this duty, and that not only by
himself alone, but in company likewise with his family: no day ever passing
him (to my knowledge) since he came to be a settled housekeeper, wherein his
manner was not (whatsoever resort was with him, or how great the business was
that befell him) to have his family gathered together, and there himself (if
no Minister were present, after a chapter once read out of the old and new
Testament, and a Psalm sung) upon his knees not only to bless that God that
had given life and being both to him and his, but also humbly to crave of him
whatsoever things he thought most necessary, in regard of soul and body.

As for the second, 2. Sacrifice.
namely his reading of the word of God privately, and hearing of the same both
read, as also opened and expounded publicly, I shall not need to prove his
more then ordinary diligence herein by arguments, where are so many
eyewitnesses present: and if they were not, yet this our demonstration were
argument sufficient; namely, the great measure of knowledge he attained unto
in holy letters. Yea such a piercing insight into points of divinity the most
abstruse and difficult, that as his judgment of the greatest Clerks and most
judicious Divines (both near hand and further off) for the soundness of the
same was much approved; so was it for the more then ordinary streine, and
passing depth thereof, exceedingly admired.

But here whilst I am thus speaking, I find my thoughts at some variance and
strife within themselves, whether I should speak rather of the matter of this
sacrifice, or of his manner of offering the same. To end which strife in a
word, let the issue (if it please you) be this: That whereas there is no one
thing the whole Scripture through more commended unto us either by variety of
arguments, or more noble consequence then the sacrifice it self; neither any
thing in my conceit, whereof the most here (in this so judicious and Christian
an assembly) have a more honorable esteem then of it: for me to enter any
commendations of the same, were a mere lending of light to the Sun, a labor
altogether needless: and in the mean time a neglecting of that light which
this glorious Star does offer unto us, as a most necessary direction for the
performance of this so Christian a duty.

Now that we may look the better into the same, how he did it, we will divide
the Sacrifice into two parts, and will consider of either of them briefly, and
yet severally by it self.

And for the first of these, it is his reading of the word of God privately and
alone. A duty indeed commendable in all, but admirable in him, considering
that it is not the fashion for men now adays, especially of his place and
greatness, to take this course. And yet a less amongst many hundreds of his
rank and order (nay let me offend none in giving him his due) scarce in an
age is there not (especially of his years and time) such another to be found;
so general a scholar, his understanding so refined, his brain so pure, and
in all kind of learning so absolute. All which he promised from his cradle,
in the grass showing what the crop would be. And whereof (in my judgment)
that fair Mother the University of Cambridge had a kind of (...), He was
chosen upon a day of solemnity to make an Oration in the College, being
little above a years standing; which he did with great applause.

Midsommer Batcheler scarce three years standing.

The death of his father and mother, dying within little less then twelve
hours one of another.


guessing happily by those signs he then gave, whither his virtuous mind
would at the length raise him: which made her so willingly to throw some of her
favors upon him; and more she would have done, even of her richest, had not a
sorrowful accident so hastily drawn him away from her kind embracings.

Now the Apostles rule is generally true, Scientiam inflare, that knowledge
puffs up, and so in truth does any other outward preferment whatsoever,
either of nature or fortune, especially those in whose heart grace is not the
principal ingredient: and because there are so few in whom it is, therefore it
is usual as I said before, for the most in the world, if advanced, though in a
small degree above others, as to have an ouerweening of their own worth, so to
have a mean conceit of God, but especially of his eternal word, either
contemning it altogether as unworthy of their hands, much less their hearts,
or vilifying the same in comparison of other writings: 2. Kin. 5.12.
esteeming with Naaman, Abana and Pharphar (though Rivers of Damascus) more
excellent then all the waters of Israel, the Israel of God. But it was not so
with him: for as he honored God from and with his heart, so had he most
honorably thought of his most blessed word. Alexander himself never thought
more highly of Homers works, then he did of this sacred Book. Neither would
Cyprian be more traded in the writings of Tertullian, Tertull. opera in tanta
admiratione habuit Cyprian^^, vt nullum sine eorum lectione diem prateriret,
etc.
then he was in the holy Scriptures: hitherto referring all his former and
latter readings, his knowledge in tongues and Arts; causing them all, not only
as handmaids to grace and attend upon this excellent Lady, but also as
necessary helps to make her mind and counsel best known unto himself.

As for the second part of this sacrifice His hearing the word of God read and
expounded publicly: therein likewise we will observe briefly these three
things.

1. His Diligence. 2. His Reverence. 3. His Remembrance.
For the first, namely, his Diligence therein, we are to know, that which few
here can be possibly ignorant of, namely, his constant and continued course of
hearing the word of God publicly taught, both upon the Lords days, as also at
all other times as occasion offered it self fit, both at home and abroad: and
no marvel, for he was the servant of Wisdom, which made him with such delight
to wait at his Mistress gates, and to give such attendance at the posts of her
doors. Prou. 18.
No weather ever so tedious, or business troublesome, that could once stop or
hinder him, but if she called, he was ready at her service. I never in all my
time can remember, if he were at home, that he missed upon the Lords day
coming to the Church both forenoone and afternoon, but only the time of this
his sickness, then indeed he was two Sundays away: it being as it seems
now, the will of God, that neither then, nor never hereafter he should keep
any more Sabboths with us here below on earth, and therefore he hastened him
away to keep with himself, and the souls of the righteous, an eternal
Sabbath in the new Jerusalem that is above.

As for the second, His reverend hearing be remembered: The which behavior of
his made him to be both the more observed, as also honored, even in the hearts
of them that otherwise knew him but only by name. I remember being upon a time
at Bury S. Edmond, and meeting with one by chance known to me, yet not knowing
him: he demanded of me, whether Sir Edward Lewkenor were that day at Church or
no? I told him that he was: so I thought (quoth he) for in all my life I never
saw a man of his years and place, that gave the like attention to the word
that he did.

Remembrance of things heard: A duty indeed necessarily depending upon the
other two, and making through the neglect of the same, the other altogether
fruitless. For you must take the heart of man as it is not only plenum
rimarum, full of chinkes and crannies, but withal you must consider Satan
like a Vultur continually sitting by, and with his noisome bill, to the
uttermost of his power opening of those passages, whereby it oftentimes comes
to pass (the danger being not prevented) that those things which are more
subtle and pure, such as is the word of God, together with the sweet motions
of the spirit, do suddenly leake out and vanish away, leaving behind them
concupiscence her self, together with diverse other carnal and noisome lusts,
like a thick and hellish air to supply their room, and fill up the vacuum.
Now the only thing to soader and bind up these crackes and flawes of the
soul, is Meditation, and calling the word of God to our remembrance when we
are departed from it: Duties not only commanded unto us in the holy Scripture,
but commended unto us by the examples of the most excellent that ever lived.
And to take these two asunder. First meditation commanded Deuteronomy. 11.18.
Therefore shall you lay up these words in your heart, and in your soul, and
bind them as a sign upon your hands, and frontlets between your eyes. And
Ios. 1.8. Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night.

Secondly commended by the example of David: Ps. 119.40.
Mine hands will I lift up to thy Commandments which I have loved, and will
meditate in thy Statutes. And David commends that righteous man amongst other
rare qualities of his, that he is one that does meditate in the Law of God
night and day. So Isaak Genesis 24. gave himself to meditation: Exijt in campum,
Etsi quidam putant, actu^ potius fuisse corporis quam animi, seque exercuiffe
currendo, saltando, vel domesticis suis confabulando. Deuteronomy. 6.
says Ambrose, vt abalienaret se a curis domesticis: The more seriously to
consider not only of the works of God, but also of his gracious promises.

The second, namely calling the word of God to remembrance, is a thing
commanded Deuteronomy. 6. beginning at the first verse, and so on almost the whole
chapter through: where the spirit of God exhorts to talk of the word of God
in bed and at board: hic and vbique, in all places and at all times: suitable
to the counsel of the Apostle Coloss. 3.16. Let the word (says he) dwell
plentifully in you. Commended likewise first by the example of the Disciples of
our Savior Christ, whose manner was after the Sermons of their Master, to
confer of things heard, as it is plain in the 13. of Matthew and elsewhere.
Secondly by the practice of our Savior himself, so willingly assoyling his
Disciples doubts, and satisfying them in things that were beyond their reach
And lastly by the behavior of them of Berrea, who frequenting the Sermons of
the Apostle Paul (as it is plain Act. 17.) did at their return home, call
over what they had heard, with all diligence searching their books, to see
whether his preachings and their Bibles did agree, especially whether those
authorities that he alleged out of Moses and the Prophets, touching
(doubtless) the Messiah, were so or no. According to whose blessed example was
this Worthies practice, not only at other times, but especially upon the Lords
day, wherein his manner was, besides his private meditation and conference of
the word of God with some special friends of his, to have his family
assembled together immediately after dinner, and then after a short prayer by
him conceived, to call over the princpall points of the forenoone Sermon: as
also before Supper to do the like in egard of the Sermon in the afternoon:
both which exercises right commendable he was wont to conclude with prayer
likewise, and singing of a Psalm.

Thus whilst others take their ease, others (as the fashion of the times now
is) deuote themselves to vain and idle recreations and pastimes, was this Noe
(as you see) busy at his work in framing of an Arc, for the saving of
himself and his household.

Neither let me here forget one thing before I finish this Sacrifice, it came
late to my knowledge, this morning, and therefore you shall have it in the last
place, (something out of order you will say) but it is no matter, fall where it
will, I owe it to the honor of this Gentleman. And it is, his extraordinary
care that he had this last Easter, for the fitting and preparing of his
servants and family, for the right and orderly receiving of the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ: all which he did not
only by prayer, and reading of the word of God (his usual course at other such
times) but with the same he adjoined then a grave speech, a zealous exhortation
of an hour long, wherein to the admiration of all that heard him, he labored
as to inform their judgments, of the nature and end of the Sacrament, so to
quicken and stir up their affections, to come with a more hungry desire and
appetite to these holy mysteries.

The which speech of his as it was Sacra concio, so was it indeed Cygnea
cantio, his sweet and farewell Sermon, where whilst he spoke, his soul was
(no question) ravished with that whereof he has now the full fruition. That
fair River that he exhorted other to seek for, he does now sit by, shading
himself under the tree of life, and satisfying himself with the pleasures of
both.

And this shall suffice to have spoken of the two first Sacrifices: now are we
come to the third and last Sacrifice of his, namely, his Alms and releeuing of
the poor.

In treating whereof I purpose wholly to abridge my thoughts: and whereas much
might be spoken, to speak little, at the leastwise not so largely as I spoke
of the former; a word or two shall serve only as a taste: Arron by a cup of
wine gave the Gauls a taste of all Italy. Plutarch. in vita Camilli. And the
xij. messengers that Joshua sent, by a bunch of grapes the fruitfulness of the
Land of Canaan.
for by a drop a man may easily gather the riches of the whole vintage. Diverse
things I know are required at the hands of every Christian for the gracing of
his sacrifice, and making of it acceptable before God. But for breuities sake
we will consider only of these two.

1. That the Sacrifice be commanded. 2. That it be cheerfully performed.
The first of these is most necessary, that it be of Gods appointing, else it
falls within the compass of that Romans 14.23. Quicquid ex fide non est,
peccatum est: Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: a mere Ethelothreschie or
humane invention, a toy of a man's idle brain, and therefore by no means to be
endured in the service of God. And as necessary likewise is the second: the
same Apostle showing a like reason 2. Cor. 9.7. Nam hilarem datorem diligit
Deus: For God loves a cheerful Giver. Yea Cursed (says the Prophet Ier.
48.10.) is that man that does the work of God negligently. Both which my
desire is may be well observed, seeing that by the one a man shall easily
discern, the worth of the sacrifice, and by the other, his worthiness in
offering the same.

And first for the sacrifice it self we must take it, as it is indeed, a
thing highly commended unto us in the holy Scripture both for the nature of the
same as also for the great account, whereof it is with Almighty God. And
therefore the Apostle Paul tells the Philippians that it is a sweet smell: A
sacrifice acceptable, and well pleasing to the Lord. And the Author to the
Hebrews exhorts the Hebrews, Heb. 13.16 Deuteronomy. 15.11. Isa 58.10. Romans 12.13.
Iam. 1.17.
and in their persons all other Christians, in no case to be negligent herein:
assuring them that with the same and such like sacrifices God is well pleased.
Neither is the Spirit of God more large in commending any one sacrifice then
he is of this.

And no marvel, for there is none besides that I remember, whereby a man may
either in the time of prosperity, get unto himself a more assured testimony,
of the sincerity and uprightness of his heart, or gain a more sacred anchor,
which being fastened upon the promises of God in time of adversity, he may, by
means thereof certainly expect an issue both happy and comfortable.

The consideration of all which doubtless, exceedingly encouraged and heartned
on this honorable Gentleman, as to do the first the duty it self; so in no
case to be negligent in the second, but to do it with all alacrity and
cheerfulness. Neither can the latter of these which is the only beauty of
the former, in my Judgment better be discerned then by these two things
especially: 1. Frequencie. 2. Constancy.


For doubtless the vncheerefull Giver cannot hide himself; but either he
gives nimis parce, aut non diu: Too sparingly: or not long: his candle, being
suddenly drowned in it self.

Too sparingly: first for matter, it is like Saul's offerings: First, the worst.
1 Samuel 15.9.
Secondly, but spoils.


Secondly for manner it is Nabals feast now and then, once a year it may be,
and it may be seldomer.

Or secondly not long, Mal. 1.13.
but at length they snuff at it, and it is a wearisomnesse to them: It is like
Saul's armor upon the back of David which in the very proof proves too
heavy. But it was not so with him, his house being indeed the seat of
hospitality, and his gate the seat of mercy. A Stranger (if of any desert in
the world) was always sure here to find loving entertainment both of the
Master himself; as also of the whole Family. Peter had a great deal worse
usage, for coming only to the high Priests fire, then a meaner person, yea
perhaps one, that served a great deal worse Master, for coming to his Table.
A small acquaintance, would in his house procure a kind welcome, and seldom
or never, did any depart from the same, without exceeding great contentment.

Secondly as hospitality dwelt in his house; so did mercy at his gate, in a
fair house built of purpose for her, whose doors like the temple of Peace,
stood always open, Seldom under 30. And some days 40. Their provision on the
flesh days broth and beife, or mutton; besides bread and bear. And on the
Fridaies Broth and Fish with bread and bear.
and great resort there was of persons daily haunting her courts: but
especially three days in the week, when she made more large provision then
ordinary.

Certainly a blessed sight was it then (which no eye but one frozen in the
place, could see, without blessing) to behold Christ thus feasted in his
members, and such a number of distressed souls, aged persons, and young
children, the widow and the fatherless, so plentifully provided for. Neither
did his noble and liberal hand hold it self satisfied only with satisfying
their hungry stomaches except it did dilate it self likewise further, in
providing covering for their nakedness, and comfort against the injury of the
weather. And therefore his manner was these diverse years together, according
to the time of his age, and years of life, to distribute garments here and
there to several Towns, round about him (this year amongst other giving 32.)
for the appairelling and clothing of so many poor and miserable creatures. I
love not to tell wonders, this is of truth, I lie not: Nay alas I speak not
half of that which my soul is privy to: of his Christian behavior in this
kind: For you hear me not speak all this while (as I might) of his bountiful
mind to many other pious and religious uses, maintenance of learning,
releiuing of prisoners, to whom I have known that he has sent a brase of
angels at a time; Neither of his tender care that he had of his poor
neighbors oppressed with sickness sending them continually things necessary
for their comfort, and oft-times horse and man for a Phisician, to come to them
to consider of their estate, and to apply remedies accordingly for their
recovery defraying all the charge of his own purse. These things I say with
many other of like nature deserving indeed Caedar Tables, for breuities sake I
do willingly omit, hastily turning my self, to the consideration of the
reason and cause of all this, namely, what the reason should be, that in these
dead and lumpish times, wherein love is waxen cold and liberality out of
fashion there should notwithstanding one be found, so liberal, so merciful?
now the reason I take to be partly, from nature, but principally from grace.

First for Nature, it were indeed a wonder that one having his breeding,
descended of Parents, to their lives end, of such renown, and honor in the
world, as for other their rare qualities, so for their bounteous and liberal
minds; great hospitality, and tender affection to afflicted souls: for him I
say thus bred to be base or miserable, were not only a wonder, but I say more,
a thing altogether impossible; Especially if we join with this, a second,
namely, Grace: (which if it were hereditary as the former oft-times is, I might
well say likewise, he received from his worthy Parents) how ever not traduced,
yet infused into that breast of his, naturally inclined unto liberallitie, by
means whereof his Faith did (...) superabound to every good work. For how
could it otherwise be, 2. These. 1.2.
so fair an Olive, springing from so rich and sappie a root, and seated in so
lusty a soil, (fatted with the blood of Christ, bedewed daily with the sweet
influences of his eternal love, and the son of righteousness, casting so
continual an aspect upon it) but it should be always flourishing exceeding
fruitful?

Neither must I here forget, in speaking how liberal this worthy Gentleman was
to others: the exceeding liberality likewise and goodness of the Lord toward
himself, dealing with him much what as he dealt with Abraham long ago, in
regard of that dear yet willing sacrifice of his in deuoting to him his son:
Now see the goodness of God, he took his sacrifice wherewith he was highly
pleased, and yet in the mean time Abraham had his son: Just so was his
dealing with this worthy Gentleman: he received continually this with other
sacrifices from him whereby he was much delighted, and yet for all this he had
his son, he inioying (my meaning is, in regard of these outward things) what
possibly could be desired. And certainly who is there especially if acquainted
with his estate, his commings in, and goings out, but would have concluded,
that surely he must needs greatly hinder himself by taking this course: and
that either he must of necessity abridge himself of some of those privileges
belonging, especially to men of his place and degree; or else run himself
into debt, or otherwise diminish his Patrimony. But none of these I can assure
you, and therefore a conclusion built upon false principles. For first of all
he carried himself like a Gentleman in all respects whatsoever, whether you
regard his apparel, his attendance, and lastly his pleasure, keeping as he
best liked both Hawks and Hounds as well he might, not only in regard of the
ability of his estate, but ableness of his mind; who knew right well to put
a difference between the use and the abuse, between a recreation now and then,
and a daily and continual practice, only using the same as physic, to cleanse
his thoughts and make him the more fit for the labors of his calling.

As for his owings I confess he was in debt, the which for mine own part, His
debts not above a thousand pounds, of which the charges of the Shreivaltie came
to five hundredth pounds of the money.
I marvel was not double, considering that to my knowledge the year before he
died, he disboursed out of his purse a thousand pounds I speak of the least,
more then ordinary.

But as for the latter, namely, making away or imbeaseling, of any part of his
Fathers inheritance, I may justly speak for him, as Nabaoth speaks for
himself Absit illi a Iehoua: Neither do I remember that ever he sold one
acre, which if he did, then sure I am, that for that one he bought two. No let
this be the portion of him that forgets God. Job. 17.14.17.
Let him, indeed be rooted out of his dwelling, and dwell in an house that is
not his; Let his remembrance perish from the earth, and his name in the
street. And let this Worthies portion be To scatter and yet more increase:
Pro. 11.24 Eccl. 11.1.
Let the bread that he throws upon the waters return to him again. 2 Cor.
9.6.
Let him lastly sow plentifully and reap plentifully, not outward things
alone, fading and corruptible, but such things indeed, which are inualuable,
peace of conscience, a never dying name, together with that Euge serve bone and
fidelis, Mat. 25.21
in the kingdom of God.

And so much likewise shall serve to have spoken of his Piety.

Now as briefly as you can desire of the other, namely, his Integrity.

Of which I speak in the second place, for that it is as I take it, a kind of
fruit, budding and blossoming out of the former; Neither must it be stretched,
in any case, so far as the word happily will bear, I intending only thereby
that (...) or Rectitude of his (as I may so term it) or that uprightness of
his conversation before men. A thing that Job amongst other excellent virtues
is highly commended for, Job. 1.1. (...): compl.
He was (says the Spirit of God) Rectus, a right down man, as I may english
it, or as some will have it Iustus erat a just and true dealing man, much what
like Nathaniel, An Israelite in whom is no guile. Now that we may look into
the uprightness of this Gentleman's conversation the better, we must consider
him, 1. As a private Christian. 2. As a public Person.


Neither shall he need at all to fear (his behavior in both estates being so
excellent) the verdict, of his Country, nor for his trial herein, refuse at
all, to put himself upon the same. For although the world I confess, be now
grown old, and the elder in my conceit, the more clownish and foul mouthed,
seldom speaking well of any, and ill of most, yea often times they speeding
worst that deserve best at her hands: yet this quality she has, that when they
are not, then to love them, and when dead to commend them. Too Crocodile-like I
must needs confess, never to respect a man until she sees his pale, and
dying face. All his life time to stand, crying with the deceiptfull Buyer,
naught, naught, and then only when she sees him hastening to the slimie
valley, or that he has already pitched up his Tabernacle there presently to
change her note with Ahuz, 2 King. 13.14.
Oh my Father, my Father, acknowledging the greatness of her loss together
with her former ingratitude, well, this I persuade my self will be her dealing
with this blessed Knight, whilst he lived and she inioyed, his comfortable
presence, then giving him scarce a good word, or otherwise speaking, very
little of him that merited so much at her hands, writing continually in The
Pythagorians wrote their anger and fallings out in water, and whatsoever good
deeds were done them in steel.
dust or water that which deserved ingrauing in steel or iron: yea oft-times
for all his kindness giving him Witness the dealings of diverse of his Tenants
with him at a general Assizes held at Bury St Edmond, Ann. Dom. 1614.
Nabals thanks, yet now he is gone he shall be both justified as also largely
commended. For instance let a bill be framed, and the worlds hand desired.

1. First whether as a private Person, he were not a most strict obseruer of
his covenants? Most just in all his dealings, his word, being not always as
good as a sealed evidence?

2. Secondly whether he were not Luke, where the poor Prodigal durst not
fill his belly for beguiling of the Hogs) and did not rather let them in such
a reasonable manner that his Tenants living upon the same, were enabled, both
to bring up their children in good nurtriture and the fear of the Lord, as
likewise to do good in those places where they lived, as smaller wheels
moving according to the motion of the greater?

Thirdly, Ephesians. 6.9.
whether he were not exceeding

Fourthly, Deuteronomy. 24.14.
whether the hirelings-wages

Again, secondly whether as a public person a Magistrate his principal care
were not to beat down vice and to advance virtue?

Secondly, whether he did ever take a gift out of the bosom, to prevent
judgment, and did not continually, without any sinister respect whatsoever set
himself, to support the truth and suppress falsehood?

Whether, lastly his whole endeavor did not bend it self, as to maintain
good men and good causes, so to quell and daunt the profaneness, and outrageous
disorders of the times?

Let I say such a bill as this be now tendered unto her and without question
you shall have her hand that it is Billa vera, a virdict true in all points:
But suppose she should most ingratefully refuse, surely the matter is not
great, seeing there are so many, and of no mean credit, whose sorrowful
countenances are at this time in mine eye, who both knew the truth of this as
also of the rest that has hitherto been spoken concerning the blessed life of
this worthy Person, and will be ready I doubt not upon any necessary occasion
to auerre and justify the same.

And thus have I (I know not how) trodden a blessed way, the way wherein this
blessed man walked, and richly adorned it was with many a delightful flower.
Those that I have offered unto you, to my thinking were the fairest. A clearer
eye, perhaps (especially in such abundance) would have spied out many more, of
like nature and of as excellent a gloss: but these though few, yet in my
judgment are sufficient for the discerning of those two things, that in the
entrance to speak of his life, I propounded to your considerations.

1. His Piety. 2. His Integrity.
And therefore contenting my self with the same I will leave speaking any
further of his life, and come to his death, the occasion indeed of a lamentable
Metamorphosis here amongst us: Bethel, being as you see strangely changed into
Bochim, the habitation of delight into the house of mourners.

Now for his death we are to know, it was much what such a one as Caesar
desired.

1. Short. 2. Unexpected.
Neither must I be mistaken for saying it was unexpected, as though this
Christian Gentleman, had either made a covenant with death and the grave, or
put the evil day far from him: doubtless he that takes but the least
survey, of his virtuous life shall easily perceive the contrary; that he
rather (as appeared by his more, then ordinary employing of his Talent) was
continually expecting his Audit-day; when he must of necessity make up his
reckoning. And as for the tempest that is now fallen, he did like a wise Pilot
discrie it long ago afar off, and did not only fit and prepare himself for
it, but did with many sweet and comfortable words hearten on and encourage his
dearest friends patiently to endure, that which in his wisdom he saw, would
not long be avoided: To us only it was both sudden, and in very truth
altogether unlooked for: for who would have dreamt of this some 12. or 13.
days ago? or what reason had we (who were in his company both eating and
drinking, merry and cheerful, seeing him as like to live as he was many a day
before) to entertain the least melancholic thought of his Fatalitie being so
nigh? But let me answer my self; reasons there were many, but if none, yet
his eminency in grace had been reason sufficient: for the more the mountain
has in height, the less it has in shadow, and the higher any person is in
esteem with God, usually that shadow of his (I mean his life) is wont to be
the shorter. What remained after Hester was fully purified, and every way meet
for the embracings of so mighty a Prince, but to be taken immediately into the
Royal Palace? It is reported of Henoch that he walked with God: and presently
after the text says, he was not found: and the reason is there likewise
expressed, for God took him to himself. Neither in my judgment is it any way
fitting, that such favorites as these should be long absent in this sorrowful
vale, out of the presence of that great Monarch of the whole world, who does
not only love them most entirely, but has also so liberally provided for them
a satietie of pleasure every way so absolute.

And besides, as we soothed up our selves with vain hopes in his health, so
did we likewise the greatest time of his sickness. Howbeit herein we are not
much to be blamed, we being persons beguiled altogether through the deceitful
working of the malady, which continually hid it self in those secret and
vital parts of his: neither did death ever unmask it self (but like a subti
l Headsman went cloaked up and down) until on the sudden it gave him his
deadly blow. And surely the time was very short, not many hours before his
dissolution, or ever we had the least suspicion of the same. For is it not a
strange thing that the death of his disease should be a forerunner of his own?
The day before that his last, to our thinking and his own feeling, his Fever
having quite left him. Nor did he all his sickness through, show himself
more cheerful, nor yield unto us a more assured hope of his recovery, then
at that time. And therefore I would desire all, especially those whom his death
more nighly concerns, to bear the same the more contentedly; seeing that now
it is so easily discerned to be no other thing else but the mere pleasure of
God, thus hastily (and in the flower of his age) to cut in sunder the thread of
his life. The blame I know right well will (especially of the ignorant
multitude) be laid upon that learned man his Physician, whom both for his great
skill in that his science, as also his extraordinary care over his so much
respected a patient, I shall for mine own part honor whilst I breathe. But
brethren let them and us all know, that if God shoots his arrow, it is not
the shield of man or Angel that catching the same, can keep it possibly from
the sides of him to whom it is intended. Neither is there any Balm so
sovereign, that can heal the wound that death makes. Let him therefore have
his due, he went as far as Art could lead him: if it had pleased God to
have seconded his labors, we ought (as I make no question we should) to have
been most thankful; how ever, we must be content, knowing that although this
be unexpected of us, yet of him long since determined, when these days of his
were numbered that are now fulfilled.

Again secondly, that I may hasten to his last and dying breath, we are to
know, as his death was unexpected of us, so was it doubtless for this Elects
sake exceedingly shortened: God herein answering him his continual desire,
which was that in his last sickness his soul might part with as little sense
of the bodies misery as might be. For we are to know, that until the Thursday
at night before his death (he dying the evening following) and only some two
or three hours preceding his end, his pains were not great, but only such
ordinary Symptoms as commonly attend upon a Tertian Ague. Howbeit, upon the
Thursday at night about 9. or 10. of the clock, he grew (contrary to our
expectation) much fainter, and drawing his breath far shorter then he had
done all the time of his sickness before, yet we still held our former
thoughts, hoping of his recovery, until between 10. and 11. of the clock at
night, when death showed her self plainly striking him to the heart with a
sudden cold, and instantly benumming of one of his arms. I will not here spend
time in seeking out what the reason should be of this his so sudden a change:
whether he took cold lying too thin clad in his bed all the day before, or
whether some cold vapor piercing in at his window, he sitting too nigh the
same after he was up, drew the malignant quality inward to his heart; or
whether neither of these, but only the immediate hand of God, in hastening of
his end, indeed the most probable. In dubijs dubie: Let it only be sufficient
for us to know, that within one quarter of an hours space through the wisdom
and great skill of the Physician his arm and body were restored to their
former temper, and himself likewise after a while brought to take some
tolerable rest. Notwithstanding in the morning there we easily discerned in
him a great alteration, it being by this time written in his countenance
whither he would. And yet at that very time, and so diverse hours after, he was
of so strong and able a body, that we did not at all imagine that his
departure had been so nigh, but persuaded our selves that he might live at the
least until the morrow after, which was the eleventh, and his critical day.
But God (as the event showed) had otherwise determined, appointing that day to
be his last, with the end whereof he should end his life: upon which day (it
being as we know according to the time of the year May Day) his desire was in
the morning to be removed into another chamber, intending only (as it should
seem) there to rest himself for a time, before he should remove into the
chamber of so great a presence. Well his mind is satisfied, and he accordingly
brought thither.

After which time there was no apparent change in his estate to be descried in
him, from that it was in the morning, until 6. of the clock at night, at
which time both his speech, and (to the judgment of those about him) his
understanding likewise were at once taken from him. The news whereof being
brought unto me (for at that time I was not with him) did at the first hearing
somewhat amaze me, yet hastening into his chamber, I found the report too true,
for there he lay as a man in an ecstasy, neither hearing nor regarding: only to
my thinking inwardly wrestling with some strong and violent temptation.
Whereupon pawsing a while, I asked him whether he knew me? his answer to my
thinking was No. Well Sir (quoth I) if you know not me, I pray Almighty God
give you the full knowledge of him, in whose knowledge alone there is life
eternal. But Sir it is your mind (is it not?) that we should pray with you:
what answer he made me I could not well discern; but whatsoever the answer
was, we regarded a great deal more the present necessity then the voice.
Whereupon we all that were present there fell down upon our knees before God,
and with what earnestness of soul we could, we humbly besought his Majesty
to take pity upon him in this his agony, to give him the sweet fruit of all
his former labors, and comfort of all those blessed and gracious promises that
carefully he had laid up against this time specially: not to suffer him to be
tempted above his strength, but to afford him an happy issue with the
temptation. Lastly, if in his infinite wisdom he saw so good, then to afford
him (if it were his pleasure at that time to take him out of the world) at the
leastwise so much liberty as to give satisfaction to the world of that full
assurance that he had of a better life, and his lively expectation of the
crown of immortality.

The which prayer of ours was no sooner ended, but it was for the most part as
graciously answered: for immediately after was both his understanding and
speech restored unto him, and he thereupon suddenly brake forth into these or
the like speeches: Lord God Iehoua have mercy upon me. Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God have mercy upon me. Oh Jesus Christ that sit at the right hand of the
Father, take pity on me and plead my cause. Oh thou good Samaritan, now
power thy wine and oil into my distressed soul. Father if the green tree be
cut down, shall the Sire be spared? If the righteous scarcely be saved, what
shall become of me poor sinner?

And thus he went on, we standing in the mean time with watrie eyes about his
bed, whilst he pleaded in this sort his cause with God. At the length I began
again with him, asking him whether he knew me? He told me yes, and called me
by my name. Sir (said I) I perceive well there has been a conflict betwixt
you and some great and eager temptation; but whatsoever it were, my hope is,
that by this time it is vanquished. Oh (says he) my sins, they are thousand
thousands, millions of thousands. To whom I answered, that he did well to lay
them forth to the uttermost, showing plainly thereby that his mind was not to
hide any, but to confess all, as one heartily sorry for the committing the
least of them. But Sir (said I) let the number of them I beseech you no whit
astonish you, considering the manner of our heavenly Father is, at what time
soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, to remove his sins (though never
so many) far out of his remembrance, Ezech. 18.21.22. Mica. 7.19.
yea to drown and bury them in the bottom of the sea. And let them be
granted so many as you speak of, yet their number is finite, but the mercy of
the Lord you know is infinite.

True (said he) But my sins are scarlet sins. Sir (said I) be it so: but
what says God Isa. 1. Come (says he) let us reason together: Though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow; though they were red
like scarlet, they shall be as wool. But Sir (replied I) for that long
discourse may I suppose be troublesome to you, I would desire you in a word or
two to answer me these two questions: First of all, whether you be not
heartily sorry for offending God your heavenly father as you have done, and
whether that be not the only weight that now oppresses your soul? He told me
Yes, desiring Christ to ease him of it. Sir (said I) doubt you not of it, he
will do it, you and such as you are being (as you know as well as my self)
the only persons that he in the 11. of Matthew does inuit and call unto him,
promising assuredly to ease them of their burden.

The second question Sir (quoth I) shall be only this, whether you do not
hunger and thirst now for the righteousness of Christ, preferring it before
all the glory and riches in the world whatsoever? Oh says he, lifting up his
dying eyes to heaven, that I do: Well Sir, quoth I, hold out in this holy
desire of yours, you shall (my life for yours) be fully satisfied. After which
discourse of ours once ended, it cannot be imagined how wonderfully his heart
was cheared, the Son of righteousness having by this time brought salvation
under his wings: the love of God like the Sun often times breaking out of a
black cloud shining comfortably upon his soul: which made him desirous, as
we well perceived by him, to have spoken much more. And as glad should we have
been to have heard him; but by this time his glass was run, and those two
loving friends, his soul and body I mean, were shaking hands, and bidding one
another for a time farewell. The which I perceiving, asked him whether I should
pray with him again or no? Yes (answered he) with all my heart: which words
of his he drew out with a fainting breath, exceeding long: In the midst of
which prayer of mine, he was heard of some in whose arms he died, to utter
these words, Lord Jesus I come to thee, and so lying quietly for a time (not
stirring scarcely hand or foot) which is a thing to be wondered at, he dying in
his full strength; within a short space after he yielded that blessed soul of
his into the arms of his Savior, in whose love he slept. Qualis vita, finis
ita. The Catastrophe as you see in all points suiting the Scene forepassed, he
lived virtuously and died blessedly. The use that we are to make principally of
both these unto our selves, is this, that we now all of us follow his holy and
Christian example: imitating herein the wary Pilot, whose manner is, passing
through a troublesome Sea, wherein is both Scylla and Charibdis, Rocks and
Sands dangerous and devouring; if perchance he spieth a ship gliding along
before him, guided by some fair and kilfull hand, and now entered the wished
Haven, to follow her course with as little aberration as possibly may be: So I
beseech you brethren let us order and dispose our selves, making his course our
guide, and his life our example. Let us as little swerue from him, as he
swerued from Christ: so shall we without question meet at the length
comfortably together in that blessed Haven where he has now cast Anchor:
where no tempest can annoy us, or storm how boisterous soever trouble us;
where a gale of pleasure shall blow continually upon our sails; where the
Son of righteousness shall be our only Load-starre, and the Father and Holy
Ghost be and Prora and Puppis, all in all unto us: which God grant.

But now, for that the holy Scriptures are indeed our Vrim and Thummim, lively
Oracles, teaching us and all the servants of God what use to make further of
this and any other the like calamity: let us I beseech you now draw near to
the same, and hear what the Lord speaks to his people out of a part of that
Psalm even now sung, Psalm. 39. verse 11. The words are these:

When thou with rebukes do chastise man for iniquity, thou as a moth make
his beauty to consume: surely every man is vanity.

The which words taken generally, are no other then a plain Demonstration
wherein our Prophet does manifest to the world what God is; how great, how
glorious; in power infinite, in majesty incomprehensible: Things indeed most
necessary to be known in regard of God, that man may yield the greater
obedience and reverence unto him, of whom naturally he has so mean and
ordinary thoughts; imagining him, if not worse then himself, (as those
Heathens do Act. 17. gold and silver) yet at the leastwise like unto himself,
as it is plain Psalm. 50.21.

Now that he that runs may read these things in God, therefore does our
Prophet demonstrate and set forth this God, though not as God does himself
elsewhere by his glorious name Genesis 3.14. and glorious works, 1. Of Creation,
Ier. 5.20. 2. Of Providence, Ier. 23.24.
yet in as familiar a manner and way of comparison, comparing him and man
together. Man we know of all other creatures here in this inferior world is
the most excellent, coming most near to God, Genesis 1.26.
created after his own image, in whose breast are hidden those sparks of
divine nature a little lower then God: Psalm. 8.6.
and a little world of himself, being most valiant, hardy, and of noble
spirit; before whom the beasts of the earth tremble, and whose presence the
fowls of the heaven cannot endure. If then our Prophet will needs compare the
Creator with the creature, with whom may he better do it then with man? And if
not with him, Whereunto will ye liken me, says the Lord? Isa 40.18.

Neither are we indeed to imagine, as though our Prophet by this comparison of
his, had any mind at all to darken or blemish in the least respect the glory
and beauty of this Almighty God. Alas brethren, if he had such a thought (as
far be such thoughts from us) so to conceit this comparison, doubtless this
will not do it. What beauty trow you is in the silliest worm, to blemish the
glory of the mightiest Prince? or what light is in a small and fading sparkle,
to darken the luster of the glorious Sun? Nay rather we ought to know, that
this comparison here of our Prophet, does serve most excellently (as it usually
falls out when contraries are compared) to set forth the wonderful
difference between God and man; his power, and man's weakness; his eternity,
and man's vanity. That we may yet look further into these things, let us I
beseech you consider in the Demonstration these Two things 1. The precedent. 2.
The subsequent.


The Precedent in these words; when thou with etc.

The Subsequent in these, Thou as a moth make, etc.

And withal let us observe him laying down the ground of this latter; Surely
(says he) every man is vanity.

In the precedent we are not to behold God sleeping but waking: When a sleep
no difference between the Coward and valiant man: the courageous Lion and
timorous Hare: and therefore he sets forth God, not only awake, but rousing
up himself: meaning indeed to show himself a God in punishing man for his
offenses, and taking this course with him; then what follows? the subsequent
is, as a Moth, etc. well put both together the precedent and subsequent, and
then you have the comparison whereof I spoke before, God compared to a
fretting, devouring Moth: and man to a pleasant and delightful garment: the
Moth seaseth upon the garment, and the beauty of the garment presently
wastes. God rebukes man for his sin, and man withal his glory suddenly
vanishes. And no marvel, for he is but vanity. To see the comparison a
little better. A garment we know let it be of never so rich a cloth, or the
thread never so purely spunne, let the die be Tirian or Babilonish, such a
garment as Achan purchased at so dear a rate, or Solomon wore upon his
Festival days, a garment wherein Art contended with Nature, and nature only
in her Lilly excelled Art: yet no sooner, does the Moth take it but as
suddenly the beauty thereof fades. So says our Prophet here: And the like
says Eliphaz, Job 4.19. is man compared with God: make him therefore as great
as you can, desire, and happy with the happiest: let Nature furnish him with
her richest store, and Fortune seat him upon the height of her wheel; let him
have riches, honor, wisdom, strength and what you will, yet if the Lord
intends to rebuke this man for his iniquities, these will not serve him: for
no sooner God chideth but the man with his beauty consumes; and no marvel,
for surely he is but vanity.

But yet more particularly in the precedent we are to take notice of these
three things: 1. That there is a time of rebuking and chastening of man. 2.
From whom those rebukes and chastisements do proceed and come. 3. The reason
of the same plainly denoted: 1. The first in these words when with rebukes, man
chastened. 2. The second is expressed only in this word, Thou; Thou do
chasten man. 3. The third and last is the very conclusion (for iniquity) when
thou with rebuks do chasten man for iniquity.



The first of these that there is a time of rebuking and chastening of man: as
it is an infallible truth so shall I not need to spend the least time in
examining and further proving the same. If any doubt hereof I would desire them
to hear the Preacher speaking out of the third of Eccles. and the first verse,
To all things (says he) there is an appointed time. And the fourth verse of
the same Chapter, There is a time of weeping, a time of laughing, a time of
mourning, a time of dancing; Let them likewise hear what Job speaks in the
21. Chapter of his book and 17. verse How often is the candle of the wicked
lighted, and how often comes their destruction upon them? Noting as the
former does changes and alterations in man's estate: He flourishes for a time,
but anon after he is rebuked, often lighted and as often extinguished. Neither can
they indeed have possibly a better Schoolemistris then Experience herself
whose daily lesson is, that there is no constancy at all to be expected in
these sublunarie bodies, nothing here but vicissitudes and alterations,
sometimes well, oftentimes sick, now rich, then poor; last day singing, this
day sorrowing: God giving, and God taking away. This is that I say which not
only Experience, but the holy Scripture principally teaches to be the portion
both of the profane man, as also of the dearest servants of God: neither is
love or hatred to be deserved by it. And for the latter if time, would suffer
us to take a view of the lives of holy men, the holiest that ever lived, we
should easily find the truth thereof, their estate being not always the same,
but as they met some good days, so they crossed as many evil wherein were not
only Pressurae. Heb. 10.33.
(...) but (...), afflictions, but oppressions.

The which occasioned Jacob in my mind to speak as he did to Pharaoh Genesis
47.9. The days of the years of my pilgrimage are (says he) few and evil.
Intimating not so few as evil; yea our Savior Christ himself was so broken
and wounded for our transgressions, and the chasticement of our peace so upon
him; a man of that daily sorrow, that some take the ground of the Pharisees
speech Ioh. 8.57. Quinquaginta annos nondum habes: Thou art not yet fifty
years old: to be altogether from his look and countenance so ancient and
full of wrinkles, that although not fully 33. yet he looked as a man of fifty.
Howsoever yet this must of necessity be yielded as a truth, else had it been
a thing needless and superfluous altogether for our Savior Jesus Christ to
admonish his Disciples as he does so often, Mat. 9.
both of the Bridegroomes departure from them, Marc. 1.
and also of the taking up of the Cross and daily following of him, Luc. 5.
if there were not such days as these: days of rebuke and tribulations to be
expected, not only of the bad but likewise of the good, and that all things
herein come alike to both. The which being so, then let it not seem strange to
any especially to our selves that our wheel is thus in an instant turned, and
our pleasant spring strangely changed: that after so fair a calm we are
beaten with so soar a tempest, knowing that this is the time of our
chasticement.

Hitherto was our Summer, and we are they alone that feel this winter. Howbeit
in truth we are not alone: For neither do we suffer alone as the only persons
that have seen affliction (no alas we do but sippe of that cup whereof so
many holy men Patriarchs, Lam. 12.3.
Prophets, and blessed Martyrs have drunk so large a draught,) neither do we
sorrow alone; for whilst we weep there are those that weep with us: and
whilst we lament behold how a number on all hands do sympathize Solamen
miseris.

The second thing that we are to observe in the precedent is the Author of
these rebukes, namely, from whom they do proceed, and come: the which is
expressed in the word Thou, somewhat darkely I must needs confess, yet
afterward in the 12. verse of this Psalm, more plainly and clearly, for
there he styles him by the name of Lord (Hear my prayer O Lord) so here when
thou (that is) that mighty God having a being in thy self, do give a
subsistence and being to afflictions and chasticements: Intimating that from
him is Malum poenae as for us Malum culpae, the evil of punishment, though not
evil of sin. Thus God speaks of himself, Isa. 45.7. I form the light and
create darkness, I make peace and create evil. And as the evil so the evil
Doer, as he further speaks in the same prophecy, cap. 54.16. I have created
the Smith that blows in the fire, and I have created the Destroier to
destroy. Whereupon Amos takes it as granted in the third Chapter of his
Prophecy and the third verse That there is no evil in the City that the Lord
has not done. And this verily has always been the conclusion of the servants
of God, at all times, and in all ages, that whatsoever afflictions they have
met withal in this their pilgrimage that the same came from God. Thus David
when Shemei cursed him with an horrible curse, 2. Sam. 16.5. concluded that God
had hidden him and therefore none must touch him. Thus Aaron long before Leuit.
10.3. when his sons were stricken dead before the Lord, held his peace,
concluding it was the Lord that would be sanctified of all, that come near
him. This lastly was the conclusion of the whole Church in general; when as
manifold afflictions like a dark cloud wrapped her in on every side, Lament.
2.17. The Lord has done (says she) that which he purposed, he has fulfilled
that which he determined. A truth most necessary to be known in these two
respects.

The first is to comfort and encourage the servants of God, and us especially
to bear and undergo, all crosses and calamities how bitter so ever, with the
greater patience, and cheerfulness, considering they come from him who as a
Father to all, so is he principally to the elect, Math. 6.9. Isa. 63.16. An
earthly father we know may at his pleasure and as he sees just cause,
chastise and correct his child, neither ought the child to take it otherwise
then well, in no cause either murmuring or resisting: and if an earthly, then
much more (says the Apostle Heb. 12.9.) may the Father of Spirits, our
heavenly, and we in the mean while receiving the same most patiently and
contentedly. Isaackes burden Genes. 12.6. was both heavy and uncomfortable;
heavy for the matter, uncomfortable for the end: And yet as far as we can
read he bare it willingly, the reason I take it is expressed in the same verse,
Pater imposuit, His Father laid it on him. Whose example my desire is may be
ours: What God will have let us embrace: if he will impose it let us endure
it: remembering the counsel of Solomon to his son, Pro. 3.11. My son refuse
not the chasticing of the Lord, for whom he loves he corrects. Who knows
not that the Argument that Absalom used to persuade his Sister Tamar to
patience, 2. Sam. 13.20.
bearing as she might, the hard dealing of her brother with her, was but only
this Frater est, He is thy Brother? doubtless if this were reason, as he
thought sufficient to still her voice, that then cried and wept so bitterly,
and pacify her wrath and fury against him, that so justly had deserved it.
Then Brethren I beseech you, how much more ought the consideration of the
person, from whom, this calamity is thus suddenly come (he indeed our
gracious Father) to persuade, and put us on, to endure the same, with contented
minds: knowing withal, First, that as he never offended us, so have we
infinitely him. And secondly that it is come from that sweet hand, from whom we
have all our lives long, even to this instant, received such a world of
blessings: receiving then so many good things, is it not reason, that we
should receive some evil?

Secondly, this does afford unto us a most necessary direction, to whom to
resort, in this and all other our greatest miseries, surely to him only, and
to no other. Intimating herein, the poor Prodigal, who being in that misery,
wherein he was, would try the courtesy of no more Citizens, but went straight
way to his Father; I will (says he) go to my Father, so let us to ours. Thus
do the servants of God hearten on, and encourage each other in their greatest
trialls. Hos. 6.1.
Come (say they) let us return to the Lord he has spoiled and will heal us,
he has wounded and he will bind us up. Neither ought we to be discouraged
in so doing, seeing this is he whose name, Pro. 18.10
is a strong Tower to which the righteous fly (flying doubtless upon the
wings of their faith) and are exalted. Ier. 31.20.
This is our merciful Father, who whilst he is striking has his bowels sore
troubled and his Repentance rolled upon him. Hos. 11.8.
For a little space I confess he has been angry, but if we seek him in due
time he will yet be found of us, Isa. 54.7.9.
yea he will return with abundance of compassion. Psalm. 31.6.
Let the Lacedaemonians therefore in the time of danger tie and bind their Mars
amongst them with gyues and fetters of gold. And let us only hold and tie God,
with tears and prayers; Imitating Jacob who although the principal sinnewes
were shrunk in his thigh, yet would he not suffer, Genesis 32.26.
the Angel to depart without a blessing.

The third and last thing that we are to consider in the precedent is the
reason why man is rebuked, contained as we heard in this word Iniquity, when
thou with rebuke do chastise man for iniquity: Now iniquity we are to know
is, taken diversely in the holy Scripture: two ways especially, either for some
great and heinous sin: and accordingly, do the brethren of Joseph speak to
him, Genesis 44.6. God has found out the iniquity of his servants, that is their
great and heinous sin, and is now ready to punish them.

Or secondly, for sin in general agreeable to that Romans 1.18. The wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all iniquity: And so in this place for
iniquity, that is for the sin. Now sin is termed by the name of Iniquity
Quia peccatum est ab aequitate alienum, according to the Apostles own
expression (...), 1 John 3.4. For sin is the transgression of Law. Showing that
(...) or sin is nothing else but (...) a transgression or crossing of the Law
of God. And indeed hinc lachrymae, hence it is (says our Prophet) that man is
rebuked: suitable to that Lament. 3.39. Wherefore then is the living man
sorrowful? man suffers for his sin. With which agrees the saying of the
Apostle Romans 6.23. Stipendia peccati mors: The wages of sin is death: that is
not only the reason why soul and body be separated, and nature destroyed, but
the cause likewise of all that labor and travel to which man is daily subject
as the sparks to mount upwards, Job. 15.7.
Job. 15.7. Iniquity I know right well, is not always the chief cause of
Gods rebukes, and chasticements; yet is it usually found in such as are rebuked
and corrected. Let Job I pray you be our example: (neither indeed do I
remember any one more pregnant) whose trialls as all know were exceeding great
(take his own word) heavier then the sand of the sea, Job 6.3. and yet the end
that the Lord propounded, as the event showed, was not simply to rebuke him for
his sin, but rather in so doing to try his faith and patience, and
accordingly to leave him a Mirror of both, to succeeding ages. James 5.11.
notwithstanding consider but the passage of things between God and him, and
him and his friends, and you shall find matter sufficient, as for that, so a
far greater humiliation, as he freely acknowledges unto God crying peccaui,
Chap. 42. 5. 6. Neither are we indeed to have the least thought of injustice
or cruelty in God in thus punishing man for his iniquity: For shall not the
Judge of the world do right? Genesis 28.14. No brethren sin is another matter,
and of far greater consequent, then the ignorant person and profane
imagines.

For first of all iniquity or sin is a crossing as we heard before and
thwarting of the Law of God: Psalm. 9.7. Romans 2.1.13.14. Isa. 6.3.
A law first of all perfect in it self, and drawing men on more and more to
perfection. Secondly a Law, of an infinite God and therefore carrying with it an
infinite punishment.

Secondly, sin as it is contrary to the Law, so to the Lawgiver himself,
1. Ioh. 5.1. Coloss. 1.15.
He being light, and that darkness: He pure and that filthy: He spiritual and
above, that carnal and beneath.

Thirdly and lastly, it is that which defaceth the image of God in man, and
like another bewitching Delila, Hos. 11.9. Leuit. 11.44. Mar. 7.23.
having ensnared the unhappy wretch, never gives him over til those beautiful
locks of his (the ornaments I mean of his mind) be quite shred off, 2 Cor 5.27
the light of his understanding darkened, (if not quite extinguished) and he of
a Prince made a prisoner, Romans 7.5.
Genesis 3.7. Ephesians. 4.24.
of a great Lord a miserable slave, not to a few, but to all, even his meanest
and basest enemies. Sin being then (as we hear) the cause usually why man
is rebuked, then ought we in the first place to be exceedingly thankful to
God, that for all our sins he has so long spared us, yea the time of our
rebuking being come, is it not his great mercy, that whilst the best is thus
corrected, the worst are not consumed? Lament. 3. And in the next place how
ought this likewise to settle our minds further patiently to endure the rod of
God, diuerting all our thoughts wholly from him to our selves, making us
impatient with none, but with our sins indeed occasioning all this? Abner we
see for a time dallieth, but ere Asahel is aware, with the hinder end of his
spear he strikes: And this Egyptian robber, howsoever she embraces, yet if
she can at the last she strangleth.

Again, sin being (as we hear) thus hateful in the sight of God, then you
that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. Amos 5.15.

Hate it: First, as an enemy to God. What the Father justly hates, there is
no reason in the world that the son should love. Our Father long ago began
the Feud: let us I beseech you his sons and daughters continue it.

Secondly, as an enemy to our selves, it being the original not only of
this, (as before was showed) but of all other miseries and calamities that we
meet withal here in this troublesome vale: every day that has the least,
having by means thereof enough of the own sorrow.

And therefore howsoever the fool makes a sport of sin, Proverb. 10.23. and
14.9. let us I pray you, foster no such Scorpion in our bosoms, which
howsoever (as I said before) it may fawn for a time, will at the last wound us
to the heart: whose pleasures are but for a season, Heb. 11.25
and their end always bitterness.

The subsequent are in these words: As a moth thou make his beauty to consume.

The which words have diverse significations allowed them by Interpreters. We
will think only but of two: And first of all they are taken 1. Passiuely. 2.
Actiuely.


Passiuely, that a man, howsoever he may presume perhaps upon himself, his
strength, wisdom, riches, and many other preferments, yet is he no more in the
hand of God, then the silliest moth in the hands of the mightiest man, who at
his pleasure crusheth the same, and brings it unto nothing. The which indeed
is a truth, and the only drift of our Prophet here in this place, to show the
vanity of man; howbeit, the same to my thinking expressed after another
manner: And therefore we will follow the second opinion, taking our Prophets
meaning altogether Actiuely, intending a comparison, wherein God is (as we
heard before) compared to a moth, and man to a garment: The which comparison or
similitude of his he rather (in my judgment) chooses then any other, not only
in regard of the secret and sudden working of God in humbling and abasing of
the proudest man, but also as best suiting the profane, and yet ordinary
conceit that man has of the eternal and Almighty God, esteeming him no
better then a moth or fly, and his anger but a buzz, and not to be regarded.
An hard censure I must needs confess of the creature, especially in regard of
the Creator; yet our Prophet seems to yield to what they affirm: A moth,
says he, but withal shows, that suppose a moth, yet a dreadful one, as
soon spoiling and consuming the mightiest Potentate, and most renowned person
in the world, together with all his glory and beauty, as the moth does the
fairest garment and of greatest luster. Now although that this comparison here
used by our Prophet, be sufficient of it self to set forth God even in his
weakness, as the Apostle speaks 1. Cor. 1.15. far stronger then man; yet
for the understanding of the words the better, we are to consider the reason of
either.

1. First, why God as a moth consumes man.

2. Secondly, why man so glorious a creature is so suddenly consumed as a
garment.

The reason of the former, we shall find the better, if we consider the
eternal God here likened to a moth, set forth unto us in the holy Scriptures
by other comparisons far more honorable, as namely Hos. 13.8. by A Bear
robbed of her whelps, rending and tearing the heart and call. Joel 3.6. by a
dreadful Lion roaring out of Sion, and the heavens and earth shaking. But of
all others, most glorious are those comparisons that you may read of Dan.
7.9.10. where he is described, having His hairs as pure wool, and his eyes a
flaming fire: A fiery stream going before him, and thousand thousands
ministering unto him. Job 15.10. Beholding the heavens, and they are impure in
his sight. And Job 4.18. Imputing folly to his Angels. Isa. 44.13. Crying and
shouting like a man of war. Ios. 5.13. A valiant Captain with a glittering
sword in his hand. Apoc. 19.13.16. His Coat Armor dipped in blood, whereupon is
written (without doubt in golden letters) Rex regum, and Dominus dominantium,
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But of all other, that Heb. 12.29. For
our God is a consuming fire. No marvel then if whilst he rebukes, the
beauty of man consumes. For this is he that touches the mountains, and they
smoke; and at whose rebuke the ancient hills vanish. Now the only reason why
the spirit of God both here and in so many other places in the holy Scripture
is so frequent in describing and setting forth of this God, is without question
(as we have heard before) that man, silly man, may have more honorable
thoughts, together with a more high and reverend esteem of the divine and
glorious majesty, then naturally he has. For certainly the thoughts of man
in regard of God are (as I said) most ordinary and mean, as may appear 1. By
the Honor, 2. By the Fear,
(though both his due) that are usually affoorded unto him.

And first for honor, there is no question but that honor is due to him, not
only as the Father of us all, Ephesians. 4.6. and accordingly does he challenge it
to himself of all his sons and daughters Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where
is mine honor? but also it is his due, as our dread Sovereign, and King
universal: which makes our Prophet Psalm. 2.11. so earnestly to exhort all
sorts, yea the most puissant Princes on the earth, to do their homage daily
before him for fear of his high displeasure. Now how far men are from the
performance of this so necessary a duty, may appear,

First, by the obedience that is yielded to his most blessed word, Psalm. 110.2
Isa. 53.1.
That rod of his power, whereby he rules in the midst of his enemies. Who
(brethren) like Ester touches this Mighties Scepter, and boweth himself
before it? Nay do not men rather imbase and contemn the same? he saying what
he will, and they notwithstanding doing what they list.

Secondly, who does honor this God as he ought, in deuoting to him all that he
has, soul and body, Romans 12.1.
a having Sacrifice, making his members weapons of righteousness, Psalm. 24.7.
and daily opening the doors of that fair Temple of his, (his soul I mean)
that so the Son of glory may come in, and not only inlighten, but enrich the
same with all saving graces, Faith, Hope, Repentance, Peace of conscience,
Sanctification, Gal. 5.21.
and such like?

Thirdly, who does honor him in depending and waiting upon his providence both
in prosperity and also in adversity?

In prosperity neither sacrificing to Hab. 1.16.
nor burning incense to his yarne, but with Jacob Genesis 32.10. ascribing all
that he has, his whole estate, to God the giver of every good and perfect Iam.
1.17.
Being full, not forgetting him whose stepe have thus dropped down fatness upon
him, Deuteronomy. 8.14 Psalm. 65.11 Job. 21.3. and 29.2.
and whose light now shines upon his habitation.

And secondly, in adversity is not ready with profane Esau to sell his
birthright, Genesis 25.34.
as occasion serves, to free and deliver himself from the correcting hand of
God, under which he ought rather to humble himself, with that holy man's
resolution; Although thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee. Job 13.15.

Secondly, for the fear of God, it is that which the Lord himself commands
and challenges likewise at the hands of all his servants. Ier. 2.19.
Deuteronomy 4.9. and 6.2. Prou. 1.7. Matthew. 10.28. And yet who is there that fears
this God with that awful reverence that is due to him? No (alas) men fear the
creature more then the Creator, the garment more then the maker. Earthly men
are feared, especially Kings and Princes of the earth, and good reason, for
their wrath is the messenger of death: Pro. 16.14.
If men fear them, then who would not much more fear thee, Oh King of
Nations? Ier. 10.7.
But the truth is, Genesis 20.11.
there is little fear of God at this time (I will not say with Abraham, in
this place, for far be it from me by so saying to wrong so Christian an
Assembly, howbeit this I may safely say) in some parts of the Land. Instances
let me give you two. First, Genesis 6.6.
do not men ordinarily those things that their consciences do tell them vex
and grieve our gracious Father as he fitteth in heaven? Ephesians. 4.30.


Secondly, are not things usually committed in the flaming eye of God, Dan.
10.6. Ios. 7.21.
which men labor by all means possible to cloak and cover from the knowledge
of the world? Certainly, where these things are, there is no fear of God, and
if it be, sure I am no filial. And seeing it is so, how necessary then is it
for every one of us to have this God always before our eyes, not only as he is
described in his most holy word, but verifying the truth thereof both in
rewarding of the righteous, Psalm. 58.10 Romans 2.6.
and punishing of the wicked, Apoc. 22.12.
giving every man according to his works? Let the kindness of God allure us,
and his mercies showring daily upon the dwellings of the righteous, persuade us
to honor and fear this Almighty God.

If not they, then let the Majesty of God strike a terror into us, we seeing
this devouring moth suddenly consuming the beauty even of the mightiest, in the
midst of all their royalty. Let us therefore behold Pharaoh in the midst
of his Army drowning, Exo. 14.20 Dan. 5.6.
Belteshazer in the midst of his cups trembling, 2. King. 19.37. (...).
Sanacharib in the midst of his Temple dying, and his Epitaph over him
warning all men to fear this dreadful moth. Lastly, let us behold
black-mouthed Julian, in the midst of his greatest security breathing out
his damned spirit with Vicisti Galilae. Thus I say let us take notice of the
goodness of this God, as also of his almighty power, by opening our ears to
his voice, and our eyes to his works: so shall we think most highly of him,
and basely of our selves; honor him, and humble our selves, saying with Job, I
have heard of thee by the hearing, but now mine eye sees thee, therefore I
abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job 42.4.

Secondly, let us (I pray you) consider as before the power of the moth, so in
the last place the frailty of the garment: a principal ground or reason why
it is so suddenly consumed. Surely every man is vanity.

The which being a principle hardly believed, is therefore (as you see) by our
Prophet earnestly urged and pressed. Surely (says he) man, that is, not one
man, but all, not this man, but every man, is vanity. Further, whereas he
says man, we must not take him alone, but attended likewise with all his
glory, the garment with the beauty, and both but vanity.

Let us (I pray you) single out both these, that so we may take the better
notice of either.

And first of the glory and beauty of man in the first place, being no other
but the possession of those things, as we heard before, that make him glorious
and renowned, as honor, riches, strength, beauty, and the like: all which he
shows to be no better then man, and man vanity.

And indeed vanity they are, First in themselves, being most unconstant and
uncertain.

Secondly, in their promises, promising much, but performing little, nay for
the most part the quite contrary happening.

Their manner is to make men believe that they can lengthen out their days,
but alas oftentimes they shorten them; that they can make them the happiest
under the Sun, and for the most part they make them the most miserable, not
only in bringing with them such a number of cares and troubles, but also so
locking up and imprisoning their thoughts in themselves, that their souls have
no liberty, scarce an hour in a year, to consider of those things, wherein
the true joy and comfort of a Christian consists: for which their false and
deceitful dealing, they have the lie given them Psalm. 4.2. And the Prophet
Ierem. 9.23.24. exhorts all those that have them, in no case to be ouer-ioyed
or puffed up with them. Let not (says he) the wise man rejoice in his wisdom,
nor the strong man in his strength, neither the rich man in his riches: But if
any glory, let him in this, that he knows me that shows mercy and
judgment.

Secondly, as his glory is, so is himself, nothing better, but vanity.

1. First, vanity, being taken from so frail and brittle an element.

2. Secondly, vanity, being so subject every moment to be dissolved into the
same again, and in the mean while meeting with such and so many sorrows, and
with so few and such mixed pleasures, that leaving the stage, he may close up
his part with that speech of Job, 4. I had for inheritance the months of
vanity.

Seeing then that man with all his glory is vanity, let us not then (I pray
you) build upon him in the least regard placing our trust and confidence in
him, No (says the Psalmist 46.3.) not in Princes. One reason is there: for
there is no help in them. There is another, Isa. 2.22. for their breath is in
their nostrils. And here in my text the ground of both: For they are but
vanity.

Secondly, as we build not upon others, so let us not (I pray you) build upon
our selves in regard of any outward privilege whatsoever, seeing we are no
better then others, but even vanity as well as they.

But here let me make a stay a little, and propound two questions, which being
answered, then will I draw to a conclusion.

The first shall be this, What the reason should be, that God being so strong
and man so weak, the wicked notwithstanding all this, should live, and wax
old, and grow in wealth, Job 2.7. These are Gods enemies, why does he then
suffer them, seeing if he please he can so suddenly consume them?

To this I answer, that long life, together with the fruition and enioyment of
these outward things, are not always a blessing, and if they be; surely rather
Esaus, yea even in Esaus eye they are not the best, which makes him so
discontented with his brother for leaving him but only this. And in truth God
suffers the wicked often times as David did both Absalom and Adonijah from
their cradle, laying the raynes upon their necks, and giving them their hearts
desire: his rod is not upon them, Job 21.7.8.9.
they spend their days in ease and pleasure, and all this in the end for their
ruin. Such lenity as this in man is cruelty, in God severity. A sore
punishment that God often times inflicteth upon the worst men, Psalm. 78.29.
in giving them up to their hearts desire. The fool has his ease, and this
slaieth him.

But secondly there are diverse other special ends that our heavenly Father
propounds to himself in all this. I will name but some of them.

First, to allure and draw the profane Romans 2.4.
know thou that the patience, and long suffering, and beautifulness of the
Lord, leads thee to repentance?

2. Secondly, that Asher may be the rod of his wrath and staff of his
indignation, Isa. 10.51. to scourge and humble his Church, and people for their
iniquities.

That thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou
iudgest, Psalm. 50.4.

Heb. 11.26
to which Moses and all the faithful have from the beginning looked, of higher
nature, and more noble consequence.

My second demand shall be, the reason, why the Lord thus sparing the wicked
man and miscreant, does in the mean time rebuke and chastise his dearest
servants, and oft-times, in this very kind cutting them off in their
flourishing age?

1 Cor. 3.22
Now the Resolution in a word, that not only afflictions, but death it self is
to the servants of God great advantage. Phil. 1.21.


And first for afflictions, they serve Romans 7.24. These are the refining pot,
Eze. 22.20. Pro. 17.3.
of the Lord whereby he purges his gold from the dross; and his cutting
knife, wherewith he cleanses his vine, Ioh. 15.1.
and is daily pruning of the superfluous branches.

Secondly, to weane them more and Epicures they should not make their nest,
hereupon the earth: or with the Israelites delight too much in this their
Egypt, but that loathing the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5
they should long hourly for the habitation of Sion.

Thirdly, To make the kingdom of unto him? with what cheer does he enter his
doors; and with what contentment does he sit him down in the midst of his
friends flocking on all hands to congratulate his return? His misery past is
instantly forgotten; or if he speaks of it at any time, it is always with
much delight. Doubtless this is the estate, of all the servants of God their
pilgrimage once ended, and they through manifold afflictions entered that
blessed Palace, by how much they have more suffered, by so much are their
joys more augmented. Here they were contemned and spurned at: How comfortable
then are the embracings of that heavenly company unto them? Here naked or at
the leastwise in rags and patches. How welcome then are those pure garments
the precious robes of Christ's righteousness to them? Here hungry and thirsty.
Apoc. 7.9.
How happy then do they think themselves, being once set at Table with
Abraham and his sons, Mark. 8.
feasting and banqueting in the kingdom of God?

Lastly, hereby those graces, that otherwise would lie hid and buried within
them (or at leastwise not show themselves so clearly) are discovered and made
manifest to the world. These being the sharp and cutting winds of the Lord
that blowing upon his garden, cause these blessed flowers to cast forth their
savor. They bring indeed darkness with them, but only to this end that the
beauty of these precious Diamondes may be the better veiwed and more plainly
discerned.

Secondly, as these so death it self is gain unto them, die they sooner or
later; If later, then they are Scholars, longer trained up in the School of
Christ, and having greater experience of the goodness of God, attain to an
higher pitch in grace and fuller ripeness in Christ.

Secondly, if Christ calls sooner, the sooner does Bartimeus throw off his
patched cloak. And the sooner the Angel calls Peter, the sooner does he
leave that stinking prison of his; and through the iron gate enters a City
both spacious and delightful.

Daughters of Jerusalem (says our Savior Christ) weep not for me, but weep
for your selves. And yet he was then approaching the gates of death in the
midst of his days, and flower of his age, yet says he Weep not for me.

And truly, no cause at all, had they to weep for him, for now was the time,
when the son of man, should be glorified: Now was he to put off that shape,
and form of a servant, which for our sakes he had taken upon him. Phil.
21.6.7. now was the time come, when being wholly freed from the contempt, and
scorning of all his enemies, he should be advanced above all principalities and
powers, That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Ephesians. 1.21. Phil.
21.10.

Let them therefore not weep for him, if they will weep, then let them only
for themselves and for their sins.

And as this is the estate of the head, so is it likewise of the members:
howeuer the ignorant man esteems them dying in the best of their strength and
midst of their days, as unhappy men; yet we are to know, that this their
taking away does add greatly to their happiness. For behold death gives to
them A quietus est from all their labors, and a cessation from all their
troubles. After that no more pain or grief, no more sorrowing or lamenting:
Apoc. 7. and 21.
Their mouths are filled with laughter; and the salt tears wiped from their
eyes. That pleasant Land and fragrant Hill, Mount Sion (I mean) which all
their life long like Moses, standing on Mount Nebo they beheld afar of, now
they cheerfully enjoy: here they walk to and fro, no longer by faith, but now
by sight they see as they are seen, they know as they are known. If then
their estate be thus (as indeed it is,) and far more happy a great deal
then I am able to express) why should any trouble themselves in bewailing and
lamenting the same which is every way so blessed?

But will one say to me; Not sorrow? why who can with dry eyes behold such
worthy persons as this cut off in the prime of their age? who for their piety,
wisdom, learning, and many a noble virtue might have stood the world (if God
had thought so good) in exceeding steed. Shall the righteous perish, and no man
lay it to heart?

To this I answer, though there be no cause at all why we should sorrow for
them, yet there is cause sufficient for our selves: and that in these three
respects:

First, That when we had them we made no more account of them, not knowing
our good until we had lost it.

Secondly, that by our sins we provoked the Lord to deprive of so great
comfort and to extinguish such glorious lights in this Church.

Thirdly, let us weep for our selves, in that the evil day is so fast
approaching upon us These summer birds do leave us, doubtless: our winter is
coming God hasteneth so fast, his servants into their chambers, and therefore
we have cause to fear that a storm is at hand. Isa. 26.20.
But suppose the Lord spares the Land in general, yet good cause have we
every one in particular, to look to himself, we hear what our Prophet hear
affirms in the latter part of my Text, that Every man is vanity: and woeful
experience this day verifieth the truth both of this, as also of the former:
That when God rebukes, man consumes; and therefore it being so, let me desire
you all, a great assembly here met together, (some I know only to see, but
most to sorrow.) well to consider the speech of the Preacher, Eccles. 7.2.
affirming that it is far better to go to such a house as this, The house of
mourning, then the house of feasting; and his reason is for this says he is
the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. Giving us to
understand, that such places as this (where are so doleful objects offering
themselves to all) serve most excellently to awaken the drowsy and secure
heart of man dreaming (as before) of I know not what perpetuity and
steadfastness of things here below; to entertain thoughts far differing,
both of the vanity and uncertainty of all other things, so principally of
man himself. And accordingly I beseech you let the temper of our thoughts be,
we are the living, in this honorable Gentleman, let us behold the
inconstancy of all things here in this transitory world; and in his end, the
end of us all: and let us not only see but consider, and lay it to our heart:
where he is now, we must all come hereafter, death being the haven, where the
smallest boat, and tallest ship at the last arriueth: Yea the appointed
Harbor of all the living, Job. 30.30. we shall go to him, but he shall not
return to us, 2. Sam. 12.23.

Secondly, as he is gone before, and we there is no remedy must follow after,
so indeed know we not how suddenly, a hint whereof, our Prophet gives in the
first word of my Text. When thou, that is, at what time soever thou intendest
to rebuke man: intimating, that as there is a day and time of rebuking, so God
knows when, it may be nearer, it may be further off, it may be to morrow, it
may be this night. Thou fool, he will take away thy soul from thee.

Sure we are, we all must die, Old men may young men must: but who knows
amongst us all, whose lot is next, and at whose door the staff now stands?
Seeing therefore it is so, let the profane person, whose eyes the God of the
world has blinded, do as pleases him: let him make his rest here on the
earth, and mind no other but these earthly things: let his thoughts be
continually working how to pull down his barnes, and build bigger, or how he
may go to this or that City, and there continue a year to buy and sell: Iam.
4.13.
putting the evil day from him: Like those whereof Isa. 50.12 calling for wine
and strong drink, Come fetch wine, and let us fill our selves with strong
drink, for tomorrow shall be as this day and more abundant. But let us
brethren take a quite contrary course, seeing our lives are so uncertain, to
think more of our departure then ever before: practicing the commandment of
our Savior Christ, Mat. 24.41. Wake therefore, for you know not at what hour
your Master will come. Getting into our Lamps store of oil, that so when the
voice is Ecce sponsus venit: Behold the Bridegroom comes: we may likewise
Virgins be every way fitted, to attend upon him into that presence Chamber
whither this worthy person is already gone. To which most sacred place, Christ
for his mercies sake bring us all: to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit,
be praise and glory world without end: Amen.

UPON THE FUNERAL of Sr EDW. LEWKENOR.
(1)
AMongst the mournful multitude which stand
With Cypress branches 'bout the monument
Of this dead Knight, who list to understand
His life, his death, what he, what his descent,
With all which unto him is pertinent:
Right glad would I this gentle task fulfill,
But that my Muse fearing it might be shent
For undertaking thing beyond her skill,
Only a Porters place will here supply,
To let them in, where they may read this history.
(2)
There they shall read, how worshipful his Berth,
(To which ambitiously all sorts aspire,
How e're in other worth they suffer dearth)
There they his wealth, (which worldlings so desire)
There (that which only gentle minds admire,
And does embellish wealth and parentage)
His Learning and Religion entire:
I, for my part, (how e're in this nice age
It sound but ill, and homely seem) will span
His spacious praises thus, He was an honest man.
(3)
So leaving him to his eternal rest,
Let not my disesteemed Muse offend,
If my respect (which ever I professed
Both to your self, and my much honored friend)
Sad Lady, I to you now recommend.
Whose grief for his decease (if you give ear
To your dear love) will never have an end:
Nay but add faith against despair and fear,
And precious hope let in your bosom dwell,
Wherein else differ Christians from the Infidel?
(4)
He is not dead, whom you as dead lament,
Only in the journey which all once must go,
He you in time a little ouer-went:
And even in duty (which all wives do owe,
And wherein you much buxomnesse wont show)
You him precedence may not well deny,
Since to provide against your after woe,
For your best comfort and society,
He has you left (till you two meet again)
The gages of his love, the models of you twain.
(5)
To whom, vouchsafe me leave among the rest
Which honor you and your fair Family,
To wish all good, and of all good the best:
Whereto Almighty God which sits hie,
Let say Amen: let all the Saints reply,
And all the blessed Angels, which intend
The care of man, this blessed note reuie:
Joy you await, and comfort them attend,
Like ready handmaids, and what ever thing
May theirs or your delight, or new contentment bring.
(6)
And if my prayers of any force may be,
Such as the Palm in midst of fresh Springtide
In some clear crystal stream her self does see,
And her strait twigs, and branches spreading wide,
Which goodly sprowt and burgen from her side,
With silver blossoms rich embellished,
So may you see your young Imps multiplide,
And grow up thick like seeds in gardens shed,
And last your own lives thread be drawn so small,
That (not a minute ere your time) like fruitful ripe you fall.
(7)
Here stay my Muse, and craving pardon, kiss
The virtuous hand of this sad Lady Gent.
Who to her sex so worthy credit is,
That for ten thousand women which miswent,
Her gracious life and sweet comportement
Shall make amends, and take away the blame
Wherewith they all their sex have shamed and shent:
For which her endless praise and her good name
Like precious Incense shall on hie ascend
To heaven, and earth indeering her with God to friend.
FINIS.

