THE VALIANT ACTS And victorious Battles OF THE ENGlish nation: from the
year of our Lord, one thousand three hundred twenty and seven: being the
first year of the reign of the most mighty Prince EDWARD the third, to the
year 1558.

ALSO, OF THE PEACEABLE AND quiet state of ENGLAND, under the blessed
government of the most excellent and virtuous Princess Elizabeth: A
compendious declaration written by C. O. And newly translated out of Latin
verse into English meeter. By I. S.

Nob^ so la ^statque vinica virtus. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue

The names of the kings of England in whose days these wars and great
adventures have been made.
Edward. 3 Richard. 2 Henry. 4 Henry. 5 Henry. 6 Edward. 4 Richard. 3 Henry. 7
Henry. 8 Edward. 6 Phillip, and Mary.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir William Mohun Knight, longlyfe, and heavenly
felicity.
IF Maroes Muse, if Homers sacred vain,
(Which ancient Poets, intombed lie in molde:) Virgil (...) neth the (...)
deeds of Ae^ ^s. ^er bla^ seth the ac^ of Achilles (...) son to The tia.

Parnassus Nymphs had bett into my brain:
If that their skill, my slender quill did hold:
Then (worthy sir) your praises manifold,
With Trojan Dukes should lifted be to sky,
Or Thetis Impes, whose fame shall never die.
But bitter Fate, and cruel destinies doom,
Such cunning rare, denide have to bestow,
On me poor lad, to Homers lofty room
I may not clime, but cowching lie full low, Cher^ (...) (...) (...)

With Cherilus, and Virgills vain forgo.
They of their store, did spread and blase their skill,
I of my want do testify my will.
Wherefore in worth accept my willing heart,
Which what I could, not what I would, have brought,
Of Artaxerxes play the princely part, (...) (...) ^y ki^ (...) (...)

Of fountain floods, who drunk a hearty drought,
Which to his mouth with hands Synaetes rought. Syn^tes (...) poor (...)
Phillipp^ (...) ^oble (...) of (...)

Let Macedonian Phyllips courteous mind,
(Right worshipful) within your breast be shrinde.
The Persian king in bosom shrouded close,
A silie bird, which shund the hawke by flight,
And did her self for safety there repose,
Till that her foe were soared out of sight.
So these my toils accept with countenance bright,
Which I present here humbly to your hand,
Your like, or loath, may cause them fall, or stand.
Here Martial feats by valiant Brutes atchiu'de,
Here hard exploites, here battles fiercely fought,
(...) then the value of the gift. Howbeiti the toil and labor in trnaslatyng
was mine, t^ ^ectation and pleasure in reading shall be yours, if any be, which
I would it were as much as I could wish, to your contentation, and good like:
and to my great comfort, and hearts desire: Both encouragements to incense me
hereafter, to attempt some other thing which shall be peradventure more
pleasant, I will not say more profitable unto you for besides the notable
gestes and high exploites, of our Britain kings, and other particular
personages deciphered in this small volume, here also are lively expressed, and
blased forth, the haut stomachs, and famous acts, of our English nation in
general, their co^quests in France, their victorious ba^les in Scotland,
their memorable adue^tures in Spain, their valor in Iustes and combats at
home, their order of battle, their kind of munition, and Artillery, whereby
they have achieved so many co^quests, and have been most redoubted, and
terrible to their enemies: I mean Archery, which laudable, and martial
exercise, how greatly it is now in these our days, fallen into decay, we shall
I fear me, if constrained to endure those bruntes, and attempt those
adventures, and perils which our forefathers have done, to soon for our
selves, though it to late repent. I have not presented it here, as a thing
exquisitely done, but as a work rudely ouerranne, rather then curiously
absolved and perfited. If any one hereafter to the better explication of the
Poets meaning, to the liuelier bewtifiyng of his Countries exploytes, and
famous attempts, and to the greater delight, and utility of the reader, shall
in a more lofty vain, and heroical style polishe and publish this Author a
new, who I confess deserves a tra^slatour far better then I am, then let
these my toyses be brent and consumed to ashes, deuoide of farther name and
memory. In the mean space if you vouchsafe to turn them over, for your solace
at vacant times I hope you shall reap some vtility be the matter, though not
by the meeter, in which, though you here, and there find a escape, I beseech
you pass it over with patience, and persuade your selves, that if God send me
life and health, upon information thereof, it shall be in the next Aeditio^
reformed. As for you my Masters, and Teachers which read this Author in
s^koles, you must not be offended, though every verse answer not your
expectation, according unto the Latin, for as the worshipful Tho. Phaer in his
Preface to his Aeneads affirms, beside the difference of a construction, and
a tra^slatio^, there are many things which seem delectable, and pleasant, in
the Latin tongue, which converted into English, would either be so intricate
that none could understand them, or so unpleasant that none would vouchsase
the reading of them. Wherefore I have Imitated the counsel of Horace, in his
book entitled De Art Poetica, where he commendes and allows him as a good
interpretour, amongst other points Qui quae non sperat nitescere posse,
relinquit.
and have somewhat in some places omitted, though i^ but little, and somewhat
altered, though not much, altogether for the ease of the reader and the better
understanding of the whole work. The Authors meaning as near as I could I
have kept perfect and inuiolate. And so fare ye well most friendly Gentlemen.

Yours to use. JOHN SHARROCK.

William Bluett: studient in the University College in Oxenford in praise of
the work and Author.
CEASE, cease hence forth you worthy English wightes,
at strangers deeds, to take such admiration:
Since far they come behind the noble Knights,
Which fostred have bin, in our English nation.
Cease cease henceforth, to wonder at the acts
Of martial Caesar, and renowned Pomp^,
Cease, cease to talk of Alexanders factes
Of Scipio, Hanniball, or the warlike Fabie.
Cease, cease a while, to turn the books of Liuius
Plutarch, Tacitus, Appian and Curtius.
Of Homers tales, or Virgill very fables,
Of Thucidid or Herodotus bables.
Behold a wight from Parnasse lately pressed,
Has Phoebus sent whose pen, of ancient name
Our noble Henry's, Edwardes, and the rest,
Enrolled ha^h in bookeof lasting same.
Where you may see the virtues manifold:
Of this your country done in former years:
Patterns to follow, where ^keyou may behold,
If you will imitate such noble Peers.
Now, if his voice, you do not understand,
Or l^iffer had in speech of this our land
This Author read: hark what the Muses have
Of that decreed and done which you do ^aue.
They prayed Sir Phoebe in humble wise of late,
From out his sacred mount, to send some on,
That might this work into our tongue translate:
Who looking round about, his Helicon
Sharrocke espied amongst his learned b^nd:
VVho^ straight (as apt and able both) he binds,
This worthy work to take forth within hand,
Thereby to profitte you his country driends:
Who yielding straight: God Phoebus hest and will
Has this performd with speed, and skillful quill.
Cease Zoilus to carpe: the Muses him commend
Be silent Momus; Phoebus did him send.
(...) Hortatorium eiusdem W. Bluetti ad authorem.
vt ad altiora contendat.
Perge age: quid dub^ as? Parnassi scande cacumen:
Dexter Appollo tibi, dextera Musa tibi.
TO THE MOST EXCELlent and most mighty Princess Elizabeth, by the grace of
God, of England France and Ireland QVEENE, Defendresse of the Faith, etc.
Renowned Nymph, of Britain land, the guidance great, and stay,
Which do most glorious shine in peace, and true religious way
Which glittering in thy lives deserts, and manners radiant light,
Exceld'st Zenobia, or if one excelled her, by right,
In rule which Juno, Uenus fair in form, Minerue in art
Expressest, and more virtue shrinst, then female sex in heart:
Come favorable, happy slide, to these attempts of mine,
Thy gracious look (O goddess) shall, as power of godhead shine.
The work is hard, I may not prop so huge, and vast a molde,
Less with thy friendly aspect, thou (me goddess) do behold
Look friendlye, (goddess bright) and see, what hard exploites of yore.
Thy great forefathers have atchieu'd, three hundred years and more.
Whose royal chaier, and Diadem, since thou (O nimphe) sustaines,
Their glory wonnne in bruntes of Mars, unto thy laud remains,
Nor it is unmeet fearce battles, to a virgin to express,
Then pleasant peace, the brunts of wars did Pallas please no less.
Therfo^ this work (most worthy Queen) with gracious cou^tena^ce take,
Thy judgment settes me bolt upright, or fondred flat does make,
Though all men me abject, and spurn, I naught them all regard,
It is enough, if from my Muse thy liking be not bard,
God grant that long in native peace, thou may enjoy the crown,
And eke excel thine ancestors, in glory, and renown.
Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject,

C. O.

The notable Battles and high exployts of the English nation.
HOw valiauntly the warlike race of mighty Brute did bear,
Themselves in blouddy camps of Mars, how they the tre^bling spear. Mars God
of battle.

With courage shook, and troops of foes by force in fight did foil,
Full fiften hundred years ago, when Caesar first this soil.
With Romish army did assault: his Story teaches plain, Iul us Caesar.
Caesar's Commenta^s.

Which yet does many a noble act, of this our land contain.
And if that treason his attemptes, had not propt, and up bore,
In vain had Julius set his foot upon our English shore.
In vain Gradiuus offspring had their banners brood displayde, Gradiuus one of
the names of Mars from whom Romulus first king of the Romans dis^ded.
Britains paid tribute and did homage to the Emperors of Rome. Ciuil^
diffention, present destruction of a c^ntry or common weal Erinnis a fury
breeding dissension.

Nor homadge to the Romish king, nor tribute had been paid.
But what is of that force^ what Realm is of that might and power,
UUhich civil hatred cannot cause the enemy to deuower?
The common people what do they not break, and bring to naught,
UUhen once dissentions headlong heat, their retchlesse brains has rought?
UUat does not discord quite consume, diminish, and decay,
UUhat foul Erinnis, fearful fend, does rule and bear the sway?
A pearelesse Prince was Caesar sure, a warlike, haut, and bold,
UUhose worthy acts in memory, deserve to be enrold:
So many kingdoms brought by force, the Roman yoke to hold.
But what? could he without the power divine, and sacred hest,
Of high Iehoue, such nations fierce, by force have ouerprest?
The Germans he by dince of sword subdued in Martial field,
A nation which inprowesse will not to the Latin yield.
Both stout in arms, and haut of heart* the warlike Galls he tamde, I atines of
Latini people in Itali^.

UUhose virtue rare, to shine in peace, and wars, has still been framde.
UUhy then alone to Romans, did the glory of war redounde?
UUhy then the world so vast, to bend at Caesar's b^e was bound, Galls of the
the people Galls in Frau^.

Each countries force, by blouddy Mars made subi^ ^is might:
Or quayled quite, before his power, and army came (...) sight?
Undoubtedly that Jesus Christ, our sweet Messiah b^e:
All nations should be linkt in league, which hatred erst had torn.
All things must have their course, and their disposed order sure:
Which also limittes have, beyond which time, they cannot ^ure.
The first that ever Monarch hight, that proud, and pompoue town,
Which walls of brick, full huge, yconipast, to her great renown, Semyramis
wife to king Ninus of Pertia governed the first Monarchy. Nylus a great river
in Aegipt by whose inundation with the heat of the sun is the country
adiaco^t made fruitful. Alexander Magnus king of Macedonia the second Monarch.
The Romans under Romulus had the third Monarchy but rather under Julius Caesar.

Did Babylon contain, and Aegipt, through thy fluent streams,
O Nyle, when Sol from hye, thereto does bend his blesing beams:
Replenisht full of corn, and wine, and oil, and cattle store,
Did foster up, to other lands, wars scarce were known before.
A few years after that, the Greeks the p^se of warfare wanne,
Who other nations far, and near; su^ng ouerranne:
The Italians than the pomp of Greece ^prest with might, and mayner
Which shortly after by the Goths, were forced to yield again.
As wallowing waves successively, the one the other drives:
So he which was depriuer now, an other Prince depriues.
It Is God almighty, which all mortal things ^th beck does guide,
UUhich seas, and lands does rule, and eke the Starrie region wide.
He, he, is God of arms, whose thunder dint, resounding shakes,
He is the God of armies to, which gives at will, and takes.
UUhich trembling terror bringes, and manly courage ads again,
UUhich victors makes, and conquered foes, by swourd yeldes to be slain.
For he behold his enemies force, quite craches with puissaunt might,
UUhich Gods hye sacred will esteems, most worthy of by right.
The Thratian nation fierce, through deeds of arms renowned are The praise of
all the nations in Europa. The Scithian and those co^tryes which lie near the
North Pole at the people Getae and Sa^uromatae and others.

And they which Northern nipping cold does pinche, a people rare,
For Martial feats, in wit, and manly force who do excel,
And other points of Chiualrye, in fight too prompt, and fell.
Usde often to blouddy Mars, the Germaynes, corpse which hugie have,
The Polon, and Dalmatian, the Hunne, and doughtie Swaue,
The Flemming, Frenchman fierce, the Spanyard, and the Brytaine haut,
The Scot also through manly heart, prompt for to give assaut:
The noble feats of Mars, in warfare use, with might, and main,
And neither of the Summers heat, nor winters cold complain:
But by their acces, their ancestors, through minds unconquered stayne.
Thou wars O mighty king do send, as scourge, and dart most dire,
Sins just reward, when nations proud, provoke thee unto ire.
And for their foul, and filthy factes, some dreadful penance pay.
UUhen others by Jove's mighty hest, do bear the palm away.
Therefore the praise of each exployte, and glory great of war,
Referd must be to God above, whose beck does make, and mar.
Let him to me intending now, of blouddy wars to sing, The Author^ ^uocation.

Beginning be, and author firm, this work to end to bring.
Let him with his omnipotent, and heavenly power divine, Bd^rd the third began
to ^gne Au. 1520. in the xv year of his age.

Support, and favor this attempt, and enterprise, of mine.
From William spro^g, hight Conqueror, that stout, and Princely Peer,
King Edward, third of that name, began the Britayne crown to wear:
When scarce the number small, of thrice five years, he had full filde,
A counselor sage, at home, which seeds of Justice daily tilde, Edward a
godly Prince. VVherof this was one Longbeardes ha^ ^eile, paus ted houdes
^else. Gay coats g^celesse, ma nes England th^stleus. The Scotts entering into
^ngland as fair as Stanhop park were compast rosd by king Edward who thought
to subdue there but by ^eason of s^e of his host they (...) (...) the king by
^n self of Sir Edward Mortimer, who the bare great sway in England delivered up
those Charters and Patentes. But more scillict to spite the king of England.
Edward Baliol king of Scotts d^uen out of his co^ try comes into England. The
Oration of Baliol to king Edward.

And statutes made, and laws consirmde, the common state to ease,
But chiefly he imployde his care, the Lord of Lords to please.
Four times the glittering Sun, each sign in heaven wandered had,
The fifth the when through Cancers arms, he stealing began to gad:
A chosen true of Martial knights, king Edward having got,
Cntented battle for to wage, against the busy Scot.
The greatest part of all his Realm, with words do more increase,
His Princely ire, for that the Scotts, had brake their league, and peace.
Hereto a Caunte full of reproth, against this noble land,
UUith an old grudge was ioynde, since they on Stanhop were in band.
Moreover at Northampton, vy the kings chief Casketts torn,
UUherein they left their bands of league, the seals taken of beforne.
These causes just incenst the valiant English hearts to fight,
And clean expelde all faintyng sear, which might their minds afright.
But yet by speeches fair, repent if that perchance they would:
And eke amend their traitrous minds, if that which Justice should,
Atrribute due unto the Crown of England, they would pay,
To win the Scotts, the courteous Prince, first friendly did assay.
But they no white at all relent, but more, intend to bring,
Some means, whereby to work the death, of Baliol their king.
UUhich spying out their treasons false, all perilles to refrain,
Attaines the English coast by stealth, and so auoydes their train.
And setts abroch unto the king, what fraud they did pretend,
Ungrateful Scotts, their sovereign leyge, to bring to fatal end.
And then requests in himib^ sort, his grace his case to aid,
For thus (permitted for to speak) in doleful sort he said.
He which made heaven, and earth, and men, and beasts of brutish hind:
In guidyng things most provident, assuredly did mind,
That kings, of kings should need the help, and should their succor crave,
And he which had received, most commodity, should have.
A grateful heart, to bear for aye, the giuers acts in my^e.
And sure I think it Gods behes^, that some are here assignde,
Under some lucklesse Planet borne, in some unhappy hour,
UUhich in this world, most griping grief, and sorrow shall devour.
And to what end: for that the Lord, most perfect, good, and kind,
In ample sort, to good men gives good gifts, with willing mind.
And will his like have for to aid, men plunged in distress,
But what auayles by circumstance, my mind for to express?
Wherefore in brief, unto the cause it self, i will me address,
Of late a kingdom I possessed, my fathers only heir.
And did that stifueckt people well, with rain restricted bear,
I liu'de deuoyde of fear, in pleasant peace, and ^de my land,
UUhen suddenly a tumulte made, of rebels false (...) ^de:
Me unawares besieges round, suspecting naught at all,
And having chosen captains fit, besets my pllace wall.
UUhat should I do, unhappy wight, such dangers pressed at hand:
And at that pinch, when not a friend was by my side to stand:
Help from the Gods, with voice submisse, and lowly mind I crau'de,
God heard my plaint, and in my heart, this was forthwith ingrau'de: od present
at faithful prayers.

To fly the watch, by scaping through a window in the night.
From whence, I here am come (O king) unto thy land by flight.
And under this, that nation vile, their vile offense have closde,
That I, not in their Peers, nor in their people, trust reposde:
But to to much, your grace esteemde, and Britains lou'de to near,
My native country now I want, my wife, and children dear.
(...) ^oore, and needy wretch, here wander in a foreign land,
^thing but hope remains, a sorry comfort still at hand:
Unto distressed wightes, which never sure their minds forsakes,
Till gasping breath begone: my broken heart which somewhat makes:
For to revive, and will in time, more friendly Fortune bring.
Some pity take, I pray, upon my travails past O king.
But if you will vouchsafe to take, the tu^ele of my state:
While I am here tormented with the scourge, of bitter fate:
And me into your favor high, by good luck, shall receive,
You Ba^ial shall his state ychangde, of thousand thrals bereave:
And eke your Fame throughout the world, shall blased be therefore.
This is the sum of my request. then this, I ask no more.
He having ended his discourse, forthwith to make reply,
King Edward him address, of Britain land the glory hye.
All things within this wavering world, to fickle chance, are thrall, The
answer of king Eid. ward.

The turrettes (...) huge in hight, sustain the greater fall.
He that is nothing mou'de at all, with beggars state most base,
Nor yet is daunted, with the looks, of frowning Fortunes face.
But with a mind unmoved bears, all loss no whit apalde,
He ought by right, a prudent man, and stout in deed, be calde.
A virtue patience is, which other witness does surmount,
Therefore this adverse luck despise, and thereof make no count.
For God himself, has limittes put, unto thy cares no dout,
Which at his pleasure, he will end, when times are turnde about.
Expect a while, till ripe corn ears, Autumnus heat shall bring,
And green grass, by the blasing beams, of Phoebe aloft shall spring. (...)
one syllable take for the Su^ two sillables for the Mo^.

That for the barbed courser brave, the earth may prouend yield.
Mean time, against this nation false, to fight, fit for the field,
I armor strong will get, and soldiers stout, through all my land,
I will collect, and what things else, for wars in steed may stand.
The fautors shall be quite destroyed, which that vile cause sustain,
And over that unbridled nation fierce, i will make thee reign.
If God shall grant, and set will in thy fathers seat again:
Thus said the English puissant Prince, the Court with murmour cract,
On every side, resounding shrill, a foul, and filthy fact:
Each one cries, for cankred nation proud, their lawful king,
Of royall-scepter to bereave, and work his bale to bring.
Few days expired wear, and stealing time not far had start,
When doughtie knights, and soldiers brave, the king from every part,
Selected had, and Captains stout had chosen stoare at hand, Preparation for
war against Scotland.

The troops of horsemen set in ray, and many a mighty band.
Of footmen (floct in heaps before) being all disposed: (the mass,
Of coined gold, for so great wars, and silver, taken was, Gold and ^luer borne
on carres to pay the soldiers.

Out of the chestes, wherein all goods confiscate hourded are,
And to be borne, on carres was laid, no dout most gratfull ware)
Forthwith the warlike Princes both, the Britain first in sight,
And after him the Scot, before the town that Barwicke hight,
UUith walls aloof erected, strong yfenct, their tents they place,
UUhich bordreth near the (...) fields, where Twede does run his race. Twede
a mighty river runnyng by Barwicke.

A fortress Barwicke is, with ample walls succincted round,
Cut out from craggie rock, and bulwarkt up with baulkie bund.
That from the dreadful dint of sword, it can hit soldiers shield, Barwicke
b^sieged. Description of Barwicke. Flora the Goddess of flowers and green
(...).

And will not to the bouncing blows, of warlike ingine yield.
Fast unto which conioynde of hollowed rocks, (...), lies
A turret, mounted up aloft, unto the Starrie (...).
And far, and wide, beholdes the champion fields of Flora bright,
UUith sundry sorts of armor full, and valiant knights yfright.
And many a fort, fit for defense, the walls on each side guard,
That dreadful force, of foreign foes, from Barwicke quite is barde.
Twede saues that side, which Southwinde shrill, with moistie wings does
And on that part, the salt sea floods, with bellowing, bouncing beat: (weat,
Which Titan from Aurora fled, with fiery face beholdes, ^tan the unne.

The Northside has a castle fair, which it against foes imboldes.
With native people, which the woody mountains joint thereby,
Inhabit, and the Scottish realm, which wholly there does lie.
Yet all these fenced fortresses, could safety not afourde,
Nor Princes tower the dwellers shroude, from dinte of direful swourd,
For after that the English camp, the fair broad fields throughout,
Was spread, and compast had the walls, with hollow trench about:
With hugy heaps of molde up cast, the Scotts all trembling closde, The
assaulting of Barwicke.

Their iron gates, and walls, with spanges, and boltes of steel composde:
The common sort do fortify, and propp with hugy ^es.
On the other side, with heue, and sheue, all thrunging thick, on flocks,
The English army, gay in glittering coats, endeavor fast,
Some fiery flashing brandes amayne, to tops of garre^ts cast,
Some tend the double, leaffed doors, with bars of steel to tear,
But Vulcans frying flames to quench, the Scotts do water ^are, Vulcanus God
^ers Iub^s smith

Each fountain f^re drawn dry, in every street, the town throughout.
And more of fiery force, the present peril, less to dout:
The entry of each gate, with heaps of rubble thick they throng, The
Britains gave so hot assault that the Scotts drew all (...) (...) walls and
pi^es dry to quench the fired places of their town.

All passage barring quite, and water scalding hott, among
The Britaynes, he wing out a way with blouddy blade, they fling.
Nor unrevenged thus scapes the Scot, for some the whurling sting,
Some others down the pearcing shaft, to ga^ly shadows ding.
Not light of day, the town besiegde, not dark, and duskie night,
Could rest permit, their irefull minds so glowing hot to sight,
Desire of deep revenge, had made, and kindled more, and more.
In a cl^e darkesome night, they feign the walls to scale therefore:
The dubbling dromme resoundes, and ladders, ladders, each one calde,
UUhich makes the Scotts to shreike, so tre^bling fear their minds appalde,
Now there be seckes an entrance through the wall, an other here:
In coats of lyncloth clad, through darksome shades, milke-white appear,
The valiant race of Brute* no s^ombring s^eepe, their eyes to touch,
The town besiegde permits, hope on both parts, and fear is such.
Mean time in ^ege full thirty days, expired were, and past,
UUhen cruel dearth, and famine fell, does pinch the Scotts at last, The
Scotts like to sa* (...) h^.

Closde fast within their walls, and needful food each where does want,
A little bread, was sold for gold, it was so rare, and scant.
Their fish was spent, they had no flesh, nor other victuals,
A little eger wine was left. Forthwith together calls,
His mattes, the Chieftaine of the tower, and thus he speaks in brief.
UUhich of you all is ignorant, that here we want relief?
UUe can by no means fly from hence, nor from our charges swerve,
And it is a dreadful kind of death, through hunger pale to star^e: The Orati^
of the liuetenaunt of Barwicke to his soldiers.

Chiefly for men of body sound, and full of solid strength:
Of his accord the apple ripe, does fall from tree at length.
But hardly he by force, unripe, is plucked from of his plant.
UUhat use have men of joints, and limbs, if grateful food (...) want:
UUhat fruit has life, both head, and hands, shall languish, and decay,
If fostring good they lack. Therefore now (ma^es) what do you say?
UUill you that on conditions, the City yielded be?
UUhich by the Britaynes stout subdued, ere long time you shall see,
UUith griesly dynt, of blouddy blade, her men and children kilde?
Or will you that we all do p^e, and be by famine spilde?
The Captain thus his whole intent explande, his speeches ends,
When straight, with hurly burly noyce, a diverse sentence rendes,
The fickle common sort. But all in fine, do thus agree.
A streamer white as driven snow, wide open in sight to see:
Out of a turret top, they hang, a sign of peace to be.
And more right humbly pray to have, some parle with the king,
Or with some noble man, to him their message for to bring.
From out the kings pauilion straight, on to the walls was sent,
To know their mind, and to return their purposed intent.
UUhen lowly, thus a soldier sage, begins to frame his speech.
The troop of men besieged here, most humbly does beseech,
Such friendly favor to be shown, that through the mercy great,
Of Edward peerlesse Prince, a few days truce they may entreat.
And promise plightes, the fort to yield, and town, as to him thrall,
If on that side, where Northarne pu^es, do batter Barwicke wall:
In darcke night shade, sent from the peers, and primates of the land,
Into the City do not escape of armed men a band, Eight day^ truce.

UUith succor, and provision frought, within full eight days space:
And that unto the Britains they, by just right will give place,
And eke deliver up the tower, unto the Princes grace.
Their plighted promise to confirm, the king would pledges have,
To whom (which truce made for a time) in number twelve they gave. Pledges
taken.

But long the sleightes, and subtle guiles, of that vile nation ^ye,
May not be hid, in whose heart roots, and bowels, lumpes do lie, ^he Scott^
(...) their ^ce (...).

Of fraud ingraft, by natures skill, that needs not arts devise.
For scarce Sir Phoebe with blasing beams to, the world had compast thrice:
When carefully the English camp, do keep their watch, and ward,
And other some supply the rooms, which others erst did guard.
The fourth day comes, when Southwind blastes, along with whistling ^ide,
And in the UUesterne Ocean floudes, Sol began his front to hide.
The night draws on, and shadows quite the earth, with darkness blind.
In quiet rest, all men, and fowls, and beasts of savage kind,
UUear softly laid, and weried corpse, refresht with slombring sleep.
The watch, the Nothside of the town, takes only care to keep.
Lest on that part the wily Scot, by stealth should entrance get,
Because it was as covenant, twixt both the nations set,
That on that side their hoped aid, to come, they would in take,
Or of the tower besiegde, forthwith the Britains owners make.
But here behold, in glomy shadowy night, a fearful foe,
Dacett, the chiefest Scottish Peer, three miles in compass thoe, Dac^tt with
a few other enters Barwicke in the ^ight.

Had trast beside the English camp, and over Twede had past,
Into our borders, all on ^orse, with army ^ying fast.
And though the bridge, of hard rock framde, was ransackt, and up torn,
Clean to the walls, that over hit, no passers might be borne.
Yet hardy Dacett through the streams, attainde the warlike tower,
Some of his men in chanel whelmde, for fishes to deuouer.
Straight ways a clamor loud, from Barwicke rought the starry skies,
And gladsome news of present aid, through every street forth flies:
UUhich shortly after turned was, to doleful plaintes, and cries. The Scotts
truce breakers.

For of deceit and treachery, they all with shame convicted,
Forthwith which justly they deseru'de, with penance wear afflicted*
Fame of this thing so speedely, with flickering fe^hers fled,
That tydinges to the king was brought, as he lay in his bed.
Day light appears, when fair in sight was to a Iybet trust, The pledges
hanged.

One of the pledges, whom forthwith succeed an other must.
By strait commandment from the Prince* who had decreed, each day,
Them two, and two, to hang, till all wear dead, and made away.
Then, then, at length that nation faithless rued, their traitorous minds,
When he far of, of faithful friend, the breathless body finds:
Hye tottring in the air, tossed to, and froe, with whurling winds.
He by infamous death, complains stock diffamde to be,
Whiles in prospect of all, his son is tied to fatal tree.
The wretched mothers only hope, and solace in distress,
The women eke with hayres unfold their dolours do express, Famine oppres^eth
the Barwicke souldi^urs and inhabitants. One sorrow and calamity mittigateth
an other.

And howlinges loud do make, and naked breasts with bouncing beat,
But for because that hunger dire, and scarsitie of meat,
A deadly plague, through all the town, does headlong range about,
And food from hungry jaws of men, by little plucketh out,
Devouring victuals all: those doleful sorrows were the less.
But here behold an other guile their famine to redress.
That to the English camp unawares, of men (...) selie band,
Might range abroad, and victuals bring from out the Scottish land,
And other aid procure, eight days truce more they pray the king.
But he their fraud foreseing, smiles, yet grauntes to them that thing. Truce
the second time.

True glory he, and high renown, not golden booties sought,
For well he did perceive by chraft, the matter to be wrought.
The Tenttes in peace do rest, and Barwicke soldiers careless s^rt,
And weried limbs through tossing toils, with pleasant sleep comfort.
For meat was none, whereby their hungry stomakes fill they might.
And now through midst of heaven hye sir Phoebe had taken his flight,
And ouerra^ the hugie shoulders brood of Leo fierce,
All headlong prone descending down, where Vesper first does perce,
The duskie cloude^. An army great, in glittering harnish dight, An army of
Scotts sent to remove the fi^ge.

When from the mountains tops in ranks, appears wide open in sight.
As sheep in broad fields floct, go green grass nibbing here, and there:
Or as on pleasant hills, where young lam^es skipp with sporting chere,
The number is confusde: so thick on troops they bleating go:
The Ram amongst the milk white ewes, himself does lofty show,
Excelling both in courage have, and strength of body great,
And fenced with his hooked horns, reuengement fell does threat:
None otherwis^ the Scottish armed bands, on tops of hills,
From far do show them selves, and fields with thousands thick up fi^s.
Whence down in good array they march, into a valley plain,
And every one within his bands, his footesteps does contain.
Each standard bearer does his streaming banners broad display,
And taller by the heads the valiant Captains lead the way.
Twede at that time her banks with swelling floudes had overflowed,
By reason of the salt sea spring. That way to fly was none,
Left for the English armed bands, that hope was quite bere^.
UUherfore the bragging Scotte, to humane f^rre which only cleft,
The mighty power, of high Iehoue, respecting naught at all,
Presumptuo^lie with swelling heart, himself does victor call.
And vauntes that Britaynes all at once, shall slo^p to di^t of lance,
And shall of sharp two ^ed bl^, abide the greisly glaunce.
Thus they before the battle foug^, the triumph blasde, and spread,
Puffed by with hope, and native pride, which full their fancies fed.
Moreover hope of rescues near, the cow^e besieged had,
UUhen far on p^ning plains, the Scottish armies thick to gad,
They had espied, and every one hi^ native armor knew,
And eke their nobles standerdes all, when first they them did view.
The Frasiers brethren twain and chiefest of the martial rout, The of
Scottish Nobles.

The forefront of the battle led, with Gwalter Stuard stout.
Then Greham, Card^, Parkeys Gordon, Gramat next, and Bride.
And Gilbert Douglas fierce, and Morreys Abbhyn by side.
All dect in precious purple (...), the common (...) ^ours bear, The Scotts
divide their army into three battles.

The pearcing laun^ and some in hand* do wiel^ the ^die spear.
All clad in stealed Iackes, with glittering (...) gorgeous gay,
UUhose gastlie threatening ^okes, their inward anger did bewray.
These Peers the second army guides, and last, whose force exceedes
In martial acts, and to the first, are not unlike in deeds,
First Moses, Morys then, and Valam, with that mighty (...)
Gordein, and Alen Stuard, then whom Sotherland ^th cheer
UUith honor due, and Ruffy shyning all in armor bright,
Then comely Alexander Brus then Ceton, doughtie ^ight,
Last Lyndesey, Gros, and many more, whose fame and glory hye,
Through all Europa costs so vast, to their renown does fly.
All sprung of royal blood, from ancient stocks descending all,
But of the conunon sort whose names to mind I cannot call The English army.

Full sixtye thousand fighting men did stand in battle ray:
On the other part the offspring stout of Brute did not delay,
But ready makes their swourdes, and drierie darts, with ^nted ends,
Their sinowye bows, and trusty strings, the shaft which whu^ling sendes.
Their filed steeleheades strong, the sturdy stem which stedie bears,
UUith plumes of feathers decked, which crested hellmett lofty reares.
Most godly to behold, thus stands each band, which Tytaus rays, By reason of
the reflexe of the sun. The exhortation of the king of England to his
soldiers.

Do more set out, each order placde: the king thus boldly says.
Ye Britaynes comne of aunciedt race, I do rejoice to see
Your manly looks, which plain foreshewes, your hearts from terror free,
All trembling fear of death expeld. So does it men beseem.
And such as worthy me their king, and Captain, I do deem.
That Prince which guarded is, with doughtie ^ddes, in battle (...),
And tendes by force of blouddy Mars. to strive in quarrel go^
He shall more holdly enterprise, in fight his foe, to quell,
And mates for strength, and valor good, I think of you so well
As of his warlike Macedons great Alexander thought,
UUhen he against the Persians, and king Da^los fought,
The Monarch proud of Asia all. Dur cause most good and sure
Now who does dout, for what a Princes fame can more procure:
Or greater honor win, theu to restore a banished hing.
And him unto his fathers seat, and regal scepter bring:
UUhat open injuries of late, this people false have shown:
I need not now to ripp again, they all to you are (...).
I Will teach them if I live, Gods honor due not impayer,
Nor sacred Justice to infringe, nor Prince from royal chayet,
His right by birth, by force to pluck. Now long will thou O Lord
Behold and suffer to remain these sins, so much abhorde? The prayer of the
king of England.

Be thou from starrie region hye, revenger of this wrong,
Let vigor from above discende, us suppliant souls among,
And bashful fear, let feeble make, out foes which us (...).
Dout nothing valiant hearts, Gods puissant might will be at (...).
Let every one forth girde the trembling spear, with courage (...),
UUhy stay I now, (...) good event, I tookens feel n^ ^out. A policy to
animate his soldiers.

UUherfore go (...) our ensigns spread, and ^ers in the (...)
UUith (...) (...) assault (...) foes, yplung^* in deep (...)
Thus having said, Prince Edward mighty Peer does make (...) (...).
UUhen straight the English camp with clamor loud the skies does (...)
Redoubling still amain, ours, ours, the virtorie is, hye love,
His haly sprite does breath on us, and sendes he (...) (...) (...).
Mean time the army large, is (...) strong (...) (...)
UUith bows, and arrows good, which swiftli^ (...) (...) (...) string,
The threefold mayled coat of proof, with squared head (...) pearce,
And now with blast of sounding trompe, the warning, gin, forth fierce
UUith eger minds, the onset first, the valiant Britaynes gives,
The shiuering shaftes do dymme the air, so thick erh (...) drives.
And as glommy shower, with (...) (...), (...) (...),
The light with ^sh (...) (...), which suddenly (...)
All trembling makes men's minds, and pleasa^ fields to (...) compells,
Eth mortal wight, and to return for succor where he dwells:
None otherwise the shaftes thick sh^e, ^lose the ^are day light,
UUhilst Britayne bold the bended bow, does pull with manly might.
The salt sweat (...) through labring ha^, (...) (...) (...) (...),
UUhilst peaceing arrow through the air, by force (...) passage seeks.
Both armies bustling meet and man, to man (...), in that (...),
Not so with ghastly Cyclops strokes, mount Aetna did resounde: Vulcane as
Poets said had his smithey in mount Lemnos in Cicilie where he with his mates
wrought. A great scath by the Eng. Archers done to the Scotts.

Nor Vulcan fiery God, in dungeon deep, such noyce did make:
UUhilst that his monstrous mates by turns, the massy fledge did shake,
UUith twhick, twhack, thu^pe thump, bou^cing fast, as thu^deringlike did roar,
UUith clattering classing loud, of swourdes, the trampled Barwicke shore,
And all the mountain Halindane. Some take into their brain,
The whurling shaft, and struggling knock the earth, in deep disdain.
He fighting far aloof, is fiercely through the shoulders pusht,
He dies on point of mawrish pike, his thigh most greiflie crushed.
The most part yield their faintyng breath destroyed with ghastly wound,
Even through the bulk, their breast plates torn, where natures skill has
Unto the trembling lunges, the liver full of lively heat, (bound.
The battle yet hanges doutfull, none has gotten vantage great.
But after the assault more hott, and vehement began to ware,
The noble Prince Plantagenet his foes with pursuit backs.
The gorye blood, the flesh ygasht, with drierie dint of swourde,
Spins through amayne, as fluent floudes do scour the gurtie foorde.
Or as the blustering Southwind black, the fields does moist with showers,
In winter season cold, from duskie clouds, which forth he powers.
Who can declare the slaughters fell and labors of that day?
Who can with floudes of trickling tears; the sorrows justly way?
Of slaughtered bodies who the number great, and names can tell?
How many thousands eke the swourde in Plutoes pit made dwell?
What groans were heard, what sobbing sighs even from the heart roots
UUhilst out of dying corpse, ye flying ghostes their passage sought? (brought?
O ruthful shape of things, with breathles bodies covered is
The earth, on plumpes which lie, and honor of sepulture miss.
And as the greedy woulfe which rauine hunger forth imboldes,
UUhen be by shoouing long has brust a way into the foldes,
The seely sheep by tears, eke ravening hott blood streams out suckes,
And half devoured carcasses oerhippes, and more down pluckes,
UUhich are alive, proceeding fast with blouddy jaws to spoil:
None otherwise the Brytaine stern, with trampling feet does soil,
His sloughtred foes, and hott pursues the quick in fight to foil.
Down dinging some with spears, and poles, to Lethe rivers brinkes Lethe a
river in ^al.

UUho so dare once resist. The Scott this seeing backwardes shrinkes
And shiuering seeks to turn his back, and save himself by flight:
Again the progeny of Brute strikes lofty skies with shright:
Still following fast in chase, the starting foe to quell by might.
And floct in troops, as often as the adverse enemies crew,
Stark mad in mind, begins again the battle to renew: The Scotts slain
and pu^ to flight.

So often unto the conquerours might it waxing feeble bendes.
At length the glummy shadowye night, the blouddy battle ends.
Then sounding trumpet shrill, retires the weried Britains fast, The Retrai^
so^nded.

By Princes hest, and from the field, aloud, Retrait, does blast.
The enemy quayled thus, free, vncontrolde, rejoice at will,
The soldier might, and take of rest, and quiet sleep his fill.
It glads them for to think of bitter toils, and turmoiles past, Bacchus God
of wine. Ceres Goddess of corn and such like provision.

And then God Bacchus froothing boules, and Ceres gifts they taste,
To animate their hearts, no eye for pure toy winkes that night,
But showing his exploites, and hard adventures in the fight,
Each one unto his mate; of dangers past takes then delight.
Mean space (for nothing can be found more swift then fleeting time.)
The morn is come, and Titan clear begins aloft to clime,
And with his beams the fair brood fields does set wide open in sight.
Then myndefull of the succor sent, and power from God almight,
The godly Prince on bended knees, commaundes his camp throughout,
That every soul with reverence, and prayer most devout, Edward the next
morning after the battle fought with all his army do praise the Lord.

Should serve the Lord, and on his name high solemn praise bestow.
The mighty God, which for our sakes, the enemy brought full low,
That in the starrie firmament, thrice holy reigns for aye,
The Lord of Sabbath eke, which condign honor bears away,
Most worthelie be celebrate, and feared, without end,
In ages all, all nations eke, let to his Godhead vend.
Of thundering Jove the most redoubted might, who can abide?
UUho can his force withstand, which roaring floudes with beck does guide?
And earth rough ragd with baulkes, and ayrie region running round,
His glory great therefore with solemn tunes let Britaynes sound.
All victory comes from him, and from hye heaven to men discendes.
These things thus done, his tents he leaves, and course directly bendes,
Renowned Prince, unto the place, wherein the field was fought.
And there he learnes of such as were taken captive, to him brought, The number
of the Scotts slain in the battle was xxxv. thousand five hundred.

The names of those redoubted Peers, that there had got their bale,
UUhich some resemblaunce had in face, of former looks, though pale
Through want of blood they were, that scarce you might their countnance
But when untouched he did the race of warlike Brute espy. (try.
And lackt but only thirtene wightes of all his mighty train, Thirten
Englishmen only lost.

(Those which were hurt were shortly healde by medicines help again)
Ertolling both his arms aloft to glittering starrie sky,
He thus exclaimes amain, and to the Lord of hosts does try.
O Lord thrice mighty in thy deeds, how much do I thee owe,
What favor great upon this realm of mine do thou bestow?
Mean time one of his Captains had the whole brood field survued,
And Carcasses with clottes of dirt bedaubd, which would have rued
Ones heart to have beheld, their mestiue looks with tears imbrued.
And finds full xx. thousand Scotts and five to be by flight
Safe home returnde, so that destroyed by Brytaines fell in fight
Of all the Scottish army huge, thirty five thousand wear.
Which sloughtred number to augment, which noblest blood did bear
Of all their realm, five hundred Peers were sent to limbo lake.
Plantagenet these things thus known, return does speedy make
Unto his tents, whom by the way a Legate meets in have
Declaring how the Barwicke Lords would yield themselves at last
And leave their goodly town, which ^rong stone walls do surely ^arde,
If by the mercy of his grace their lives might all be sparde:
And that with bag, and baggage, they might freely thence depart.
The godly Prince the late shed blood, lamenting at his heart
Their lives with good will grauntes, but goods, and substance, does denay,
Which on my soldiers must (quoth he) bestowde be, for their pray.
Prouookementes, to incense their minds, adventures hard to prove.
UUhat does not mortal men to do lean pined hunger move?
UUhat does not adverse fate, conculking backward folk constrain?
Need is a direful dart. To save their lives they therefore feign
Conclude, and only with their clothes their native town forsake. Barwicke
^elded.

Forthwith Prince Edward of the tower by right does seison take.
And Barwicke gives unto his men with all her substance free.
UUhose not inricht goods to possess of which no owners be?
Though thousand troublous thoughts turn^ild, the king, now here, now
And restless rage, of clogging cares, his mind did piece meal tear: (there,
Yet chiefly Baliol he respect^, wherefore with helping hand, Baliol restored to
his kingdom.

He sets him in his Graundsiers seat, and Princely throne to stand.
Inricht with ^es of coin, and guarded strong with warriors stout.
And after garrisons were placde each where, the town throughout:
Time styding warnes the king, the South parts of his realm to see,
To London therefore hying fast, in short time comne is he. King Edward
returns to London.

UUhich fair brood streates addornes, and forth with solemn triumph
Unto his royal palace brave, whose coming there abides, (rides,
The Cytizens, his safe return applauding, and his feere,
The Princess Phillip, with her son, which looked with smiling cheer.
His noble praise and high renown through every streate does range,
And glory past the uncouth coostes of A^ke people strange.
The swift report of this new war, beyond the banks f^ue out,
Of Ganges liquid floudes, the mirror of our world no dout.
The king vnweryed sturres, and circuit makes throughout the land,
Survewing towns, and fortes, and in what case each thing does stand,
But chiefly at Newcastell he does love to make his stay,
Which from the Scottish borders far, is distant not away.
Here whilst he laws confirmde, and for offenders stablisht pains,
King Baliol comes, and after him a troop of nobles trains,
His homage for to do, as customde was in elo^r age,
And eke to show his friendly heart, which should at no time gage,
Wherefore admitted for to come before the Senate sage:
On bended knee, as in degree inferior, he submitts Edward Baliol comes to
Newcastell ^e does homage to king Edward.

Himself, King Edward on his throne, with regal scepter sitts;
And biddes with cheerful voice, him prostrate to be taken from ground,
Commending highly this his face, that though in duty bound,
Yet vncompelde, he honor gives, and aid by promise plightes
If that his traitrous subjects should against him bend their mightes. He:
scillic^ the king of England speaks comfortable wourd^ to Baliol.

Of commonweals affairs, and of God Mauors noble art,
Much talk was spent, he biddes him have a haut unconquered heart,
And not to bear in mind, his former thralls, and irksome fate,
But courage stout to have, concordant to his present state.
To Saints celestial yelding praise, and to the powers divine:
He more submisse does humble thanks refer, and thus in fine
In sondrie sorts of talk, and sporting mirth a day they spend,
And then another, till away Plantagenet did wend,
And Baliol king to Edenbrowe his progress straight did bend.
The Moon increasing often, had now repayrde her glittering gleames,
UUhen Edward with swift slyding hull deuides the surging streams,
Requested by the Flaunders Earl on causes of great weight
For to consult, to bothes behoof, in time redounde which might.
UUhom kindred near, and eke his spouse, to Britain monarch knit, Edward say
led into (...).

And having had on their affairs such talk as they thought fite,
They strike a league, and heavenly bodies bright, to record call,
UUhich never during term of life, be abrogated shall.
The Peers of Flaunders on their oaths, this league a vow to keep.
This done the king to England back the salt sea ^udes does sweep.
These (...) the French man galls, and fills his mind with doutfull (...),
UUhen through the streets of Paris, pompous town, this fame had spread,
And rumor running fast, uncertain who it first should rear,
And did likewise the irefull heart through burning choler tear. Pillip de
Valloys king of France threatens England. Edward summoneth the French king
and bears the arms of France intermixed with the English. Claimyng France to
be his by inheritance, Preparation for wars. Gold at that ty^e made in
England by art. Edward sayleth into Flau^ ders.

Of Valoys king of Galls, wherefore his Lords to counsel taken,
By dreadful Mars it was decreed to work the Britains bane.
Small matter finding out, and that unjust, to build upon,
But the English Rector fraud preuentes, with virtue pure anon,
For he to blouddy wars the Frenchman summons, as right heir
Unto the crown, and arms of France with the English mixed does beat.
For that his uncle Charles did to joys supernall pass,
No issue left behind, whose sister true, and coheire was
The comely Lady Isabell, out from whose loins did spring,
(She comne of ancient line her self,) the mighty English king.
UUho with these causes just of ire prouookt, in bags does fold,
A mass of silver pure, and hugie heaps of glittering gold.
And ready gettes each thing, for present wars which he thinks meet.
But first he goes the Flanders Earl his faithful friend to greet,
And to consult beyond the seas. A mighty army gardes
His majesty, which hollow hull from flashing surges wards.
And now in midst of weltring waves, the navy fleetes apace,
UUhich with his boystrous blastes the Northwinde cold along does chase,
His lusty laddes to copp, with whistle shrill the careful guide
Commaundes, where standing one, of Ships a navy huge descryde,
And ask, how many: answer makes, on wooddie mountains hye,
So many as are tender oaks esprong. Then of what country:
Of France (quoth he). Forthwith the king biddes each man to address,
Him self to fight, and armor strong to set in readiness.
And that no man should turn the stern, and course intended leave,
On pain of loss of that dear joint, to which the shoulders cleave.
Don Phoebus now, with glimering rays, the hye heaven costs deuides,
And lofty in his chariot bright, the winds quite calmed, rides.
Stout Valoys his up sturres, the broilyng battle to begin,
Shipp, fast to shipp conioynes, the clasping grapple, hellish ginne. A great
battle on the sea* near ^ude.

On both sides fiercer grows the fight, blood, blood, pursues full fast,
He headlong tumblyng down, in gulfie channel quick is cast,
A pleasant bait for frisking fish, he gasht with goory knife,
Into the surging salt sea floudes is thrown deuoyde of life,
And so one man with double corture, has his fatal end.
Moreover huge vnwieldie stones, the English soldiers send,
Down from their hollow topps, which Celtanes brainepans battring rende,
And bodies brusing tear, and hatches sprinke with brains, and blood:
The sharp side swourd the assault likewise does make more fierce, and wood.
The French defend themselves with poles, and stoutly break the blows,
Both nauyes fierce amayne, with sanguine streams of red blood flows.
But the English eger press their foes with much more force to sting.
Alas what stony river rough from stickle Alps whose spring,
With winter showers augmented is, with greater force does fall,
Into the brood seas gaping gulf? no semblance now at all
Of greenish color clear, dame Thetis wallowing waves retain Thetis godde^se
of the sea.

But purple hue do bear. So deep wounds pour bloudstreames amain:
As liquid water drops, through broken pipes, and conduites strain,
Besprinkling all the ground. No man by flight looks life to gain,
Nor ouglye shape of death, does any strike in staggring stound:
And now eight long hours fled, Sir Titans lamp had compast round, The fight
induced from XII a clock at noone till day break ne^ morning.

The ayrie region vast, and bending beak to deepes down stelt,
Then midst of summer was, in Cancers house Don Phoebus dwelt.
The skirmish hotter grows, and more, and more, does anger swell,
Haut courage kindles each man's mind. The ghastly bickering fell
Not night as black as pich, nor direful darkness stintes and stopps.
This bark salt water leakes, and surges high through thinks in hopps,
Her ribs by force out torn. There might you see huge hulkes half burnde,
Their men on scriking, drown, we drown, into the channel turnde.
Theirage yet restles rampes, and Britains force with hardier might,
As though even then they entered had into that fatal fight.
So fervent waxt their moodes, as though some sad unlucky star,
Did threat destruction dire to fall, on the one part of from far.
But the aspect of God Mars against the Gauls more cruel was,
The timber bourdes, and beams, do not them shrine from death alas,
Which those behind, in dark night shade, themselves thought for to hide,
And now almost deaths drierie dart the enemies all had stryde,
For thirty thousand in that fight their swift ghostes did convey
To Limbo low: end of the night, and dawning of the day, Thirtis thousand
slain of the Frenchmen. Edward victor.

Was final end of wars also. The famous conquest light
On Edward mighty Peer, the adverse navy most in fight
Taken either captive, or destroyde, few saude themselves by flight.
To thundering Jove, Plantagenet the chief laud does betake,
And biddes each man to him prostrate, his humble duty make,
And honor just ascribe. Things finished thus, back home again Edward
returning into England goes to VVindles Castle.

Prince Edward hies and through the floods, with brazen keele does train
Who lands at London tower, which mighty Tha^mes with waters clear
Soft slidyng, passes by. Then Windsor noble castle near
He goes to see, and royal banquetts makes, with costly cheer,
To be preparde, for four days space, and there to him both call (...) George
is feast.

The English primates chief, with their espoused Ladies all.
Each peer in his degree devout to sacred temple hies,
The Priest his rites performs, and tributes laud to Jove in skies,
God seru'de, down sits cch one, at Tables large, with naprie spread,
In parlonrs richly houg, with Aras wrought with silken thread.
Where fountain waters bright, were brought to wash, of custom old,
Then Ceres dainty dishes come, and massy boules of gold,
With Bacchus filde, which ancient shapes of Britain kings did hold, Bacchus
God of wine, used for wine it self.

By skillful art ingr^u'de. The king, and Queen, in lofty seats
Both jointly sit. And lower down, the nobles at their meats
In seemly sort are placde. Whose precious clokes ou shoulders hinge.
Three hundred Seruitours eke, successively arow did bring
Forth dainty cates, chargde to attend, and cupps with wine to fill.
When every slate sufficed was, and satisfied at will:
The tables voyded were, and from the silver Ewers still
Sweet smelling streams again to wash. Then takes the king in hand
A mighty gobblett full of wine, which on the bourde did stand,
And drinks Carouse to all his guestes, they pledge him in like sort.
Thus passing time, with sundry iestes, and meekle pleasant sport,
This king this motion makes. Letts now my Lords some maistries try,
UUhich may be grateful shows, to all my people standing by,
Quoth he, what answer make ye Sirs: They willing, yea, reply.
Straight trappers golden, golden bitts; and sadles guilt with gold,
Provided are, and each man horsd on trampling courser bold.
The king in armor bright engraven, on foming sleede is set,
And now each knight, a bunchie spear, of ash in hand does get,
The stoure begins, and rushing swift, with peise they press, to skies
The splinters shiucring small, and fragmentes broaken, rattling flies.
But he in midst of foreheard, which with sturdie troncheon struck
His foe, and course redoubling swift, his stafe most often brake:
He bore the palm away, and of those iustes the honor wanne. The first
institution of the golden Garter.

And now the bye heavens light, the night with shades had oueranne,
The Turney cudes, the Prince, and Peers, to banquet home them have,
UUhich Gods themselves you would have said, might have vouchsaude to taste.
At four days end, the king for all contendours prises fitts,
And garters, studded thick with pearl, about their legs he knitts,
UUith precious gemmes, ybrought from Eastern regions far permixt,
The Carbuncle which glittering rays out yeldes, among infixt.
Moreover chains of fined gold, from utmost Indies brought,
UUith glittering Jasper stones beset, to each, most costly wrought
A double leaffed tablet fair, of gold, depending down.
And of this orvet knights of noble ^ocke, and high renown,
In number xx. foute, he made, whose frates in war should gain
Eternal fame, and bids this rite their progeny to retain.
A noble deed no dout, which retchles time, with restles wings,
Shall not devour, nor tract of years, commite to Lethe springes.
Mean time the French king ^nteth not, injuriously to spite
The Britayne nation stout, and eke to wars them to incite.
The English Monarch discontent hereat, and mou'de in mind, King Edw^ ^yning
to him the ^ar of VVarwic^ and (...) ^arl more waste^ the VVester^ ^stes of
France. The king (...) turned no^ calls a Pa li^t wh^ in he she^ (...)
Crown^ of France be his by (...) heritance.

Forthwith his mates to be in wars, four noble Earls assignde,
And wastes with fiery flames, and dint of smourd, both towns, and towers,
Along the UUesterne coasts of France, down fortes, by force he scoures.
UUith eight score ships of war strong fenst, the enemy to sustain.
At length returns not having lost his least, and ^plest swain.
Declaring straight unto his Lords, what requi^ he thought,
First how, and what reproachful factes, against us have been wrought
By the unfaithful Frankes, then how his uncle Charles void
Of issue died, whose Crown by right he ought to have inioyde,
Heresn a counsel general was ca^, throughout the land.
In which these points above the rest were borne the king in hand
First that by taskes, and subsidies, great store of gold in come,
And that each subject was a^rste, to pay a greater sum,
By Parliament decree. More that much golden vessel large
Should coined be, of these new wars for to defrait the charge: Vessel coi^
to make m^ ney.

And though that burdens more then meet, on manyes necks were laid,
^t without grudging to the king, each man his mercement paid.
All other things established were for commonweals behoue.
And herewithall the Senate ends, and Counsailours home remove.
Staight armor is prepaide, by strait commandment from the king, Preparation
for war.

The valiant Britayne youth, in sturdie steel coats glittering spring
Great plumpes of horsemen stout, and cluttering troops of footmen thrungde,
And now with good luck on, through mounting surges swift they plundge,
The ^endly Northarne gales, their hoisted sails drive ^orth amain,
Till Normandy at last a fertile soil of fruit, and grain, The Brita^ (...)
arri^ at (...) die A^ol Go^ the wind^ (...) (...) (...) them the^ selves.

The Britayne fleet in harbor safe from Aeol did contain.
Their weary corpse here well refresht, their tents they farther move,
And houses ri^ling spoil, their formers owners quite out drove.
Come hourded up in ^ort in broad barn bays, by country swain
And otes the warlike praunser fatts, the straw lest to remain.
For needful use. Vulcanus brandes the roofes down rattling tear.
Young children reft of home, their woeful mothers wandering bear: (...) ^ranne.

Their fathers lately sent by fawchon dint to shadows dombe.
These but preambles are to greater wars in time to come.
And in what place through r^unging wide, in brood fields cause of stay
Is offered there the army huge, do pitch their tents that day,
At length they came to Caen. Of craggie rock, a bridge whose side ^he
assauling and sub^uyng of ^ane.

Does guard, through passage strait, which weltring streams rough under
Th'assaut begins, and more, and more, the fierce fight kindles wrath, (slide.
The Chieftaine of the town, with soldiers stopps the strait bridge path.
To bar the enemy out. The French down groueling headlong throws ^rchery
does ^uch pre^ayle. Celtane of Celtaea people in France The H^rle of Tanca^
(...).

The whirling shaft, until at length they came to handy blows.
Then stayne with ghastly wound the Celtane spurling kickes the ground.
One Earl captive taken: an other eke no less renownd,
Through Tancaruilla, of which place he title bears, and name.
The remnaunt armor cast ^st de, all captive thralls became,
The king the walls down beats, and fort consumes with fiery flame.
This town thus sacked, proceeds with wings, on both sides strongly armde.
from Cane the army proceeds further into Nor ^die and (...) brea^th ray.

with bows, which would we pearcing ste^me, ye Fre^chma^s pride have charmde:
The army, and with sloughter dire, and sword, all things decays,
Much like a noisome pestilence, which when he roming strayes,
Creepes in by stealth, and mortal men with deadly venom slayes.
Or as rough roaring Eastern pufes when through their caves they rush,
Down woods, and mighty trees, with boystrous blastes they threatening push.
And oaks up mounted huge in hight, their roots torn, battring crush,
On the other part an army great, with faint heart half afright,
King Valoys gathered had, into the next fields brood in sight ^alloys
ga^hereth an ar^y.

Yet durst he not encounter with our bands, in open wars,
Or battle join, and so ^ntright, disside, and end the iarres.
But rought with fear, in woody mountains wandering far us froe,
He watches what we do, and whether we intend to go.
With wary mind, respecting well his own estate, and realm,
And more commaundes his camp, the bridges all to ouerwhelme. ^ridges of ^ome
broken ^owne to ^eepe back (...) English ^my. ^ridges of ^ome broken ^owne
near Paris by the (...) ^f Valloy^.

That by that means the enemies force they might bar of, and stay
Their iourneys eke. But when to valiant Britaynes each hard way
He easy saw, and that no stopp could hinder their intent.
With all his troop of armed men he straight to Paris went.
And gardes the City walls, which shiuering fear had shakt before,
Comm^nding peecemeale down, the Sequane bridges to be tore.
Now safe the Frenchmen think themselves with gurtie river deep
Incompast rou^e, howbeit they watch, and ward, do daily keep.
Suspecting both the fierce assault of mighty Brutus race,
As also least the light fire flames their fair town should deface.
Their journey hasting fast the English camp is comne at hand
But after down the Bridges broke the king did understand:
Each place of entrance eke with great endeavoring fenced sure:
He fretts disple as^e in mind, and thoughts turmoiling, more his fure
Augments, till he at last upon this final sentence stays.
To build the bridge again, and lofty arches up to raise,
Over those floudes, which by the walls of ancient Paris glide, The Bridge a
Paris built b^ the English camp in tw^ days.

Which less then two days space does finish quite, that fair and wide,
Each soldier passage has. In battle ray, and now they stand,
Beyond the river banks prou^oking Frenchmen hand, to hand,
For to encounter fair in martial fields. But when again
No equal offer made of fight they see, in great disdain
The Britaynes move their tents, and passing forth from place to place Phaeton
the son of Ph^ bus by misgouernyng his fathers chariot^ had almost burn the
whole world. The Britain proceeding^ to Callice pitch their tents near the
forest of Cr^sse or Cr^ssey.

No town unburned leave, that Phaetons flames again to trace
That land throughout, of that way one had looked, he would have thought.
Until at length the army stout, the broad plain fields had rought,
Near Cressy ^des, and there their tents d^ne pitched, to make some stay.
A valley (...) there lies, with springing meadows fresh and gay,
Through midst of which a brook with siluery streams cuts forth his way
One side of which a hill, with fertile soil for tillage fit,
Besetts, to Paris wards, which rustic swain with plough does slitt,
In joyful time of peace. On the other side adjacent lie
Some pleasant hillockes eke, but chiefly stickle mountains hye,
Whose topps do Cresseis groves of oak trees thick besett, contain,
And darksome dens, where brousie beasts of savage kind remain.
UUithin this vale the English camp, of former toils of shook
Their werinesse, with dulcet sleep, and grateful viandes took.
UUhen suddenly a spy from mountains topps in post have runs, Valoys Insu^
eth the English army with a great boost.

And warning gives, that Valoys king of Galls in armor comes,
UUith thousand thousands guarded thick. A sound the trompet shrill
Gives forth, and with Tantara thrice, each soldiers ears does fill.
The valiant English hearts, arms, arms, redoubling loud out called
Forthwith king Edward adds. Take tools in hand no white apalde,
Ye ladds of martial Brutus blood, high thundering Jove this day, King Edwardes
exhortation t^ his souldiou^ before the battle.

Has hard my voice, and has betook into your hands a pray.
The king himself not only comne, with this huge host I here,
But eke throughout the Realm of France of ancient stocketh Peer.
Wherefore so ost a Nation tamde by for^, in blouddie (...),
Shall victors drea^of stely Doves shall Lions fear the sight:
Now God forbid, and turn that lot to bett^ luck I pray.
If that among the heardes, a fearful captain lead the way,
The followers never will be fierce in fight, but backward sway.
And you I vouch with faint, and fearful men, shall war this day.
They come with spoils, and booties rich; the Britain home to lade,
You all with robes of silk, and glittering gold, shall rich be made,
You precious ringes shall wear, and purses make with ^gent strout:
If that you will stand to it, like valiant lads, and fight it out.
And sley with ga^ly gaping wound the Frenchmens trembling rout. (...) English
battles placed. The first battle was led by the Prince of Wales being but
xviii. years of age. The king causes his army to retire near the wood to
avoid back oss^.

Thus said: the host in cul^ed sort is set, and ordered right,
The wings stout archers guard, with whitling (...), and armor light.
His son and heir, the beardles. Prince, the king in forefront plast,
Which had not yet of eightione years, the ^act out fully (...):
Nor on his cheeks the soft and (...) locks, you might discern,
By reason of his youth the weighty works of Mars to learn:
The maine battle, he himself in gli^ering armor brodered takes,
And backward to retire the (...) all, (...) near he makes
To Cresseis baulky boothes, all (...) (...) thereby to void.
And more that by that means, the (...) (...) (...) be (...),
By marching up against the hill, and disadvantage by
The unequal soil, in the assault. But when the Galls did spy
The Britain back to draw, more rash, then wise, forth fast they hie, The
French^ (...) ^king the (...) to hau^ fled, insues and assailes them. The
horses of the Frenchmen hurt with arrows throw their riders and break the
rays.

And spurde their cours^ fierce, supposing Britains for to fly.
The trompets sound, (...) ^mies shout, the noise hie heaven does pearce,
The English ra^es (...) their enemies troops, assayling (...),
With yew bows bended stife, which flickring flights forth whistling sends
The warrior praunser hurt with stripe, his rider flinging trendes
Out of his sadle, and with hard horn hoof his master kickes,
An other horse, within whose paunch, a long stamne staggering sticks,
His countrymen down drives, and rays disturbing, backward runs,
Outrageous, springing fast, and stables seeks from which he comes.
Then other after others raungt, their sitters all outwrencht,
And here, and there, crosecoursing fease, nor hedge, nor dike deep trench,
Can stop their furious swinge, but bye paths scattered several trace,
The goorie black blood drops, the ground besprinkling in the race.
And now the footmen forth are comne, and fierce with weapons fell
The battle do, restaure; the English stripe, with stripe repel.
The theiftaines of the Frenchmen strecht along, with gaping wound
Digd in, by dint of drierie blade, lie strugg^ on the ground. The noblest of
the French army (...) slain. The Duke of ^orreine. The Duke of Alanson, or
Dalanson.

He first, which cruel borderers on bank^s of Aibis flood
Acknowledgd for their Prince, then noble, Lorein fierce, and wood,
Then of Dalanson Duke, then Harcourt Earl, and many more,
Who from: their ancient pe^egree, their worthy titles bore:
Or else from castles fair, or warlike countries, drew their name.
A number of the common sort, then also had their bane.
The king with ghastly gleiue, like thunderbolt drives forth away, The king and
(...) Eddward his son fight valiantly. Thirty thousand Prench men s^yne.

So does the Prince his son, whose Britain virtue bright that day
Did show it self, and of what force it was, and puissaunce good:
In which were thirty thousand slain, and fields moist made with blood.
UUhith when aloof from hie hill top king Valois did behold,
Forthwith backsliding fast, through swift course borne of horses bol^,
His country b^ attainde. A foul reproach to France no dout,
And blot most black to him, for at his heels a greater rout,
He slying after drew, then Britains were which causbe him flee, Valois seeing
such slaughter of his men flies.

So much it is, at first assault, of courage fierce to be,
In blouddy martial fields. The camp throughout, then joys at will
Each heart, and ^kes sweet consent, each care with t^es does fill.
Of Frenchmen thus the pillage sweet, and precious gold possessed, The Britain
victor.

Our men unto their tents, in shadowy evening them addressed.
Next morn ^s soon as glittering globe of Phoebe vpstart, the Frankes
Mutabilis alea Martis.

Together flo^t, and once again in order set their ranks,
UUith arms to try, if that perhaps Mars chance would wavering be. The next
da^ after the battle the Frenchmen gathered them selves again who by these
thre^ Ba^les of VVarwike Huntington and Northampton were clean^ subverted and
distroyed. Callice besieged.

UUhich, first the king entreated hard by earnest suite, that he
UUould give them leave, in open field, once more with Galls to fight,
These three Earls stout, of Warwike first, a haunt, and egar knight,
Then Huntington, and after him Northamptons chief renown,
All unawares, in skirmish hot, the Frenchmen batter down.
Then lawfully king Edward might the large fields raunge at will,
Resistance none is made, against his bands, but all is still.
The Frenchmen dare no more, the brunt of Britains force abide,
Nor them against, in open camps, their quarrel to disside.
Three days here spent, the king his tents remoues, and backward goes,
To Caleys shoares and town with trench, and bulwark round does close.
UUhen won by fraud, and fauning flatterings smooth of Valois king,
The Scottish scepter bearer vades our (...), and down does fling, David king
of Scotts (...) instigation (...) the French king inuad^ England.

All things to frying flames. The prudent ^ene her husband lack,
For to suppress these fal^e periude irruptions, does not slack
But bands of armed soldiers up collectes, nor need she had
(...) Th'inhabitantes it Poytiers call, near which withouten bound
An open plain there lies, in which no tree with shadowy limb,
Nor braky bush does grow, a place most fic for skirmage grim: Prince Edward
and the ^ench king oyne battle ^care (...).

Here both the armies meet, on ground out black blood gushing powers,
The horsemen topsie tail are turnde, death conquered Frankes deuou^
The rays are broke, and remnant yet alive the battle shunnes,
Through swift pursuit thevictor pantes, and starting lightly runs,
His footestepps thick, thick fetching fast. as in a champion plain,
When as the watchful grayhound has a wattkin spied, full feign
He springs on, his pray to get, he life for to maintain.
The greyhound gaping wide. with greedy jaws, threats still to catch,
The hare herself from biting chapps, away does scudding snatch:
So is in hope of pray, the Britayne swift, and dreading bane,
The Frenchmen fly, but in the flight most are subdued and taken.
The king himself into the tents was captive brought, and chose King John
taken.

More rather for toyeld, then life by dint of swourd to lose.
Forthwith in slidyng hull, through flashing floudes to Britain shore
He was conveyed, where prisoner like, the servile yoke he bore:
To teach him of the Britain king, his Lord, to obey the lore. There were ^ken
in this ^attade at Poytiers ^500 of the ^iefest of all ^aunce.

Now noble Prince Plantagenet two kings did captive hold,
And gentle prison many Peers of both lands did infold,
Of ancient stocks esprong, which Britains took in blouddy fight.
But clemency of Edward king resplendent shinde so bright:
Such virtue rooted in his breast and mercy did remain The two ^inges David of
Scotland and John of ^aunce (...), with ^he rest of the ^aptiues. Edward the
(...) dies before the (...). (...) one ^f the three ^adies of (...) which
^tts the ^ed of man's (...). ^ward the ^ther dies. ^ichard the ^cond began
(...) reign ^377.

That on conditions, and for ransom, he ^mist again,
Each one unto his country soil, and kinsfolks linkt in love.
Those kings high, glory follows fast, which battle so do move,
So to contend in dreadful wars, immortal praise atchiues.
Good shepheardes use to sheere their sheep, and not to ski^e with knives.
He noble Monarch sparde the suppliant, down the proud suppressed,
Thrice happy sure, if Atrapos fell Goddess, had not wrest
To unripe death, his noble sons, Prince Edwardes fatal thredd,
But having first begott a tender babe, in wedlock bed,
UUhich Richard had to name, whom as his heir he left behind:
And whom his (...) dying to bear the regal mace assignde.
According as this nations laws, and ancient rites did bind.
The child the slender age of eleven winters did not pass,
UUhen that with Princely (...), his head adorned was.
But when he near to man's estate through riper years was start:
No man can well declare, how for from (...) ^awtie heart,
And manners eke he swaru'de, in mind unlike how he became.
Contrarily disposde, to mighty Sier, and noble dame.
But antike virtue still, in breasts of Britain Peers was shrinde,
And manly courage bold which in the ancient primates shinde,
By natures force ingraft. that in God Mars adventures hard,
The ofpring worthy of such Syers, with them might be comparte:
And freely durst to tolerate, what tossing toils you would.
The nobles (seeing thus the feats, of mighty Mars wax could
For that the king secure and pleasant peace, sought to uphold)
And fearing sloughtfull Idleness, her poison should instill
Corrupting them, and more least from Bellonaes warlike skill, (...) Go^ desse
of Battle.

Long discontinuaunce should degenerate the Britains hearts:
Incensing them to filthy lust, soft sleep, and sluggish parts:
(The king thereof aduertizde first), a solemn Iustes they make, Iustes and
(...) nyng at the Tilt between Englimen and fo^reyners. Four and twenty
Britayne Pee^ provoke as many as will come. Southfield.

The counterfaited work of Mars. The quiuering spear to shake,
At Tilt, and Torney eke, th'appoint for four and xx. days,
Which number just of Britain Peers, as challengers forthwayes
To externe nations Legates send, such tydinges for to blase.
That Britaynes iustes triumphantlike will keep for one months space.
Joint to the City lies a field, from Smithes deriu'de the name,
Th'outside of London walls, an ample place fit for the same,
Here shall the race be pight, and certain limitts measured out,
Let hither make repair, of noble blood each champion stout.
All nations shall have safe conduct. And they which shall do best,
And to the ground most doughtie knights, out of their seats shall wrest,
Most in (...)ber.

Or sturdy stafe shall oftnest crack, they massy heaps of gold,
Shall for their service have, and precious rewards rich shall hold:
King Richard them bestowing, of manly fortitude the hier.
This published thus abroad, to many Cities far, and nyer.
On this side, and beyond the Alps: as manlier courage hold,
Possessed each foreign heart, by worthy lynage high extold:
He horse, and armor getts, and swift through salt sea surges springes.
From France comes th Earl of S. Paul, his heir and with him bringes.
To whom a fruitful land of fish, Bataue the Duchy yeldes.
And many more of noble birth, out of Italia ^eldes.
From sundry regions of the world, likewise against that day,
Full many a Peer of royal blood, at London made his stay.
The king of England from the tower, which mighty Caesar built
Proceeds, whom four and xx. doughtie knights in harnish gu^
Do after train, along proud pompous London streated broad:
In number even (which mounted brave on milk white palfrayes rode)
Them jointly after trace, their portlike Ladies, richly dressed
With golden neckbandes bright, ^mboso with stones, their corpse inuestd
With golden roobes of needle work, with shapes of hearts of gold,
In wrought, whose necks eke golden crowns most curious did infold.
The Britain king these liueries would have his lands to be.
The forriners with precious genunes ydect, with gallant glee,
Of no less co^ly workmanship, did sumptuous garments wear,
And goodly to be seen, on trampling steedes, did armor bear,
Of Iron sweltes, and gold, yforgd: most grateful sightes to see
To common people much amasde. To Smithfield comne they be
At last. Then Circle wise in ranks, the Tiltyard fair about
They all suruewing traste, both Challengers, and challengd rout. ^oth the
Englishmen and ^einers be^aues them^elues stoutly.

The bard horse mounts an end, and with his heels the air does beat,
Carreyring forth, and back, with studded raines yfurnisht neat.
The hollow brass trompe shrill, with Taratantara skies does threat,
The Torneyars iustling meet, with might, and maine, and labors great,
They tire themselves, now salt sweat dropps down still, from top, to toe,
And panting puffinges following fast, out of their mouths do go.
The point of rattling spear, the thin air, small dishtu^red tears,
The troncheon burst beforne, to ground the enemy stombling bears.
The lookers on rejoice, and clapping hands a shout up reares.
Now glommy night approaching near, one days contention ends.
On morrow to renew the warlike sport, each champion wendes,
(...) courage ^all to their ancestors, through doughtie deeds
They plainly show. True glory sure from hard exploites proceeds.
The third day comnes, of sundry peoples flock the assembly large
Do wonder at the Captains mighty acts, how they did charge
UUith peise, the trembling stafe, and lusty arms aloft did lift,
And eke with what fierce courage was endued the courser swift.
UUith clashing loud of armor, skies through bouncing bobs resound,
Each day for the contendours, knights, his proper pleasures found,
An^ (...) full four and twenty days, in Torneying were expirde:
And time the Britain king to weyghtier causes fast requirde.
UUherfore the stranngers he for manly prowess much extolde,
Rewarding them with massy chains, of pure, and fined gold,
And looded home with other gifts, to native soil does send.
That bags with heaps of coin (...) up, their masters down did bend.
But The English challenge makers Fame requird for their reward,
To be commended for their factes, they only did regard:
And each unto his proper home the Iustes thus finished hies,
When to the king his nephew thus, with words express, applies
The noble Duke of Lancaster ybred, in Gaunt that town. John of Ga^ Duke of
Lancaster desired aid of king Ri^o inuado spaigne. Gaunt.

Dear nephew to thy uncle, of Grandsyers stock the chief renown,
Thou know I think that if an injury committed be,
Against lineage of Plantagenetts, of what impaciencie,
Of mind they are, forthwith by dint of swourd, requyring right,
Such courage was ingraft in our forefathers great of might.
T'imitate mine ancestors, why should it yrke my mind*
Renowned Prince, within your realm caulme peace long time has shinde,
No foe deccipt pretendes, nor bickering dares your force to try,
Whilst uncle to your majesty, and princes of spring, I,
Behold my spouse in wedlock bands conioynd, of Hispanig land
Her fathers only heir, by force the Spaniard to withstand.
And bar from kingdoms rich, which, public laws her gives as due.
UUherefore of soldiers stout (by your commission large) a crew,
Let me collect, this warfare long, to undertake with me,
And of my spouses right, by wars to seek recovery,
And Justice rites inuiolate, by dreadful Mars maintain.
His uncle speaking thus, with friendly speech the king again
Receaues, at lengh this answer makes, a^ydst his noble train.
I can not sure but much commend thy stomach haut, and bold, The aunswee^ of
king Ri.

In no respect behind in courage, our forefathers old.
Go with good luck unto the land which flood Iberus streams
Do famous make, and what as dower unto thy wife pertaines,
By custom due, which Nations all have erst allowed for right,
If that the Spaniard will not yield, that stoutly win in fight.
True heirs to be defrauded, both Gods laws, and man's deny,
Almighty Jove to aid the right, will succor send from hie.
Herewith he him dimisde. The Duke with mighty navy straight,
Strong armed for those combrous wars, with hardy soldiers fraightd,
The sounding salt sea sweepes, with virtuous spouse, and daughters twain.
His cause distrusting straight, of peace conditions offreth feign Spaigne
invaded by the Duke of Lancaster.

The Spanish guide, which being taken, forthwith eight carres with coin
Full loaded to the Duke he sendes, moreover does enjoin
Himself, ten thousand pounds, of yearly tribute for to pay,
In Bayon Castle fair, which then did Britayne Prince obey.
But The English Duke for recompense, unto the Hispaigne king
In marriage linkes his daughter, which first from his loins did spring.
That so the happy concord of this late confirmed peace,
Might through a (...) kind of league, established, more increase. The Sp^nvard
^teth For peace. Peace granted. Consta^ce the Dukes eldest daughter ma^ed to
the king of Spain. Anne the second daughter to the king of (...).

The Lusita^an Prince (for so there ^ou they did agree)
The second daughter took to wife, with solemn pomp, and glee.
These matters thus performde, by power of God the almighty guide.
To antike seats again, through Ocean vast, they backward slide,
And he withal his train, are lau^ed safe on Britayne shore.
Few days expirde; the Princes leave by suite obtainde before:
A bragging Scottish Earl hight Marley enters English coasts,
On frothing palfrey borne, and challenge making boldly boastes,
To London comne, within the listes, to just with pointed spear:
With whosoever durst contend. the Prince was present there,
And thousands of the common sort, in plumpes thick thrungo that tide.
Lord Mo^bray valiant Peer these Scottish bragges could not abide, An insolent
challenge of (...) Sco^, (...) the Englishmen The (...) (...) (...) in the
Torney.

But goodly to behold, in armor close, his steed he takes,
And down with force the Scot out of his saddle shogging shakes,
And horse with mighty push, of steeled troncheon throws to ground.
Wherewith the lookers on, with shouts applauding, loud resound.
He all astoynisht lies, two ribs in sonder craced quite,
Whom set upright, his feeble feet could not support one white.
Wherefore from thence he was to lodging near adjoining borne,
Where shortly, through the grief augmented more, distract, and torn,
He yeldes his breath, by force of arms, so he which honor sought,
In arms does honor lose, and challengd combatt dearly bought.
Next Darel Scottish Peer Lord Courtney Britain did provoke,
And lofty looked for praise, but of like Fortune felt the stroke:
In force inferior far. The third companion in the race,
U^ that he iustling ran, of valor small, and listes did trace,
Five boystrous blows down drives, and conquered Cocburne it did shame
For to have strous, no glory got, retourning whence he came.
But the contendours chief, Lord Haubers mighty limbd, and next
Haut ^macke Courtney stout, whose venging right hand sore had vexed,
And back repeld the foriners, which challengd Britains bold:
Through foolish pride puffed up: with condign honor were extold.
Those torneys finished thus, and things at home set in a stay,
King Richard to the savage Kernes imbarkt did take his way Ireland sub^ by
king Richard.

And them by wars res^ting fierce, with little bloodshed, down
He brought the Britain yoke to hold. Then shortly from the crown,
And precious Princely diadem, himself he did depose:
And Henry Duke of Lancaster to ^old the scepter chose.
Now Henry fourth of that name king the Britayne state did guide
UUhose stout, and puissant valor then sufficiently was tried, Henry the
fourth began to reign 1^99.

UUhen for his Ladies dower, his father Spanyardes made to stoop,
UUhen Sier, and son, and after them, of men a warlike troop,
From Callice sands proceedyng forth, did enter Gascoine soil,
And foes by drierie dint of blade, and reaking fires did foil.
The meekle virtue of the man, and stock so much renownd,
Throughout the world the Britaynes foes, through fear put in a slou^d.
He yet a very youth through these adventures hard did pass,
That glory whole by due desert, on him bestowed was,
Of each exploit, were it atchiu de at home, or foreign coast.
Besides his flowing wealth, this king himself might happy boast
Through noble progeny, to whom his virtuous Lady fair,
Four sons of wondrous towardnes had borne, of which the heir
Of comely stature tall, when manly years he near had rought,
Full many a ventrous enterprise which courage bold he wrought.
Of equal years, and manners eke, companions to him sought.
Yet nothing he unjustly did, nor straide from virtues line,
Beloved of all. within whose youthful visage then did shine,
The very image of those deeds, which comne to riper age,
He should absolve. Now twice seven years his Syer by counsel sage
The British a^tient land had ruled, with love and laud of all.
Till waxing crook through age, him final end of life did call,
Incroching fast, and sickness dire procurd his fatal fall.
Forthwith his fathers royal crown, the s^eyre apparent takes,
To whom the Britayne Peers on bended knees their homage makes, Henry (...)
fi^t succedeth his father 1412.

UUith sckipping hearts, for glad, their countenance eke expressing joys,
But he among his mates, somewhat addict to wanton toys
Before, forthwith (his father dead) became both stayed, and grave,
And from the Court his leude licentious panions old he drove.
More for such fawning hangbies, he priscribde a penalcie, Henry banisheth from
the Court, all his leude companions, left they should corrupt him by their
evil counsel.

If once they should appear in place, whereas the Court did lie.
Thus changde in all his actions, he does as a Prince besee^de,
For counsaylours using such as sage, and of great wit, he deemde.
And seldom ceast from taking care, what best might stand in steed,
For co^on wealths avail* much shepherd like, which taking heed
Unto his foldes, long winters nights, with painful watchinges wastes,
And whilst what was his right, reuoluing deep in thought he castes,
And what unto his ancestors perceiude in elder age,
He calls to mind ^ow king of Galls, incenst with furious rage
Had sundry ways indamaged, and hurt the Britayne king,
UUherfore a counsel straight be calls, and causes good does bring,
UUhich might provoke the valiant Brutes those wars to take in hand,
Unto which point agree, all peers, and primates of the land,
That back again, by dreadful wars, the kings right should be sought.
Forthwith for to require his own away by Frenchmen rought Legates sent into
France to require the king of Englandes right.

The king does legates send of polisht wit, and council rare,
Unto the king of France, from him, this message to declare.
The most renowned Britayne guide king Henry, much does muse
UUhat this injustice month you and rigor for to use
That you the plighted league have torn. UUhy others proper right,
Do you with clasping clumbes by force out wrest, and wrieth by might*
UUhat moves you thus despitefully against the English land?
Them absent cruelly to pill, but when they be at hand, The Oration or speech
of the English Legate.

If brandes of dreadful Mars they stir, (I needs must speak the troth)
Your cause is foundred still, and forct your justice yield, though loath.
UUherfore to Britains (...) restore, away unjustly taken,
Or dint of swourd, and fiery force, expect to breed your bane.
And that which we out of your hands may not by fair means wring,
Unconquered Mars shall wrest. Such hope does feed our noble king,
That Jove of heinous wickedness be just revenger will,
UUho bids ^s this to say, and princelike threats this to fulfill,
Unless, your mind to better chaungd, you ware, repent in time:
The chance of Mars is mutable, not one way does incline.
UUhen these words uttered had th'imbassadour from Henry sent,
Forthwith hot (...) burning black the Frenchmans hartstringes rent
The palace vast, which burly burly noyce, consusde does ring,
And disagreeing angers rage, their minds does glowing sting.
The king all wroth at last, did open his mouth in great disdain, The reply of
the king of France.

A labor hard to get, but kingdoms got, for to maintain
Is virtue great. If he deserve high fame, and worthy praise
UUhich through unfriendly Mars (perchance unjust) does go his ways
As victor chief, subduing lands, to bear his servile yoke:
Is It not unto the conquered, if courage they revoke?
A greater glory, of their legs, the fettring boltes to shake?
And necks from yooke to pluck, and force, by force, recuile to make?
"Some hour, to some more happy chance, then other does portend,
"And ficle Fate will not remain to one firm to the end.
"The Frenchman now does rule, tower the Britain bare the sway,
UUe florisht have in time, and have been Trojans do you say.
Ten years wars first expirde, by Greeks the Trojans were subdued.
France after many Summers, has her antike force renewed.
And me her captain now again begins to look aloft,
Her injuries revenging bold, and setting foes at naught.
Young boys do terrify with threats, with bugges, make Girls auaunt,
No vain colluding shadows, can the manly courage vaunt,
Nor boasting brags, nor florisht blade, with threatening trakes forth shown.
UUhat that your king to manly years, is nothing near yet grown,
Inexpert quite of doleful wars. Let it suffice, that he
For his disport do toss the ball, at home, and shunning flee
The glittering tankes, of mighty Mars: let riper age those guide,
Therefore this aunsweer take, and thus declare it was replied:
That Frenchmen will their country coasts, and native cities shryne,
With arms; in spite of all their foes, that thereat do repine.
The Legates answered thus, to native soil in have they hie,
And wourd by wourd declare, the manner of the Frankes reply.
The scofe the king not taking well, all other things derides.
Mean time his royal navy huge, at Hampton he prouides,
And forth through wandering salt sea floudes, with friendly gales he slides
Henry sayleth into France.

For Jove almight, the Southwindes coucht in caves did close contain,
That both the King, and captains stout, with all their warlike train,
Unlooked for, on th'ennimies shore their ankers fastened feign,
And ships forsaking, far and wide did all things wrack and wast,
And houses brued with blood, and roofes with reaking flames down cast
Now puissant Henry in his tents, one night away had past:
When Phoebus rising, clouds consumde, and brought again the day,
And with his radiant light, each place in broad sight, did bewray.
Which way, that mighty flood which flowing forth from Roan does fall
Into the sea, and with his rage, the rocky shoores does ball: Seine a mighty
^uer (...) from a (...) flows by Roan and through a great part of France,
and at length falls in at Ca^ or K^d Ca^ where are two strong towns.

And with his sprinkling makes moist the bordring camps annexed,
Near to the tents, whereas his mouth, with gaping jaws wide strecht,
UUithin the compass of six hours, still salt sea floudes does sup:
And out again, against customde time, does belking perbrake up:
Two warlike towns, with mighty walls, ycompast round, they spied,
On this bank one, that other built upon the farther side.
Forthwith the king commaundes them both with bands besiegd to be,
Against them both the whirling crosbow shot to be let flee,
And walls with ingine forgd of iron hard, to batter down,
This vnaccustomde kind of torment fell, put in a stounde,
The Celtaines closd within their walls, boys, mothers, ^ed siers,
(...) But to his great affairs (as he was wise) does fit the time. Henry
goes again into France.

If that perchance his fathers Law, which then in years did clime,
Him absens should desire to see: the coast of France again
He goes until, where comne, the Duke of Burgoine shows plain,
How that the Dolphin tumultes made, and reared vprores new,
Pretending faithles fraud. Against his foe, a warlike crew
The king does therefore send, his false attemptes for to withstand:
But causes of more weight, he needed than to take in hand,
And not for to respect at all, the Dolphins sielie band.
Which valiant Britains pressed at hand, dares manly naught to done,
But two days journey of aloof, does wary still them shun.
This did he at the first, that corn and victuals, might abound,
Throughout his camp, and needful food might not be wanting found. Henry
offreth the Dolphin battle which he refuses.

Who having all things bought at last, the Britain proffer makes
Of battle, in an equal soil, which trembling he forsakes,
In number, and in puissance, not with Brutes to be comparde.
That place moreover unto which, the warlike English guard,
Approaching draws, the young man shunnes, worse then a dog, or snake,
That he refusing flies, and course contrary swift does take.
When that the doughtie Britains camp Northparts of France attainde,
He thence his power remou^, and with his bands to Narbone ttainde.
And hit inuading does ves^ege, which from the Celtanes might,
The Duke of Bedford straight acquites, and Dolphin puts to flight.
Mean time the king with broilyng heat, and toyling labors brake, Henry taken
with a fever.

Him languishing, eff^ebled sore, a fever sharp does take,
The heavens intemperate air, and scorching dog star sweltring hott.
Was cause, that near unto his heart, the deadly poison got.
How be it he iourneyed still, with wondrous grief tormented fore.
Till that his heart, and limbs, still faultring, fainting, more and more,
He will perceau'd the struggling panges of gha^ly death draw near.
His brother Humffrey posting comes, and Bedford Duke so dear.
And do with trickling tears, this sudden thaunce lamenting rue,
Most doleful wightes. The king at last, these words, with grief out drew.
(With both his hands extended bye to heaven) I much do owe
O God almighty guide, but worthy thanks therefore bestow,
I cannot, that in bloming youth so fresh, I hence depart,
Unto this day, not having felt, dame Fortunes bitter dart. The speech of Henry
before his death.

That in this life all my attemptes. with good success have gone,
That to thy heavenly power O God referred be alone.
And to his brother? turning, says, why thus with mestiue heart,
Do you this mourning make, and deep sobs let with grief depart:
I do rejoice my fatal hour, and death to be at hand.
That must with equal mind be borne, which no man can withstand.
By sacred league of brotherhoode, I do beseech you all,
That Henry you my tender son, regard, love, foster shall,
And honor as your king, and specially with heavenly fear,
You will inform his mind, so shall he worthy be, to bear
The scepter of so noble a Realm, and purchase endless fame. Henry in his
death bed committe^ his h^yre H^ry with hi^ wife Queen^ Catherine to his
brothers and exho^teth the^ to love and (...) (...).

My loving spouse which of the race, of mighty Princes came,
Which is above all other left, a pensive wretched dame:
With godly duty her sustain, so does it Brutes beseem.
And concord, greatest gift of God, that favor, and esteem.
The Bedford* and the Burgoine Dukes, let them the Frenchmen guide,
And to Duke Humfreys governance, let Britains stout be tide.
This carefully to be fulfilde, I bid, command, require.
More Normandy a fertile land, which under their empire.
Our ancient graundsiers did in elder age by right retain,
Which lost, by dint of sword, and conquering arm, I got again,
That do you keep by force, with just war that do you defend.
Now death approaching near, did Henry bring to fatal end.
The only honor of his land, dame virtues shining light,
From age, to age: to come, of stomach hie, unconquered might,
Whose gentle heart his loyal friends alone, not only lou'de,
But enemies did embrace also, of faith, and Justice proud, Henry the sixth his
(...) was crowned at Paris. 1422.

Of everlasting memory, the king now laid in ground:
The Junior Henry cheerful babe, with diadem was crownde
At Paris, and about the streets, as custom was did ride.
But ^icle Fortune wavering dame, will not still firm abide.
UUhich with her turning wheel is always tossed, in compass wise.
The Frenchmen here the tender Prince, rebelling, do despise,
A periur'de nation false, and violate their faithes yplight:
In sacred Sinode late beforne. But Bedford Duke by might.
Does tame their rage, great slaughter made, and Dolphin puts to flight.
The king peace thiefly lou'de, when that to ripe years he attainde,
And ghastly bickering s^kirmages, of dreadful Mars disdainde.
And never busied was, in civil hatredes restless race,
But void of care, with settled mind, did grateful rest embrace.
To prayer much addict, and often on God in secret cried.
But wicked people fell, such godly kings cannot abide,
But loothes them, and detestes with virtue, vice cannot agree:
And glimmering light, dark duskish clouds eschewing swift do flee.
The gentle disposition, therefore of Britains guide,
When that the Dolphinne and the rest, of Celtaine peers had spide:
They blouddie battle move, and some by fraud betraying take,
Some towns by conquering might, unto their force to yield they make.
The Britains hope retired back, and hearts to faint began,
Since Henry fifth of that name king, a stout, and valiant man,
UUas laid in grave. Hereon a cause insude of greater grief, For the. Duke of
york claimed the crown whose son and heir, Edward Earl of ^h afterward'
obtained it by name of Ed^ward the fourth. William co^querour first Duke of
Normandy.

For sudden strife at home, concerning rule, and title chief,
Perdition threatening dire, increasing kindled more the iarres,
Muse silence keep, or muttring soft, the Britains civil wars
In doleful verse declare, because that ghastly wounds again,
By touching blede afreshe, and do renew the former pain.
Old Henry now forgotte, none Normand nation stout regards,
UUhich barren, and bereft, all destitute, of ancient wards,
In vain does denth of William monarch haunt, bewailing rue.
Fair cities wresting out by force, from their possessours true,
The Dolphin through the region vast of France does roming struck:
Prohibited of none, and towns assaulting first, does take.
A willing people to subdue it is an easy thing,
And freely offering up their hands. Howbeit small glory bring
It came unto the conqueror, th'out bloodshed lands to win.
Such hurly burly, civil broils, the Britain land within,
How could they force of foreign foe, oppose them selves, to bend?
The Britain is the Britains foe, the hand, the womb does rend,
What that the foot, with rechles anger moved, the head does crushe?
And Citizens, do Citizens, in furious rage through pushe,
UUith drierie blade? his Lord, the slave, his man, the master slaies.
Fell slaughter bears the swaye, and blouddie Mars wide ra^ging straies.
Alack for little breach, the Brother works his brothers end,
One neighbor, thrustes an other out, no place could safety lend,
From savage enemies rage, the holy sanctuary veiled naught,
Which ever safety heretofore, to wightes distressed brought.
These places were most famous made, through griesly slaughters vast.
Saint Albones, Blore, Northampton, Banbury fields, and Barnet plast At S.
Albons was foght the first battle between king Henry and the Duke of York.
Blore heath field. 2.

Near copped hills, Wakefielde, Saint Albones than the second time,
And Northern Exam, which with Scottishe borders does confine.
So that the husbandmen, that habit near those blouddie soiles,
Out wayling to this day, as often as the plough turmoyles.
Those fields, where casting furrows large, of men halfeburied bones,
The chaw^g soldier with, with ^uglte showtes the s^es does rend,
And now they di^ wear^, as far (...) ^urdie (...) to^ (...) The onse^ given
valiand, by the Asc^.

The whistling shaft, with strength pul^ up. Sho^te, Shoot, the Captain
Ye Britains stout, your p^rsing ^ems, and ste^nt ^kering flights, ^reights
Apply your bending bows, apply, your hatrd enemies scour,
Like hailst^nes thick, when ^ttling down does fall a winter shoure.
The arrows girt, forth fly, and light of Sun obscure do make.
In shoulder wounded deep, with beating paws, the ^ier does rake,
All endlong ree^d a^ooft, the ^ourser flerce, his master cast.
The Celtaine horsemen galled thus, more sauffer think at last
Upon our footmen for to ruime, with point of charged spear.
Forthwith our (...) ^ronglie sens^ with bows, to ground to bear:
They fiersly press with lance, the sight than bloody wareth more,
Stabd in with sharpened stakes, even as the Prince had showed before,
The horses foundred lie, upon the ground, their sitters slain
By drierie blade: And when no shaftes their quiuers did retain.
The bowmen take their gleiues, and down their enemies tombling fell,
The King endeavoring, fierce with sword in hand be^res him well,
Each noble Captain did the same, and with them all the rout.
The bouncing Helmet knockes, did shrill resound the woudes throughout,
With clattering clashing loud of harnish, ringes the waters clear:
And morning groans the bordring hills, and hollow valeis near
Of dying souls receive. The goorie blood streams so abound:
As does the earth with standing pooles, when Saturn old is found.
And Jove inferior in degree, Mars, Sol, and Venus neat,
Hermes, and Lune, in Cancers house, Pisces or Scorpion weat, Duke of B^ ^layne.

Just through the brainpanne with a shaft the Duke of Bar yshot
Comes tumbling of his steed his fainting spirit, and heart blood hott,
Out through the deadly wound dispersed, in thin air vanished quite. Some of
(...) nobles of France s^yne.

The noble Duke of Alanson with fatal arrow smitte,
The timber pulls out, but steelehead leaves in scull remain,
Dire death ins^es the deadly wound, wherefore in deeps disdain
His steed he falls fro, and hard earth rending with his sees,
His aierie ghost out startes, and thin in starie region flees.
Like bane thy Duke O Brabant bringes unto his fatal end.
These Peers the first rank did conduct, the seconds guiders send,
Like wise their dying spirits, to Plutoes kingdoms, large to fly
As The Earl of Navarre with whom O Sans, thy Bishop ^te,
Eight Earls more beside, their flickering ghostes did send to s^e:
With grisly wound y^, And of those Peers which Barons hight
Above an hundred lost their lives. Of Knights and Squiers in ^ght (...) God
o^ (...) ^l these cit^tances ex^ressed in son ^y places ^ane no^ing else but ^e
dyed as ^ndyng to ^utoes king^es to (...) the rivers (...). etc.

^ue times full sixtene score their breaths out gaspt, the common sort
Unto ten thousand souls and more did Stigie varge transportt,
Of Celtans army huge. Three hundred. Britains only slain
And in the hands of Henry king the victory did remain.
Alack the Duke of York with staggering lance his death wound got,
Where first against our men, the bickering skirmage waxed hott.
And Suffolk Earle' huge heaps of ghostes, first sent to Limbo lake,
Of Frenchmen Peers, his vital breath, with heart blood did forsake.
The Captive Celtane Lords, were safely kept in trusty hold.
These things thus done, his men inricht with the enemies spoils, and gold,
The noble Victor with his fleet, hastes back to Callice shore,
And cutting ore the strait sea gulf: of ancient kings of yore,
To royal palaces he wendes, triumphantlike a train,
And after him he draws. the Mayor of pompous London feign,
UUith all his troop of Aldermen, in roobes of Ermines clad, The Citizens ^f
London ^eaue home ^e king ^th great solempnitie.

Three miles against his royal grace, for honors sake began gad,
To testify their duties, all the Citizens do the same.
And to express their joys, that he the Celtanes pride did tam^,
The Clergy eke their sacred temples left, do solemn sing, ^o in like ma^er
do the (...).

The streets throughout, deserved laud to the eternal king.
The common sort with noise, resounding brim, do after trace,
Long prosperous health, beseeching God, to give unto his grace.
This solemn pomp, the captives all, in order set, ensue,
Unto the Victor Prince his Court, where entertainment due,
By Henryes hest, they showed had. In fleeting bark yhore,
Behold Sygismund takes land, upon English shore. ^vgismunds ^he Empe^our
comes ^o England ^o treat a ^ce be^weene king (...) and ^he French ^yng.

UUhom courteously the Britain Monarch hye, a grateful host
His ancient friend receaues, and welcome bids to Albion coast.
Now lofty horned stagges, now sielie does they hunt in chase,
Now hawking likes them best, and hollow winged gossehaukes race:
Whilst lesser sort of birds, for dread all shiuering, he ^fests.
When leisure served, and clogging cares expeld were from their breasts:
The Emperor thus begins. Most royal Prince, through fame renownd
UUhich blasted has thine acts, throughout the world, with tro^petts sound:
^he speech of (...) (...) ^halfe of (...) Frankes.

Spare now the conquered Galls, at length from blouddy w^rs abstain,
You goorie blood have drawn enough, and foes-on heaps have lain:
UUhy do you tire your self? and subjects wear with endless pain?
Your late atchiued (...) in mind will still remain.
Let peace be rooted in your heart, love peace, then which the Lord,
A greatet gift on mortal men, at no time does afforde.
King Charles does entreat the same, his Legate it does pray,
Which present in your royal Court, for that pretense does stay.
All cause of strife remove, let loyal league of truce be plight.
King Henry shall of Frenchmen have, what lawful is by right.
Behold how tender babes, of Sters bereft, do howlinges make,
And widows mourning wail, their husbands sent to Stigie lake.
Consider pondring deep, unto the Lord how we are wrought.
Sigismund had king Henry near, by this persuasion brought
To condescend: who deep in thought, now this, now that way strayes,
Uncertain what to do, to pity rare addict always.
And doutlesse the entreaty had, prevailed of his friend,
Had not, (the French Ambassador entreating for to end,
Which erst the Emperor had proposde) a post from Harflu comne,
Declaring how the Realm of France, wars to renew begone.
And how of Englishmen, of late was made a slaughter dire,
^eare banks of Seine. All burning wood, and furious stands in ire, The
Frenchmen viola^ their (...).

Prince Henry, hearing thus the Britayne soldiers to be slain,
Which few, could not the mighty power, of Celtane king sustain.
And stopping straight the Legates mouth, entreating still for peace,
He says, reuengement shall ensue, wherefore your suite surcease.
The Emperor* was ashamed, that for that periurde nation bad,
He suppliant, low, with speeches fair, his friend entreated had.
UUho ready to depart, with royal gifts in Princely guise
Presented, sacred league of truce, with Britain king contriues Sygismond
(...) Henry strike a league during their (...) Sygismond departs.

And country soil, through surging seas, by prosperous gales attaines.
Forthwith resounding loud, the brazen tro^pe his hoarse voice strains,
The egar youth thrunge thick on flocks, with hearts incensed mad
And by commandment from the Prince, each one in armor clad,
The hollow hull up fills, and through the rough seas scouring pass,
Till Normandy a fertile land of large corn fields, and grass, The king of
England renews his wars in France.

On rockie shores put out, receaues the warlike Britain train.
His souldi^urs here refresht: he Touch at first assaults amain.
The Frenchmen hard, endeavoring fierce resist, by dint of sword,
The blouddy onset beating back, but that small help could ford,
For conquerde, they to Britain victor stout, to yield were feign,
And Britain camp within their walls perforce eke entertain.
From thence he moved his siege to Cane, which he did not subdue, Many towns
in Normandy subdued.

But with great bloodshed on both parts. But doutlesse virtue true
Cannot be tamde. In first assault, he clean their power did quell,
Howbeit the bickering, then at Cane at no place was more fell.
He favored sacred temples all, and sanctuaries eke he sparde.
UUhich when the trembling habitantes, by fame broad bruted hard:
Admiring in their mortal foe, such wondrous virtue rare:
And how he did preserve Jove's houses with religious care:
The Normand people do commit themselves unto his grace,
And to his camp with victuals in troops did flocking trace:
Conueying basketts heaped full of bread, to them apace.
Then he with conquering force, Alencon did assaulting get,
Next Argenton, fair Constance does without resistance set
UUide open her gates: But Laudum, and Falesia populous town,
In vain expecting native aid, at length were conquered down.
And under the subjection brought, of Britain monarch wear.
Then Larcha bordering near on banks of Seine, which hie does rear
Her rampire walls with turretts fenced strong, next conquered was.
And many burrowes more beside, whose vulgar names I pass.
Roan last of all remainde, which costly wars, and glittering gold,
UUhich fined silver, precious plate, abondantly does hold:
The Normand City chief, which by a hugie mountain side,
Is situate, near chanells deep, where mighty Seine does slide.
Here Rumor spread, that Britains army vast, was near at hand.
The husbandmen, and such as near did eair the bordring land,
Did hither bring their chiefest stuff, transportyng it in carres,
Persuaded, that so strong a town could not be won by wars.
The Britayne king with trenches deep, and rampire bulwark banks,
The town enclosing round, does fierce besiege with warlike ranks. Roane
besieged.

Rocks rolling huge, and lofty towers down throwing, an ingine vast
A ram, of steel swelts strong yforgd, by martial skill was plast,
So that with crooked horns, he might the walls ransacking tear,
Again the Normans fierce, from hie walls crest do battle rear,
And rough rocks tumbling rolde, and wrest'd from far the trembling spear
UUith hott assault, and courage fierce, on both sides it was fought,
Till Fleeboates armed strong, the king into the river brought:
On every side to stopp, that through Seines gurtie streams, no aid
Of men of arms, or victuals, should be by ships conuayde:
The town besiegd to help. Then Famine dire, does raunging stray
Throughout the City large, and want of food does much dismay
The feebled soldiers poor. wherefore of boys a combrous flock,
And sielie women weak, out of their gates they thought to lock,
UUith point of threatening blade, the English Captains that denyde.
(...) Howbeit our deaths unto our land, small safety can procure.
If we resistaunce make, all unrevenged we shall be slain,
And troth we must confess, our goods, and substance, will remain
To Henry king of Brutes, both town and gorgeous turretts, gay,
If ought offended were tofore, that pardon we thee pray,
And if no succor from our Prince be sent, for our redress,
UUithin eight days, then entrance make, and freely do possess,
Hold and enjoy, our town, with luckie chance, this let us crave
To spare our lives, such mercy sure becomes it kings to have:
This virtue rare thine ancestors, did erst renowned make.
UUhat here the Celtane to obtain demaundes, that let him take,
Replies our king, and here withal, unto their proper place Eight days truce.

The Frenchmen home he sent, truce was confirmed for foresaid space.
Eight days expired were, no help was sent, no native aid,
The promise was required: then howling parents half dismayde,
UUith sucking babes, then virgin troops, from antike dwellinges strayde.
The Celtane people all, out of their gates in plumpes thrust thick, ^ded.

All sad, of armor stripe, most wretched, empty, poor and sick.
And habitations new for to provide, they were constrain'de.
Forthwith throughout all Britain towns, the crier loud proclaimde,
By strait co^aundement from the king: that who so Harflu will Englishmen go
to inhabit Harflu, their own country left.

Beyond the Seas inhabit, and the fields adjacent till
Or practice handy crafts, or follow greedy marchantes trade,
Or turn the earth with crooked full, or delue, and digg, with spade:
Let him to Harflu hie, where certain place for his abode.
Upon the asker by the king, shall freely be bestowde,
Nor only he, shall it enjoy, but after him his heir.
Forthwith unto the salt sea shoores, much people make repair,
Expecting only prosperous gales, to cause the hull to glaunce.
And where as nearest passage was unto the realm of France:
UUhat press of people floct, in so short space, it wondrous was.
That for inhabitants great store, no place did Harflu pass.
UUhich guarded strong with men, the king his tents began to remove.
UUhen as a Scout into his ears, this uncouth tidinges drove,
That through the bridges broken down, he should no passage get,
That sixescore thousand warlike Galls, did near approaching iett, Bridges
(...) Some.

All dight in steelecotes strong, to bear the brunt from naked breast,
And saletts glittering eke, with white plumes staring through the crest, Henry
was advertise (...) a great (...) of French^ approaching

So huge a troop of horsemen, as in elder age no wight,
Has seen before, unbridled, fierce, oer broad fields scour in sight.
Plantagenet no whit disturbde, with this vast army, gads
Still forward, and unto his mates, he fearcer courage adds.
His course directing straight, with stomach bold, against his foes.
And for that Vespers shadows glomme, anon would Sol enclose: Sol, the sun

Near to the wouddy thickets dark, to pitch his tents he chose.
Then unto his pauilion straight such Peers as seemde him best.
He bids repair, there to consult, upon the danger pressed. Henry a little
before night calls his Lords to Counsel as concerning their danger
through the multitude of their enemies Thetis Goddess of the sea used for the
Sea. A stratageme o^ slight to intrapt the the enemy by fraud.

For scarce three miles the enemies power, was distant from the place.
A little now before the night, they comne unto his grace,
There do decerne by council wise, what meetest they do think.
Amongst the rest (Don Titans beams now couch in Thetis brinke)
The soldiers all commanded were, sharp pointed stakes to choose,
Out of the groves, whereof the king most prudent shows the use.
That on them, fastened in the ground, the troops of horsemen fierce,
Might light, in midst of race, which through the coursers hoof would pearce.
This secret guile, that foremost ranks, should from the enemies close.
Fraud is a virtue great, in dreadful war, to trap out foes.
Mean time, untimely dusky night, from hie heavens rushing pressed,
And mortal men, their wearied limbs, in sweet sleep laid to rest,
Forgetting troublous cares, that fresh they might to labor rise.
Howbeit with drowsy slombring clogd, few Britains shut their eyes,
Some stringes unto their sinowy bows do fit, some whetstones plied
In sharpening arrow heads, which might through harness pearcing slide,
He to the almighty king his wife, and children does commend,
As though in fight the sequent day, should bring his fa^all end.
He put his gold away, in hope that on the morrow morn,
He shall the Frenchmans gain, as customed was of old beforne.
The glittering morning fresh, unawares the Britains, clearly shone,
Arms, arms, ye English hearts, with cries which rought the heavenly throne,
The valiant captains call, take armor, armor take, we pray,
Your weapons gripe in hand, to twig your strong bows forces lay:
And chiefly in the hottest broyle respect to keep good ray.
These words no sooner said, but joint the bands in order went, The English
army set in order.

Expecting foes approach with mind to blouddy battle bent.
When suddenly a Scoutwatch spurs to courser setting swift,
UUhich watching had the night before, to understand their drift
Survewd the enemies camp, cries, cruel Frenchmen, Frenchmen comme
Like as in midst of winter cold, the sounding South wind glomme,
UUith showring flawes, and duskish mistes, made thick, does whirling run.
Or as Orion clouddie star, with countenance black does fr^,
The hugie mountain tops, being far aloof, and near, with sway
Rough rushing winds fly out, and with their ^rce do ^ke away:
So does the Celtane army ^ast, (...) broad ^thes fair in sight
The Sun vpstart, approach, displaying insignes glittering bright.
The earth does trembling shake, with hollow ^oof of trampling steedes,
Through thrunging thick on heaps, the pilming dust to skies proceeds.
Sturd up with horsemen plumpes, and bands of footmen flocking fast,
This morning had the king, into a founder stomber cast,
Then ^e of custom used, so void of care sweet rest he takes*
Until one of his Peers into his be^ tent entrance makes,
And him with touching soft, out of his pleasant sleep awakes.
Declaring how the Celtane host, within two miles were comne,
And how into great ieopardie his camp was like to run:
Wherefore he prays hi^ show, what by his Captains should be done.
The king even as he was, vnclothd, his lively corpse does take, Henry rising
out of his bed prays God to aid him.

Out of his bed, on bended knees, and thus does prayer make.
O hye and mighty king, I suppliant favor do require,
Thou greatest, puissance great, into thy servants Lord inspire.
On thee I plant my only hope, do not thy servant leave,
The enemy to his horse, to thee alone, we trusting cleave.
If I as victor chief this day, the conquest shall obtain:
Thy Godheads wondrous praise from age, to age, which shall remain,
In holy temples, sacred men, and women eke, shall sing.
This pr^yer finished thus, the ranks to place, forthwith the king
Commaundes, and quickly clad, his glittering armor fitting fast,
He starteth out, with skippyng pace, and through the rays he past.
Demanding of his mates, what cheer, and hope their minds possessed,
With cheerful countenance all do answer make, we hope the best.
The Duke of York for honors sake, then down himself inclinde, The Duke of
York beseeches the king that he might lead the forefront of the batt^e.

And says, renowned Prince, a thousands causes move my mind,
To testify my love, and bounden duty to your grace,
^ert to my country soil, wherefore grant that the foremost place,
Of all the battle I, and forefront may conduct as guide,
So shall I by my worthy deah eternal fame provide:
And less I be deceau'd, by false illusions of my mind,
I shall by drierie dint of blade, the dastarde enemy grind.
And everlasting glory will such noble acts succeed.
He ends his tale. Plantagenet approchyng, him with speed
Takes up from ground, and friendly does this courteous answer ford.
Since thou my kinsman dear, do offer of thine own accord, The king
granted the Duke of York the con lucting of the forefront.

Such grateful service, as no thought imagine may a part,
More grateful, (...) ^hy the I ye^ for thy most grateful heart.
A work of high (...) (...) thou (...) ^ll, (...) the same,
Thy warlike n^ unto thee (...) (...) straight to battle frame
Thy self, and dreadful foes to come, by ma^y courage tame:
And through thy great exploites in war, deseru'de laud bear away.
Without delay the Arthets stout, are set in battle ray,
Of which the greatest part, in sundry wings divided wear.
The martial ranks which tronthesn pi^es, claspt in their hands did bear.
The ensign of the king, in armor thick did compass round.
The Earl then which by the name of Suffolk was renownde, The Earl of
Suffolk.

The right wing did conduct, the Warwick Earl the left hand rout,
Both armde with soldiers old, which twangd there bows with courage The
Earl of Warwick.

A troop of horsemen light, the pik^en ranks did firmly guard. (stout.
The reregarde such as brown bill^ date, and (...) keen did ward,
Like Giantes strong, with hugie limbs, and camp behind did close.
Here was the Britaynes power, this hind of battle ray they chose.
The army ordered thus, the king demandes, what time a day?
About the time in which our Priests accustomed are to pray:
The nobles answer make; throughout the towns of Albion hie,
Be of good cheer ye Britaynes ^ut, the king does straight reply.
For in this (...), the sacred clerks, do pray for our success, The king of
England exhorts his soldiers to fight.

Go to my lads, your valor so by great exploites express:
That like to your forefathers old, this day you may depart,
Whose hands in fight, not only have the Frenchmen made to start,
But manly looks have stoinde, and forced to fly with broken heart.
All fear expel, death dreadful is to none of gentle kind,
If to be ouercomne by destinies lot we be assignde:
The last gasp of my vital breath, shall be blown out this day,
For me as captive, to redeem, no man shall tribute pay,
Nor for my ransom British land, shall any charge defray.
He said. Like mind was to them all, the army showting hie
Redoubleth loud the noyce, and promise plightes that all would die
On paint of goarie blade, if Fortune victory should deny.
Mean time toward the Celtanes host, began to wend away
The army all, and broad in sight, their bankers to display.
Behold of dreadful Mars the trompet ghastly noyce out blue,
Prouokementes dire of blouddy slaughters fell, then to ensue.
The armies both bloudthirstie near, and near, their footestepps drue,
The share vprooting reares, and brings to light, in steed of stones: At
Northa^ton was foughten the third battle where the king was taken prisoner in
the field. The fourth famous battle was at Wakefield where the Queens pow
et slew the Duke of York with his son the Earl of Rutland, and destroyed his
host. The fifth battle fought at S. Albons again, where in the Queen
discomfited her enemies and delivered her husband. The battle at Exam fought
between Eddward the fourth, and the Lord Mo^ tague lieuetenaunt of the North
to recover the crown for king Henry the sixth. The battles at Banbury,
Barnet, Todeastell, and Teuxbury were fought in Edward the fourthes days.
Henry Earl of Richmond at Bosworth slew Richard the third, being third brother
of Edward the fourth, and then married the Lady Elizabeth daughter to king
Edward, and obtains the crown, he first joined the houses of Lancaster and
York being long time at variaunce.

Do curse, and banne with doleful playnts, those civil battles fell,
In which an hundred thousand wights, the blooddy blade did quell.
Todcastle eke through battle strange, a noble name does gain,
In which full thirty thousand men, in doleful sort were slain.
The last broyle of this civil war, did Teuxburie contain.
Which towns yet standing, of those wars are testimonies good,
How then that flowing rivers ranue, converted into blood,
So many dreadful foughten fields, the faction of two kings,
Did cause, which mighty Jove at last unto conclusion brings.
Here Bosworth blooddy wars, and others more, I will omit,
By which king Henry seventh eternal fame, which will not flit
From age to age continned still, in memory attaynd,
UUho first but Earl of Richmond, then king Edwards daughter gaynd.
In wedlock linked fast, and with her Britain crown possessed.
That did the laws require, and English Primates chief request.
This God the almighty guide, as author chief, did bring to pass,
And thus at length the rage, of civil hatred ended was.
He rayngd unto his subjects all, a noble prince most dear,
All externe enemies far and near, his puyssance great did fear.
He worshipped chiefly God, and godliness, and justice lou'de,
And crafty wicked men, he hating, sharply still reprou'de.
Full twenty years and three, belou'de of all he ware the crown,
Of forrayne princes high esteemde, and had in great renown,
A king of justice rare, of prudence, manners, courage bold,
who dying left the dyademe, to Henry stout to hold,
His heir, with wondrous wealth, huge heaps of silver pure, and gold.
The end of the first Book.
HE from him tender years, the works of mighty Mars esteemd, ^try (...). 509.

That other gifts most singular, which well a Prince beseemd:
As well of body, as of mind, I do not here declare.
How puissant, courteous eke, how he his shoulders lofty bare
Above the rest, with comely face adornd, and virtue rare.
The fourth time harvest yellowish waxt, since first he ruld this soil,
And hott Autumnus scorching flames, the earth did chapping broile:
UUhen Henry valiant Britayne king, did fearful wars up rere,
And cruel Frankes, to blouddy camps, of dreadful Mars did stere.
The Roman bishop him incenst these wars to take in hand:
UUherfore the surging floudes he cuts, and does at Callice land,
The City filling full, with thirty thousand soldiers stout.
Four noble Captains only taken, out of the warlike rout: A great expedition
into Frantic^.

Lord Talbot martial Peer, and eger Poynings fierce in fight,
Rice ap Thomas flower of Wales, and Somerset a doughtie knight.
UUhich Henry had foresent, to fragrant fields where Turwyn stands. ^ir Rice
ap Thomas

Turwyn a walled fortress strong yfenest with warlike bands.
In tune of pleasant spring, as boystrous winds with whirling blastes,
On ground all sweeping sheere, and slubble light, and dust up castes:
Or as the earth, with crooked teeth, of sickle sharp, is shorn:
So down the heardes of dear, with The English horsemen thick are borne.
They troops of prisoners take, and droues of beasts, subdue by might.
The king insues, and thirty thousand men in harnish dight, Turwyn (...)

Of hard brass beaten forgd, in siege against Turwyn walls he pight.
Under the Britain king the mighty Emperor serves for pay, Maximilian the
Emperor, se^ues king Henry, for pay.

And blouddy Germans fierce, in bruntes of war renownd always.
Nothing to soldiers is disburst for hyer, but fined gold:
Of which each tent throughout the camp, such wondrous store did hold:
That money for to coin, the king of silver was constrainde.
Rewards stout courage brought, and hier in arms haut hearts maintaind.
The Celtane horsemen troops with valiant Brutes do battle make,
To rescue theirs, but all in vain they weaker armor take.
The palm of conquest won away, the puissant Britayne bears,
The enemies all thrust through, with sharpened points of thirling spears.
The walls with roaring Cannon shot, all groueling battred down,
Do easy passage give, and entrance large into the town,
And Frenchmen filled with shiuering dread. Now Turwyn Britains hold,
And conquered spoils, of ransackt town, the king decks manifold. Turwyn
won.

UUhose mighty puissance great, in feats of Mars, with flickring wings,
Swift sliding through the air, Report, to bordring Cities bringes.
In Tornay famous City strong, when that these news were told, Tornay rendered
pays, the king ten thousand ducats for yearly rent.

For very grief she groans and grauntes for tribute sommes of gold.
And gates wide open fetts, permitting Britains entrance bold,
UUithin her walls, and subject now, unto new Lords becomne,
Extincting former laws, of Henry king takes new in romne.
Mean time king James which then of Scotts the regal mace did bear,
And to confirm the league, till wars of Britains ended were,
UUith Frankes in hand, the sacred host had taken not long beforne, Whilst
king Henry is busy in France James King of Scotts inuadeth England

And on the holy Sacrament, had most devoutly sworn:
For to observe the rouenantes, then plighted to his friend:
Himself with flaming fire, and sword, against our banks does bend.
And sixty thousand soldiers hard, all armed, training fast
In absence of their Lord, the Britain borders wide does wast.
The Surrey Earl of English bonds, assignd lieftenant, stright
Of valiant Brutes an army chose, and to augment his might,
He noble Peers of ancient race descended, to him ioynes,
Scroupe, Stanly, Latymer, of stomach stout, and sturdy, loins.
Lord Dacres present was, and Clifford harnisht glistering gay
Than Bulmer, Butler than with Haward Admiral of the sea:
And Edmond to him mind, sprung of one line of Grandsiers old,
UUhich first assailde his foes, courageous knight, aduentring bold.
Both dight in brestplates black, so made by salt seas springling drop, Lord
Haward admiral and his brother in black harnish The Scott had pitched then
tents on flodden hill.

The enemy planted was, on Flodden mountains crested topp.
And when approaching fast, the king perceau'd, in battle ray,
UUith banners broad displayde, the Brutes toward him take their way,
Dismounted from his steed, where glory vain incenst him forth
Or fervent angers rage (which in such case is little worth)
He forefront of the battle leads, and straight assailes his foes.
On sturdy buckler bosse, the Britain bare the enemies blows,
And venging gleine, with goary blood, down runnyng red, imbrued.
Three long hours, armies both in doutfull bickering fierce pursued.
The Scott with two large greifley wounds, the sharp sword edge does stay:
James king of Scots slain and all his army discomfited.

So does he for his faithles part, deserved penance pay.
Part saved themselves by flight, the remnaunt down to death are cast,
Renowned Henry, thus of nations twain, returns at last
Chief conqueror to his native land, where thus his foes destroyde,
Then after many years he ruled, and quiet peace inioyde.
At length the Northarne borderers, abusde were of the Scott,
But he Ambassadors does send, the trespass out to blott, A Scottish legate
comes into England.

And to acquit himself, which done the Legates home retire.
But after that, on this side Britains grudgd, and Scottish Ire,
On that side is incenst, for on their borders grew a strife,
And secret murmuringes went, how quarrels daily waxed rife,
Betwixt the peoples twain. Scarce thrice dame Phoebes glittering flame
Repaired had her blazing beams, and circle round became:
When as a mighty power of Scots well arm'de with troncheon spears,
One part on foot, the other horsed on praunsing steedes, up reares
Themselves, and in November when the high heavens rain down powrd, The Scots
^reaking into ^ngland ^ore Carlisle.

Irruption making fierce, with sword and fire, our borders scourd.
There is a City hight Carlisle, with strong walls fenced round,
Built in the Northpart of this land, which without balke or bound,
In valley plain is set, and fair broad camps does bordring vue,
Out of this fortrest warlike town, the kings lieuetenant drue.
And other parts adjoining near, which are in Cumberland,
Two thousand Britains harnisht bright, against all the Scotts to stand.
Which hautie hearted Wharton, does conduct in open fields,
And egar onset gives, dishiuering spears, and battering shieldes. Wharton
with two M. ^uldiours ^bdues the ^cots and ^uts them to ^ght.

But Scotts, a chilly fear their trembling hearts possessing stright,
Astonished were, at first assault: and by Jove's power almight,
UUere conquerde, battered down, all groueling on the duskie ground,
Some takes the bushy groves, and dungeon caves with rough rocks bound.
Some swift to mountains tops, with tale oaks froughted, flying gate:
The king of Scotts himself, which on a hill side lurking sat,
Afright with this event, and of his men the sloughter vast:
To pass a gurtie flood, himself into the channel ^ast.
The river through wild winter showers, then flowed above the brinkes,
Wherefore in midst of striving streams he, gulping waters sinkes. ^ames King
of ^cots swim^ing over a ^uer as some ^y was drow ^ed.

Besides all those which flight preserved, and were in skirmage slaiue,
A number captive of the Peers, and commons did remain,
UUhich wearied sore, and sad, that night Carlisle did safe contain.
The common sort with iron beltes, and shackles fettred fast.
UUhich for a mashy muck of coin, all raunsom'de at the last:
As conquerours, and conquered between them could agree:
Do haste them home to native soil, from bondage quited free.
But all the nobler sort, from race of ancient Peers esprong, The Chiefest
(...) Scotland taken priso^ers, sent to ^he Tower.

From thence to London Tower with swift course were conveyed along.
UUhere they enclosed fast, the first night were constrained to stay,
All mourning, pensive wightes, sweet liberties freedom taken away.
The next morn glomy shadows dim, from hye heavens had depres'd,
UUhen godly Henry mindful s^ill, of wretched wightes distres'd:
Commaundes the Captives all, adornde in robes, as white as milk,
The kings rich precious gifts, all curious wrought with finest silk.
Through midst of London unto him, gently to be co^ayde. The clemen of King
Hery.

Then of the hard ungrateful hearts of Scotts, but little said:
There old accustomed fraud ingraft, he reprehendeth much.
Yet all with wondrous le^itie, and pleasant countenance such,
As loving parents use to have, when they their children dear,
Sprung from their proper loins, correcting chide, to put in fear.
The Captives on the other side, did render ample speech,
Both for themselves, and country soil: and for their late dead leich,
And farther did in humble sort beseech his royal grace,
That he unto their words would lend, his listening ear a space,
King Henry grauntes, deep silence straight each man from talk does hold:
When thus the eldest of the troop, of captives thus he told.
O Prince amongst all noble kings of Europe most renownd,
UUhose mighty praise through weighty works in warfare does abound. The
oration of the Scottish Captiu^ to King He^ rye.

UUe conquered Scotts, thee conqueror, confess with willing thought.
Nor shame it is to such as you, us subject to be brought.
what shame is it for the Panther weak, to the Lion grim to couch:
If sharper penance you appoint, deseru'de I hit avouch.
Our vital bliss, our final bane, in your hands does remain:
Howbeit to such a prince renownd, our death small praise can gain.
Nor to be slain, can profit bring, unto your soldiers stout,
Respect our sucking babes, and doleful spouses scriking out:
with tears the ruthful funerals, bewayling of their Lords:
As dead. Offenders to forgive, it greater glory fordes,
If they offend which hest obey, of their anointed king
Then twenty hundred foes in field, to dreadful death to bring.
But now unto our suit, which pondring wey with justice right,
Renowned prince: we entrance made, thy coasts to wast by might,
And wasted have the bordring hamsettes near with fiery flame:
Have not our men with coudigne death, paid penance for the same:
Our king no longer vital breath and air supernall takes,
But lucklesse chance, of lowering Mars, and life, despising hates.
Perchance the Destinies so required, and God the eternal guide,
would have it so, unto whose beck all things on earth are tide.
That of his wondrous clemency, two kingdoms joint combinde
Might be in friendly love, and both have one concordant mind:
Discordant erst before, and endless league of friendship knit.
This thing to bring to pass, occasion now is offered fit:
which take O noble king, and of two lands procure the bliss,
A male child of great towardnes your heir apparent is.
Our Prince has ta^e his fat all fall hi^ heir of female kind,
But lately borne, the Scottish crown to wear, (...) left behind.
If these two Princes were conioynd in Hymen's sacred bands:
The cause of all out bickering iarres w^d qu^e be out of hand.
And eke in everlasting peace both regions should be tide.
Who can prohibitt this, if it by you be not divide?
If you command it to be so, which me ask and request?
He said ^th one (...), both parties this ^steeme as best.
Affirming it the wondrous work of ^ye Iehoue to be,
For nations (...) in hatred ^st, by such means to agree.
The king that present time, few words did render back again,
But them dis^, co^ndes (...) states beseemd to entertain,
And portlike house^ (...), (...) (...) Peer he friendly lenties,
Expenses all defrap^, rich ^ires, gold, and silver s^des, King Henryes ^cence.

And more with massy golden chains each captive he addornes.
Now fearful does they hunt, and chase ^er ^eepe hills thick with thorns,
Now into hunting ^tts, they dr^ue the swift ^aggs, haut with horns.
"But flattering pleasure puts a mean at lengeh unto her joys,
"And nothing is so pleasant found, but it has four a^yes.
"To country g^ostes, more sweet in taste, is bee^ then patridg fine,
"More grateful eke then dainty cares, is powdered flesh of swine.
Even so the Scotts their country cold, then ours, more better says,
Though all things likes them well, and all things they unwilling praise.
Such ardent love of country soil, men's mortal minds does tax:
In respect of which, all other joys dot sour and loathsome wax.
Wherefore they burning in desire, to see their native (...),
And license free for to depart, attaind at Henry's hand:
Whilst that they promisd golden m^tes, and did persuade the king,
How they two nations linkt in league, and endless truce would bring: The Scots
set ^t freedom and pardoned without any ^aunsome on them.

He froothing palfrayes fayrs, and bugy he apes of fined gold
On them bestowd, and grati^y most cheerful did behold:
Their raunsomes pardoning ^ke, Thus captive Scotts dismissed ^ee
With solemn shows of wondrous joys, now welcomde home they he,
Unto the palace of the Queen, which to her husband drowned,
The sacred rites of funeral, performing (...) they found.
These primates thus returned safe, the Queen their sovereign dear.
Demaundes what ^er, in Britains ^ourt, and how they used wear.
Ungrateful Scotts they first concelde, king Henry's grateful heart,
And did disprayse the English guide (a vile unworthy part)
Then dosefull her lamenting still, they earnest did exhort,
The Britain not to choose, in wedlock bed to be confor^. The S^ts d^ h^t the
Queen (...) m^ying h^ daughter to the English Prince.

Unto the Princess fair, but foreign son in law elsewhere get,
And noble Celtane king in nations severed far to fet.
And peace for wars to change, to such as wars would boldly make,
That fortune then in tune to fore, success would better take.
These sayings all, the Scottish Peers vpheld, with one assent,
And toward britains borders straight, with sword, and ^er, they went.
The periurde Scot, to burning wrath now Henry kindled had,
And cheerful trumpets rattling sound, to broils stout britains bad.
Forthwith in solemn sort, were summond states of all the land,
A heinous fact, each one cries out, reuengement out of hand.
By dreadful sword, by reaking flames, each says must be prepared.
And promizd severally their helps, all cause of stay that bard
This enterprise seemd long, to ieopard life none dout does make,
That Brytaines of such villainy, reuengement just might take.
The Captains chief assignd, the Earl of Hartford uncle dear,
To Edward tender Prince, and Dudley haut and warlike peer, Edward (...) of
He^forde and John Dudley Lord admi^all with a navy of ship pes enter Sotland.

Which Henry Admiral of his Fleet, appointed had to be,
In wit, and courage like, but far unlike in sterce, for he,
In mighty puissance fierce, of sturdie limbs, and joints, did pass,
The other subject less to ire, less wroth and dreadful was:
In few days did the enemies shore, with crooked keele attain,
Through weltring salt sea floods, with prosperous gales blown on amain
Without delay, with armed soldiers stout yfenst, they land,
Their Mariners hot blooddy broils, beginning out of hand.
The foe rumies scattred here, and there, the country cottage tops,
which either clotted turfes, or flaggie marrish rushes stoppes,
And couers from the winter showers: with flerie flames at^ burnd.
Lies ransact, to the ground by Vulcans blasing brandes was turned. I eithe and
Edenborowe ransacked.

And all the bordring region near, did smoldring smoke up rear,
Of female sex the doleful mournings loud, the skies do tear
With scriking noise, and aier throughout, young childrens clamours ringes,
All, sadness did portend, a wretched shape remaind of things.
To Edenborowe then our men, with tents removed proceed,
Dear bickering blows begins, with showers vplifted fierce indeed.
The Scotts their entry gates, indeuoring fast with ingines rambd, The
Scotts placed their, ordinau^ full ag^ their g^

And ordinance roaring loud, with just charge of gunpouther crambd.
On this side foundred is the Scotte, their Britain breathless lies,
Those gasht with goorie blade, those flame with shaft which flickering flies.
The bounchy ashen tronch, does many riue with gaping wound,
Sent far aloof, but more the whussing bullet dings to ground.
At length part of the Britains camp, the battred walls had scalde,
Inuading fierce, with reaking fires, and v^utes and roofes down haelde.
The Scotts do fly for fear, their goodly Ordinance Britains hold, The
Scotts forsake their Ordinance.

They shun their sight, as does, do hounds, as hindes, do Lions bold.
The strong stone walls remainde, and housen pinions stared vast,
All other things to ashes burnt, with Vulcanes sparkling blast.
The castle yet of Edenbrow, unconquered stands stout,
An ancient fort, with ouglie walls, of cragged rock cut out,
Depending on her strength, and burning with desire of fame,
That she durst proudly boast, no foreign force her power could tame,
"The event, and final end of things, does try them false or true.
But thereof trial to be made, the kings edict withdrue
For present time: wherefore the valiant victor Britains host,
Fame leading them the way, with swift course sail to native coast,
In fleeting hull ybore, with cheerful noise of trompetts sound:
The ships safe in their wonted roades, with mighty cables bound.
When thus the navy strong tawe ropes, to grapling ankers tied:
Lord Dudley martial peer, straight way to Princes court him hyed.
Whom, many a right hand stretched out, does welcome home full feign,
Where he saluted is, and salutations gives again.
Before all others Henry Prince, to lofty skies does raise,
His Admiral, and puissant corpse, with mind vntamde does praise.
UUith Princely words, and Princelike gifts, adds to confirm the same.
Scarce through the twelve celestial signs, done Phoebus glittering flame,
Had stealing crept, when Britains force, the Frankes prouokt to fight,
Preparation of wars against France.

UUhose king with cruel miscreant Turks, a league of truce had plight.
Out, out, a filthy fact, and deed unworthy to be spoke,
For Christian king to do, religious care which seemde to take:
And of that title to the world so vast a show did make. The king of France
his league with the Turk.

Against him therefore for to war renowned Henry bent,
UUith suffrage of the primates chief, and councels graund consent.
He arms of proof prouides, and soldiers customed long to wars,
And doughtie ladds, of courage stout, and prompt to bickering iorres.
And valiant guides of stomach haut, all such he brings out.
The nobles present wear, and commons eke, a hugie rout,
And first that Pee^e, whom Suffolk name, and title hye assignde,
Up mounted on a trampling steed, in Tyrian purple shinde,
UUith golden helmet decked, whose copped crest did streeming stare.
Then he to whom like title, rich of sheep woll Norfolk, ^are,
Exulting skipping came, a Duke to wrothfull anger pressed, The Dukes of
Northfolk^ and Suffolk^ the Earl of Arundeil. Lord Paulet, Lord Russell
appointed chief in this warfar^.

Howbeit of mind unconquered, nor by Mars to be suppressed.
Then Arundell an Earl, of youthful years a strippling brave,
UUith Pawlet, which did corn, and needful food provide and save.
Lord Russell then, which warlike troops of burly ladds did trace,
UUhich Deuon fostred up, of white tin mines a fertile place.
Walls sent a jolly route, and Ireland eke a few did yield,
UUhich neither dred the bright drawn sword, nor blouddy foes in field,
In running springoldes light, of heart, and hands of valor tried:
The chosen Northarne crew, on warlike Coursers fierce to ride
In mayled shurtes, of sturdy iron sweltes fine forged, dight,
By swift course of their horse, could equal strive with birds in flight. Sir
Anthony brown master of the horse.

Anthony Brown whose comely corpse, if men you would behold,
In portrature none excelde, nor in exploites of Mars more bold:
Most willingly the horsemen troops, by Princes hest did guide,
From all the coasts of Britayne, came, thick thrunging, far, and wide.
A mighty power of Springoldes fresh, and store of palfrays fierce,
The horn hoof of the foming horse, the trembling earth does pearce,
And horsemen armde with sturdy lance, do run with frisking pace.
The camp thus ordered well, in long ranks marches on a pace,
And aierie region vast, with clamorous noise discordant fills.
UUith armed troops, the hollow vales, and lofty mounted hills:
As with fallen flakes of snow, or Titan set, with dropps of due: Or Tita^ set
that is, or when the Sun is set.

You might all scattered thick, in complet harnish cluttering, vue,
whose blasing brightness through the rays of Phoebe so dimd the look,
Of vewers all, that Titans beams, away the prospect took.
New raiment party colored made of woll by skillful art,
The soldiers of each Captain did disseuering set apart.
Fine silken banners broad displayed, before each ^and does go,
The skipping soldiers of his guide, the Ensign spread does know.
Even as the fragrant flowers above the green grass lofty show,
In pleasant time of spring: and with their colors do delight,
If any man of fair fresh fields, shall walk to take the sight:
Such semblaunce has out bands whilst oer ye plain heathes thick they gad,
In silken iacketts fine, with skirtes imbrodered curious clad,
Their glittering armor glimsing rays, like Sun beams casting fro. The
description of king Henry the. 8.

King Henry loftier by the head, all boistrous, stout does go,
A great and mighty Peer, where you his strong arms do behold,
Or huge thighs sturdy pight, which art had closd in precious gold.
And eke his manly corpse, with mighty brestbont bolstred broad:
By no force to be tawde, nor through with hard steel to be throad.
Him armor strong inclosde, of finest metal polisht wrought,
Such as by fiery puissant God, yforgd you would have thought, ^ulcanus.

Or by the monstrous Cyclops vast, in smoldring Aetna caves.
The workman, there sleep clammering hills, and liquid floods ingraues.
Here shadowy darkesome woods are set, their shrubby salowes low,
Moreover Themmes, which with straight course, into the sea does go The
descrip^ion of the workman ^hip of king Henry's har^ish.

And on that side whence Eastern winds, with boistrous blastes do sweep,
Were Seuerne grau'de, and Trent, two mighty floudes with chanells deep,
Whose weried streams to th'greedy gulf of The Ocean vast do pass.
On the upper margent of the shining brestplate graven was,
The shapes of mighty kings, and ginning of his ancient race,
Edward Plantagenet the fourth there had his royal place,
The lively Image then, and antike form of Henry sixth,
Of mothers, and of fathers side, his grandsiers next were fixed.
Then Henry seventh with loyal spouse adioynd, in seats are stalde.
By name of royal Solomon most worthy to be calde:
For that he prudent was and godly eke, which virtues twain,
Unto a Princely Peer, eternal fame deserved can gain.
His son of young and tender years, the staring hellmethad,
Whom ruling here on earth, dire death did envy youthful lad.
Two Princes, virgins last, by several mothers brought to light,
Successors to the crown, so laws, and rites requirde by right,
Two royal chaires possessed, ingrau'd in crest of headpeece bright.
Where from his sturdy bow the king his flickering shaft did wrest,
All showting loud out cried, that he therein excelled the best.
Or whither he with straining force, did charge the shiuering spear,
He had again the praise. If valiant Hector living wear,
And now Achilles should assail, with ghastly gleiue again:
Like force of thunderbole, so he his sword with might did strain.
But to de short even as their king, the army all desires,
To be the like, hye honors prick their hautie stomachs siers,
Incensing more, with courage great* adventures great to take.
The soldier will be stout, which under stout guide wars does make.
Upon his armor honge; a ves^ure dect with precious gemmes
From utmost Indies brought, and Emerauldes dazeling eyes with glemmes.
The Diamond, shining Sapphire eke, and Jasper were infold.
His hangers guilt, his sword hilts gold, his buckler bosse of gold,
Or if that any thing, then red gold were more precious found.
And to be brief his gorgeous trappers gay, and bitt linkes round,
Did cunning rare contain, and cost which such a king beseemd.
The common sort thus richly dight, him not a man esteemd,
But thought a God. For God himself, the heavenly monarch hie,
Will earthly Princes have also, in royal dignity,
To be, as Solomon in glittering ornaments we know.
And now the sea which through the strait clifes, rough with rage does flow,
By blastes of prosperous western winds, the Britains over cast,
At Callice landing safe. Refreshing toils, and labors past, King Henry
landeth at Callice.

The king, and all his warlike troop, their viandes gladlyer taste.
And now the dim night, weried corpse, all drouping lays to rest.
The greatest part do watch, perplexing cares them so oppressed,
Each little stay or none, to wights destrous seems delay.
When Titan from the Eastern floods, with bright beams began his way,
The dreadful trompet sounds shrill, each tools in hand does take,
And toward coasts of Celtane king forthwith do journey make:
Toward the glistering beams of Titans flashing chariot bright,
There is an ample soil, amongst the Galls, which Artoyse hight,
A fruitful plague, for pasturing fields to feed the fleesie sheep,
Abounding eke with lofty trees, and bushie mountains steep,
There see we stand aloof, with pompous houses Bulloine old,
On rough sea shore ybuilt, with walls of hard rock round infold,
In elder age inuinsible by any foreign foes.
This warlike fortress proud, for to assault the Britain goes,
And rampire bulwark casses, and town with deep trench does enclose. Bullen
besiged.

To those that were shut in, no hope remaind of coming out,
Next to the walls fierce Dudley stands withal his dreadful rout
Of mariners, through flashing surges brought, a people fell
Are mariners, and stern, unbridled, such no force can quell.
Which boistrous roaring floudes, with mighty whirle wind raging stoure,
When in the gurtie channels low the ouglie rocks they scour:
Does never daunt, with shinering dread, nor chilley fear procure,
To whom nor ragged desert rocks, nor fiery flames, inure
Do terror cold, nor dangers dire, by sea, or else by land.
The Admiral of the sea, reioysde at this his warlike band.
The mariners, themselves of such a Captain happy deem,
So like, does like, with willing heart embracing, high esteem.
Of all the hugie Britain camp these men one quarter wear,
By which the Bolloyne Citizens, did utter ruin fear.
On the other side does Charles Brandon dire destruction threat,
And town besiegd, withouten rest, and walls does battering bent.
Nor far from thence stout Henry king, his warlike tents has pight. The
English give assault.

From whence through thin air, rattling pearst with peise, the whirling
And sparkling burning brands, to lofty tops of turrets flies, (flight,
None of the shiuering enemies durst for fear lift up their eyes.
Nothing but trembling terror pale, within the walls remaind,
At length from rampire tops, and crested walls, down iauelinges straind
The Galls besiegd, and stoutly force, by force again repelde, The gall^
resist.

And with their manly balute bold, to tacke the Britains held:
The bickering blouddy groes, here fear, here glory move men's breasts,
The staggering lance with force, forth flying swift, both parties wrestes.
Through gasht with gaping wound, out grudging ghoshes a number send,
Most yet of these were slain, which hye walls garrets did defend:
And maimde with ga^ly stripe, with grief unto their homes are borne,
He stoynisht, gasping breathless lies, he haltes his foot ytorne,
With brains on ground besprinckled broad, no form of bisage left
An other spraules, with knock of stone, he tumbleth peecemeale cleft.
The ancient age in conquering fortrest'd towns, and cities, found
The use of ingine fell, with mighty beams of timber bound,
Or else a Ram, with hooked horns, of sturdie iron wrought,
which shogging pusht the walls, and hugie stones cut losened brought.
This kind of warlike ingine, in our age avails naught,
Our men a torment much more dire, for dreadful wars have sought: The use of
the great gunne.

There is a gunne composde of molten streams, of ire, or brass,
Of which a Friar (as some report) the first inuentour was,
Wherewith in few days, strongest fortes, and towns, may down be bore,
Which scarce in space of one hole year, subdued might before.
That powder then, the hollow boored brass, in equal wight
Do load, according to her charge, a rule directs right
Where it be more, or less, ensuing which, close after ramd:
If that a pellet fashioned round, of ire, or stone be cramd:
And that with level just direct, you peise her on her wheels,
UUho would believe, but trial true thereof experience yeeldes:
That whurling fearce, like wind, it lightened all and set on fire,
The bullet flies through the air, and strikes what mark you will desire.
Down battering sturdie walls, with rockie stones full strong erect,
Nothing against the whuzzing pellet swift, can force object.
For what can stand against, although it were a mount of ire?
The walled City strong, assaulted with his this torment dire,
Does bear off many bouncing bobs, with noise resondes the skies,
And smouldring smoke as black as pitch, to heavens does reaking rise.
Both earth, and housen shake, as if with shog of whirlewinds rage,
They from their deep foundations mou'de did staggering beckning gage,
UUith clamours loud which rought the stars, our men bestow their blows
UUhen of the wall a hugie part, with rumbling crack down goes:
UUherewith both heavens, and seas do roar, the mariners tents eke shril John
Dadley be^ chec^ the king that be with his mariners might first scale the was*

Resounding shake, whose captain haut, the kings pauillion till
Him hies apace, on bended knees and suppliant him does pray,
That he the battered walls to skale might first begin the way:
And that none from his soldiers bold, that worthy praise might get,
Although the praise with present danger pressed, were jointly set,
Because that dearer was then life, hie glory, and renown,
And loss of breath, was to be changed, for worthy murall crown. Corona mur^
lis in old time he that first entered the Enemies fort wanne great honor and
therefore crowned with a garland in the triumph.

As long as by him, and his men, the victory were atchiu'de,
He death a thousand ways would take, if thousand times reuiu'de,
He were again. The king scarce would consent to his request,
Such ardent Jove of him, he had conceau'de, in royal breast,
At length on morrow following next be licensed was to take,
In hand his wished enterprise: he condign thanks does make
To Henry mighty prince, as though a precious treasure great,
He had found out, his suit obtaind, and humbly does entreat,
His Grace his wedded Lady dear, and children to respect.
Forthwith for to return no time at all he does neglect
To him desirous egar knight the night did longer seem,
Then it was wont to be, so feign he would at bickering been.
His mind turmoyling this, and that, soft stealing sleep refusde,
Before day break, his soldiers calde, as he of custom used,
He bids their bodies straight, with lightest armor to be dight,
Then many things reuoluing deep in thought, the clear day light
He long expect'd, his sturdie bands of Mariners repare:
On warning small, assembling thick, as bid to costly fare.
Then Dudley noble peer his mouth resolves amongst the rout.
They that in all their time, no hard exployt have brought about,
Deserving lasting fame (redoubted laddes) their lives forsake, The oration of
John Dud^ ley to his m^ riners.

Much like dumb players, from the stage descending, nothing spoke:
we were our country soil, with life, and labor, borne to aid,
Or wherefore have we in this world, so long like sluggardes stayde:
The earth her seed, with large increase, referres to sow again,
The fruitful tree, in season due, her burden does sustain,
The pear tree pears does bring: The cornell Tree, does Cornels yield,
These do their masters good, and profit tillers of the field,
No creature else of use so small, I can here call in mind,
By whose increase some other things, no needful fostring find.
Unto our country we were borne, no man can that deny,
And does not Justice us require for it again to die?
What is the life of man, but stombring sleep, or pleasant trance:
The action of clear Virtue does men's praise, to stars advance,
Which simple glistereth not at all, but in her subjects shines.
Wherefore the warrior stout, on quarrel just, she chiefly shrines.
Some languishing in tormantes fell, with grievous panges out blastes,
Their flickering spirit to skies: whom blouddy Mars in wars down castes,
They dye a worthy death, and in a moment yield their ghostes,
Disseuered thin in air, glad wandering, in supernall coasts.
We in subjection are, and ours, to mighty Henry's lore,
By poures celestialls sound decree. That we to death be bore.
If thundering Jove do think it good, and Henry puissant Prince
Command, we must obey, it were in vain against prick to wince.
Than how much nobler is it, a high exploit, with willing mind
To undertake, then by constraint thereto to be assignde?
Us victors everlasting fame, and glory, shall endure.
Howbeit but hard adventures, can true laud in deed procure.
And now attentive mark I pray, whereto this speech is made,
The king and counsel have decreed, that we shall first invade,
And ransact enemies walls, with ladders, fierce assaulting clime
This grateful province, after long request, to me, and mine,
Permitted was, if every one, to take his chance be bent,
Than dout not but your Captain I, do promise good event.
He whusted here, with shoutes extold to stars, bring ladders calls
Each mariner, starse Captains threats, can hold them from the walls,
With such desire of praise, and ardent love of glory rought.
But godly Henry pondring much in mind, him vnbethought,
Not so much waying warlike towns, with rampire walls inclosde, The King
considering the danger that Dudley with his men wear like to run into
commaundes them to desist Bullen rendered.

That with his men to certain bale, and drierie death reposde:
He would nor fortresd Cities rich, nor kingdoms vast subdue.
UUherfore by strait edict, from his pretense, he Dudley drue.
Few days expired were, when Bulloine of her own accord
All armor laid aside, to Henry yeldes, as lawful Lord.
The Frenchmen all themselves withdrue, and gates wide open set,
UUith streaming murrtons glimmering bright adornd, in Britains let.
Six thousand Galls, their antike seats, all pensive did forsake,
The walls, with stately buildinges, fair, and turretts Britains take.
The warlike Castells strong, with Captains new yfenced were,
And certain garrisons of men, in stations settled there:
Lieutenant of the conquered town, the king that worthy Peer
Assignd, which of his mighty fleet, did the protection bear.
Forthwith with primates, guarded swift he salt seas does, divide, John Dudley
Lieuetenant of Bullen.

And through the walloing wrestling waves, to native land does slide.
Lord Dudley his committed charge respects with wondrous care,
Reuoluing much in thought, in great foresight and all things bare,
And does by secret policy, the wielie Frankes prevent,
Sometime by fraud diminishing, and weakening their intent,
Sometime in open fight, provoking them to bickering blows,
Subduing Captive some, but more the goarie blade down throws.
No day past one, in which no hard exploit he did atchiue,
UUhereby stout Dudleys name, through the world so wide swift Fame did
And glory greater waxt, renowned more in Celtane lands,
And higher he accepted, was imbrast at Henryes hands. (drive,
Thrice golden Phoebe, to her brothers lamp conjoined was,
When from the puissant Britain guide a Legate forth did pass,
The Admiral to recall, on weighty causes of this land,
The noble Order welcome him, fast clasping hand, in hand,
The Britain springoldes fresh, at his return do shipp for glad,
Few months expirde, swift fleeting Fame, throughout this land did blab,
That Frenchmen had prepared, of warlike ships, a navy vast,
For to invade the Britain coasts, and land with ruin wast. Preparation of
the Frank against England.

Each to defend prepares, hye beacons built, of fagotts light,
UUeare on the copped cliffes, that kindled, they give warning might,
If on our shore, the enemies fleet, should steal in duskie night,
And landing, down with reaking flames, our country hamletts cast.
Sols chariot bright with swift course had the head of Leo past,
UUhen Celtane navy huge, with boistrous blastes along are blown.
The sea now showed no sea, if from a craggie steep rock, one
By chance upon the floudes, far underneath had cast his eyes,
Or like a shadowy grove, or wood, with oaks which lofty rise,
It rather seemd to be, or field, with tall trees thick ypight.
UUith salt sea waters compast round, there lies the I Will of Wight
where shearing Southwind glome, with rough waves bounce the Britain
The enemies army vast, in hollow hull is thither bore. (shore, The Frenchmen
with a great navy it uade the I Will of wight.

The grappling anchor strong, is cast out of the stern before,
And with his whistle sounding hoarse, a sign by master ginne,
(...) And prudent with immortal praise, had Britains haut contaynd,
Since he the mighty scepter, of their happy kingdom bore, ^enry. 8. after
3^. years ^yeth.

UUhen that the almighty Jove by fatal sickness waring more,
Did warn him leave this mortal life. alak, and wail a day:
How many Brutes with blubbering tears, their soft cheeks did beray*
How bitterly the Britain states, him-sick bewayling rued:
All England droupes, bereft of joy, with trickling tears bedewd.
Physician naught can veil, nor wholesome herbs found in the field,
UUhich health accustomde wear tofore, to mortal members yield.
No compound drugs could life prolong, nor pleasant potions brought,
"Alas, to cure deaths drierie sting, in vain is physic sought.
Howbeit before his final gasp, because his tender heir,
Prince Edward yet was young, he states assignde the rule to bear,
For a prescribed time, of which Lord Dudley high renownd,
In royal tomb inclosde, his worthy corpse did lay in ground:
With brinish tears. Of funeral now sacred rightes right done,
By all the troop of mighty Pieres, on Edward prince, his son, ^dward the
sixth begun ^o ^aigne ^ 546.

In solemn pomp, a precious crown of gold adorning round,
His temples fair, was set. The Britains all in duty bound,
UUith one assent, him lawful king, with reverence great adore,
And heir legitimate to his sier. The Earl of Hertford bore
The title of Protector chief, and by his nephews grace
The Duchy took of Somerset, to him, and ofsprong race. The Earl of (...)
created Duke of Sommerset. John Dudley made Earl of Warwick.

His other uncle Seimer made Lord Admiral of his fleet.
But Dudley by the title, he of Warwick Earl did greet,
From whence his ancient progeny, by long descent he drue,
The greatest mirror of his stock, and kindreds glory true.
As every man in great revenues floev, with honor dew
So was he high extold and decked with glorious title new,
A wondrous troop of royal Pieres, the kings court stately found,
And lookers on, applauding loud, with shoutes up reard a sound.
All things have limits true presirt. Now pleasant pas^imes past,
The counsel causes of great weight, reuoluing deep did cast.
Of commonweals affairs, of ancient forts fallen in decay,
They council take aduisde of planting garrisons in a stay,
In certain places weak, and what auaild for common state,
But chiefly they respect'd the Scottish realm, which bordering sat,
Each in remembrance had the plighted troth of Scottish Peers,
which they had firmly vowed, to bring to pass in former years,
Concerning linking fast their maiden prince, in w^dlocke bands,
And wished that so might be procurd, the unity of two lands:
UUith everlasting peace, and endless truce thereon to spring Expedition of
soldiers into Scotland.

wherefore when glittering Phoebe declinyng down, his beams did bring
Into fair Virgos fa^e, straight armed troops, of warriors, sent
They gree to Scottish soil to be, to know the Scotts intent. The Duke of,
Sommerset Ealre of Warwick and Lord Dacies assigned chief in this warfare.

Chief Captains were assignd, the Prince his eldest uncle dear,
And to him joint as mate, the Warwick Earl, a puissant Peer,
Whom warlike glory hye, of dreadful Mars, had made renownd,
And virtue rare, with ardent love, in soldiers hearts had bound.
The third companion to them knit, bold Dacres Lordling went
whom doughtie ladds of Cumberland, to blouddy skirmage bent
Their Captain would elect, and after him in warfare trace.
To Dacres faithful Cumberland, the nurse of gentle race.
The vulgar sort, their native Lords, most arden^ do embrace.
A number of the Britain Peers, to these wars put their name.
And martial knights, of ancient rite, of golden Garter came. Lord Grai^
captain of the horsemen.

Amongst the which Lord Gray, of mighty l^ynes, and stomach bold,
Of th'armed horsemen troops did for his skill chief guidance hold.
A wondrous (...) rout, of common soldiers flockt beside.
Howbeit before within the banks of Scotts they once did stride,
By Legates letters were foresent, their cause expressing plain.
That to their former plighted troth, they steadfast would remain.
By fair means they were prayed, that Britains ca^p^ no force should show,
If promise vowed to Henry king, they would not now forgo.
In vain are admonitions gin, if no man them regard,
In vain the deaf are counceled right, when council is not hard.
The Scot does wars require, he will contend and end by blows,
He desperate naught respects, where well, or ill, his quarrel goes.
The Britains equal cause, committed to Jove's power almight,
Their stomachs boldned on all trembling terror put to flight.
Therefore the Duke of Somerset, his mates, and warlike bands
Ensuing, pitched their tents, and armde remainde on Scottish lands.
Howbeit nor sparkling brands they slong* nor with injurious deeds,
Did hurt, or damage any wight, fresh pasturing for their steedes,
They only took, all other thing from scath preserved sure.
Lest troublous causes more to wars, the fierce Scotts should procure.
Mean time the Earl of Arreine with furious anger stong,
Which of the kingdom rul^de the raines, til that the Princess young,
Were comne to riper years, chose thirty thousand warlike wightes,
UUith weapons armed strong, against Britains power to bend their mights.
By chance the day which should before the fatal battle fought,
The puissant Warwick Earl on trampling palfray milk white, broughe
Into an ^nple plain, the foe to bickering calls out.
Here scoures the Scott, here Britain rides, the Carreer round about
And staggering tronch of poisoned lance, does gird with courage stout. A
light skirmage of the horsemen of both parts the day before the battle.

He blood out belking lies, with goary blade through th'bowells pusht,
His flickering ghost out flies, with point of sharp spear greisly crushed.
The courser furious sterce, his sitter cast, does by paths tracke,
An other topsey turnde, a while sticks dead on palfrays back,
At length down tu^bling, gaiust the ground, his skull does battring knack.
But chiefly, and above the rest, of ancient Brutus race,
With mighty puissance Dudley Peer, did Scotts down hurling chase.
The trampling feet a misty fog; and duskie cloud up read:
Much like as when a glomy ^ure, from aierie region teard.
At length our horsemen^ging on, the Scotts to fly constrain,
And to the camp with spoils addrn'd returns back again. VVhori it was
near sun set.

Now scarf the fourth part of the day remaind, and Phoebus lamp,
In chariot swift conueyde, did have to th'westerne Ocean camp.
Behold from Scottish marlike cences, an ^erause comne does pray, The Farle
Arreine governor of Scotland sen. death an Herault unto the the Duke of
Somerset, and the Harle of Huntley provoke him had to hand.

That vncouorolde unto the Duly a message he might say.
Wherefore unto his royal cent, with frequence great conuapde,
He was permitted for to speak who thus distincklie said.
what is the cause, that thus you stri^e; one realm to wast by might?
Irruption making fierce, unto our land what is your right*
Is this the part of nation joint up vicine borders knit?
The sielie people batcring down, with drierie blade to hit:
But armor laid aside, forthwith depart, and leave our land,
Or of your bold invasion look reuengement out of hand.
For of the valiant Scotts collected is a mighty band.
A blouddy sckirmage on to morrow nert for to succeed,
I do denounce, if to your coasts, you have not back with speed.
Alack that without loss of blood, us battle may be fought,
With what abondant purple streams shall conquest chief be sought:
How many mestiue wives their husbands fall shall wailing moan,
Destroyde by cruel death, constraind to lie in bed alone:
How many parents of their sons, and offspring dear berest,
All comfortless in grief, to lead their old age shall be left:
I tremble to express, nor you unpunished shall depart.
wherefore the Scottish guide with wondrous pity mou'de in heart,
Toward his country soil, me bids this message to declare,
Unto the Duke of Somerset, since both have cane the care.
And guidance great of kingdoms large, let both the common cause,
Of kingdoms safety move, of legal truce he offreth laws,
Of that the Britains will, their tools, and armor laid aside,
All glorylesse forthwith retire, in cause inferior tried.
Unless you do, theu slaughter dire, in wars without remorse,
Expect, the Scottish weapons fell, fall with such weighty force.
Moreover puissant Huntley Earl these words me utter had. Huntley challenged.

To th'mighty Duke of Somerset, lest Christian blood be shad,
And great effusion made, that the contention may be tried,
Between them two, and armies both disseuered stand beside.
So loss of little blood, of all these sarres and end may make.
And headlong prone dissensions rage, a souder may be brake,
By one man's death, and wars vpsturde, a final end may take.
These words he uttered. when the Duke, replyde thus back again,
Determinate into your coasts, this army I did train.
Conditions not take, but grant, of peace (that answer tell) The Duke of
Somersets reply.

When Scotts had time, these dangers pressed, they might have voyded well,
Now to to I^e to deal, by vain colluding craft they tend.
That Huntley Earl, with native pride puffed up, does to me send,
with him in combat for to loyne, through glory vain extold,
According to his nations guise, he prou'de, aduencreth bold.
He as a private soldier serves, nor bears impery,
If I were so I would him make his challenge dearly bye.
Here warlike Dudley with this speech, the Dukes Oration takes,
And faithles Scotts, with words more sharp be reprehending shakes. The
answer of the Earl of Warwick to the messenger.

Your slipperie faith, and fickle troth, your periude glauncing tongue,
Us Britains, though unwilling, eggs to scour your coasts along.
Jove's anger just, prouokes us to revenge such heinous sin,
He our attemptes shall prop, and force maintain to strive therein.
Howbeit if promise plightd you keep, then foes us not esteem,
we nothing will commit, but faithful friends it shall beseem.
But is with arms prepared, you mean in martial camps to try:
Your selves with weights of puissance stout, to war you shall epsy.
UUho will not laugh to scorn, such boastings vain, such Scottish crakes:
Think you that bugges, or prochant words us Brutes afrighted makes:
You err the scope of heaven, and raunging rouine beside the way,
Let boys, and girls of tender age, such vain illusions fray.
That here your mind aboadment gives, great slaughters to ensue.
And dire destruction of your men, you prophesying tue:
The holy ghost offended, with such false perjured wightes,
Does it foreshew, and to our power has subject made your mightes.
Of mighty armies God is one, alone, the very same,
which huge Go^ath by the hand of David small subdued,
UUhose brainepanne rent, by stripe of sung the ground with gore imbrued
He author of this quarrel just, on just cause taken in hand,
By such as reverence due his name, will always firmly stand.
But this, (that other things I pass) I cannot but admire,
How Huntley or such confidence depending, durst aspire,
And on him take, laws to lay down, to his superior far,
Himself inferior in degree, and honor eke, why darre
He proudly should, to combat, and provoke so noble a Peer,
As Duke Protector eke, of Edward Prince, and kinsman near.
But swollen with glorious native, pride, he vaunteth so by kind,
UUherfore if such desire to fight, such louging have his mind,
These words to Huntley show, and message do from me declare,
I in my country am an Earl, and justly may compare
In honor with an Earl of Scotts, our title Warwick hight
UUhose Fame through Europe coasts along, renownd has taken her flight.
Though Castells fair, at root of mountains set, his name addorne,
And he from noble ancestors, the offspring true be borne:
If honor be respect'd, one order does us both containd.
To morrow morn, when Phoebe vpstart shall lift his lamp again,
And ouerspred the earth with light, I Will Huntley glorious, stout, The Earl of
Warwick chalengeth Huntley to single cumbat

Expect, we two will try, both armor less, and fight it out.
If this he does deny, though better armde he do proceed,
On horse back; or on foot, to meet him sure I have decreed.
I nakt him naked will assail, unless our shirtes do close,
Perchance our corpse from shame, as nature seemelines does chose.
Ten Britain Peers, to single combatt else do ten provoke,
Or twenty, twenty Scotts, if ye will grant, and strike the stroke.
Or I alone, will ready be, with him alone, to fight,
If that I conqueror him subdue, our part shall have the right,
If Fortune at us spurn, our armed troops shall backward stright,
Unto their borders wend my final gasp, or his, shall cease
These iarring braules, and twixt both lands, establish future peace.
How noble is it by dint of sword, this frail life to forsake?
Now proffered opportunity, of combat let him take,
If that he list, to morrow morn, say I will ready be.
These speeches uttering forth, a mighty mass of red gold, he
Upon condition gave, that he declare that message would,
To Huntley Earl and more these words he him departing told,
If that the Earl assent, and will with me contending fight,
To morrow next, as soon as day on earth shall cast her light:
Do thou forthwith as messenger, thereof return this night.
And for the pains of gold received, I double will the wight,
Unto these words most willingly, the counsel sage assent.
Forthwith throughout the tents, with flickering wings, swift rumor
How mighty Dudley had an earl of Scotland challengd stout, (went
Each soldier skips for joy, and loud resounding liftes a shout,
And manly stomach takes, and hautie hearted Dudleys praise,
To starry region hye, and heavenly powers extolde, does raise.
The evening now in western coasts, with rays all fiery shinde,
When fires bright burning the tents throughout, of hard wood you might
Scoutes sent to spy, a hugy rout of Scots brim to appear, (find:
Returning show, in steelecotes dight, our army settled near:
With careful minds, and waking eyes, the watch their charges keep,
And now our men with grateful cates refresht, and dulcet sleep:
Look when Aurora goddess bright, from roseall bed shall rise,
And with beelight coruscant, show the world unto their eyes.
Till Huntley comes, in vain his christaine lights, still rolling casts
The mighty Dudley here and there, no messenger, at last:
Returned an answer back, though pure gold offered for his pay,
At length the better half expirde, and midpart of the day:
In valleies low appear, the Scottish ranks in battle ray,
Prepared for to fight, and banners broad displayed did bear,
Approaching fast, But Brutes a hill, which hie himself did rear:
Then interiect betwixt, ascended up, that place more apt The Engli^ army is
set order.

Might be for skirmage grim. The horsemens guide the left wing lapt,
The right, where Navy lay at rode, a marrish moore did close,
The vaward after Warwick Peer, in long ranckes marching goes,
Mean battle to be led^y thee, O Sommerset remaind,
The rearegard all behind, in order Dacres stout containd.
And now approaching near, the enemy armies bustled ferce,
UUith dreadful rattling noice, the clanging brass tromp air does perce, The
on set.

And clattering classing armor ringes men's clamours loud abound,
Not so with dashing waves, th'weltring main sea floods resound:
UUhen they the craggie cliffes, and rough rocks bellowing loud do scour,
Soon after Aeol puissant God of winds, the brethren four:
With endless discord rapt, from dongeon caves permits to stoure:
On the other side the Scotts with panting pac^, against the hill,
Up clammering mount, and thick in plumpes, themselves do gather still.
The harnisht horsemen troops, with shiuering spears then furious rusht,
Whose first rank down is borne, their huge corpse through with weapons
But forth the other rays, with sharp spur^ prick their tra^pling ^eeds (pusht
And fellows deaths revenging wrack which Gray ^ut captain heedes,
UUho even at first assault, in mouth recea^e a ghastly stroke,
The Britayne army all, courageous fightes, Mars does provoke,
Men's minds incensing, wood, and gaping wounds does vigou^ bring,
More, near those shores in harbor rode the navy of the king:
From whence through powlders furious force, composde of brimstone blue,
^uskelborow ^lde.

Both bullets forgd of stecle, and iron chains, red glowing flue.
Full fourteen thousand Scotts their g^stes to glommy Stigie lake,
Down sent in deep disdain, the rest to flight them did betake.
Our men with toyling labors sore, the cheerful trompet shrill,
Does back again retire, who gladly wend their tents until.
O what rejoicing then, what wondrous mirth that night did last,
The tents throughout, each takes delight, to talk of travels past,
Of dreadful perils dire escapte, it is a pleasant thing,
"UUith mind secure to think, but chiefly power of heavenly king,
"Did their attemptes support. Just Jove a false cause, down will bring.
The next day light appears, through uncouth coasts, and by paths blind
Of th'chiefest Scottish primates fled, report remaind behind.
Some, desert mountains stickle tops did shrine, some, castle wall,
Did firmly guard, that th'enimies camp appeard no where at all.
The winter now approchte, and space of days does shorter grow,
And black Orion cloudie star, himself in heavens does show:
UUherefore our camp, their warlike tents remou'de to native land,
Determining a fitter time, to take those wars in hand.
The mighty Duke of Sommerset, and Warwick Earl also,
Are welcomd home, the nobler sort, of youth which then did go:
UUith them to blouddy wars, all safe returnde with them again,
The noble king right hands to join most royally did daine:
And all the Princes friends, in arms did willing them infold,
Commending high their haughty hearts, and manly courage bold.
Mean time the Scottish Peers with ^ckle lightness puffed in mind,
And Enuies rage up swollen, that frustrate hope might Britains blind,
UUith general consent, in month which December hight
Unto the Celtane nation send, that their young princess bright,
Right heir unto king James, be knit in bands of wedlock might.
To the heir of France, If Henry king, this profer would not take, The Scots
send into Frauncc to entreat a league between the heirs of Sc^*land and
France.

That so an everlasting truce two nations, one, might make:
Yet that the mighty guide of Frankes this would vouthsafe to yield,
That for the love, which loyal league twixt nations both did build:
As Scottish, and the Celtane eke: he would not once permit,
One of them torn by dreadful wars, whereby the league might flit:
Or spoyld by dint of the enemies sword, to foreign empire bend,
The Brutes by force of conquering hand, that only to intend:
And in the sequent spring, the surging floods with navy vast,
Quite covered for to be, and troops of horsemen flocking fast,
To enter scottish lands, proposing this, their only stay,
The Scottish heir, from mothers lap by force to take away.
which pray if they attain, by adverse luck, and spurning fate:
O woeful realm of Scotts O black and lamentable state,
Nothing but mourning sobs, and blubbering salt tears left behind.
UUherefore by Gods, by sacred rites they prayed, that called in mind,
Their ancient league, established erst, he would the virgin take,
Before, for long delay does often greater danger make.
which tender Impe, if with the king of France she be up traind, Hymen God of
wedl^k

with princely education eke, within his court containd:
That then they had a certain hope, of great good to succeed,
which might the perfect happiness, of both their kingdoms breed.
And after that through years mature, she may in Himens Iace,
Be ^nked fast, to whom he please, let king of Galls her place:
Forthwith by princes hest, the Celtane Fleet launched from the shore,
Is finely furnished neet, and Gal^ies swift with sail, and ore:
which after from the callmy harbor close, wih Southwindes shrill,
Swift sliding through the deepes, the Scottish realm they come until.
The Princess Mary now, to painted Pull with pomp was led,
where for her princely Grace, was set a stately purple bed,
Soft cushions underneath, with soft Down stuffed as white as milk
And costly Arras, Cabbins decks, ywoucn of gold and silk.
Great heaps of silver plate was brought, with shapes of gold inwrought,
And whatsoever else for virgin Princess, meet was thought.
Forthwith the comely damesell thus, a shipbord portlike placed,
withal her virgin troop, and men of arms which after traced:
She ste^ting fast is borne, the air the spread sails driving on,
And merry gales of wind them through the rough seas course anon.
The flecte in order saild, as Swannes twixt fishie rivers banks,
whilst middle, and the third, insues the first, and in long ranks:
(...) The third day comes, and Phoebe the world with clear light over goes
Stout Dudley with his warlike mates, them selves in tents do close,
So do the doughtie bands, which London mighty City yields,
Near ancient Norwich walled town, down pitched in open fields.
Which when the country crautus, tought with pale fear, had espied,
In briery brakes, and lucking holes, in shadowy groves they hide:
In no place daring peep, but after boldness fiercer grown,
In time, that all those soddaine panges, of fear away were flowne:
They rushing thick out brake, and to a valley bordring hye, To Dusson dale.

No man remembering calde to mind, the danger preasing nigh:
But armed stood, with carres, and waynes, their wings incompast round,
On the other side the princes host, with cheerful trumpets sound.
Proceeds, and first the blows begins, and egar fight up reares, The Rebels
^nclosed themselves with their cariages on every side ^o keep of the assaults
of the Barle of war wickes horsemen.

But Warwick furious wroth, with blouddy blade his foes down bears,
At length, when beastlike backs to turn, on this side shame forbad,
On that side certain death the rebels (...), outrageous mad:
One part resisting fierce down falls: the other groueling flat,
Is battered, but stout Warwick Peer, respected chiefly, that
Least all at once were overthrown, those men of perverse wit:
Hawbeit of courage such as dangers done should force to flit:
He causes through the Martial field, an Herault loud to cry, The Harle of
Warwick subdueth the rebels in Northsolke.

If any armor would abject, which he most traitorously:
Had taken in hand, and for his fault would pardon humbly crave:
He should unpunished life, and goods, and former freedom have.
Which when the commons heard, they tools, and armor laid aside,
On bended knees, with mourning tears, and Pardon, Pardon cride.
The mercy then of Warwick Earl, did so resplendent shine,
That penance of their heinous fact, he pardoned free that time.
No Britain now remainde, whom Giaunt like, rebellious rage, The Giants in old
ti^e rebelled against the Gods, and would have pulled ^ubiter out of heaven.

Did rechlesse bear away, none did from loyal duty gage,
But to their true anointed king remainde and country sta^e.
The Princes court, from this lugubrious war, did Dudley take,
With solemn pomp, and joy: with flitting wings, whom Fame did make
Renowned through the warlike towns, of Britain kingdoms stout,
How in king Henry's days, he hard adventures brought about,
Whilst that his thundering gleiue he rold, amongst the enemies rout.
Not of deaths drierie lance, or dreadful edge of sword, aghast,
He never doubtful stood, himself to dangers all to cast:
If great affairs, or countries cause, required him to go,
Or hest of sacred king, incenst his mind for to do so.
How many times with boties rich, and laud immortal won,
Did he to native soil again, from externe Regions come:
His enemies battered down: or else in fearful flight back driu'de,
Whereby he royal dignity, and endless Fame atchiu'de.
God prospering the event, which he begone in luckie hour.
Wherefore as yet he higher was, extolde in Fortunes bower:
The King him Duke creating, whom with joy and mickle cheer,
Northumberland did title give, and honoring love full dear.
Him Lord chief Stuard eke, the Princes Court embraced feign, The Earl of
Warwick created Duk^ of Northumberland.

Till Atrapos the fatal thread of Edward cut in twain,
Renowned Edward from the paps framde of his noble Dame,
Instructed in all Sciences, by learned men, became.
Who Greekish phrase, with Latin speech conioyning in short space, The death
of king Edward

Did reap such ample fruit, that unto none of princely race
He was inferior found, which Britain nation fostring reares, King Edwards
praise

Nor Peer he any had, if flexile age, and tender years,
Ye do respect, which three times five, and two, had scarce expirde,
Or ready sharpness of his wit, or judgment, ye requirde:
In any point to learning which, or moral virtues bright,
Did appertain, the Phoenix rare of Europe, and the light.
UUhom death untimely, like the flower from tender stalk of rapt,
From Britains took away, and youthful corpse in coffin lapt.
Death enuies on the earth, who sacred laws observe, and keep.
So boys, and springoldes fresh, he with his dart away does sweep,
which Jove the almighty king, vouchsafes to heaven to have extold.
The king thus dead, him after does a woman scepter hold,
UUhich Mary hight one of the sisters twain, sprung of the race,
Of Henry royal Monarch high, which did within short space: Mary begins to
reign 1553.

A Foreiner, her kinsman eke, king Phyllip Spanyard take,
In wedlock bands, which penstue hearts unto the Brutes did make.
For seldom shall you mark, two realms concordant to agree, Queen Mary
marries to king Phyllip.

UUhich far by lauds, and seas disiungd, and legal friendship be.
Here whilst this Bridegroom new, does with his spowse himself delight
Round guarded with a mighty troop, in purple Mantles dight,
UUith hemme of gold about, beset with Emeraulds glittering bright:
which wandering merchant had from utmost banks of Iudy brought.
Phoebes burning lamp the front of Leo vast, had ouerought,
And in the hye heavens region broad, now many signs oregone: S^itium, ^ernum
is (...) the eight Calendes of January.

The winter Solstice passed had with swift course borne anon.
Secure and pleasant peace both Frankes and Britains jointly bound,
UUhich league both Spanyardes, Fleminges, eke and Phyllips king^
And for because the feastfull time, the great year rold about, (wound
Christmas he means.

Not without solemn pomp; and mirth, the Britain land throughout,
UUhich in Decembers nipping cold still falls: each heart bereau'de,
Of faithless fraud, which secret foe, in watching bed conceau'de:
King Henry Celtane guide, with youthful heat provoked mad,
And thirsting after endless Fame, great hope incensed had:
In mind, that either Phyllip none was, or but half a man,
And stablisht sacred bands of league, to violate began,
UUith reaking flames, all Flaunders coasts, then wasting broad in sight,
Henry of France inuadeth Flaunders.

Subduing droues of beasts, and troops of men by martial might.
UUhich Hyspaigne king provoked wroth, and cholers raging ire,
Of all the Spanish Peers incensing, kindled light on ^re.
Not Autumn yet was come, that lofty Ceres fruit might spring,
with yellowish ears, and pastures large, the green grass fragrant bring:
Nor of the earth, Sols scorching heat, the moisture had up dride,
That under hye heavens coape all night, the soldiers might abide:
wherefore till hoped hour, of them des^rous looked long,
The navy rigged is, swords, flickering shaftes, and iauelins strong,
with armor strong of proof are got, flesh; bread, and wine, are bought,
Preparation of wars against the Frenchmen.

That needful food for valiant men, might not be wanting sought.
But in each tent abound, huge chestes were packed full of gold,
That they which fought with courage stout deserved hire might hold,
From sondrie nations severed far, full many a martial crew,
King Phyllip willing so his Peers, came to his warfare new.
Mean time the bewtions Queen, and noble spouse of Phyllip king,
To aid her husband bent a trusty troop of men to bring:
A legate sendes unto the Frank, which dreadful battle bad,
And did unto that nation false, rough threats moreover add.
All France in uproar stands, with fearful tumult, on her part,
All England cracked with noyce, to blouddy Mars vpsturd, does start. Diverse
nations in phillips (...).

All Flaunders, Aspurge eke, all Burgoine, and Tirolis strong,
And many a doughtie Captain Spaigne so mighty minges among.
Full many eke whom dreadful wars, long times had vexed sore,
whereby their skill in works of Mars, through use increased more:
In crested helmets streming dight, all glorious to behold,
Their corpse in harnish strong: with shieldes bright shining broad infold.
The puissant captain present was which Brunsweikes title due
Does beautify, in harnish black, whom gardes a horsemen crew,
This troop at first assault, did daunt the Frenchmen sore with fear,
And down with manly might, did many (...) b^orse tumbling beart.
From Germany likewise to aid, were sent a ch^ (...):
Nor doughtie warriors wanting were, from out Italia land.
Dalmatians fierce unto these wars, and active Heynowes trast,
Howbeit the chiefest confidence in Britain bands was plast.
The narrow league of friendship plight, and wife requir^ the fame,
To whom with her espoused feere, all dangers equal came.
The Earl of Penbroke general of Britains ranks assignd,
Three Earls more had linkt, first him whom Worcesters title shrind,
Next him whom Bedford did adorn, with honors which beseemd
So mighty a Peer, and lastly him which Rutland high esteemd.
To these in like degree, for his exploites atchiu'de beforne,
Was joined Sir Anthony Brown, of Anthony sier true offspring borne.
with whom stout Dudleys manly race, gay springoldes armor bare,
And from what noble blood they sprang, expressly did declare.
The Palm tree cannot down be pressed, but loftier does extend
Her braunched top, if that with weight you go about to bend,
Her bows, w^h baistrous stem, and springing liftes her crest to stars.
Wars purchase high renown, great honors are atchiu'd by wars.
Hence springes the Princes love, and gracious favor offered grows,
Hence commons like proceeds, if unto Mauors bickering fawes
For native countries sake, you boldly do object your breast,
Refusing dangers none, each kind of death to venture pressed.
This was ingraft by natures skill, if no man had instruct,
The Dudleys, they with parents milk, inuicted courage sucked.
So much it is to spring, from valiant Sire, and noble dame,
The cheerful Brethren three, in armor like exulting came.
Of which the first, outstarteth fresh, of mind unconquered bold,
With shoulders broad bespred, hight Ambrose, whom rich clothes infold,
Of purple hue, upon his armor polisht fine with gold,
Joint by his side, in brethren love, linkt fast, and natures bands,
That mutually one might defend, the others quarrel stands
Robert his brother, borne with smiling fate, in luckly hour,
Who as he gentle was, so stout, and bold, his foes to scour.
The third companion to these knit, which like love did impart,
Was Henry, void of fear, of mighty force, and hautie heart.
These three all striplings gay, had soft locks scarce on cheeks sproug out,
Such bodies fair, as seldom yeldes the like this world no dout.
A fourth, these Brethren had of elder age, whom stealing death,
In flower of youthful days, untimely reft of vital breath.
Through languishing disease, by bitter destinies cruel down,
To mighty Syer, and Grandsiers old, who like had sure become,
Inferior unto none, in high exploites, of all his line,
Such courage rare of mind, and force in hardy corpse did shine.
You would him said to be of Hercles sturdie arms, and breast,
Such vigor great he had, where girding forth the stafe he wres^d,
On courser mounted brave, or strong in wrestling might expres^d.
What kind of sap ingenerate, the Apple tree does feed.
In Autumn season, favoring like, such Apples well proceed.
So the courageous progeny, from valiant Dudley sprung,
Do imitate their ancestors, both he whom death has stong,
And they which lively now do skip the Spanish Peers among.
And farther many more which were by knighthoode noble made,
With warlike weapons strong were armde, the Celtane coasts to vade.
which Primates stout, teen thousand wightes of Brutus race were bound,
To guard, and now the time was comne, when clangring trompetts sound,
These uncouth nations, far a part, togethers summond round.
The season of the year the corn ear, causd, with reed, to strout,
And for the barbed steed the earth, green pasturing burgend out.
The warlike region vast of France with fortrest Castles brave,
Abondes ybuilt with hugie stones, out of the hard rock claue.
And every side with Cities fair, is garnisht wondrous gay,
where toward Spanish coasts she looks, or clouddy Alps, always
UUith slakes of snow bespred, or rising of the Sun beholdes,
France: rightly may be proud, of mighty towns, which walls infoldes.
Here is a famous City, that of Quintines name does bear, Saint Quintinnes
besieged.

which does in fruitful plot of ground, her buildings stately rear,
Most plentiful of corn, and wine, within that ample field,
King Phillip pitched his tents. when thus the town besiegd beheild
Herself with the enemies tankes about, she stoinde with terror stays,
And to to late the French kings aid, she craves the siege to raise.
For some the earth deep trenching, down to tear endeavored fast,
Some for defense of rubble up a bulwark bancke did taste,
Some scaling ladders framde, and firebrandes flang to turretts tops,
The strong stone walls, with ingines fell, some other shogging pepps.
But see, here none this secret guile, and subtle slight espide,
For when the glomy dark night shades, men's eyes with soft sleep tied:
A Celtane Captain with a band of Frenchmen close did slide,
Into the town, with poulder stuffed great baggs each soldier brought.
These things did luckly fay, whilst entrance he by stealth had cought.
But like success to thee did not O Memorancy fall,
whilst eighteen thousand soldiers stout, he after him (...) call,
Through wouddy bypathes blind, (...) hi^ mountains near to stray:
Till that the duskie night, into the town might fourd a way:
Amongst thy hardy borsemen troops (Renowned Duke) he light,
The best part of his army slain, the remnant put to flight.
But Brunsweik Duke the Captives safe, in prison strong up closde.
Forthwith before king Phillip was the Captain ta^e reposde.
Then hurly burly stir, and wondrous joy through every tent,
was spread abroad, the noise vpreard the aierie region rent.
This good beginning, all of like success aboadment takes,
The soldiers fierce with cannon shat, the hard walls battring shakes,
The diches are with rubble filde, and now the plaistring pusht,
And losened with the vehement shot, three hugie parts down rusht,
And several places three, into the town gave entrance new.
Then out of every band, the king did take a chosen crew,
In plated harnish white, them arming all, and bad invade,
The enemies town, where passage free, the walls down ransact made.
The clamoring Ioude of warriors then, the hye heavens coasts does fill
The dubling dromme resoundes, the rattling trompetts clanging shrill
Confused mixed with noise of men, makes deaf the soldiers ears. Saint
Quintines ^ted.

Here egar Almaines fight, the Italian there him doughtie bears.
On this side Spaniardes press, by force through gaping wall to pearce,
On that side guarded strong in steel thrung thick the Britains fierce.
But first before the rest, did hardy Henry Dudley tend,
With course unbridled swift, the walls down shogde for to transcend,
So do his Brethren twain, of puissance like, and courage found,
Howbeit of Henry, whilst he stoopt, declining to the ground,
I know not what to rear, or rip, anyron bullet brust Henry Dudley slain.

His scalp, broad scattering bruised brains, and corpse dead laid in dust.
He gentle spirit out gaspt, even in his fresh and bloming years,
Whom back unto the tents, his mates conuayd with blubbring tears,
His body clad in lincloth shroude, as Christian rite requeres.
His brethren furious wood, burn in desire of deep revenge,
As every foe them meets, with sharp sword pusht, his neck he bendes
Dissolved in quaking death, with raging ire, and bitter sting,
The Britain stout in arms, like thunder dint his foes does ding.
On every side th'assant, against wretched Citizens wareth grim,
A thousand grudging ghost are sent to gastlie shadows dim.
Pale death their hearts afrightes, whom ransackt walls in compassd round,
He of the Celtanes happy is, whom goarie gaping wound,
Has groueling lay^ along ^o be re^de by (...) skill.
with shriking plaintes up lift^, their ruthful houses weomen fill,
And trembling in their arms, their tend^ sucklings do embrace,
Distract of mind through fear, and wandering stray from place, to place.
Young boys do wailings make of arms such ghastly horror grows,
And suppliant both their hauds, with plaint^ to heavens extending, throws,
with humble voice beseeching Jove, some mercy down to cast.
But they whose natural moisture of their brain vpdried, was past,
And could not weep, whom crooked age, from death had shrouded free,
Their countries fatal fall, and ruin of their town to see:
They from the bottom of their hearts, do grievous groans out power,
Till midst of day more fiercer still, and vehement du^s the stout,
Through courage haut, and mighty force of Phillips soldiers stout,
But not without great streams of blood, of the enemy powered out.
The Citizens inclosd, suppose at hand the final day,
Of the subversion of their town, and hour of their decay.
And now the army through the gates, wide doopt, had passage won,
The Frenchmen, str^ke with chillie fear, in plumpes do backward run. Saint
Quintinnes taken.

Some shroud themselves in cellars blind, some beams in houses cops clime,
A combrous rout to temples fled, themselves from death to shrine:
And wretched wightes, in arms the alters clasping fast, infoldes.
The victor with his armed bands, the walls and strong fort holds,
The martial troops, in stately buildings fair, do beat the sway,
Which thee (Redoubted Phillip) served (...) Lords driven away.
The Celtane pomp is overthrown both precious robes, and gold,
And massy bolls by goldsmithes act, (...), of silver mold:
The Spanyard soldier sckipping takes, the (...) sides up torn.
And precious Arras curious wrought, by Germans out was borne.
Bed tikes the feathers powered forth, along the ways were sprad,
Set out to sail, to buyers such, as ready money had.
Fine linen Garments, woollen eke, in (...) did scattred lie,
And pannes, and caldrons huge, which were preserved, need to supply,
In seething meat, and instruments which kitchen ought to hold.
A brazen pot, with platters large, of pewtet fine, was sold
For two grotes prise, the crier loud proclaiming first the same.
what precious household stuff in all the town remaind that came
UUith Jewels, rich attire, and Orient gemmes, in coffers found,
Unto the victors pray, King Phillips laud hye heavens resound.
Which to his mighty Sier, in warlike honor they compare.
Mean time the common people floct to sacred temples ware,
And to the Sanctuaries of the Gods, themselves in heaps had bare.
Expecting all with trembling heart, their final gasp to breath,
No spark of hope to them remains, them to preserve from death.
which trying brunces of wars, in open broils are ouerthrone,
But God the affectes of hearts does move, and in his hands alone,
Are dispositions eke, of earthly Princes every one.
What way his mighty hest, directs forth, that way they take,
He softneth, he, their breasts, and prone to good works hearts does make.
As mollified wax to every form, is subject brought,
And stamps or tipes impression takes, ^o formers pleasure wrought.
wherefore the Princes mind, more lenisted, through quenched heat
Offeruent ire, through Jove's behest all injuries does forgeat,
And soldiers straight commandes, for to desist from shedding blood,
Of male and female sere, now wondrous troops of captives stood.
The impotent, and tender youth, with such, as wages hierd,
Dismissed were, but the wealthier sort, as martial laws requi'rd,
UUere kept in band, mong'st many Peers, esprong of worthy race,
Shattillion, which of the town the kings liuetenant was:
As Captive was subdued, again to be redeemd for gold.
A garrison of warriors then, here left the fort to hold:
The king his tents remou'de and Castle strong of Haune besetts,
which Conquered ransackt down, he many forts despoy^ing getts. The Castle
(...) Houne taken ransackt.

while that this blouddy scourge did range in the Eastern parts of France,
The Admiral of the English Fleet, his title to advance.
Lord Clynton, warlike Peer, of noble grandsiers old esprong,
Unto the western Celtane coasts, was carried swift along.
Three hundred Carickes vast, you might have seen the surges hye
with brazen keele to shere, whose tall tops rought the starrie sky.
The fiery belking brazen piece, with tearing chain shot hard, The Admiral of
England with too, ships sayleth into Fraunc^ and burns Conque.

Both pup, and side, and beaked stern, of every ship did guard,
Destruction threatening dire, unto the adverse Celtane true.
There is a City hight Conque, which Thetis waters blue,
with raging stoure do wash, that takes our ships in wished road.
Forthwith Alarm the trompet foundes, the soldiers fresh abroad,
Out sckipping fierce, along the salt sea banckes, were scattered thick,
Of all the Captains have, first Winter does on dry land stick,
Red flaking brandes of fire, to rampire topps forth hurling fast,
which ragged walls, with smoldring flames incroching, lickt at last.
Not only hugie ioistes, and beams unwieldy matter yield,
But Tons of oil increasd the fire, then dwellers life to shield,
From dint of wrathful blade, fly back, the walls with rattling noyce,
Are overthrown, the women sckrich, and boys with doleful voice.
And when no force for to resist preuayld, the stronger sort
Of solid years, and hardy Ioines, all desert left their fort,
And uncouth by ways strange, withouten path did pensive stray.
Not pillage noble Clinton sought, or spoils to bear away,
But glory great of wars, both town, and treasure, fire deuoures,
To ashes eke consumde are turned, both bordring towns, and towers,
High blasing sparkles belching up, in circles to the skies.
A while bold Clinton tents down pitched, and in the plain fields lies,
At last with honor great adornd, to painted deck he hies.
Mean time the Frenchma^ cloking fraud under fair frendships name,
Two thousand soldiers led, and Alderne yland overcame.
Where with a navy small yfrought with ladds of courage stout,
Sir William Winter sayld, by force the Francons to drive out. Sir William
VVinter with many of the Queens ships takes ^gayne Alderne I Will ^o^ he hands
of ^e Frenchmen.

The I Will as soon as of the Brutes, it far aloof was spied,
In wallowyng surges rough to anchor cast, the ship was tied.
Six hundred warlike soldiers then of doughtie Britains bold,
Scelected were in all, which cockboates swift with ores, do hold,
And on the craggie rough sea shore, on foot all safely setts.
Here Winter prudent guide, (for long experience wisdom getts)
That beastly hope of dreadful flight, he clean might overthrow,
And greater courage kindled more, in each man's mind might grow:
As soon as on the dry land set, his armed ranks did wend,
The empty botes, unto his fleet, he back again did send,
With speedy course to go. Then thus he spoke with countenance sage:
The puissance of our Englishmen renownd in elder age,
Me warning gives, that like mine ancestors, I naught at all, The words of
Sir William VVinter to his soldiers.

Deaths drierie dart regard, which crooked age in time does call,
Or is by sickness fell, with torments dire, and vexings brought,
Death is of men to be contemned, that endless fame be sought.
Behold with frothing floudes and stormy waves, us compast round,
Our enemies near approach, perchance in number far more found.
Howbeit us Brutes in martial feats, and courage fierce, behind,
France mighty is, these bands you slow, and feebled faint shall find.
But grant our enemies strong, with might and puissance stout endued,
We through them with our corpse, and valor, passage must reclued.
Things of great weight, are not atchiu'de, without adventures hard,
And victory often in doleful fight, bold courage does awarde.
Which by how much more vehement, and fierce, its in you grown,
By so much surer (valiant hearts) we all will down be thrown,
To Stigyan lake this day, less foes by sword, or flight, we quell,
We conquest will atchiue, or famous death us all shall fell.
Stout hearts, a noble death, by mighty wounds, seek to obtain.
And mates let Fame of worthy death, as prise of life remain.
If any man for fear shall turn his back which God forfeud,
UUith shame in midst of weltring streams there let him take his ^nt.
No cockbote shall him shrine from death, nor plancke from drowning save,
(Unspeakable reproach) no not if I the same would have:
If any man me disobey, he life shall lose therefore,
And to the maine mast trust aloft, with cottering winds be bore.
Into the bickerings hard of Mars, I first will lead the way,
UUith stomach bold, and first in arms, I force of foes will say.
The heart of him that first shall come, this hand shall riue in twain,
He said, they life, and labor cke, t'aduenture press forth feign:
And clamours loud up lift, the trompe Alarm resounding blows,
The onset bidding black, in order Winter stoutly goes:
Before the rest, and in his fist a sharpened tronch he claspt,
His body covered all, with glistering armor buckled fast.
Two thousand Frankes against our ranckes, themselves forth fiercely bare,
UUhose Captain marched first, and thought with ours for to compare,
Uncertain, where with pride conceived, or mighty valor mou'de,
Or only but to make a show, and backward would have shou'de,
If him his heels to stick unto, for warnde had perils dire.
But egar Winter let not back this glorious Frank retire,
Much like Jove's mighty bird, with grasping talents fenced strong, Sir VVillim
VVinter meeting with the French Captain slaieth him valiantly

UUhen with swift course, he chasing flies, the sholes of foul among,
The smaller sort lets slip, the mightiest birds with claws down pluckes,
And feathers plumes, with nooked beak, and brains, and blood, out suckes:
Even so the Brute courageous, does the Celtane captain urge.
And for because with bunchy pike, the enemy did insurge:
with armor fenced like, and weapned like, on him fierce flies
Stout VVinter, groueling dead on ground, now Frankes conductor Iyes.
The other pillage of his foe, and rich spoils does obtain.
Mean time both parties mingling blood, their courage stout did
And ghastly wound is recompenst with greistie stroke again. (strain, The
Frenchmen subdued.

The Frankes retire, with flickering shaft stabd through in hasty flight,
The Island is subdued, and conquered yeeldes to Britains might.
These things atchiu'de, and ^nisht thus. By Captain Winters hes^
The Mariners their helmes, toward the ragged shores do wrest,
Then great reports were made, of (...) skirmage fought that day,
Applauding every one, their inward (...) did they bewray,
UUhich noble conquest is to mortal men ^nt to defray.
These things in August done. Then after in Decembers frost,
The Frenchman it besieging, was unhappy Callice lost,
(Unspeakable mishap) which adge, and feeble folk contaynd, C^lice lost.

For the most part, within her walls, few soldiers fresh remaind.
Howbeit few soldiers, cannot force, of many men abide,
This ancient sort neglected, and a woman Prince beside,
whom then a treacherous prelate made by perverse council stray,
Her noble spowse in foreign coasts disseuered far away: Thirlby Bishop of
Elye.

Hereto, add rough and boistrous floods which raging sweld that tide:
And far disiung'd beyond the seas, the sandy Callice bank,
Unwilling it to take, the town might thrust unto the Frank.
This fortress lost, the Spanyardes wife, began to consume away,
whom eating ears, with parching grief, brought to her fatal day. Queen
Mary dies.

Thus ends the second Book.
ELIZABETH QUEEN. OR A SHORT AND compendious declaration of the peaceable
state of England, under the government of the most mighty and virtuous
Princess ELIZABETH.

Whereunto is added a brief Catalogue or rehearsal, of all the noble men
which being now dead, have been, or yet living, are, of her Majesty's
Counsel. Written in Latin verse by C. O. Done into Engl^she, by John Sharrock,

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile, dulci. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert
Walde-graue. Anno. 1585.

To the worshipful his approved good friend, M. JOHN ESTMOND Bacheiler of Law,
one of the fellows of Saint Mary College: commonly called the New College
in Oxenford.
WHen as at the request, and earnest instigatio^ of some of my friends,
(worshipful M. ESTMOND.) I had done into English meeter, the two first books,
of that Poem, of C. O. co^tainyng the battles, and high adventures, of the
English Nation. I was determined there to stricke sail, and to cast mine
anchor: knowing, that the longer my craced keele scoured the seas, the more
water she would leake: and fearing, least that Scilla escaped, I should be
sunk in Charibdis, or Libia shunned, I should be swallowed in Syrtes. If
Cherilus that fielie Poet, had brought but a brief Pamphlet, when he dedicated
a huge Volume, unto the Macedonian king Alexander, his gain peradventure had
been the more, his pain undoubtedly the less, in escaping a great many
lashes, which he suffered, to his extreme grief and endless infamy. Even so
was I persuaded of my self, that the more I wrote, the more want of skill I
showed, whereby I might heap the more dislike, and so by a consequence the
more reproach. But when I called unto mind (Gentle Sir). How greatly I should
dye in your dett, for your manifold benefits, and friendly, yea rather fatherly
affection, where with you did embrace me, being your pupil in Oxon, to my no
less comfort, the commodity: It were incredible, to think, with what
celeritie, and disdain, I shook of those terrifying causes, and how ardently
I burned, with a vehement desire, yet at the least by this kind of writtyng,
(in as much, as I cannot otherwise sufficiently express my zeal and true
affection) to testify my good will, and my heart full of all humility, and
sincerity toward you, and to bring to pass if I might, that in all ages,
and posterities, as long as ever these my watchynges, and writtynges, shall
live amongst men: your name should never dye, but remain as a pattern, to our
nephews, and offspring, of all gentilitie, courtesy, and humanity. and that
as every fautor, and maintainer of good letters, is called ALTER MAECENAS, an
other MAECENAS: so every one which imbraceth his friend with faithful love,
hates no man, and is free from all baseness and slavery of the mind (as
beseems a gentleman) might be named ALTER ESTMONDVS, an other ESTMOND. Take
therefore well in worth (dear Sir) these my simple endeavors, being a
compendious declaration, and treatise, of the peaceable reign, of our renowned
Lady ELIZABETH, compiled by Master O. and by me metrized, as a certain
testimony, and the express tipe of my good will. Communicate them with your
friends, shroude them from my foes. This is all I do request, this me thinks
I already see your Courtesy, and gentleness to grant me. The Lord preserve you
in health, wealth, and felicity. AMEN.

Yours assured in that he may, John Sharrock.

TO THE NOBLE, AND most virtuous Lady, endued with all kind of good
Literature, excellent, both in the Greek, and Latin tongue, the Lady MYLDRED,
Wife to the right honorable Lord, Baron of Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of
England.
Renowned Greece in elder age, with learned dames did shine,
Whose written works remain as yet, with phrase mellifluous fine:
Of Muses bright besprinckled, drawn out of Parnassus spring.
Of female sex, erst mighty Rome, a hugie troop did bring*
All expert in the Latin tongue, how heit they lesser praise,
Adornd with native language wanne, their fame to heaven, to raise,
And everlasting memory, by writing to attain:
Than due is to those Noble Nymphs, which severed far remain,
In externe Regions wide, in tender years, whose native tongue,
Is to be learnd, the Romayne then, by toiles, and labors long,
Of form renewde, with limits straight, and bonds incompast round,
As English Ladies, many may of worthy name be found,
Which flourish at this day, which through the world swift Fame does blase.
Who join, like learned men, the Greekish tongue, with Latin phrase.
Yea which is more, like skillful Poets, in dulcet verse they floe,
Wherewith Homerus frought his books, or Mantuan Maro.
If cause requirde, ex tempore, their meeters framing fine.
O Nymphs, O noble Sisters four, but (Myldred) unto thine
High favor, as the chiefest, I appeal, be thou mine aid,
And like an other Pallas, let thine Aegis strong be laid:
Before my breast, that this my book, feel not the biting i^, Aegis the shield
of Pallas.

Of Theon, Viper fell, or carping Zoils slanderous flawes.
If me beholding with thy shining looks, thou will defend:
The Envious, and Malicious crew, dare not me once to rend.
So, as in sanctuary shut, I shall no danger feere,
Inferior far I know my Muse unto the virtue clear.
Of the renowned Prince, howbeit the will of subject true,
May here appear, if that the just, and courteous reader view,
And pondering way the work aright* and not with censure hard.
If that this long, and prosperous peace, hereafter (...) ^clarde
By trompe more shril, I wish, and b^, these writings unto naught
By sparkling flames to be consumde, mean time, I them have brought
Renowned Lady to be shrinde, vpheld, and set in stay,
By your high honor, turn not from your Clyent I you pray,
This does your true Nobility, and manners meek, in breast
Ingraft, this does your Godliness, require, above the rest.
Your Ladyships in all humility. C: O.

To the gentle Reader.
IF verses you delight, with stately style and sounding words
Which lofty swell, seek Poetts books, which such high things
You will perchance affirm, that of so high, and mighty a Queen (affords.
A work should of more majesty, and stateliness be seen.
I worthy her confess, whom Homer should insugred verse,
Or with the Notes, of warbling Lute Apoll^ great rehearse.
I am no Poet, you pardon must me, since I pardon pray,
If that a bourden over vast, do down my shoulders way.
My art unto the vertueyeeldes, of her a Prince so great,
Which should be sounded by a trompe more shril, with winds repleat
If others lie in silence shrinde, why should my Muse not sing?
But when her laud, in fluent phrase, from one more learnd shall spring
Then will I these my papers void the fiery flames to feed,
Mean time the honor of her Grace, let these my verses breed.
ELIZABETH QUEEN.
FOrthwith in royal throne, and regal chair, as Queen was set,
Elizabeth, a Princess stout, wh^ Henry did begett,
King Henry monarch high extold, amongst all earthly Peers.
Elizabeth, abornished even from her tender years,
With manners meek, with learnings lore, with wisdom ^e divine,
Excelling in the Greekish tongue, and Latin phrase so fine.
She knows each Countries language to through Europe all along,
The German, and the Italike, the French, and Spanish tongue.
In skillfull scanning of the law, she palm deserves well,
In comely feature, beauty clear, her visage does excel.
The courage of her mind is such, as like is hard to find,
In female sex, celestial wisdom pure, so deep is shrinde,
within her royal breast. The mirror of this age no dout.
On earth a regall^mace to bear from heavens dimised out.
A virgin brooking grateful peace, gaynst dreadful wars oppos^e.
Howbeit that of this Princely Impe the birth day be disclosde:
And from what happy mother sprung, so happy a birth, made glad,
The Britains hearts, through mestiue groans and sobbs which erst were sad:
The Lady Anne a damsel bright, with Henry linked fast
In sacred wedlock was, his conscience prick, and moved at last,
The best divine of high Iehoue expressly to him shown,
His brother Arthurs spoused scere, to cherish as his own.
which twenty years, and three, unwitting mighty Jove's edict,
By Moses mouth express, such bands contractforbidding strict:
He used had, (the Britain Peers allowing this his fact)
Lest that so rich a dower from his demaines should be extract
Again to be repayde. The Roman Bishopps Bull, this act
Confirmed to, that lawfully one brother might obtain,
His brothers wife, if him behind, suruiuour he remain.
Howbeit few years expirde, the Approbation of such bands,
Quite abrogated by the learned Lawyers of the lands,
Of Italy, and France (that here vnshewd, their suffrage hold,
Our English Doctors all, through sacred knowledge high extold. The Censures of
the Universities of Italy and France against the Pope.

The Romish prelate proud, such acts for to allow,
As though the heavenly laws divine unto his beck did bow:
And he himself exempted, did not under laws abide,
As subject unto Christ the head, the very church is tide.
For head is one, sweet Christ alone, to which as corpse is knit,
His flock unite, two heads cannot unto one body fit.
Hence did this ougly monstrous beast, first take his curelesse wound,
One horn off torn, though nine remain his front succincting round,
And does with shiuering dread, the hugie world put in a stound. The town
Princes of Europe more or le^se are meant to be as ten horns unto this beast.

Moreover with divine instinct inspirde, a prophet sage,
Has song the time to come, in which this hellish fend shall rage,
Unarmde, his other horns off torn, which earthly Monarchs shall
For time prescribde forsake, being spotted black and rough withal.
wherefore in good, and luckie hour, by best of Jove almights,
Are worthily solemnized Hymeneus sacred rightes,
Twixt Henry king, and Anne, with royal pomp, of honor due, Hymeneus or
Hymen God of marriage.

which more adornde, of Britain Peers a huge and stately true,
with troops of men beset, in silken vestures bravely clad.
The States most precious robes, with red gold spanges imbrodered had,
And massy chains of fined gold, on shoulders foulded bare. A solemn pomp
at the marriage of Henry and Anno.

The Courtlike Ladies blasing gemmes, their hands beseeming, ware,
Their necks, with Jewels glimmering bright, adornd, and ouches rare.
On ancient beams bespred, was cloth of Arras curious wrought,
Such as by Pallas proper hand ywouen, you would have thought.
All things did mirth portend, both boys, and men of elder age,
And virgin troops, with solemn Himnes, did good success presage.
The holed box pipe filled with wind, does plaiers will obey.
Then might you see the springoldes fresh, in streets to skip, and play.
These open signs of commons joy, might well the Queen delight,
And with his new espowsed feere, rejoice the king by right.
But after that of seed conceau'de, through womb extended hye,
Undoubted tokens to the world, the princess did descrit:
Almighty God, what wondrous joy, the hearts of Britains rought,
What ardent hope, what decpe desire, each noble stomach cought, Anne great by
King Henry.

That to the king into the world a male child might be brought
Forthwith unto the antike tower, of Caesar mighty king,
The Queen with condign pomp; a troop of noble peers did bring.
From whence she came, according to this nations guise of old,
To take the princely Diadem (imbos'de with stones) of gold, Anne crowned
which happens to none but to the heirs of the kingdom. Nestor li^ed three
hundred years.

The people all exclayming, Jove your bliss, and ioies increase,
God grant you live king Nestors years, God give you good success.
And whilst she did triumphantlike, in gorgeous chariot pass,
With trampling milk white Steeds, of courage fierce, which carried was,
With yeomen tall, of sturdie loins, in purple decked neat,
Strong guarded, as a prince beseemd: perfumes in every streat,
We are made, as erst in elder age, when men in temples praid,
Sweet smelling mith, and frankensence, were on the altars laid
And as in time of Autumn when the round, and staring stalk,
Stands bolt upright, in furrows large, that passers as they walk,
Cannot discern the ground, so thick are sprung the reeds of corn:
The ears all wavering with the winds, now here, now there are borne:
None otherwise in every street the people press apace,
The ways up thrunging thick, that scarce remains a standing place:
Each eye directly bent, upon her gracious heavenly face.
The Conditts eke, which liqued streams, accustomed erst did scour, The
condui^ ran with wine at the coronation of Queen Anne.

Did Bacchus sacred gifts of wine fresh frothing bolls out pour.
The outside of each house, fair hanging carpets brodered dight,
And balmed odours eke of fragrant flowers breed much delight.
Which joys augmented more the cheerful countenance of the Queen,
And thousands thick of people, which ran straggling to be seen,
Most wondrous thrust on plumpes, from street, to street, ensuing fast,
And musickes skill, the ears did fill with many a cheerful blast.
Now Phoebus hastening for to shrine in Ocean floods his face,
Beholdes the journey of the Queen, as to the royal place,
Of Henry King she hied, in western side of London set,
The next day comes. The princely train to Peter's church does set, VVhit^hall
Saint Peter's at Westminster.

Where breathles corpse, of Britain kings, intombd are went to lie,
The nobles first before, in order two and two do hye,
As Princes Court requires, and Britain nations antike rite.
A king at arms, each setts in rome, as honor does inuit.
His fellows eke, in ancient coats of Arms resplendent dight,
The solemn pomp do much adorn, and bewtifie the sight.
The troop of Peers ensuing next, a stately Wagon shows,
which palfraies white as driven snow on bright bits champing draws,
The Queen, unto the commons all, in robes of purple fine,
with Diamondes, and Emerauldes beset, which glistering shine,
with countenance full of modesty, adornd, and seemly grace.
Who with a troop of courtlike Dames, which after her did trace,
Into the temple wendes, with heart, and hand to Jove extolde,
Where in the midst of prayer time, a precious crown of gold,
Her temples bright does garnish brave, the priest with solemn vows,
Beseeching God, with fruit to spring, to bless this late made spowes.
These sacred rites performed thus, each noble in his rome,
Returns unto a royal feast, in order as he come.
Chief Steward then of England was the Northfolke Duke assignd,
The dignity of Taster, th Earl of Arundell did bind. Thomas Duke of
Northfolke made chief Steward of England. ^rle of Arundeil T^ster.

High Chaberlaine the Oxford Earl did deck as title new,
The remnant comne of royal race performed their office due.
In massy bolls, of fined gold, God Bacchus gifts were brought,
And plenteous store of cates, was laid on tables curious wrought.
This solemn banquett, time with certain limits finished quite,
When Phoebus near the evening star, began with rays to smite,
The Ocean salt sea floods, and down in deepes his front to hide,
Declining prone toward the coasts of Libia Region wide.
The princely Court of Henry king, with murmuring noyce resounds,
At the returning of the Queen, such wondrous joy abounds.
Nine times her glimmering light, the lamp of Phoebe had renewed,
And after the solemnized day, the tenth mouth fast insued. Phoebe two
sillables used for the Moon.

Don Titan had not yet, the face of Virgo ouerpast,
Remaining in the aspect, of that heavenly star, where placst
Hermes, as in his mansion house, to be does chief delight.
Great learning wandering Hermes does foreshew, and manners bright,
But chiefly he portendes a happy wit, and judgment quick.
But if that Jove exalted be, linkt in conjunction strick
To Venus, and with them in friendly aspect Sol be tied:
O goodly God, which so the course, of heavenly stars do guide
And force do give, and take again, as likes thy sacred hest,
The child borne shall be fortunate, with honor eke inuest:
Shall royal seepter hold, and still in flowing wealth abound,
Rewards bestowing still, nor end of giving shall be found,
With heavenly wit endued also, adornde with counsel sound,
Each virtuous work attempting bold, in bruntes of Mars renownd,
God this does, bring to pass, not Planetts which their course do take,
Within the Spheres celestial, for Planets courses make:
By power of Jove divine, without whose aid they naught prevail,
Nor good effect can work. God in them is, which thouten fail
Does certain hour of birth appoint, to every mortal wight,
As him shall please, that Author was, which formed them aright.
As other things, so Planets were the work of God almight.
The seventh of December, (Jove omnipotent to pass,
This doutlesse brought) by course of years, the day of Sabbath was,
Wherein king Henryes noble spouse, in childbirth trauaild sore, Elizabeth
borne on tht seventh day of December being the sabbath day.

As grief augmentes, so skillful aged wife insisteth more,
About her charge, sage matrons eke, of worthy race applied,
Their industry to aid, when laboring Princes began to slide
In fainting panges, through burden ripe, delivering unto light,
Howbeit undoubted tokens were foreshewed, of former might.
But after that into the world a child of bewtious hue,
Was brought, with members straight composde: as softened wax, a true
And perfect image fashioned bears: the people wondering much,
The cunning workmans skillful hand, in forming to be such:
The aged Graundame cries amasde, her hands to heaven up thrown,
Ye people present praise the Lord, Christ Jesus laud alone,
A Uirgin does her mothers bliss, her fathers joy increase,
In time to come this Uirgine shall procure the Britains peace.
This is the only hope, and solace of our English land.
The king his footesteppes fetching fast, him hastes out of hand,
The mother, with her tender Impe to see, and words does speak,
Of comfort to his spowes, stick, and through fleshly frailenes weak.
Forthwith for baptism of this babe, the king his nobles bad,
For to prepare, the Northfolke Duke chief rule, and guidance had, Elizabeth
baptized and confirmed in the true faith.

who in his hand a slender rod of Iuerie whiteness bore.
All things provided, as the king commanded had before:
The Duke them willing, first the Barons went, an easy pace,
In portlike guise then Earls, then mighty Dukes did after trace.
The noble Duchess in her arms. the infant small did hold,
In swaddling sheets of lincloth soft, her tender corpse infold.
A precious mantle brodered rich, upon the which did shine,
with golden guard adornd, imbosde with stones of Jasper fine:
which eyes of the beholders dimmd; with dazeling glauncing rays.
Full many a noble Dame insues, and trusty seruaunces stays
At every beck to run, about the temple doors always.
Amongst the stately Peers, the London Bishop present came,
with milk white sfole inuest'd, as nunci^ age required the same.
Fair fountain streams were yo^red, in precious fout of siluet h^ght,
The Godfathers, and Godmothers, their promise freely plight'd
That in the lively corpse of Christ, Elizabeth united;
Should him receive as head, whose corpse the holy church perfited Her sureties
were the Archbishop of Cannterbury, the duthesse of Norfolk and the Lady
M^ques of Exeter. Elisabeth po^laimed heite unto the Crown by ^n Herault.

And purged clean from filthy dross, and superstition, was.
The Archbishop of Caunterbury, who did in honor pass
The rest, chief Primate of this land, and Northfolke Duches bright
with Exon Lady Marquis then, did vow to Jove almight,
In her behalf, that she should love his precepts, and his lore,
when unto age mature in time, she should attain therefore.
Forthwith she was confirmde, in faith of Christ our careful guide.
When as a king at Arms, with voice vplifted lofty cried.
Long may the royal offspring live, of her renowned sire,
Elizabeth, long may she live, and to all bliss aspire,
"And to the Crown her father dead, let her succeed at heir.
"The people all Amen exclaiming, noyce to heavens did rear:
"which by the air reuer^rate, causde all the town to ring:
The witnesses, of happy days abodementes good, did bring
Unto the infant severally, rich gifts of fined gold,
By skillful Art ingrau'de, with shapes, of Britain Monarchs old,
In which the Uirgine come to years, triumphing did delight. The surties give
gifts of p^e gold.

Three hugie chargers first, did warlike Dudley lift in sight,
(For from the sacred tembles borne the royal offringes were,
By princely state in solemn sort, as custom did require)
The second gifts aloft, redoubted Haward high extold,
Three mighty standing bolles. Three massy cups of precious gold,
Bestudded thick with stones, and radiant gemmes from Indy brought,
Thou third Fittzwater wenst, before thy broad breast lifting loft.
The fourth, and last (O Worcester) thy Earl succeeded straight.
whose wearied arms, of curious place engraven felt the weight.
And now the regal court was thrungd and full of people pressed,
The Primates looks bewraid their joys, conceau'd in royal breast,
with all their noble Dames, and Lords, and Barons of the land.
The Celler doors,, with wine repleat, to all men open stand.
God Bacchus bolles deep cares do quell, and joys in heart makes flow.
These things thus finished, on the rout the king does thanks vestowe,
And many sendes unto their homes: how beit the greatest part,
Of noble race esprong, from Princes court do never start.
Courageous springoldes eke, collect'd from all parts of this land,
To bend, and vow at every beck, all waiting ready stand.
More to confirm their love, toward this Impe conceau'd in mind:
with plighted oath on sacrament, themselves the people bind,
Established, firm to stand, in faithful duty to her knit.
Not one, but all, this region ceastes throughout, vow not to s^itt. The
Englis^ people by o^ vow their loyalty and obedience unto Queen Elizabeth.

Mean time the Uirgin adding groth unto her tender years,
Increasd in favor eke, of heavenly powers, and earthly Peers,
Whom commons love succeeds. But when her mother tongue she knew,
Expressing signs of wondrous wit, and Judgment to ensue:
She at her pr^dent sayings, made astoinisht men to stand,
And books desirous to be taught, would always have in hand.
She scarce the letters with her eyes intentive did behold, The toward nes of
Elizabeth in her childhood.

Their several names, but thrice before by her instructor told:
But perfect them at fingers end, as two months taught, she bare,
Their figures diverse made, deciphering well, by judgment rate.
Yea in few days (a marvel great it is to speak no dout)
The Princely impe by industie, such sap had sucked out:
That without council to assist, she any thing could reed,
So nothing intricate is found, nor difficult in deed,"
To willing minds, deceauing toils the love of virtue true."
Her mothers solace great, this Uirgin bright of roseal hue,"
Did ample hope foreshew, what help she should to Britaynes be:
The Aequinoctiall line, which days, and nights, makes to agree
In true proportion like, Don Phoebus lamp had banished far,
From this our Climate, chasing fast toward the Northarne star, Description
of the spring time.

Then ready for to take a sign celest^all by the way,
which Venus mansion house to be, Astronomers do say.
Then pleasant spring, appears on earth, and rough hayle shoures depriues,
Expelling nipping coldes, and into th'hard earth moisture drives.
Then fields do fragrant show, than all things budding blossoms bear,
Then Nightingales with chirping notes, melodiously do were
Away the lingering darksome night, and please the watchful ear.
Now was the time when grateful rest, had laid in drowsy sleep,
Men mortals weried bones, and bodies close in couch did keep.
The king therefore him hies to bed, so does his royal Queen,
His chamber he, she takes a rowme, joint to an herbour green,
With flowers of sundry colors dect, most pleasant to be seen.
where long and tedious hours she spendes, whilst studious she her book
Reuoluing turns, which customde use, of tender years she took,
Till drows^e sleep, her daceled eyes, soft stealing on, up closde.
But when she thus a great part of the night had spent, reposde
At last in lofty bed of state, (as Princely Ladies are:)
with vows devout, of soul, and corpse, she prays high Jove take care.
Then drencht in deep sleep rest she takes, forgetting fancies past,
Now midst of glomish shadowy night, expired was, at last,
Deep silence dogs, and men, and beasts of saluage kind, had rought,
when Morpheus in her grandsiers shape, the God of dreams him brought,
Unto the Queen, (which long before, was in Sep^lcher laid) ^orpheus ^od of
drea^es. ^he dream (...) Queen (...) where^ she was ^ed of (...) death at
(...) and of any other ^ble c^es.

UUith beard down dangling long, and head white hoar, and thus he said.
O Anne (which laid in dead sleep sound yet thought herself awake,)
Fear not my daughter Anne, nor at this vision trembling quake,
Behold thy Grandsier I, here present stand, of yore well known,
From all contagion earthly free, I dwell in heavenly throne,
Wherewith loves sacred ministers, I endless life obtain,
To live so, is to live in deed, thou live to dye again.
Prepare thy self with Saints in joys celestial for to comme,
To Christ, which heavenly boures has built, and sitts in highest rowme,
Desirous that his flock, with him should reign, Peace, endless bliss,
Tranquillity secure in deed, no chance, nor change there is.
What earthly honor can prevail: what glory great of kings?
What pompous wealth abundant? what rich precious vestements brings?
UUhat prosite can bright purple robes? what glistering gemmes and gold?
Can they men's minds once better? or the sting of plagues withhold?
Can they Deaths threatening dart, or vexin^ chances keep away?
All earthly things persuade thy self, do frail fall in decay,
On heaven thine eyelids firmly fire, seek heavenly kingdoms hie,
UUhich for Christ's faithful flock, prepared are undoubtedly.
Now to what end this talk does tend, with mind attentive know:
Foul envy start with poisoning snakes, from ghastly shadows low:
UUith hatreds brandes the world perturbes, in Princes Courts her nest
Erecting strong, that who so God, and Justice, favors best:
And gracious in his Prince his sight, with credit great does grow:
So much the rather on his flesh, will envious vipers gnow,
And work will with such secre^e, that he shall not per^eaue,
The venomous sting, till Atrapos ^s vital breath bereave,
And by dire destinies fatal doom, he be entombd in ground.
Thou know the mighty Britain guide, by stablisht laws profound,
In his hye Court of Parliament (where mixed in Counsel seat,
Both Peers, and People of the land, it earnest did iutreat:)
His subtle ^nining fraud, now set abroch, and known:
The Pope, with his Supremacle, out of his land has thrown,
And that no Bulls, from Romish seat hereafter should be sought,
Whereby his pomp might be maintaind, by them in thousands bought.
Wherefore the prudent Monarch, has from his dominions all.
Him quite expelld, howbeit in Court his wily fautors stall,
And faultring dread lest that their fraud detected, and betrayde,
Should in her glosing colors be portraid, and broad bewrayde.
They shiuering fear, lest that thy rule, their rage to ruin bring,
If fatal destinies in thy Prime thee with their bane should sting:
(For that those traitrous villains brue) they would triumphing sing,
No farther dout, or danger, then suspecting to impend. A foreshew ^ng of the
exterminating and io^ ting out of Idols.

Howbeit about the hugie world, Sir Titan shall not end,
Two times his wandering course, before that by the Counsels hestes,
All Idols, props supporting both the Pope, and shaven crestes:
Shall by devouring greedy flames, be burnt, and turnde to naught,
And Images be battred down, with stones, of marble wrought.
The floor of Jove's most sacred house, shall purged, and scoured be.
Mean time O happy England through thy Region by decree,
Of Henry mighty king: the Crier shall promulgate loud,
That unto carved stocks, or stones, no knee shall once be bowde.
These wondrous things thou shall not see alive, to come to pass.
But relickes of the Challice, and such dreggs, and trumperie trash,
Shall not till after Henry's death be bauisht back to Rome,
From whence, as from the fountain head, and welspring, first they come.
A boy then with coruscant virtue decked, deuoyde of crime, Rest^ (...) (...)
(...) by k^g ^dward.

Again shall bring (to Sainc^es celestial dear) in happy time,
The sacred wourd of high Iehoue, then superstition vain,
A foul, and filthy error shall all desolate remain,
For seven years space, which so does stick unto religions side:
As does the clinging Iuie thrombe, fast to the E^ne abide.
Almighty Jove, to heavenly bliss shall first this springold call:
Before the worlds frail glory, shall his heart seduce at all,
Or lusting flesh incense him, by suggestion unto sin,
A flattering foe, in flood of Acheron to plundge him in. Acheron o^ of the ^ue
(...) uers of hell where (...) are ^mented.

The seventh year of his reign, shall him bereave of regal mace.
Whom after shall a married Queen succeed, in royal place,
The Pope reducing. Then shall woeful England sliding back,
Fall prostrate down to blocks, and ripp again the Romish pack.
If any man do mutter once, by conscience terror stong, Mary's gou^ nement.

Or once reuolue the test^nt, write in his mother song:
Or out of it convince the Pope to swerve from law, and right,
In vaunting his authority, equal with Jove's almight,
With diuilish pride up puf^: he shall with scorching brands be burnd,
With raging fires consuming force, his bones to ashes turned.
(...) When that the noble Princess, had the matter peisde aright,
And called to mind, that dangers such and lucklesse chance, as might
Not be eschewie, must suffered be, and not ^ailde with grief:
Few days expirde, in robes of state, and Princely bestmentes chief,
All shining down he comes, and musing, walk in harbor green.
By chance a Courtlike Lady than, prostrate on both her kneene,
I know not what petition made, of royal stock esprong Anne declares her
dream unto a noble matrone.

Of mighty Peers, whose ielous love, and secret truth erst long,
In sundry points she had fortitide. to whom the Queen thus spoke,
O trusty Lady, manifest do not oer secrets ^ake.
None present stands, we are alone, and leisure serves to talk,
(For far apart, the portlike troop, of britain nymphs did walk)
(And opes her lips for to proceed, and faultring shutts again.)
At length she spoke. when dulcett sleep, me close in bed had lain:
My maids secluded all: Inrold in earth, in elder years,
Ay me my Grandsier old, in antike form, so brim appears
As when he drew his vital breath, he was unto me known,
And in a long process, my fatal hour has to me shown:
UUhich in this month, ensuing next, the destinies will procure.
The noble dame, sale trickling tears, bedewing her looks demure:
Astoinsht, sobbing says, no^ God auext, this bitter lot,
The fancies of your troubled brain so vain, remember not,
But quite root out, such parching thoughts, as macerate your heart,
"Out of a gladsome mind, fresh flourishing age, does bloming start,
"Perplexing grief, heart strings of mortal men, untimely freats,
"And in his pinsers holding fast, their minds with corture beats.
Mean time a page does warn, the royal king for to approach.
But Anne desirous of her grief, the cause to set abroch
Unto her trusty friend her dream in order does declare,
And what the divine oracles concerning England wear.
More of king Henry's mighty race, what should be the success.
Then of her tender Impe, in fine the fate the does express.
Her willing, truth, and faithful love, toward her to maintain,
Yet young of years, which in process, might recompense her pain.
Then to the goodly Prince her spouse, she lowly does incline,
For honors sake, who tokens great of love, erprest that time:
Both jointly side, by side, the fragrant garden trace about,
UUhich sight the hearts did gladsome make, of all the vulgar rout.
Sir Titan Venus glorious house, in heavenly coape had past,
And some degrees incroching made, in sign adjacent fast,
Renowned Anne for endless life, a short death does exchange, Anne dies.

Devouring cares expeld, and in celestial coasts does range.
Learn you that live, what can, backbiting malice gobling fell.
Black Envy, ghastly hagg, near happy livers, still does dwell,
UUhich filthy venom blew, of viperous tongues, insues as mate.
Religion, and worship true, of mighty Jove, which sat,
All drowned, much like a burning coal, up rakt in embers dead: Annes praise
for alms giving.

In happy days, of virtuous Anne, disclosd her burnisht head.
Of Anne, whose hand so bountiful, gave alms unto the pore,
Each day, and feeble creeples lame, and people blind up bore:
Ye wailyng widows do lament, the black and dismal day,
Ye children eke of Siers bereft, which took this Queen away.
The Lady Jane, of Seimers blood, stout Henry mighty king.
In holy wedlock rites espous^, from which a babe did spring, Henry marieth
Queen Jane.

A boy of wondrous towardnes, and manly virtue clear.
He was by sacred muses reard, and fostred up most dear.
To him in tender age, Elizabeth coequall cleft, Edward borne.

Aa both to soon in springing years, of noble dames bereft.
Howbeit that careful providence, in Henry's breast was shrind,
That he a man of knowledge deep, them to instruct assignd.
The day in diverse parts was cut, for diverse studies fit,
Even with Sir Titans springing lamp, they at their books do sit.
These virtuous Impes, now this, now that, with minds intentive reed.
First Jesus Christ, instilled was, their endless bliss to breed,
The life, the rock, the tracked path, to them which dread the Lord.
Then books of civil government, which precepts did afford,
And other noble Arts beside, for royal children meet.
Sound knowledge daily did increase, and ripe wit polisht neet,
Renowned Henryes ardent love, toward them kindled more,
And favor of the Britain Peers obtaind, and commons lore,
Elizabeth three years by birth, her brother went before,
Inferior in her sex, but for because of riper age:
Desirous laud, and praise to win, free from fell envious rage:
And that her brother Prince, incenst by her proceedings, might
Be spurd more ardent, to attain to Virtues sacred light:
She here desistes, and qualities beseeming her degree,
She practis^ else beside. Now silken vesture holds she,
In lilly hands, and fitting fine, with pliant fingers small:
With needle work imbrodereth rich, and ouerspreadeth all.
Mineruaes precious web, the vewers would have voucht it sure,
The hemmes distinguished with a guard, of glistering metal pure.
Now does she exercise her self, of solemn Lute to play,
On warbling stringes, now more, now less, sad dumpes to drive away.
The Nightingale her chirping voice, so diverse scarce could make,
Diuideo into sundry tunes: as she most sweetly struck,
with quauering fingers small, and gentle touching of the strings.
All men admiting much, whence that celestial Music springs.
Where dainty cates on tables spread, they were to take repast:
Or after viandes all remou'de, in galleries they wast,
The time: or else in gardens fresh, of fragrant savor walk,
Of virtue, of Religion true, of sayings wise, her talk
Should still be framde, both godly speech, and true, she always used,
A token plain, how that her heart, the spot of vice refusde.
In old Palaemons learned Art, they both most skillful wear.
The Prince, and Lady eke, so deep ingraft in mind did bear, Prince Edward,
and Elizabeth skillful in the Greek and Latin tongue.

The Greekish phrase. with Latin speech conioynd, that in short space,
Once reeding would suffice, to understand the hardest place.
That of the hugie world so vast, where Phoebus globe has flamde,
The lad the Phoenix might be called, the virgin Pallas namde.
Mean time with crooked age effeebled, Henry yeldes the ghost,
whose death as hearts of Brutes it rent, and minds perplexing tossed: Henry 8.
dies.

So does his heir apparent then, with joys their breasts comfort,
Incensing them to solemn mirth, and joys and pleasant sport.
Elizabeth revenues large, takes by her fathers hest, Edward 6. crowned

which her, of yearly rentes, beseeming her degree possessed,
Of Princelike houses stately built, and massy heaps of gold.
wherefore far from the royal Court, in country she does hold
Herself alone, accompanied with her most careful guide,
A woman of great majesty, of noble blood beside,
which always in society, to this young Impe was tide.
Admonishing with council good, and exhortations wise,
UUhat as convenient, she should brook, and what again despise.
Of twice seven years, the tender age she scarce had fully tract,
When that mature, the virgin might, for spousall rites exact,
when as behold, with portlike train, one uncle to the king,
Himself unto her Princely house, in pompous sort did bring,
And does the tender Lady bright, with much ambition woe,
Forthwith through shame, with blushing he we, her ears did burning gloe'
Attending not what Hymen meant, nor what this wooing Peer,
With earnest suit did pray. Wherefore he parts nothing near.
But he insistes again and urges more his suit to win,
Till from the princely Nimphe, he had that final answer gin,
Declared by her gouernesse, he labor lost in vain.
More, that it better were, from his attemptes soon to abstain.
That fixed it suit in royal breast, of the high Lady bright,
Not to be linkt, in wedlock bands, to any Britain wight.
Of Lords estate: forgetting not, her father, famous king,
And from what mighty ancestors, she by descent did spring.
UUho would not here admire the noble courage of h^ mind:
Yet soft through tender years, of royal kings, the gentle kind.
UUho would not wonder at her stomach have: far from the lure,
Of Cupids how, which offered bands of wedlock, might procure
Hereto accept. wherefore she seelde out from her stately hours
Proceeds, or ruling Brother greetes, or Londons pompous toures,
Does ride to see, less called forth, on matters of great weight.
Unto the Prince his majesty, she then declming straight,
The Almighty king of kings does pray, for to preserve his grace.
Forthwith, with swift course back retiring to her dwelling place,
On pleasant hill erect, which champion fields, of Flora Queen,
Adjacent does behold, near fountains bright, and rivers green: Hatfield.

Beset with trembling Aspe, and Beech, and Oaks of wondrous hight.
There Nightingales with chirping tunes, melodious breed delight,
And whistling Throssell, which frequentes the brierie shrubby thorn.
Hereunto studies such addict, as chiefly might adorn,
The daughter of so geat a Prince, with love, and laud of all,
UUere they estates of hye degree, or meaner Fortunes thrall:
The royal Nimphe, the sliding tract, of her life does contere,
(UUhen sacred rites of funeral, performde to Henry were)
UUhilell Phoebe thou with thy furious steedes, whose nostrels sparkling
Out blastes, in heavenly pole sixth times the signs, thou ouertakes. (flakes,
Periphrasis six year for the Sun once a year ouerg es the x^ signs, so
that be means by ouertaking the signs vi. times vi. year.

Sometimes she grievous plaintes does make, of valiant Sire bereft,
Her self all left alone, the ftckle worlds collusions left:
UUhich of the greatest part, are wondered at, and high extold,
In civil broiles, and combrous toiles, which do themselves infold,
UUhereas from such vexations free, they may at home remain,
Sometime her spirits reuiues, her brothers prosperous state again.
Her future Destiny witting not, procurde by powers divine,
That she a regal port should bear, and great in glory shine,
Amidst the troops of Britain Peers, though no^ she frequence hate.
In the seventh year, that royal Prince, did yield to drierie Fate
The virtuous Edward, Britains stay, and comfort of their land. Edward the. 6
dies. Queen Mary rules.

The raynes of regal government, straight Mary takes in hund,
And popish trompery dregs, established sets again aloof,
By Parliament, confirming laws, new for the Popes behoof:
Such as her famous brother had set down, extincted clean.
Here straight a rablement of priests, with oil anointed gleene
Throughout the land, like Bacchanalles and fires, with red blood feed.
If any godly were, and Jesus lou'de, he had for meed
His bowels braild with scorching brandes, and bones consumde to naught.
But some by warning sent from God (for so believe we ought)
And harkening to the powers divine, by fight their safeguard sought.
Their native country, Parents dear, and friends forsaken quite.
UUhich, change succeeding Edwardes death, a number did incite,
UUith hearts, estraungd from Britain soil, to live in foreign lands.
He fled in externe nations s^rates, he hating blouddy hands,
And rage, of that massacring crew, seeks means those evils to shun.
UUhen here (out, out, for shame) a great com^otion was begun,
The deadliest rage, and sharpest scourge, that can on kingdoms fall.
Now these, now those, the quest attainted does of treason call.
In prisons strong a wondrous rout, of Brutus race were pent,
But many more to glomy streams, of Stigie lake were sent.
UUithin the mighty Tower as soon as Courtney Earl up closde:
UUas to his certain day of trial, to descend reposde: The Bishop of
Winchester.

The glorious Prelate proud, outrageous wroth did fretting chaufe,
UUith troublous conscience vexed subversion dreading, of things saufe
UUhich were not to be feared. Yea bitter Hatreds poysned sting,
Thee, and thy state, Elizabeth, did in suspicion bring, Holy sort Ironia
cuius contrarium ve^ est

Of craced faith, toward the Crown, That thou deuoyd of cri^e
Have lived, whose brightness of the mind, did so co^uscant shine,
That Enuies eyes, with radiant beams, it dazeled till this time*
Ath, swollen with ven^bd malice fell, the holy sort forgettes.
UUhich vile impatient crew, with wrathful anger furious frettes,
Till that the sielie lamb, (howbeit her keepers, courteous were)
(For God the wolves had driven away:) ydrencht, in deep despair,
In prison close was kept, all liberties freedom taken away,
(...) That light affliction, and this gentle penance, did display
The better knowledge, of the Lord, that so she might attain
UUisedome more deep, which trace of time, to mortal men does gain.
Such like affliction, mixed with griping cares, thy graundsier old,
To wondrous wisdom rare renowned Henry seventh extolde,
which of an other Solomon, the noble name does hold.
Even as a date tree down depres'd, does loftier lift her top,
And how much more with boistrous blastes, Sir Aeol sturres to ^op,
Her perching groth, by so much more, in hight she liftes her bows:
So through backbiting viperous tongues, the Lady nobler grows.
And whom pernicious Enuies peise, down keeps, her Virtues light,
Through constant mind extolles, to starrie region, shining brigt.
Howbeit the vile mass mungring crew, lamented at their heart,
That the end expected had not taken, their false, and treacherous part.
Wherefore new guiles they do defer, until a time more fit,
And to themselves this kingdom vow, in hope, if that it hit,
That in their secret trappes now laid, the Britain heir do fall:
Mrane time their furious rage does roame, and tortures uses all,
Abundant streams of Christian blood, most ruthful, moistes the land,
And goarie floods, alack in pooles, of hit reieeted, stand.
Ay me, and wail a day, young childrens corpse, fire brandes deuoures,
And difference none put twixt their sex, both men, and weomen, scoures.
For he against Jove almighty, is a foe outrageous thought,
If any man his enemy, the Romish bishop cought,
Out of the word of God, which takes away Christ's honor due.
And falsely, white that thing affirms, which is of duskish hue.
Yea so his heinous trecheries, with gloses covered been,
As at no time, our graundsiers old, in elder age have seen.
That both the sense of touching, and of taste, do fading fail.
If that ye take that privilege from bodies, what avail,
Can the ear, or twinkling eye, unto what use shall fingers stand?
Aa, haa, in deep Charibdis gulf uplung'd, the Britain land
For very grief does groan, and ginnes of safety to despair,
Howbeit the ghost divine of Jove, her pitying unaware:
which with his bec^e the heavens, and seas, and earthly regions shakes,
For the afflicted English state, a grateful plai^er makes.
For from their hie usurped seats, proud potentates are drawn,
Down headlong to the ground, which reverent worship to be shown,
Bad unto Idols wrought in wood, or forgd of moulten brass
(...) The Prince with deep perseverance, scelected of the best
Of Britain states, a few; which long use had with wisdom frought,
And learning eke, Parnassus Nymphs to deck their wits had brought,
By which proppes of eternal, Fame, under a maiden Queen,
Renowned England through the world, is bright blazed to beseene.
First of her Counsel Bacon was a wise and prudent Knight, licolas Ba^ns Lord
privy seal.

Of polisht wit, who Britain laws, by judgment scand aright,
Whose sweet and sugared eloquence, in midst of Counsel sage:
Has such his endless Fame atchiu'de, that though Fates headlong rage.
Him has destroide, he lives, and after death his virtues blaze.
Lord Chauncelour he of England, and the Brodeseales keeper was.
Whose honorable seat, Sir Thomas Bromeley does beseem,
Thought worthy of that dignity, by censure of the Queen.
The prudent troop of Senators, their suffrage yealding like. Thomas Brockley
Lord chauncolour.

UUhich laws in equal balance weyes, and cancelling out does strike,
UUhich over ponderous to him seems, that, which is good, and right,
May thereof spring, and middle place possessed may Virtue bright.
Next thy Lord Marquis (Winchester) his worthy seat did take,
Renowned whom the title high, of Treasurer did make William Paulet Marquis of
VVin chester.

A man of wondrous gravity, whilst that he ran his race,
On earth, but crookt through age at last, to destiny he gave place,
Before all these came forth, black frowning Fortune spurning back.
UUhose faith in danger dire at hand, from sincere heart extract,
The Prince had tried, Lord Cicill, and of all the Counsel sage, Lord Cicill!
high treasurer of England.

By Princess verdict chief assignd, now stroke with drowping age,
And worn in years, with study lean, and sickly on his feat.
For great affairs, white hoary hears and crooked age to fleet,
Do cause before their time, which then scarce forty years had rought.
Seldom to sleep addict, from slender diett seldom brought.
Still grave, and modest found, at no time given to dallying play,
UUhere that he talked, or musing sat, it earnest was always.
A fuutor of religion true, of right he studious was,
In this our age, things of great weight, borne for to bring to pass.
UUhose love toward his native soil, and faith, toward his Queen.
UUhose wisdom, busied still about his countries causes seen:
Beyond Europa borders, has achiu'd him endless Fame,
Nor here he first to aid his Prince, with learned counsel came:
For in king Edwardes noble Court, he wondrous credit wanne,
And Counselor to his leich to be, in bloming youth began
UUhen among the Britain Peers, he hurly hurly tumultes, wrought
By prudent circumspection, to quail, and bring to naught.
And whilst some others furrows deep, in gurtie channels cast,
Their hollow hulls tos'd, and turmoild, with Aeolls whurling blast:
And sometime down with headlong fall the infernal pitts do see: Ae lus God
the winds.

He both his honor, and his seat, and name preserves free.
How wary in Queen Maryes dates, he did himself behave,
And sails which hung aloft at Mast, to winds relenting gave,
Because it better is, to yield, to rough and mighty force,
Of raging flood, then stand against, and to resist his course,
which does a deadly peril pressed, and certain harm procure:
By judgment plain, apparent does express his wisdom sure:
That for six years, amidst his foes, unhurt he upright stood,
Though persecuted with the hate, of Cayphas wicked brood.
In every way, in every street, in London royal mart,
To all men's dew proceeding forth: when as the greatest part,
In foreign nations bannisht straide, him Jove preserved at hand,
Forth honor of our noble Queen, and profit of our land.
He externe Princes Legates, heard attentive, whilst the hest
They of their Lords declarde, and answer prompt again express,
In counsel grave a Nestor, which now noble Burghley hight,
Of woods, and ancient farms, and Castles strong, adjacent pight. Baron of
Burghley.

which does the common Treasury of goods confiscate keep.
He being full advertised, of weighty causes deep:
It worth rehearsal is, forthwith with what industrious care,
He does disside the strife, and right ascribes, by judgment rare,
Not above two days space, deferring it, or three at most,
Unless of points so intricate, the matter stand composde
That without longer trackt of time, it may not be unfold.
which laud as chiefest, veriest eke, let this high Lordling hold.
The mighty Earl of Arundel, is in this order tide, The Earls o Arundell an
Penbroke Stewardes o the Queens house.

The Penbrooke prudent Peer ensuing jointly by his side,
Both Stewardes of the royal house, of their renowned guide.
The warlike Mauy of the Queen, came Clinton to thy care,
whereof full thirty years ago, thou have tuition bare,
Nor to thy little honor it redoundes, three Princes strong,
That thou have served, thy self of blood of ancient Peers esprong, Clinton
Lord Admiral Earl of Lin colne.

Atchiuing many hard exploites; a shipborde, and on shore,
Lincoln this warlike Earl, has with title due vphore.
Next, of the Princes Chamber, was Lord Haward chief assignd,
A man to anger prone, howbeit of gentle courteous mind, Villiam ho^ard.

Whose uncle title high of Duke, and Nephew erst did bind,
Whom dead, in like degree, the Earl of Sussex did succeed, ^he Earl of
^ssex high ^hamberlaine ^f England.

A most redoubted Peer, of courage haut, and bold indeed.
Thy royal Parsons gardon strong, and faithful tried always,
Elizabeth, pressed to attempt, the brunt at all assayes.
In fearful Mauors bickering iars, through mind unconquered haut, ^e also was
^esetenant in ^eland.

Who oftentimes the saluage Rerne, subdued has in assaut,
Whom noble victory did adorn, in blouddy wars atchiu'de,
Yet from a righteous Iusticer, he chiefest laud deriu'de,
UUhen Mary did her flickering sp'rite out breath, the Britain guide,
By chance at Hatfield, with her troop of Ladies did abide,
Her noble parson, with a true of yeomen guarded strong. Robart Dudly

Lord Dudley, on a palfray sterce, up mounted swift along
Does thither post, his color white as winters snow, tall pight,
His buttockes broad bespred, his breast, and back, most fair in sight.
As mighty Alexanders steed, throughout the world renownd,
Bucephalus, or courser fierce of Castor, whom men sound Castor and Pol^ux,
hatched ^fan agge by ^eda whom ^upiter ravish ^ed in form of (...) swanne.

Of Laedaes egg esprong: this in all points, resembling those,
So with his hoofes carreieing in the thin air swift he goes.
For of a stripling tought that art, by riders, till this time
He does delight, on lofty steedes, all fiery, fierce, to clime.
UUhere when he came, and license had to come unto her sight,
On bended knees, he prostrate falls, and duty does aright.
Here Robert Dudley, then of comely corpse, and stature tall
UUhome fresh, and blooming youth, commended goodly therewithal:
Assigned master of the horse, by her most royal grace: Master of the horse.

Does always on her majesty, attend from place, to place,
As often as she rides, and like a true Achates kind, Achates companion of
Aeneas in all his toiles and travails.

His mistres serves, her person next, ensuing joint behind.
And takes for guerdon of his pains, and meede for virtue true,
An honorable name, with large revenues thereto due.
with portlike houses fair, and stately turretts huge in hight,
whom Leycester her Earl acknowledges, and whom by right, Farle of Lecester.

with honor one all Albion land, does worship and embrace.
For he exalted up aloft, and set in royal place,
By lowly mind, and courteous deeds, has won the Britains hearts.
Pale Envy, and of malice fell the sharp and poisoned darts,
The minds uf many noble men, with venom black bespott^
Howbeit this Peer is free, from raging Enuies filing dropps,
He labreth all to help, not damage on poor men to heap,
When that he can, has still redound, unto his glory great.
Most bountefull, with stretched hand, he allmes devout does give,
Which aged and decrepit folks, erect'd for to reliue Hospital built by the
Earl Lecester

His hospital, at Warwick, shows, with annual rentes thereto.
And Couentry can testify, where godly Preachers do,
Continually the blessed word, of hye Iehoue set down.
To these annexed comes, which Huntington with chief renown, Earl of
Huntington liefe tenant of York.

Adornes, and guidaunce great, of Britains Northarne borders large,
UUith Fame augmented high extolls, whereof long time the charge,
UUith Counsel rare, much gravity, and faith unspotted, bore:
To him deserved praise has won, and Princess favor more
Increasd, and native Countries peace, and safety, made succeed.
He in his young and tender years did ancient authors reed,
UUhich wisdom, and Philosophy, in Greek, or Latin tongue
Containde, play mate to Edward Prince, of ancient race esprong, Scoolefellow
and plaimare with king Edward the 6

Of mighty kings, their books, and grauer studies laid apart.
The Preachers word, this Potentate, hard with attentive heart.
UUhose life with virtuous manners most coruscant, glorious shind.
The Warwick Earl renownd in arms, of mighty Warwickes kind, Earl of
warwick.

From noble stock of Grandsiers old esprong, of stomach stout:
In skirmage grim, despising death, and glory seeking out,
More precious then his life: And Bedford Earl, which Justice seeds,
And godliness does daily sow, religious in his deeds: Earl of Bedford.

Professor true of Jesus Christ, a fosserer of the sick,
And needy souls: in Counsel both, to Britain Monarch stick. Iord Hunsdon
liesecenant of Barwicke.

To these that mighty Lord, renowned Hunsden jointly ioynes,
whose noble aunt, the gracious Queen, delivered from her loins,
Espouso in Hymen's sacred bands, to Henryes royal grace.
what should I all recite: one yet remaynes, who in this place, Queen Anne
aunt to the Lord Hunsden.

Demeritts not, with sinallest laud, to be remembered here,
Of noble stock, of grandsiers old, yet he himself a Peer,
Far more reno^ theri they. Sir Henry Sidney, prudent knight, Sir Henry Sidney.

with the most noble order of the golden Garter dight.
whom Ireland, thrice Ambassador, holding the royal mace,
Has seen, and exceuting laws, set in his Ladies place.
Nor only seen, but felt, yea feared, and eke embraced with love,
That no man has (as true report, and fame the same can prove)
That Region entered in, with greater favor of the same,
Gouernde in greater awe, or with more wailyng from it came.
Nor only externe Irish coasts, his noble laud resound, Lord President of
wales

But Wales on part of Albion land, which does on Seuerne bound,
(Seuerne a mighty flood, which twixt the borders, sliding flows)
Her Presidentes most worthy praise, with trompe of Fame out blows.
Under whose prudent government, she long has florisht, free:
From danger, that it doubtful seems, where they more happy, he
Being there President, exult, or equal Judge, rejoice.
Long since renowmd Elizabeth France hard his sugared voice,
Thy Legate being than, of goodly stature comely set.
Nor Pary shall I thee, ydrencht in Lethe floudes forgett, Thomas Pary

Which in extreme adversity, a faithful counsailour wast,
When Fortune had not yet the crown, upon thy Lady cast.
And shewdst thy self a servant true, which safety did respect,
Of thy dear mistress, when thou did those traitors guiles detect.
Into this sacred company the Duke of Northfolke chose, The Duke of Northsolke.

Even in the flower of all his time, his vital breath did lose.
Smith both with pregnant wit adornd, commended eke beside, Sir Thomas Smith.

With all the noble sciences, whose council has been tried,
Both just, and sound, by destinies taken, does closd in Tomb abide.
Let here Sir Frauncis Knolls, obtain his seat amongst the rout, Sir Frauncis
Knolls.

A man of wondrous constancy, religious, grave, a stout
Defendour of the faith, who least he should destruction dire
Behold, and godly men consumde, with scorching brands of fire:
The blouddy English Clergy then incenst with outrage fell:
He fled his native soil, in externe costs, and those to dwell, Sir Frauncis
Knolls, in Q. Mary's days fled into Germany.

Amongst the Germans, rather there, to read a loathsome life:
In mestiue grief, and there to dye, then painted Idols, rife
In sacred temples see. Nor happy England had at all,
Him back retournd beheld, nor rich possessions home could call:
But that renownd Elizabeth, her fathers regal crown,
Most glorious did sustain, on whom her neace, in duty bownd,
Sir Frauncis loyal spouse, attendant serud at every (...).
The valiant courage of their mind, his ancestors did deck,
Above three hundred winters past, and corpse most goodly pight,
With dread, not to be daunted when of yore that mighty knight,
Edward the third, did blouddy wars, against the Celtanes rear,
Then doughtie Knolls most valiantly, himself in arms did bear,
And did atchiue such hard exploites, as may the minds delight,
Of such as reed our Cronicles, whose noble offspring, bright:
Yet flourishing at this day, shall make their nephews yet to cente,
To flourish more, if mighty Jove which sitts in highest rome,
The godliness, and righteous mind, of the aged, Siet regard.
Next Ambrose Cave insues. Then Hatton, which the Princes guard, Sir Ambrose
Cave. Sir Christopher Hatton master of the Guard.

Of yeoman call does lead, with cheerful heart, to Students pore
A liberal Moecenas, none Religion favoring more.
What should I tell the gifts ingraft within his virtuous mind:
Or sharpnes of his wit, if cause you urge it out to find:
In hearing of the Senate grave with what mellifluous phrase,
And dulcett voice he speaks, how loving he does all embrace
And puissant, men courageous does affect, and hurtes no wight.
Ralfe Sadler with his pen, and Gwalter Mildmay scanning right, Sir Raph
Sadler. Sir Gwaltor Mildmay.

The Arithmetricians Art: both cunning Clerks, whom virtue gaind
By long use, has extold, and wisdom in most things attainde:
They both in Senate house persuade, and Counsel grave down lay,
Chroftes, in his royal mistress house, controller now does slay,
And with his valiant burly corpse, adornes the Princes hall,
UUhich erst, in camps of dreadful Mars, did force the foe to fall. Sir James
a Crostes.

In Englandes chief affairs, one Secretary to the Queen
Is Walsingham, who Legate then, of Britayne Prince was seen. Secretary
VValsingha^

At Paris, when the slaughter great and dire destruction was,
And such effusion vast was made, of Christian blood alas.
A godly man of courage high, with bribe not to be bought,
Nor by corrupting chraft from path of Justice to be brought.
Most happy sure, which suppliant does talk with the heavenly king,
But secreatly, as soon as clad (...) sr^ his bed does spring.
And of each day by vows devout, ^oth good abodements take.
O would that many such great kings would of their Counsel make
Then should no doubt each common weal in blessed state remain,
And old Saturnus golden age would be renewde again.
Commended eke with sundry virtues rare the other was
Willson, whose flickering ghost of late to aierie coasts did pass. D.
Wilson.

These does the Princess use, these Counsailours has she used of yore,
For what to happy end with good success may well be bore:
If that with wavering mind you wholesome counsel do despise,
Each state into subversion runs deuoyde of good advise,
And shall I hope triumph as long as Debora did reign, (...) (...) (...) (...).

Whose tracte of life, whose thoughts, whose crown, almighty Jove main-
For many years, bless^nd preserve, in calm peace to remain: taine,
And after mortal life, these worldly thoughts, and crown forlorn,
UUith endless life, divine affectes, and heavenly crown adorn.
FINIS.

