THE HEROICAL ADVENTVRES OF THE KNIGHT OF THE SEA COMPRISED IN THE MOST FAmous
and renowned History of the Illustrious and Excellently accomplished Prince
OCEANDER, Grand-sonne to the mighty and Magnanimous CLARANAX, Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Empress Basilia; and son unto the incomparable
Olbiocles Prince of Grecia, by the beauteous Princess Almidiana, daughter unto
the puissant King Rubaldo of Hungaria.

WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED HIS PArents misfortunes, and captiuities, his own loss,
strange preserving, education, and fostering (by Kanyra Q. of Carthage) his
Knighthood, admirable exploytes, and unmatchable atchieuementes, graced with
the most glorious conquestes over Knights, Giants, Monsters, Enchauntments,
Realms, and Dominions; with his fortunate coming to the knowledge of his
Parents in the greatest extreamitie of their captivity; his combating,
affecting, and pursuites in his love toward the rarely embellished Princess
and Lady-knight Phianora, daughter unto the invincible Argamont King of
England, by the gracious Princess Clarecinda.

AT LONDON Printed for William Leake, 1600.

Favorable Readers whosoever
IN the exposing of this History unto you, I thought it best to deal with
you, after the manner of that puissant King of the Lacedaemonians, Agesilaus:
who being chosen (according to the custom at such friendly meetings) by
drawing of lottes, the master of the banquet (whose office was to prescribe
how much each guest should drink) and being asked of his Sellerer, how much
wine he should set before each of them? If there be store (says he) give
every one as much as he requires: if there be but little, divide it equally
amongst them; to the end there should neither be want of wine, nor any man
enforced to drink more then he thought sufficiently convenient: So I, tracing
his steps herein, wish no man to spend his precious time in reading this my
history, any longer, then it stands with his own liking: neither will I
discourage any one, that takes liking thereof, from the continual reading;
promising to him that desires most, enough: and leaving to them, that at the
most esteem the least for enough, leave enough to use therein their own
discretions. As for those who having once perused the same, and are desirous
once more to renew some especial matters: as also for the^, whose waightier
affairs will not lend leisure to the reading of so long an History, I have
set down my Chapters so, as some of them are almost full histories; at least,
amongst other strange adventures, contain sundry Tragical and lamentable
relations: The names whereof you may find in the table. What faults are either
committed for want of good heed in the writing, or haste in the reviewing, it
rests in thy patience to pardon it: if in the history it self, it remains
to my power to perfect it. Which, till my leisure shall give me better leave to
perform, I leave you to the perusing of what already is proposed.

The Table of the Chapters.
HOw after great wars, the Emperors son of Constantinonople was espoused to
the beauteous Princess of Hungary: and how Olbiocles combated the Knight of
the Tigre, who wrongfully challenged the espoused Princess for his lady: and
by what means the knight of the Tigre escaped death. Chap. 1. The extreme
cruelty the Knight of the tigre inflicted on Allua the Damsel of the
Round-Iland: and how he caused the Dwarf Toydell to cast himself headlong
into the Sea. Chap. 2. How the Princess Almidiana, in the absence of her
husband the prince Olbiocles, was surprised, with the princess Eristama, and
all her Ladies, by the stern Giant Ortolomorgantell: And how the princess
Almidiana was delivered of a most beautiful infant: and to what exigents she
was driven, to save it from destruction, Chap. 3. How Olbiocles, Alfortio and
Orthisius, with other Knights, put themselves in enquest after the Giant
Ortolomorgantell, to rescue the enthralled Princesses: and how Olbiocles
arrived on the Island of Acconumbo: where, in revenge of the damose^ Alluas
death, he fought with Treglador, the knight of the Tigre: And of the exceeding
joy the Queen of Carthage made, for the young sea-borne babe, her brother
Artimagus sent unto her. Chap. 4. How after Orthisius and Alphortio had put
themselves to sea, they arrived at the Isle of Sycily; where they encountered
with a strange adventure of Oezima the duchess of Siracusa; whom they
delivered from the terror of death, to which she was betrayed by the
treacherous dealing of her wicked Aunt Atryelph: who by the consent of the
Citizens, was put to a most cruel death. Chap. 5. How Oceander, excited by
the lamentable discourse of his foster-mother the Carthaginia^ Queen Kanyra,
undertook to revenge the deaths of her husband Asdrey, and her son Sygandez,
on the tyrant Marcymodez: And how he valiantly assaulted, and slew the Duke of
Thaebes, yo^ger brother to Marcimodez, and hung his carcass over the walls of
the castle Carzar, to the terror of his enemies. Chap 6. How the Gentleman of
the sea attempted the adventure of the enchau^ted shield, which he achieved.
And how he was presented by a Dwarf, with a most gorgeous coate-armour from
the wise Artimagus: in the which he received the order of knighthood of
Marcimodes, whose nephew Nigrasto he combated: for whose death, he left all
the camp in an vproare. Chap. 7. Of the knight of the Tigres arrival, at the
Hermit Calander his Cell: and the comfort the old father yielded him, by the
relating of his own misfortunes: Howbeit Troglador enraged with the
remembrance of his committed wickedness, with his own hands ended his life,
in the Hermits grove. And how Olbiocles, finding him dead, delivered his body
unto Calander, to be buried: Of whom he received strange directions
concerning his enquest. Chap. 8. The assault of Marcimodes against the Castle
of the Queen Kanyra, and of the cruel combat betwixt him and the knight of
the sea; and how by Marcimodez treason he was caught captive, and was redeemed
by the valor of the strange Knight of the Five swords; by whose aideance,
Oceander slew Marcimodez, and discomfited his whole army. Chap. 9. How
Oceander departed from Carthage, with Medion (knight of the five swords) to the
enchaunted Castle of Bryarostez: where he conquered the Giant, and dissolved
the inchauntment of the Sorceresse Mardegua; whereby he recovered the valiant
prince Ptoladine to his senses, and finished the adventure of the Fountain
etc. Chap. 10. How the princes of France and Spain arrived at the kingdom of
Volcania, where they combated the usurper Terindantes: who perceiving he should
be vanquished, murdered the imprisoned Queen Mabina: and desperately throwing
himself headlong from the Tower of the palace, being not altogether dead, was
afterward put to a most cruel torture. Chap. 11 How the knight of the Sea,
accompanied with Briarostez and Medion, in the way as they travailed to the
fiery cave of the Egyptian princess Cyafa, encountered with xi. Knights, who
would have forced a Lady: whom they ouerthrewe. And how Oceander freed the
Infant of Egypt from her fiery prison, and entered combat with the Graund
Cardigan, for the release of the Knight with the Goulden shield: who, at the
enchau^tresse Mardeguas entreaties, afterward combated Oceander; and by what
accide^t they were parted. Chap. 12. How Norin and Nigramounde, the sons of
the Giant Cardigan, ouertooke the Infant Cyafa: whom, in revenge of their
fathers death, they would have murdered; but were with shame repulsed by
Bryarostez and Medion. And how the Knight of the sea arrived on the Island of
the inchauntresse Malagda. Chap 13. The arrival of Olbiocles on the Island of
Malagda, where he remained of a long time enchaunted. How he was delivered
from his transmutation by the knight of the sea, to whom he related his
unfortunate metamorphosing: And how he supposed Oceander to be drowned in the
boat of the inchauntresse. Chap. 14. How Phianora, the princess of England,
arrived at the city of Constantinople, where she found the Emperor Claranax
his Court in exceeding sadness. And how she obtained of the Emperor to
proclaim a lust for the precious mantle of Mardegua: her conquest over many
Knights, and dangerous combat with the knight of the sea. Chap. 15. Oceanders
delivery from the inchaunted mantle of Mardegua, by the arrival of Artimagus
his messenger: with whom, the Knight of the Sea departed unto the wise man's
Castle: of the death of Artimagus, and the doleful mourning of the
Carthaginians for him. Chap. 16. How Phianora, the Lady-knight, freed the
knight of the Leoparde, from the wonderful enchauntments of the Gyantesse
Gola, and her two Sonns Norin and Nigramound: with whom she departed unto the
Rocky-Iland. Chap. 17. The terrible and perilous combat, that Olb^ocles and
the knighte of the Goulden shield had with Ortolomorgantell, the giant of the
Rocky-Iland: their distress by their devilish adversary: and their unexpected
rescue by the valorous knight of the Sea; by whose aid they slew the giant,
and released the distressed princesses A^midiama and Eristama, cha. 18. Of the
dangerous conflict betwixt the Knight of the Sea, and the barbarous Pirate
Tolurino, brother unto Marcimodez. His peril, and conditional yielding to the
fleet of Tunis and Tangur, as champion of the Alcharon against the christian
Emperor of Grecia. And of the original of the hatred between Tomarin and the
Emperor Claranax, for the death of Tumanio. Chap. 19. How Olbiocles, Phianora,
Almidiana and Eristama landed on the Ila^d of the Hermit Calander. From whom
they carried tydinges to the Emperor Claranax of the purpose and proceeding of
the Kings of Tunis and Tangur. And of the exceeding joy the Emperor, and the
Empress Basilia made, for the recovery of their long absented children, and
their politic praeparatio^ for the resistance of their approaching Pagan
enemies. cha. 20. How Tomerin of Tunis, Tangu^ of Tangur, the knight of the
Sea, and Tolurnio, with the residue of the Pagan army, accoasted the Isle of
Sicily: where they slew the Duke of Hybia, and took Orthisius and Alfortio
prisoners, and enforced King Dionine and all his subjects, to forsake
christianity, and become Mahometans. Cha. 21. How the Pagans, arriving at
Constantinople, sent Ambassadors to summon the Emperor to personal appearance,
before the Potentates of Tunis. And how the knight of the Sea slew the young
prince of Sparta, for his stout reply in the behalf of the Emperor his
master. and of Claranax his resolute answer to the message of the king of
Tunis. Chap. 22. Of the great battle between the christians and the Pagans,
cut off by the coming of the night, begun afresh the next day wherein the
Grecians went with the worse: and their revenge wrought by the slaughter of
17000 Barbarians And how the Pagan Princes, enraged, concluded the speedy
confusion of all christendom. Chap. 23. How the christians were utterly
vanquished of the Africa^s, the city taken by the Infidel^; the Emperor,
Empress, the Kings of Hungary and Bohemia, and all the estates of Greece put
in strong prisons and manacled etc. And how by the sudden arrival of the wise
Magartez, Oceander knew himself to be a christian. Cha. 24.
The end of the Table to this first Part.
A Table of such tragique Relations, as are in diverse places occurrent, being
rather occasions of adventures for variety, then altogether of the Essence of
the History.
1 The tragic tale of Allua and the Knight of the Tigre. page 9. 2 Curioes
Rustic to Olbiocles. page 26. 3 The miseries of Oezima Duchess of Siracusa.
page 48. 4 The lamentable Tragedy of Asdrey and his Son Sigandez, murdered
by Marcimodez- page 53. 5 The story of Ericlea and Tantanez, Governor of
Memphis. page 64. 6 The pitiful History of Basileon and Albinoe. page 79. 7
Of Ptoladine and the Infant Cyafa. page 97. 8 The Tragedy of Terindantes, and
the Queen of Volcania. page 109. 9 Of Zodalin and Lydia. page 117, and 118.
THE FAMOVS HYSTORY OF THE Heroical adventures of Oceander Prince of Graecia
(Grandsonne unto the mighty Emperor Claranax of Constantinople, and Son
unto the excellently accomplished Prince Olbiocles and the incomparable
Princess the fair ALMIDIANA of Hungary) the Knight of the SEA.
CHAPTER. 1.
How after great wars, the Emperors son of Constantinople, was married to
the beauteous Princess of Hungary: And how he combatted the Knight of the
Tygre, and vanquished him, who wrongfully challenged the espoused Princess for
his betroathed Lady. And by what accident the Knight of the Tygre escaped death.

AS soon as the bashful mistress of the morning, from the windows of the
East (mounted in her golden Chariot) had sent forth her radiant blushes to
illuminate the darksome foreheade of night-shadowed Cosmos: Olbiocles departs
secretly with Princess Almidiana from Hungary.
The illustrious Prince of Graecia, Olbiocles, being already spedde of his
precious prize, the inualuable Princess Almidiana; poasted with all the speed
possibly he could, from the vnsuspecting Court of Rubaldo. And taking his
troublesome journey with most speedy celeritie from his pursuing enemies,
within four or five days he attained the uttermost bounds of Hungaria. From
whence with great joy entering into the confines of the Grecian Territories,
he leasurely shaped the latter part of his travail toward the famous city
of Constantinople: where arriving, he remained in secret in an acquainted
friends house, with his most beauteous sister (for so he termed her for that
season) the admired princess Almidiana. Who attyring themselves in unknown
abillimenrs, trauersed up and down the streets to their good contentment;
until such time as Olbiocles page, Curio, having followed a great concourse of
people to the Emperors palace; brought tidings that Rubaldo, Open wars
proclaimed between Hungary and Greece.
king of Hungary, had by his Embassadoures proclaimed open war against the
whole Empire of Greece, in regard of the dishonor offered unto him, by the
stealth of his daughter Almidiana from his Court, by you my Lord Olbiocles,
quoth he. But what answer (said Olbiocles) did the Emperor my father return
them? Answered ye page: He denied any such fact to be done by his consent: and
for his excuse (being urged) he proffered to defend his innocence by dint of
Sword. And now on both parts they are making head, to invade each others
Territories.

These news struck the princess Almidiana to the very heart; so as her
color changing, she was almost ready to swoune, for the sorrow that she
endured: Insomuch as at length, enforced by the extremity of her grief, she
brast forth into these passions.

Wretched Almidiana, how art thou tossed in the seas of endless trouble! and
vexed with the torments of eternal anguishe! having no remedy to help thy
misery, nor no Balsame to salve thy misfortune. First, by reason of my loyal
love, did I forsake my kingdom to enjoy an husband: And now (miserable that I
am) having obtained, I dare not be acknowne I do affect him. And thus (unable
to prevent it) shall I see my dear dear love, the causer of my Fathers,
Countries, and husbands harms: and by their untimely hurts, mine own final
destruction: which I can not eschew but by danger; which I cannot conceal but
to my disparagement: which (gracious heavens) I would only might extend to me;
thereby that I alone might woefully bewail such happened misfortunes.

But (foolish woman that I am) why do I bewail, what cannot be helped! with
the unwise Physician, seeking in vain to salve that sore, that cannot be
recured. What say I? lament unhappy Almidiana; and weep at thy mischaunce.
Nay rather be patient, and rebuke not thy misfortunes. God has not created
thee to be confounded: neither made thee a Princess, to be always punished:
hope well therefore (poor Princess) and if this hap be unlucky, blame not
thy fate, but thy folly, that has made thee to adventure so far beyond the
limited bounds of thy obedience; as to make thee frighted by thy fathers
frown: thereby becoming the sad subject to the turning wheel of Fortune.

In these lamentations continued the woeful princess of Hungary, continually
receiving hopeful comfort from her dear Olbiocles; The Grecian and Hungarian
armies encounter.
until such time as (open wars being proclaimed on either parties, between
the Grecians and Hungarians) both the Emperor Claranax, and Rubaldo had
brought their armies to the encounter: wherein many worthy knights, on either
side, by the deadly fury of their fierce opponents being most cruelly done to
death, the Generalles at length pitying the wonderful destruction of their
innocent subjects, incited each other to try the right of their quarrelles in
a single combat: whereto the King Rubaldo was the first in moving of the
question.

Mighty Emperor of Constantinople (for though thou be my enemy, I will not
abase thy title) since it has been our unhappy fortune, Honorable not to
derogate even from his enemy.
to contend in this unkind enmity together, to the endangering of both our
Diademes; let our indignation reach no more to the ruin of our subjects: but
since for our cause is grown this contention, let our own arms defend our
justice; that thereby none but the offenders might make satisfaction for his
offense, with his blood. To which the king of Hungaries words, the Emperor
thus replied; Puisant King of Hungaria, although it becomes not the Emperor of
Constantinople in his own territories, to abase my self to any inferior
P^tentate; yet since your request is so reasonable and profitable for both our
Countries, I condescende to combat thee: with a full hope (or ever it be long)
to make thee confess the treason, with too dear a repulse for thy enterprised
invasion.

Now are the soldiers on both sides, barred out by strong fastened lances
from a prepared place, purposely chosen out by most skillful champions, for the
two chiefetaines to fight in which being finished; the king of Hungary entered
as chalenger on a milkewhite palphrey, Single co^bat between the Emperor
Claranax and Rubaldo.
with trappings of the same colored velvet, embossed about with silver bars:
prauncing up and down the listes with a wrathful mind, expecting ye coming
of his opponent: who presently approached the listes, on a dapple-gray courser,
clad in rich caparisons of tissue; adorned with mighty hosses of the refined
gould of Ophir; who, putting his Lance in the rest, gave forth to encounter
with his fierce Hungarian adversary. Who assaulted each other so furiously, as
both their lances broken upon their helmets; they were borne out of their
saddles, and both of them sent headlong to measure out their lengthes upon the
ground. But nothing amassed at their falls, they rose up lightly, and
unsheathing their keen courtelaxes, they ganne speedily to prepare themselves
to their foot encounter. But Olbiocles, at length fearing the heavy chance of
war between such noble potentates; having with him his beauteous Almidiana,
with great celeritie possed unto the combat; seeing so fit an opportunity;
stepped in between the menacing Potentates; and showing his naked breast, began
in this wise to allay the fury of the enraged Combattants. Olbiocles with the
Princess manifest (...) ^^clues to their Parents.


Here, here (most mighty Princes) in this breast of mine sheathe those keen
instruments of your anger; For I alone am the causer of this contention; having
enfired your princely hearts with rage, and provoked your unkind displeasures;
against you. Be ye therefore revenged on me (dear Princes) or else for my sake
lay away these arms; upon whose causage you have leauied them; that either I
may live in your affections, or make your selves the actors of my afflictions:
that if my tongue cannot beg full pardon for my offense, yet my heart blood
being shed by you for the profit of the common wealth, might at length purchase
some few floudes of tears to bewail my unhappiness. Speak Rubaldo; say
dear Claranax; I am Olbiocles, shall Olbiocles die? Behold Almidiana, shall
Almidiana die? We are your unfortunate children; dear parents, shall we dye?

Herewith he finished his speech with sighs; and as well the good Emperor, as
Rubaldo, unable to refrain from weeping, let fall their swords and stood
amazedly gazing upon their submissiue children; with sorrowful souls, craving
their reinstalment in their absented fatherly favors. Which woeful sight when
ye attending soldiers beheld, they all fell down upon their knees; with one
voice praying mercy, for the woeful princess, whose incessant effusion of
tears from their eyes fountains, Olbiocles and the princess reconciled to
their father.
declared the abundance of their hearts sorrow. Wherewith the fury of the
offended parents being at last mollified; they were again most lovingly
reconciled unto one another, and the match between the two princes, being
concluded upon; with all speed possible their marriage was in most sumptuous
order celebrated. In the time of whose enduring, to declare what knightly
Iustes, tiltes, tournaments, what royal bravery in feasting, infinity of
pleasurable pastimes were enacted, would not only be tedious to the reading:
but also superfluous for the recital: They are o^ p^^sed.
wherefore to following accidents we will apply us.

The marriage rites being in this sort solemnized; in the very midst of their
chiefest pleasure (whilst the Emperor Claranax with the Empress Basilia, in
company of a number of other estates, and knights of Graecia, and Hungary, were
recreating themselves in the Palace garden) news was brought unto the
Emperors highness, of the arrival of a certain knight, with the device of a
Tigre on his shield; being a knight of a mighty making, and of most proud
carriage, armed in complete harness of a sable color, fitting his minds
contentment, who came unto Constantinople, to defy the Prince Olbiocles, in
defense of his rightful interest that he had to the late espoused princess
Almidiana: whom he challenged for his true betrothed wife; and in defense of his
challenge, he offered to maintain his justice by force of arms, against whom
soever durst to enter combat in the Prince Olbiocles behalf. Troglador
chalengeth the combat of Olbiocles.
The good Emperor hearing the knight of the Tygres so insolent presumption,
waxed blanke for anger, whereby the knight remained unanswered for a long
space; until such time as the prince of Spain Alfortio, in the room of the
Prince Olbiocles (who a little before was ridden on hunting) gave him this
petty morsel to stay his enraged stomach.

Think not vntutored knight of the Tygre, that thy bare boasting and
threatening braues, shall in regard of the maintenance of so just a quarrel,
drive the meanest knight in the Emperors Court to his trumpes, or make any of
us fear thy manliness; whose manhood we have never experienced. By thy
stately gate, and comely accomplishments, thou seem to be a valiant
knight; and yet believe me, were you valiaunter then you are, he were worthy
the name of a cowarde, that should stand in doubt of your force, before he had
made trial of your fury. In which regard (by the Emperors permission) I
here, in the name of the Prince Olbiocles, pronounce the vniustnesse of your
challenge, avowing to defend his right he has, unto the Princess Almidiana,
in arms against thee vnvnto the death. Haste thee then (replied the strange
knight) unto the combat; that or ever an hour be at an end, I may abate thy
foolish hardiness, by thy miserable death.

The consent of the Emperor herein obtained, they presently departed from the
hall; the one to the place appointed for combats; the other to arm himself,
for defense of the prince Olbiocles right. Who having by this time heard of the
knights presumption, he left of his sport, and began presently return to the
city; where having armed himself in unknown armor, arrived at the lists, as
Alfortio was ready to enter: whom beckning aside, he entered the lists and
prepared himself to answer the threatened objection of his adversary: Who
having set his spear in the rest, spurred forth so fiersly against Olbiocles,
Combat betwixt Olbiocles, and the knight of the Tygre.
as breaking his staff on his shield he passed by with as good a guerdon;
being wounded a little in the left shoulder. Wherewith nothing at al agreeued,
he returned upon the valiant Greek, with his sword in his hand, determining to
requite his former foil, with a treble damage, on the helm of his adversary:
who I warrant you entertained him so valiantly, as having cleft each others
shield, and bruised their armours in many places; in that the fight had almost
continued an whole hour, they began both for to be weary; but especially the
knight of the Tygre; who by reason of his wounds received in diverse places,
was scarcely able to stand: which the Grecian prince perceiving, he utterly
denied all time of resting; but rather more fiercely laying load upon his
enemy, he enforced him many times to stagger, in such sort, as ha^ not a youg
Damzell (attended on by a dwarf) come speedily unto his rescue, T^oglador
vanquished, and saved by the Damzell Allua.
Olbiocles had smitten his head from his shoulders: but even as he was unlacing
of his helmet, the Damzell kneeled down before him, with showers of pearled
tears trickling from her eyes, most instantly begging his lives pardon.

Fair Grecian Prince (she said) if ever mercy did harbor in thy knightly
breast; or thy mollifiable heart can relent at the pitiful entreaty of a
Damzel, then be now most gently moved unto compassion; and intimated by my
woeful prayers, be gracious unto thy vassaile: and though he have thus
grievously offended, yet (gentle Olbiocies) by my words, let thy heart be wooed
to relenting. Damsel (replied Olbiocles) is this wounded knight any thing of
kindred unto you, that you entreat thus for him? Not any thing a kin to me
(answered the Damzell) but for the dear affection that I bear unto him, I
have adventured to crave his release. Damzel (quoth Olbiocles) at your entreaty
I shall willingly grant him life; but otherwise assure you he should have died,
for his villainy: herewith he delivered the wounded knight unto the Damzell who
binding up his bleeding wounds; laid him on her Palphrey, and in all have
departed from the Emperors Court toward the seaside; where we will leave
them taking shipping, and return again unto our Champion.

Olbiocles, having thus obtained the victory of the knight of the Tygre,
presently spurred his horse to depart again from the company; But Alfortio
clapping his hand fast upon his shoulder, began to stay his journey with these
speeches.

Sir knight, although I may think it a proffered injury, to be in such sort
disappointed of ye combat; which in knighthoode I ought to have performed; yet
scorning to envy your cheualrie, I only demand you to declare your name. in
recompense of the injury. To whom the Prince answered; Sir knight, I am not
ashamed to declare my name; yet since you have objected unto me, the
proffering of an injury: know I am resolved, at this time not to manifest it.
The Spanish knight was almost enraged, with this discourteous answer, insomuch
as he was ready to draw out his Semitar: but remembering himself, he thus
replied. My Lord Olbiocles, you need not in sooth to conceal your name in
this sort from your friend: but that you always love to be thwarting me. Had
I not known you by your speech; we might have begun but ilfauored jesting:
Here at Olbiocles laughed, and presently approached to the Palace window:
where doing his duty to the Emperor; he caused exceeding gladness in the
hearts of the Grecian Princes, who not a little rejoiced at his happy
conquest, gotten over the knight of the Tigre.

CHP. 2.
The extreme cruelty inflicted by the knight of the Tygre, on the sely
damzell of the Round Island, and how he caused the dwarf Toydell to cast
himself head^ong into the Sea.

But in the interim of those actions, the sorrowful Damzell of the round Island
together with her Dwarf Toydall (for so was he called) with great care and
exceeding speed, having got the wounded knight of the Tygre safely aboard her
ship, which she had lying at anchor, in the havens mouth of Constantinople, she
applied many healing plasters to his wounds, and with such diligence tended
his hurtes, as greater could not be expected at the hands of the best
Surgeon in the world. But yet, for all her applying of medicines, and doing
whatsoever other necessaries about him, he continued still in a dead swoune; so
as the poor Damzell doubtful of his reviving, most woefully despaired of his
happy recovery: and for very grief to think on his woeful disaster, she
remained in a quandarie, almost in a manner besides her self. But to the end
you may the better understand the occasion of this Damzels affection, I will
briefly relate unto you, from the beginning, the cause of her loving him.

This Damzels father being called Acconumbo, having spent his youthful years,
in following of knightly adventures; in his older age, Acc^^u^bo a wicked
governor.
kept his abiding in a certain castle in the round Island, which he held as
his patrimony. Now he being a very cruel man, and of a most severe nature,
not contented only to tax and rate his loyal subjects, but also at most
base prices would deliver up the lives of his people, into the hands of their
enemies: which the chiefest men of the Island, seeing by no means they could
remedy, consulted together to bereave Acconumbo of his government: amongst
whom this knight of the Tygre (called Troglador) was one of the chiefest; who
by his professed love to the young Damzell Allua (for so was this Damzell
called) obtained means to enter into Acconumbos Castle, Allua for T^^glado^s
^^ue be ^a^^^^ her father Acconu^bo.
where he got her (entised by his fair loves promises) with her own hands to
help strangle her distressed father: who in the pangues of death, on this wise
exclaimed against her beastlike cruelty.

Acconumbos curse.
Unnatural, not my begotten daughter;
Some hellish hagge, has me, with thee beguild^;
Hard is thy heart, for to commit this slaughter;
More fit for savage beasts, and Tygres wild;
Yet scarcely shall we see their paws defil'de,
Or jaws beraide with murdered parents goare:
And yet will thou prove so unkind a child
To him, who thee has nourished of yoare?
Think heavens at last will plague thee for this ill,
And damn thy soul to everlasting fire:
(Inhumane) then refrain thy wicked will;
It Is not a petty sin to slay thy Sire:
But if thoul' needs perform this wicked act,
And fathers cries can not thy anger swage;
Bear to thy grave, with terror of thy fact,
The cruel curse of my declyning age:
If heavens be just, account hereof withal,
By him thou love best, thy life shall fall.
But nothing relenting at her fathers words, this hard hearted Damzell
proceeded in her enterprise; which being performed, Acconu^bo ^^rangled.
and Acconumbo now by her unnatural means deprived both of his life and
dignity; she curtezanlike fawned upon succeeding Troglador; who being a knight
of no less beauty and wisdom, then fortitude and magnanimity, was chosen, as
Governor unto the liberties of the Round Island: wherein established, he kept
aloufe from the Damzels love, and made a may game at poor Alluas affections,
Trogladorcasteth Allua off.
and setting his favor on an higher Phoenix, thought by force of arms (as you
have heard) to bereave (in his folish bravery) the Prince Olbiocles of his new
married bride. Thus was poor distressed, Allua had in contempt by him she most
affected; yet was her love so exceeding toward him, as all ye while he
remained in his amazement, she did nothing but weep, sigh, groan, and wring
her hands; wherewt tearing her hair from her head, she would blame her ha^,
lament her misfortune, and curse the time yt ever she was borne unto such
misery.

Oh unfortunate wretch that I am (said she how am I able once to lift up my
eyes unto the heavens, True love n^^er (...) the greate^ danger.
who have most justly made me thus miserable; since both my wickedness is so
exceeding as it can not be pardoned, and my misfortunes so extremes they may
in no wise be remedied. Hapless woman that I am, woe worth ye hour wherein
first I breathen: for even from my infancy have and bin nourished unto mishap,
and tended up under an unlucky planet, to be the only anatomy of hate and
wretchedness. O my dear heart and love Troglador; why do my woeful eyes
endure to behold thy fair sweet body thus massacred, and thy manly limbs so
cruelly mangled: I would I had been harmed for thee, so that thou would
have pitied me; I would I had been wounded for thee, so my trickling blood
might have mollified thy heart to have taken compassion on me.

At these last words Allua shed such abundance of tears, as her sight thereby
failing, she fell in a swoune at the side of Troglador; but by the dwarfes
diligence being recovered, she prepared her self to her second lamentation;
but perceiving the knight of the Tigre begin to open his eyes, Troglador waketh
out his swoune.
she ran unto him to embrace him and comfort his drooping senses; but he
maruailing how he came thither, remembering himself of ye battle had with
Olbiocles, and knowing by his received wounds that he had suffered the wrack
of his honor, and verily supposing that the Damzell was cause of his
disparagement: he fiercely rose out of his bed (which seemed to blush with ye
bleeding of his wounds) and taking his Semiter in his hand, he came unto the
trembling Damzell, and renting her up and down the cabin wherein he lay, he
tare of all her golden hair, from her swollen head, He cruelly murthereth
Allua.
beating and bouncing her with his fists, and kicking her with his feet,
remorselesse at her cries, and obdurate unto her clamors; at length (thinking
therein to prove the more cruel unto her) he cast her into the ship-boate,
and binding her hand and foot; with his dagger he nailed her to the ribs
thereof; and dipping his finger in her blood, he wrote these horrible verses
for her Epitaph.

The love the father bare the child,
Condemned, forsaken, scorned;
Converted unto curses vilde,
Impiety against pa^e^ts never passes unpunished.
This wicked wretch forlom'd;
Whose foolish fancy frenzie-like,
Fell fury did compel,
To seek her death at champions hands,
Whose soul (condemned to hell)
Couets with naught but ugly bands
Of hideous fiends to dwell:
Where hundred tongues can scarcely half
Her suffered torments tell.
And a little underneath, to the Spectator.

If hateful horror may
Thy harmless heart affray,
Bewail this heavy sight,
With s^d and sorrowing sprite,
Contrary unto him,
That did commit this sin;
Whose heart shall near repent
The c^us^ of (...) torment:
W^^^ ^ickednesse was such
To father, and to me;
As torture none too much
For her I think to be.
Having written these inscriptions on the side of the boat, he cut the cable,
wherewith to the ship it was fastened: and letting ye same go at ra^don, he
returned toward his cabin again: where finding Toydell the dwarf crept
behind a fardell of merchandise (half dead for fear) to save himself from
Trogladors fury, he dragd him out by the ears, and causing him to run up to
the top mast, with ^hreatning words, and daring menaces, he made the poor
wretch to tu^ble headlong into the Ocean: from whence how he escaped, and also
of the revenge wreaked on the most cruel knight of Tygre; another chapter
shall serve in due time to treat of.

CHAP. 3.
How the Princess Almidiana, in the absence of her husband Olbiocles, was
surprised, with the princess Eristama, and all her ladies, by the stern Giant
Ortolomorgantell; And how the princess was delivered of a most beautiful
infant; whom she commended to the tuition of the unmerciful waves.

COnstant and joyful remained the fair Princess Almidiana to her loving
Olbiocles, in such sort, Almidiana with child.
as the time almost expired of woman's expectation, her womb (impleat with an
happy burden) began so extremely to give evidence of her downe-lying; as for
a great while being somewhat weakened thereby, she was feign to keep her
chamber: but at length her sickness somewhat ouerpassed (though the time of
her painful travel, then nigh her, approached) she determined for her
recreatio^, to walk a whi^^ in the fields next adjoining with (...) Athens,
Orthisius, ye Prin^^ (...) ^teous Erista^ (...) dies, and lusti^ (...) Empero^
(...) in that it (...) Flora ha^ (...) Siluanu^ (...) ^ding t^ (...) and fr^
(...) ye ye^ (...) ^pen (...)

(...) ap^ (...) al^ (...) ^ningly supported by many pretty wands of hasell:
upon the compassing rafters whereof, Solaceth her with Erastus and other ladies
at Meroanders Arbor.
were many pleasant devices lively both painted and engraven; as of birds, the
prating Popi^^ay, the ashbredde Phoenix, the fatal Scrichowle, the cole-blacke
Raven: Of beasts, infinite both alive and pictured, were artificially placed
all along the sides of the benches: whereof some were of stercer, others of
milder, more of stranger, and the rest of a commoner; but none of servile or
contemptible natures. As for fishes, there wanted not great store of them; by
reason that quite thorough the arbor there ran a most sweet and pleasant
stream. Which pittering on the pretty pebbles, made such a dulcet harmony,
as seemed to be the music of the Sea-gods, in the ears of the hearers. Quer
the top of the entrance into this pleasant arbor, were hung up, by
Moroander (who was thief artificer in this devise) certain gratulatory
verses, in a table of the wood Pla^anus: which the Princess Almidiana taking
in her hand, perused, unto herself, this courteou^ welcome.

Heavens Joy,
Earthes pleasure,
Iunnes love.
(...) ^towes

(...) ^enter^ (...) ^f the (...) entertain his gestes in the most royalty he
could. How excellent their bankets, what cheer, sports, and pastimes were; or
how eloquently they framed sundry histories to pass away the time withal, it
is needelesse to recite; least we should be longer demonstrating them, then
their plesures lasted; which received a cruel cross by the sudden approach
of a mighty Giant; Their disp^res dashed by the ar^iual of Ortolomorgantell.
his name was Ortolomorgantell, stern Governor of the (remote and almost
unheard of) Rocky Island; who being informed at his Castle Lapidine, by a
certain Hungarian prisoner, of the great beauty of the Princess Almidiana;
with all possible speed, he took shipping, and scouring along the sea to
Hungary, he had been thereto seek her: In the chief city whereof he did
great scathe, slaying the people, wounding the young Prince Morcauill, driving
him and the Queen Anaxia his mother, by force of arms, to seek for saueguard
in their Castle; where hearing that the prey he so labored for, was abiding
at the Court of the Emperor of Constantinople, he returned back with his
shipping unto the coasts of Greece; where he thus unluckily arrived, even at
the time when the Princesses Almidiana and Eristama, were in the midst of
their pastimes; when being certified by a prisoner that she, for whom he
sought, was in that company, he presently set hand to his fauchon, and
rushing in amongst the troune of trembling Ladies, he ran unto the
Princess, The Prince^ses surprised.
and taking them both (half dead) under his arm, he began to depart with
his prisoners; when the Prince of France, loath to let him pass so quietly,
recalled him in this sort back again.

Stay furious Devil, and suppose not to go so lightly away with those Ladies,
before you have vnderpassed the vigor of my correction. Ortolomorgantell made
little account of the Princes words, but passed on without any fear or
regard of them; which made the Prince, in a chafe, to advance himself the
faster toward him; when taking his sword in his hand, he smote the Giant a
cruel blow on his left arm wherein he held the Ladies; wherewith he was
almost feign to let them fall from him: but yet remembering himself, heee used
them as his buckler against the unhappy French man; who well might make
proffer; but never wound the Giant, for fear of hurting the two distressed
innocents, whom he knew assuredly the Giant lead unto their deaths. Wherefore
as a man beside himself he stood amazed; and by grief being made careless
he stood leaning on his sword, altogether astonished at his hard misfortune,
that he could not be a succor to the distressed Princesses sorrow.

You may well swear, that Ortolomorgantell was not in the mean while idle;
Orthisius laid for dead, and Meroander.
for so soon as he perceived in what case the matter stood with Orthisius,
he flourished his fauchon about his head, wherewith striking a maine blow at
the Princes head, he laid for dead on the ground; and not staying any
longer to prosecute the Tragedy, departed unto his ships, where he staide
for his other soldiers; who, with multitude had oppressed the manhood of the
Grecian knights; and leaving the duke of Athens most pitifully wounded; were
returned unto their master (like hagges to the devil) with the remnant of the
Ladies.

Ortolomorgantell, glad of his gotten prey, binding the woeful Ladies with
cable to the ship mast; The Giant sets sail with his prisoners.
hoysed up his sails, and putting from the shore; shaped forth his journey to
the place, from whence at first he invited himself to this enterprise.

Being about the midst of the afternoon, he thus put off from the shores of
Greece; and with great swiftness sailed he, until it was an hour before the
decline of Apollo the earthes reioycer: when mounting upon the hatches of the
ship, wherein himself sailed; he perceived (making unto him amain) four
tall ships; who being approached, called unto the mariners of his ship, to
yield them prisoners unto their mercy: which Ortolomorgantell hearing,
presently started up, and with his fauchon in his hand and his steel plaited
shield on his arm, casting a grimme look at his enemies; with a terrible
voice he demanded; who durst be so bold as to interrupt the passage of the
mighty O^tolomorgantel? wherewith closing furiously with the ships of the
pirate Tolurnio (who was brother unto Mar^im^des the usurping king of Carthage)
he presently leaped into one of them; Conflict betwixt the Pyrate Tolurnio, and
Ortolomorga^toll.
and smiting all those that he met under his feet, he met with Tolurnio,
who resisting the Giants rage, was occasion, that between them two there grew
a most bitter bickering: which no doubt has been dangerous unto both of them,
had not the dark secrecy of the silent night come suddenly stealing upon them;
whereby being unable any longer to continue combat, they were enforced to
vngrapple their Barques, and cease off the conflict.

But now return we to our prisoners. No sooner was the conflict begone
between this merciless Giant and the menacing pirates, but that the Princesses
Almidiana and Eristama recovered their senses; and reviving out of that their
long continued trance, they fell most woefully to bewailing of their miseries;
Eristama wonderfully, for death of her brother Orthisius: But Almidiana more
grievously, both for the loss of the Prince of France, as also for the
unlucky absence of her dear husband Olbiocles, thus lamented.

Ah dear and loyal husband Olbiocles, how exceedingly will thou grieve when
thou shall hear of my captivity? And how bitter will be thy anguish,
Almidianas lame^tation.
when thou shall know of my miseries? Little will thou brook with patience my
penury: and lightly thou will not sorrow at my mishappes; but wilt fret with
anger to be partaker of my mischiefs. Dangerously thou will aduenter for my
releasement; but in thy attemptes, God shield thee from the author of my evil;
who worse then a devil, True love desires no copartner in misery.
houldeth forth horror and hazard to destroy; venture not sweet Prince,
endaunger not thy self so much for my sake dear Olbiocles. But since my
destiny declines to dire destruction, and that necessarily I must abide in
this thraldom, cheer up thy heart (dear husband) and let this one thing
suffice to comfort thee: That as I lived, so I will die none but thy dear and
loyal Almidiana.

On this manner did the distressed Princess both lament and comfort her
disconsolate thoughts, until such time as enforced by her grief, the time of
her lying down appreched; and for grief of her heavy burden, giving great
shriekes and gromes; the Mariners moved by her distress unto compassion (and
the rather because they had been Christians) give her Ladies leave to convey
her down into ^inner cabbinet, her painful throws coming upon hereafter
grievous torment suffered, she was within a while deliverer of a most goodly
infant; whose beauty causing her greater sorrow, ^nfo^ced her ^ongue on this
sort to lament the childs mis ortune.

Ah dear Infant in what unhappy time I have traveled in childbed with thee,
the Gods do know, and thou art unable to acknowledge: but what great miseries
after this lucklesse tinte of thy birth thou art like to suffer, thy self I
fear shall too exceedingly feel, whilst I thy unhappy mother shall grieve at
thy misfortune.

Herewithall she kissed the child, and with the tears falling from her eyes,
weeping most extremely, in the excess of her passions, she was thus comforted
by the Princess Eristama. Eristama comfort her.
Doubt not (dear Madame) of your poor Infants happiness, neither affright
your self, concerning his future fortunes. Heaven (no doubt) has not blessed
you with an husband, that you should die in thraldom: neither graced this
Infant with a Prince to his father, to the end he should suffer the wrack of
his happiness. What though at this time you continue a captive to the tyranny
of your fierce enemy Ortolomorgantell; yet you ought to be patient: and
although your child be borne in this time of disaster, will you therefore
torment your self? Nay, rather thank the Almighty, who showed you such
favor in your distress; and become not impatient by your miseryes: but have a
firm hope, that he (the God of heaven) who has blessed you with such an
offspring, will daigne in his mercy, to provide for all following casualties.

The distressed Princess Almidiana, was somewhat recomforted, by the good
advice of Eristama; wherefore she cleared up her cloudie brows, and with a
more mild fare (according as her sorrow would suffer her) looking upon the
infant, he seemed to her thinking, to smile upon her. Wherewith she said, God
grant (my sweet child) yt after a su^shine there come not a cloudie tempest.
Herewith they heard some knocking at the door of the cabbinet: who reported
unto the Princess the success of the fight, and how he thought that very
speedily the conquest between Tolornio and Ortolomorgantel would be finished;
which struck the Ladies to the heart: but knowing they had no remedy but
patience, they remained quiet; consulting by what means they might save the
harmless Infant from the fury of this devilish monster.But alas, The Ladies
devise for the child's safety.
what should they do? On what should they so (in vain) consult? Two ways
only there was, both doubtful; either of life, or death. If they should keep
him still, who could tell whether Ortolomorgantell would save him; or offer
him (according to his wicked custom) up on the altar; of his heathenish God
Metrath Agorah? Or if peradventure he did decline from his devilish custom,
and save his innocent blood; yet it was too manifest, that he should for
evermore continue a most wretched captive: where, if he had not what was
sufficient to maintain him, he was like enough, either by cold or hunger, to
suffer danger. What then should be done? This one way wrought assured
mischief, and the other brought as mickle danger. For if they should commit
him to the mercy of the Ocean, who knows not that the Seas are senseless, and
therefore merciless? An hard choice.
If they place him in a boat, where will he have victuals? or having
victualling provision, in this hapless misery, what man shall help him? Who
shall feed him? or what kind heart shall cherish him? Help himself he
cannot: yea, though meat be put into his mouth, he can not eat it He is but
an hour old, and can not shift: he is but tender, and of no force, and
therefore can not help it self. what then shall he do? What means shall
the wretched mother devise for his delivery? Cast him into the Seas? Perhaps
some nature-incited Dolphin, will on his back take pity on him? Who knows
that? were he Aryon, he could not without an harp be saved: or had he an
harp, being he could not use it, it were bootlesse: or could he use it, yet
being so tender, the winds would have power of him, and the chilling cold of
the billowing waters, would with a sudden stiffness stifle him. Oh poor
child, how unfortunate is thy fate, and how unhappy thy chance, to be borne
in such a time of miseries? Yet God shall purueye thee of better fortunes.

With these sorrowful considerations, the woeful mother exceedingly terrified,
for very grief was ready to give up the ghost: but being recomforted by her
ladies, she received courage to cross her mifortunes; and at the last
consented, with patience to commit her silly soul to the tuition of ye calmed
Seas. In which determination, taking the babe in her arms, bestowing on his
heart (whereon by Nature were lively depainted the billows of the Ocean; which
by his hearts panting waued up and down like the maritime deep) a thousand
kisses, into his opened bosom, af- a whole volley of sighs, she breathed out
this affectionate farewell.

The Princess Almidianaes farewell to her most dear Infant.
MY pretty babe, whom royal Sire begotte
On beauteous mother, in unhappy time,
In whose nativity kind stars daign'd not
To future happiness for to combine,
Their prosperous glory foreshewing shine,
Behold thy mother (sitting in my lap)
With watery eyes bewailing thy mishappe.
Thy wicked hap, which woeful fate aboads thee,
To cross thy sweet spring, with sad winter sower:
Which from thy infancy (poor soul) o'reloads thee;
And chiefly for thy infant-yeares want power,
To shadow thee from saddest sorrows shower;
Whose stormy gust's, and frosty nipping blast,
Thy fair youths heaven, with grief shall ouercast.
For why? (unkind) I must against my will,
Even in a moment thy poor self forsake,
And to thy lucklesse lot, must leave thee still,
Unto the senseless Ocean to betake
Thy tender corpse, whose pitious cries might make
An harder heart, then mine (God knows) to rue:
Yet I poor soul, cannot the fact eschew.
Ah, what will others say, when they shall hear
How cruel I am proved to my child?
Will they not bounce their breasts, and tresses tear?
Cursing, fell vengeance on a deed so vilde?
And say, Medea never proved so wild:
For she did only slay her infant brother;
But thou thy son: O most tyrannous mother!
Her fact may be excused, her shame may leave her;
Consuming time her cruelty may hide;
But thy most savage deed shall blamed, ever
Within the memories of men abide;
So as, though time do near so swiftly slide,
Yet shall he on his wings, transported still,
Carry remembrance of my wicked will.
What then (unhappy wretch) will thou effect?
Which way will thou determine his relieuance?
Will thou, for fear, his safety neglect?
And still retain him to a farther grieuance?
If hear he stay, he dies: if go, perchance
Some happy star may guide him to good fortune:
Which otherwise might too much ill importune.
Then silly soul, why should I longer stay,
From prosequuting what I have intended?
What though a while from me (poor babe) thou stray,
Unto the raging billows safe commended?
It must be borne which can not be amended.
And since withouten help I must forsake thee,
Sweet boy, to Gods tuition I betake thee.
CHAP. 4.
How Olbiocles, Alfortio, Orthisius, and other knights put themselves in
enquest after the Giant Ortolomorgantell, to reskew the inthralled Princesses:
And how Olbiocles arrived on the Round Island; where, in revenge of the Damsel
Alluas quarrel, he fought with the Knight of the Tygre: and of the exceeding
joy of the Queen of Carthage, for the young Sea-borne babe that her brother
Artimagus sent her.

Delivering forth together with sobbes and sighs, this sorrowful farewell, she
set her last loves signet upon the tender lips of the young infant: whom,
having wrapped in warm swaddling clothes, Hard shift.
she put into the ruins of an old chest, which by ye help of an honest
mariner, (who pitied her case) was with pitch so cu^ningly fastened from taking
any violence from ye waves, as hoping the Gods would, as well in this little
planke, as well as in a greater vessel protect him, speedily she delivered the
silly infant up unto the tuition of the Ocean.

But the Almighty pitying the childs miseries, most graciously provided for
his safety; for by his divine institution and providence, he caused a poor
fisherman, who was casting his nets about the shoares of Asia, to draw nigh
unto the ship, and (having never seen any such before) to stand houering about
it, and in amazement, to gaze exceedingly upon ye strangeness thereof. Whereof
ye Ladies being advertised, called him unto them and some of them giving him
their purses, others their bracelets, girdles, cheines, or whatsoever else
might seem of worth, to carry that child unto the Emperor of Grecia: which
he promising to do; they delivered the child, and yet before they would
depart with him (as well as they could) they gave him his christendom, by the
name of Oceander: The child christened Oceander and delivered to K^lus a
Fis^man.
which greek word (...) signifies a man of the Ocean: Whereafter suffering
the poor fisherman to depart with his charge; they al with one consent
returned unto the mastes again; whereto being, as they were erst, chained,
they expected ye coming of their furious keeper Ortolomorgantell; who having
ended the combat, waued unto their ship, to follow more nearly unto them;
which they did: and because there was none but Christians in the ship, ye Giant
concluded to have the same guarded by a certain number of Barbarians: who
seeking to dominier over ye poor Christian mariners, caused yt the miserable
Ladies endured ye greater servitude: We return to them again in the 18. chap
which don Ortolomorgantel with al have possible, made toward ye Rocky Island:
where we will leave him, til time fit to tell his tyranny, to talk a while of
our woeful knights of Greece and Hungary.

Such was the extreme anguish, that both ye Emperor Claranax and the king
Rubaldo, with all the rest of the knights of Grecia conceived for the sudden
surprisement of ye Ladies, as also the death of Meroander duke of Athens; as
they were all at the point of going out of their wits; Meroande: deceased.
but especially the young prince of France; who reviving out he fell into by
reason of his wounds received, by the fury of ye Giant, being enraged with
despite of his own misfortune and his sister Eristamas loss, presently
called for his horse and armor, and in the company of ye valiant Impe of ye
king Oruntio of Spain, Orthi^ius and Al^ortio emberqued themselves in reskew
of the Princesses.
he hyed him unto the haven of Constantinople; where imbarquing himself he put
out to the Sea. But yet for all this have of Orthisius: Olbiocles, hatting
heard of his Ladies il fortune, had armed himself, and before ever Orthisius
could attain the haven; he went aboarde, and hoysing up his sails, made away
so amainely from the coasts of Greece; as in short while he was past ken of
his country inhabitants: which he perceiving; and with tears lamenting, at
last brast forth into this agony of passions.

How unadvised are those foolish Poets, which stick not in their labored
penworkes, to praise Fortune as a Goddess? and how indeliberate are those
makers, which impute unto her fickle Deity, more then a divine potencie? too
far do they reach their fancies, to attribute such infinite power to such an
inconstant guide: Oshiocles inuectine agianst Fortune.
Since if she were what they feign her to be, she would be merciful, whereas
now she is monstrous; and she would continue mighty in her constantnesse,
when now she is ever variable and unconstant in her mightiness; resembling the
Sun, who by his heat scorcheth the grass of Pelion, ye erst by his beams
was nourished; playing the cunning Panther with men's affections, showing a
glorious countenance to allure, whom she determines to delude: putting a
pleasant bayt down our throats, under the which she hydeth a hook to rent
our weasand, covering serpents with Sinamon, and foul toades under the sweet
leaves of a flourishing Laurel, to the end, that if we taste we might be
stinged; or if we smell, we might be enuenomed. She provides Cleopatras
dainties to allure us, that being bitten with the figge-hidden Aspis; we should
sleep to death, with security, retchlesse and unrepentant.

Not unlike the monster Hyenna, she can change her self, and in a moment
growing variable transmute her countenance with her conditions, so as no man is
able in most security, to say accordant to the presuming proverb;

" Mayor sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.
"I am beyond the reach of Fortunes rage.
For even in performance of our pleasures, she seconds us with pain, crossing
our delight with dislike, and our ioyfulnesse with ioylesse accidents: as in
me she has made manifest, whom in the midst of pastime, she has pained;
and in the interacting of my pomp, has dashed out my glorious title, and
plunged me in a sea of punishment, making my love a captive, me a catife, her
an enthralled prisoner, me a painful pilgrim, obliged by my hearts love, to
attempt her freedom. And lastly, allotting her bands, with care, and my self,
banishment without comfort, or almost any possible hope of regaining her, my
love, my dear spouse Almidiana: whose soul the almighty for his mercy,
comfort, and whose chaste body the high Jove preserve from spiteful villainy of
her ouerrulers; that as she has lived for me, so in mine arms she may
contentedly give the world her indebted farewell.

Herewith, tears stopping his speech, Olbiocles swouneth.
he fell down in a passion, in the bosom of his page Curio; who lamenting
his Lords mifortunes was sitting by Olbiocles; with trickling tears to bear
the diapason in his masters melancholy music. This Curio, therefore, raised
from his dumpes by Olbiocles swoune, started up on his feet, A careful
servant.
and using sufficient means for his Lords recovery, whom he quickly revived
from his trance, and enquiring of his welfare, was thus answered. O, my dear
page Curio, how often have I bin recovered by thy diligence and care, from
extazies! Sure many times; but thou shall not pass requitelesse: for here I
give the this chain: which, being thou shall by reason of my miseries, shortly
leave me, may peradventure stand thee in some stead. Herewith he proffered his
chain (which was made of refined gold fetched from abounding Ophire) and urged
him to take it: But poor Curio, rather wishing his Lords presence without
reward, then delighted with riches in his masters absence, fell prostrate at
Olbiocles feet; and with tears in his eyes, humbly requested his Lords
favor, and that he would rather with his own hands reaue him of life, then
once to motion a matter so opposite to his souls affection; vowing before ye
majesty of the heavens never to joy, after he should be so forsaken without
deserving.

Olbiocles perceiving by the outward action, his poor pages inward affection,
most kindly reco^forted him up with a firm promise never, whilst his life
lasted, once to offer to forsake him: whereat ye loving lad rejoicing, he
humbly kissed his Lords hands, in token of his content, studying daily, seeing
his lords melancholy humor, by some pleasant entercourses, either by way of
history or tale, to expel his assiduous sorrows; and amongst diverse others,
he cheared up Osbiocles drooping senses, with this pleasant, (though
unpolished) Rusticke.

The Pages pleasant Rusticke.
Upon the hills of Arcadie,
Where old God Pan melodiously
His pipe of reed full sweetly strainde,
Whilst on fell Fortune he complainde,
Which did his beauteous Sirinx change
Into the whistling reed (so strange
An accident was never seen,
Unto Gods, Paramours to been)
At what time Flora in her prime,
Observing it was summer time,
With fragrant flowers of each dye,
Had diapred most gorgeously
The face of mother Tellus fair;
So as thereby she did declare
The Approaching sacred festival
Of God Siluanus nuptial,
Unto fair goddess Clarida:
Wherefore this Sheepheards holiday
Was clepid of each country swain,
That to Siluanus did pertain.
Thilke day of mirth and merry cheer
Each sheepehearde knew approaching near:
Wherefore they gathered every one,
Together to king Caucus stone:
About the which they place the flocks
Of Sheep and Goats, about the rocks
Which skip and leap wild thyme to brouse,
Which grows thereon most plenteouse.
Then with Pastoraes hand in hand,
Each Rusticke does in roundell stand;
Which is entrenched in the ground,
With seats of turns y placed round;
On which poor Sheepeheards lovingly
Declared their true constancy,
Unto their loves: who them invested
With coronets of green bows wrested.
In lieu whereof, to Sheepeheardesses,
In courteis wise each swain addresses
His hand, his heart, his cappe, his coin,
And all the good he can conioyne
Unto his true loves courtesy;
Who gives again most lovingly,
All kind of token she did take,
And then as to her loving make
She yieldes herself obedient
In all that is expedient:
When if he likes her, he does gin
To vow to her, and she to him,
Foreuermore continually
To live with him obediently.
Thus they conclude, and thus agree,
Both loving man and wife to be;
So Cloden did to Coladine,
So Ferin to fair Eglantine,
So Chloris did to Coridon:
And so dealt sheepeheards every one;
Solemnizing their nuptials,
Upon such holy festiuals.
Thus in disport, while they them held,
They suddenly among them beheld
A Nymph in strange attier dressed,
Which putting in among the rest,
Had kept their day of frolicking,
With a strange kind of wondering:
Sometime her face they might perceive,
Ready to smile, and then deceive
Their loving expectation,
With other kind of fashion.
For sometime laugh, and sometime cry,
Now right, now houlding neck awry,
With ieering kind of scoyning eye,
She changed her face so diversely,
As soon each seely sheepeheard boy
Began fear she meant them some annoy,
In that she came in such disguise,
Unto their sheepeheards sacrifice.
Wherefore they began for to suspect her,
And cast about them to detect her:
Of her they did inquiry make:
But no man of her knowledge spoke:
But every one did murmur much,
To see her change and gesture such:
Wherefore they did determine straight,
Her to intrappe, for to lay wait.
Therefore on her their hands they lay;
But there they did their selves betray;
For some lost sheep, and some their good,
Others for want of love were wood:
Yet do what ever she could do,
She was at length oppressed so,
By such a rusticke multitude,
As being brought to servitude,
Her self false Fortune she confessed;
Which known, the Swains her so detest,
As presently with all their might,
They proffer her most fell despite;
And stripping her from her attire,
To whippe her they done all conspire:
Which they did so perform indeed,
As soon they made her body bleed:
And for she wrought their miseries,
low Fortune ame to be linde.
They reaued her of both her eyes:
Then setting her upon a wheel,
Which forward could (not backward) reele,
They sent her from their rural store;
To which she vowed to come no more:
Which is the cause that ever sense
She does to sheepeheards none offense;
But bendes her power against king and princes,
Whom to her thraldom she conuinces.
The woeful Prince of Greece, was greatly eased of his griefs, by this and such
like pleasant tales of Curio; who endeavored, both in speech and action, so
neatly to set forth the matter he pronounced, as Olbiocles could not choose but
both applaud the poor pages invention, and added grace; which made the matter
handled, far more pleasant and delightsome. But notwithstanding all this
iouisance that he received; he could in no wise forget the miseries that most
galled him; neither did he at al leave to meditate on his misfortu^^^, for
although his countenance waxed calm, and the clo^^s of his brows were
sometime cleared; yet his heart harbored discontent, and the fair welkin of
his happiness was surcharged with sorrow; so as even in ye very center of his
soul, was sadness enclosed; and in his woeful breast, a whole legion of
tormenting passions were included: which feeding upon his lives maintainer,
with such eager fierceness, as the staruen Eagle upon the outcast carrion,
scarcely suffered him to desist one minute, from thinking on his dear and
loving Lady Almidiana: whose sacred Idea continually presenting it self
before his sleepelesse eyes, caused new commotions to arise in his breast, and
unwonted perturbations to perplex his soul: which agony so afflicted him: as
even in his nightly rest (which was naught but of broken slumbers) he would
rise out of his bed, exclaim against Fortune, and in his rage and fury call
for his sword and armor, to defend his distressed Almidiana.

In this perplexity he continued almost for the space of fourteen days, with
a most earnest desire, wishing to attain some strange harbor, where he
might hear of any tidings concerning the distressed prisoned Princesses.
Olbiocles arriueth on the round Island.
And after a while sailing, he came within the ken of an Island; into the havens
mouth whereof being entered, he enquired of a certain Mariner, the name of the
country, and in what state the government thereof remained. To all which
interrogatories the Mariner answered, that the country wherein they were now
landed, was named the Round Island; wherein in times past the cruel knight
Acconumbo held his tyranny: for the which deposed and done to death by the
help of his daughter (who lately here arrived all massacred) and the ungentle
prince that now reigns; he left his diadem to this knight Proglador to
inherit; who (as we hear credibly by the Damsels dwarf reported) has since
most inhumanely murdered the young maiden, named Allua. The inhabitants in
arms to revenge All^as death against Troglador.
For which cause ye whole Island is up in arms; and by the reason of Trogladors
mightiness, it is likely that the contrary party shall suffer a great hazard
of their good fortunes, and the Common wealths extreme ruin of her most
loyal subjects. The Prince thanked the mariner for his relation, and
presently striking sail to come nigher ye shore, he went a land with his
dwarf Curio: who carrying his helmet and lance after him, travailed farther
onwarde into the Island; when they perceived a great company of pauilions
pitched about the walls of a Castle, wherein, as then ye Damozels friends
were besieged. Wherefore, he spedily buckled on his helmet, Olbiocles enters
the ca^p of Troglador.
and kept on his pase, until he was entered into the camp of Troglador:
where he was greeted by a company of knights after this sort;

Knight of the Leopard (for such was the device in his shield) know that from
the mighty prince of this Round Island, we are to command your stay in this
place; until his Highness leisure of enterparleance for your abearing. Upon
pain of his displeasure, proceed no farther: but for the assurance of your
desisting, dismount ye; and either leave thy horse or thy head, for gage of
your abiding. Herewith they began to lay hold upon his horse bridle: whereat
Olbiocles enraged, rendered them this answer. Unworthy, in good faith, were I
of the honor of knighthoode, if for the vain bragges of a sort of injurious
opponentes, I should be so foolish as to hinder my intended journey: and more
unwise should I prove, if I should not only desiste from my purpose, but also
(in lieu of my cowardice) leave either my horse, or my head behind me,
without enterprising their deliverance. Herewith he unsheathed his curtelax,
and gave him that held his bridle, such a recompense for his boldness, as he
curtald both his arms off at the elbowes, giving him a fair warning for
approaching any more so near him: who falling down, Olbiocle^ slays some of
Trogladors knights.
left his void place for the rest of his companions; whereof diverse of them had
almost as unlucky entertainment. For, some their shoulders, some their brawned
arms, and others their heads had (by the Princes vigorous fury) parted in a
short space from their maimed bodies: so as by his valor, Olbiocles being rid
from his enemies, for fear of farther danger, pricked forth his horse,
toward the Castle: He enters the castle of the defenda^ts
whereinto received by the porters, he was gladly entertained of the
defendants, for their conductor and Champion; and so after due rep^st taken,
for that night he reposed himself on a most soft bed of down, placed in a
most gorgeous gallery of white marble; on the walls whereof were curiously
carved infinite images of the strangest living creatures; with such lively
art-proportioned lineaments, as if they had as yet enjoyed the vital spirit of
breathing.

On the next morrow, so soon as the fyre-breathing palfreys of Apollo, with
their horned hooues, had stricken the Hunts up, at the iron lattices of
Thalatto, and that their master Phoebus, leaving the watery bosom of his lover
Thetis, had with his Iuory chariot made his swift passage thorough the ribs
of the Ocean; the valiant Greek, awaked from his slumbers, attired himself in
his warlike abilliments; and, descending the stairs of his chamber, came into
the base court of the Castle: where assembling together the principals of the
knights defendants, he consulted together with them about the effecting of
their liberty: Olbiocles determining to challenge the monimachy of Troglador,
is prevented.
amongst whom at length it was concluded that (for the trial of their
innocence) the knight of the Leopard, with the usurping Homicide, should
contend in a monimachye or single combat. Upon which, being resolved; Olbiocles
calling for ink and paper, determined to write a challenge to his adversary,
the more to egg him on to enraged fury: But in the initium of his intent, he
was presented with the like Letter of challenge from his angry adversary
Troglador: which Olbiocles vnripping, found it to contain thus much in effect
following.

Troglador
to the most injurious Knight of the Leoparde, neither health nor happiness.
IN regard (discourteous knight) of thy wicked dealing toward me, not only
bereauing me of my fair spouse, the Princess of Hungaria, and also thy
disloyal and vnknightly abearing of thy self toward me in the combat of
Constantinople (both which I can willingly pardon) but also for thy great
villainie thou have offered my knight-heraulds which I sent unto thee, whom
thou have most inhumanelie massacred, against al right or law of arms; I here
challenge thee (as thou will be accounted valourous) in a single combat with
me, before the gates of the Castle, with thy body to make good the damages
thou have done me; or else, not daring to satisfy my request, keep thee still
enclosed in thy fortress: but with assurance, that yer long, by maine force, I
shall pull thee out from thy walled defense, and with my sword, lay dire
vengeance on thy cursed shoulder.

From my camp. Troglador your greatest enemy.


This threatening Letter being lowdly read by the prince Olbiocles, caused to
the whole audience great sorrow: but the generous Greek made so small account
of his vain boasting, as with a great laughter at the usurpers folly, he sent
back the messenger to his Lord, with this answer. I know not what mad fury
drives thy master Troglador unto this folly; as, with the burned child, once
more to put finger into the fire: or with the singed gnat to dare again to
flutter about the flame of the candle. The fish Sphyrana, once entangled, will
take heed of the net; and the dogs of Egypt, once thoroughly terrified by the
Crocadils, will ever after only war^ly l^ppe at the brinks of the river Nilus.
Tell Troglador, ^e should have meditated before he menaced; and like a wise
Martialist have consulted with his courage, before he ^hallenged the conceyted
conclusion of a doubtful conquest: he might will enough have better remembered
with perpendancy, his Constantinopolitan combat, and then he should not have
needed to challenge a new conflict: But since he is so wilfully forgetful,
Olbiocles accepts the combat.
the next time that I meet him (which shall be within this hour) with my
curtelar, i will beat a little better memory into his brains.

The messenger, though he were a good knight, yet he was almost terrified with
so terrible an answer: insomuch as longing to depart, he took his leave, and
presently returned unto the camp: where finding Troglador in his tent, he
thoroughly declared unto him the whole resolution of Olbiocles; wherewith the
cruel tyrant enfired with anger presently stepped unto a lance, and piercing
the messenger to the heart, vowed by the powers of heaven, with the self same
weapon to make the stern Greek to abye his insolent presumption.

In this anger he armed himself; and taking (on his arm) a most strong
shield of well tempered steel, he mounted a mighty Courser, wherewith he
praunced gallantly up and down, before the gates of the Castle, awaiting the
coming of his fierce adversary: who, The justness of the quarrel to be
respected.
in the mean time (being loath to enter the combat but in cause of truth)
examined the dwarf Toydel, of the whole misfortune of his mistress: who
making relation of her miseries, begun in her life, and continuing unto her
death; declared also, how after the Damozell was so massacred, and himself
toppled into the sea, by reason he had some cunning in swimming, he attained
the boat, wherein Allua lay murdered, and the help of a poor fisherman
(whom Troglador killed for his labor) he was set a land on this Round Island:
where he, with the Damoz^ls friends and aliance, has ever since sustained the
fury of the tyrant. Which relation of Toydel, when ye Grecian Prince had fully
waied; pondering in his heart, how heinous a thing the cruel murdering of a
Damsel (though death des^ru^ng) was in the eye of the most high, he
determined by the assistance of the almighty, once more to co^^e the co^^^ge
of this unjust catife. Wherefore, having endorsed his harness, and purueyed
him of sufficient (as well offending as defending weapons; he mounted his
Palfrey; and (commanding only his Page Curio, to wait on him forth of ye
Castle gates, he departed from his wronged friends, with hope to make his
wro^ging enemy feel ye force of his vigorous arm: without the gates he found
his adversary, ready appointed for ye assault; whereupon fewtering their
Spears, they ran fiercely one against theother as in their courses; the Knight
of the Tygre; shiuered his Lance upon the shield of Olbiocles without any
further harming him: They encou^te^.
The like the Grecian Prince performed to the full on Trogladers Target:
whereby passing one by another quietly, they prepared themselves, for their
second encounter; which was so valia^tly performed by the noble Greek, as
(without any harm received to himself) with a mighty blow, he bare him out of
his saddle to ye ground; and presently alighting, proffered the Tyrant ye
combat on foot. But, as the proverb is, The baited Bear will beware of the
stake. So Troglador, having once before thoroughly felt the fury of Olbiocles
to his cost: and now again being entered within ye same predicame^t, fearing his
stars to boade a worser chance, he determined not to hazard his life in the
single Combat against so tried a Champion, and therefore casting his shield at
his back; he remou^ted his horse: and betook himself to flight, Troglador
betakes him to flight.
from the fury of his adversary: whereat the worthy Grecian, enraged, mounted
also on horseback, and after him for the space of an hour, he hotely followed
in pursuit: But seeing he could not ouer-take him; he speedily returned, first
to the Camp, where (saving of some few) he was willingly entertained, and
afterward to the Castle, where he was most joyfully welcomed, and honorably
feasted where we must this time leave him; to turn our tale to the poor
distressed Infant.

By the providence of the Olimpian Rector, the poor captiued Princess of
Hungary, being on the sudden eased of the care of her silly Infant, through
the coming of a poor Fisherman, to whom she delivered her Son to be
transported into Greece; beseeched the Heavens for their good hap, and so to
her sorrow committed them to their following fortunes. The poor Fisherman
Kalus (so called for his honesty) was no less confounded for joy of this
little Babe, and his gotten infinity of treasures, then the poor Princess
was comforted with the hope of her Childs more happy safety: wherefore with a
glad heart and a merry gale, he cut his course toward the coasts of Greece,
fully hoping, for the presenting of so bewtifull an Infant, to receive of his
Landlord (who was a great Gentleman of his country) some rich recompense for
his labor.

But as no Garment sooner receives stain, then that which is most brightly
colored: nor any man sooner deceived, then he who by hope was most assured:
so this man, in his chiefest expectation of good, Kalus overtaken with a
tempest.
was suddenly crossed with vexation. For while Kalus was thus merrily making
way cross the billows in his Ferry-boate, there rose such a sudden Tempest,
that he being in the midst of the vaste Ocean, without hope of any harbor,
was so tossed up and down by the bounding waves, as thereby having lost the
use of his sea-skill, he was forced to commit his Bark to the fury of the
waters.

In this plight he remained for the space of three whole days, dangerously
ryding on the rising surges, most wonderfully amazed at ye swiftnes of his
Ferry-boate, which for the roughness of the Seas and the rage of the Storm,
slyced her course cross the Ocean, with such a speediness, as (contrary to
all natural reason) he safely arrived at the third days end, at a certain
Island, He arriueth on the Island of Artim^gus.
on the confines of Africa, where at that time, inhabited a cunning Magitian,
named Artimagus: who knowing by the secrets of his art of his infantes
miserye, had framed his whole science to the bringing of this fishermans
boat to the place of his abiding. Wherefore having now brought to effect his
intended purpose, he attended at the marble stairs of his Castle (which by
art was so framed, as none, but when he consented, Artimagus his Castle.
could descry it) he attended his coming: whom with what joy he received;
my pen nor my tongue, is scarcely able to make manifest; but only thus much
I will willingly insert; that he, having reserved him to some necessary
purpose (whereof in place convenient you shall be informed) s^nt him by his
daughter Magartez, to the wronged Queen of Carthage, his sister; who accepted
his present so thankefully as ever after she thought her self more bound
unto him by this good turn, then by her natural consanguinitie. In which her
joy, we must be feign to leave her, until such time as Oceanders years
gives us a more sufficient occasion to treat of him; and turn our style to
other accidental occurrences.

CHAP. 5.
How after Orthisius and Alfortio had put themselves to the Sea, they
encountered with a strange adventure of the Duchess of Siracusa, whom they
delivered from the terror of death, to which she was betrayed by the unjust
dealing of her wicked Aunt: who by the consent of the Estates of the city, was
put to a most cruel death; and the young Duchess reinstalled in her
inheritance.

EVen as these things were thus in acting, the two valiant Princes of France
and Spain having put themselves in enquest (as you have heard) after ye Giant
Ortolomorgantell; bending their course toward the west end of Europe, they
furrowed so spedily cross the Greekish Seas, as into the Mare Mediterraneum;
wherein they sailed a good space, until such time as by the rage of the rising
billows, they were enforced to seek for harbor on the Coasts of Sicilia:
where, surging at the port of Sicacusa (a city in the forenamed Island) they
were very joyfully received by the young duke of Hybla; who was brother to a
most beautiful Lady, ^^^hisius and Alsortio arrive at Siracusa.
being Duchess of Siracuse, named Oaezima. For the redress of whose
miseries, her brother Oreardey, hearing of the arrival of the worthy Princes,
attended their aduent with exceeding diligence; whom, he causing to land,
after most courteous embracements, in this sort most kindly welcomed: Fair
knights and (as I guess) noble princes of Grecia: If unknown Choraebus,
Kindly entertained by O^y (...) H^^^^.
with his troops of vpdaunted soldiers, were in Troyes extremity welcome to
the distressed Priamus; or the resolved bands of Achil es, with his fierce and
fearful Mirmedons, acceptable to the Grecians, in the time of intestine
skirmishes; then think brave minded Champions, that your coming is not
unwelcome unto my country; or that I will prove unthankful to the Almighty
for your most lucky arrival in my haven, in this time of disaster; wherein I
have more need of your heroic actions, then either Priam, or the Grecian
Heroes, of their proffered succouring aiders. The Princes were ready to reply
upon him, when he thus cut off their inceptions. But yet for all my miseries
which I endure, let them not any whit aggrieue you, until such time, as
(hearing the whole circumstance of our misfortunes) ruthe may drive you to
rage, and your conceived anguish move you to such exrreame anger, as by your
knightly virtues you may dissolve ye Gordian knot of our miseries. Herewith he
led them with him toward the Dutchesses Palace, where the two princes found
exceeding good entertainment, both for delicate cheer, as for sweet sounding
music: which, though it somewhat solemnly sounded, yet exceedingly delighted
the noble Champions, so as with great content (after their royal welcomes)
they betook their wearied bodies unto the downe-soft couches: with which they
were not a little contented; finding themselves so safely seated from the fury
of their late feared tempest. In this quiet they remained until ye morning at
which time Apollo, the days glorious directour, had no sooner chased away the
coale-blacke night; but that the noble Princes of France and Spain presently
brake off their slumbers, and attiring themselves in scarlet colored velvet
mantels, they were by an attending Page conducted into the Palace garden:
wherein, by the variety of most sweet smelling herbs, flowers, and
diversity of Indian shrubs, their drooping senses were exceedingly delighted
and refreshed, There they walked up and down, meditating and asking many
questions of the boy concerning his Lord, and the young Duchess Oezima;
whereunto, the Page in this manner answered.

My Lords, it is not the part of an honest servant to delay the delating of his
mistresses sorrow; neither should it be the property of a courteous Siracusan
bluntly to deny any interrogant, asking whatsoever is lawful, and more
necessary for the required, than the inquirers, to be declaclared: Therefore in
that which I can, I will resolve you; especially touching my self: But as for
any thing touching my Lady the Duchess of Siracusa, I neither can nor may
inform you, since it is a matter only to be resolved by her self, after her
delivery: to the contrary whereof she has sworn never to perform any thing
to the infringement of her determination, though she dye therefore.

The two knights seeing they could get no more concerning this Lady
Duchess, being loath to urge him to tell any thing against his will, or the
oath of his dear Lady; required the relation of his own misfortunes whereunto
the Page willingly consenting, reported unto them the same, after this manner.

The Pages report.
Although (most noble and valourous Champions) my miseries be without remedy,
and my sorrows vnsalueable; yet. notwithstanding to requite your courteous
requests; I shall not stick to rippe up the whole history of my misfortunes.
Know ye therefore, that in times past, I was bestowed by Fortunes savor, on a
most beautiful Lady, for her Page: whom with how much love and diligent care
I served for the space of two or three years, I will not at this time dilate:
only thus much know ye, that I attended her with such affection, as should she
have required my head I should have thought my self ingrate, if I could not
have found in my heart to have given it her: But alas, I would she had had it,
so by my death she might have been defended from following misfortunes: which
a little after befell her in this wise.

There was a knight of great power in the Island of Vulcania (whereof my Lady
was Gouernesse) named Terindantes: who, Mabina Lady of Vulcania.
as his possessions and power were greater than any others in the Island; so he
had his hearts center impleate with far more pride, and his thoughts soothed
more high exceeding ambition, than any others else within the confines. Which
his ambition, causing him to make his mark of a crown; gave him so great
respite and leave for his affecting, as openly with great insolence, he began
to be check make, or hail fellow well met with my Lady Mabina: for so was
her name. Which his presumptuous action, she but indifferently brooking, began
to cool his courage with this caveat. Take heed proud Teridantes, and be
warned in time by her who may command thee, that thy abearing be better
toward thy Sovereign; and thy audacious actions be more humbly ordered
toward our highness; least. provoked by thy misdemeanour, we disdeame of
thy disloyalty; and thereby, or ever thou be aware, thy presumption procure
punishment for thy ouerweaning pride. Think not that Princes are painted
gewgayes, to be pricked on thy sleeue; or that I, a Queen, am made of cloutes,
to be plaide withal by every cullion-like companion; but know that we are
borne Princes, and therefore must rule; we are created Queens, and therefore
will be obeyed: wherefore I charge thee here, by our regal authority; not to
dare (upon pain of death) hereafter once to approach our presence, or to come
nigh the gates of our Royal court, by a league, without our highness granted
permission; remembering henceforth, that the Prince is not to be compared with,
Teridantes banis^ed the Court of Vulcani^
of a subject but with loyal eyes to be gazed at, as an heavenly object.
Herewith the Queen Mabina caused Teridantes to be presently excluded her Court
gates, with firm resolution, not without his penitent submission, ever any
more to admit him to her highness favor.

Teridantes, galled to the heart with this nipping reprehension, in a rage
departing from the gates, vowed or ever the Goddess Cynthia had thrice changed
shape, to ruinate the Palace of the Queen M^bina, and work a most cruel
revenge on his female enemy. Makes a conspiracy against Mabina.
In which his resolution, he called together his kinsmen and near alies, and
with their help leuying a sufficient army, he laid straight siege against
the Palace wherein ye Queen remained: which by reason of the infinity of
soldiers, victuals, and munition, by the providence of the Queen being
furnished, he was not able any way to carry; although by the space of a
month, he had encompassed the walls with his multitudes of valiant and hardy
soldiers. Which almost made him to be past all hope of ever winning it; and
the rather, because that the defendants (in a sally, which they suddenly made
out at a back posterne gate, upon his vnsuspecting soldiers) had by their
valor not only greatly disturbed his Camp, Tarisdin taken prisoner.
but also taken a Cosen of his (named Tarisdin) prisoner. Wherefore he resolved
to break up his Camp: but cruelty not suffering him to prove cowardly, he
suddenly began to stay, and bethinking on his revenge, he at length effected
it by this stratagem.

Having parlously pondered with himself of the sundry mischiefs and infinite
miseries that happened to a Commonwealth, through such civil wars, and
homebred contentions, he cunningly concluded a peace for eight days with the
Queen Mabina; with lawful leave granted for either other, Truce for eight
days
quietly to pass and repasse from the Camp to the Court, or the Court to the
Camp; and in as peaceable manner (during the time of the truce) to converse
one with another, as if there had never before been any deadly fued betwixt
them. Of the which truce, not only Tirindates, but also Maniba (vnsuspecting
future misery) was greatly rejoiced.

But how long continued it? Not (scarcely) passing two days. For Tirindates
(who minded nothing but revenge for injuries) clean contrary to his taken oath
and plighted fidelity, spying his time of advantage (though he was narrowly
watched by the Queens loyal defendants) entered ye Palace with his armed
soldiers, Mabinas two sisters (...) ^^^ed.
and laying hold on Mabinaes two young sisters of exceeding beauty, in spite
of of all the resistance that could be made to the contrary, he departed with
them to his tents; where, for that night he kept sure watch and ward about his
army, for fear of some sudden sally from his fortified enemies. Which indeed
served him in good steed; for about midnight, he had gone nigh to have paid
for his treason, had he not been forewarned by his skoutes; and so being in a
readiness, prevented the fury of his assailants. But, what profited these
secret assaults? since what they adventured for, was in the hands of their
enemies. On the next morrow, Tirindantes, causing all his army to be in arms,
with a troop of lusty knights, carried with them the Queens sisters to the
gates of the Palace: where, erecting a place of execution for the two innocent
young Ladies; he threatened the Queen, that unless she would presently
deliver him his captive cosen Tarisdin, she should speedily see the destruction
of her loving sisters; who woefully houlding up their hands, most pitifully
requested her hearts compassion. But, as the Lion scorneth to be bearded by
any servile or base condicioned beast; Majesty cannot brook insolency.
but with his paws and gnashing his tushes together, will fiercely assail
him: so this worthy Queen disdaining the terrible threats of the disloyal
traitor, with a courageous heart, and vnterrified stomache, for his former
menace, did mete the like measure.

Do what thou can, or dare, proud Traitor (quoth she) unto my innocent
sisters: for of this thou may be assured, that if they perish; nay if thou
do but wring their fingers, thy Cosen Tarisdin (whom thou love as dearly
as thy life) shall of his head, make a footeball for my soldiers to spurn
at. That shall I quickly try, said Tirindantes. Now therefore expect thy elder
sisters Tragedy: And therewithal, Kathe^^^^ beheaded
he caused the Executioner to smite off Katherinaes head. And then again he
settled him to solicit his former suite. Now Queen Volcania, resolve thy
self what thou will do; since thou see me resolute in my enterprise:
answer me to the proof: will thou restore my Cosen Tarisdin? or will thou
perspect thy second sisters execution? Speak therefore, and that briefly:
otherwise, no longer deceive thy self, but be sure I will make short with
Straffera. Herewith he paused a while, expecting the Queens determination.

But Mabinaes heart being already stricken dead with the former butcherly
spectacle; and with sorrow amazed in her soul, for her sister Katharinas
death; overwhelmed in a sea of grief, she sanke down in a swoune; not being
able for the space of half an hour to utter one word, or heave up the liddes
of her eyes; until such time, as revived from her passion by the piteous and
loud cries of her loyal subjects, Straffera beheaded.
who lamented the death of her second sister; she suddenly started up: and
viewing the cruel murder, cursing and crying out upon the wicked Traitor;
Tarisdin slain.
she resolved on revenge on captive Tarisdin: whom causing to be held over
the walls by her soldiers, with his own dagger she dug out his heart
from his traitorous breast, and griping it in her hand, she flang it, in
despite, at Tirindantes face, saying; And not this only, O bloody tirant, but
a farther revenge I do seek for.

With which her fierce revenge, Tirindantes being enraged, presently
embattailed his army; and approaching to the walls of the Palace, at the
second assault, he mounted the gates; and winning the mastery over the
Queens subjects; Mabinas power ouerthrown and her eyes put ^^t.
in his fury he put all to the sword, except the Queen (whom, having put
out her eyes, he keeps in extreme thraldom) and a few others, who getting
out by a posterne gate, fled for the safety of their lives both night and day
from the fury of their pursuing enemies. Amongst which number, I being feign
to shift for my life, was forced to fly unto Sicilia; where of my Lord
Oriardey, at Hibla (with whom I now remain) I was entertained for his trusty
servant.

Thus have you heard (most noble knights) of my misfortunes, and my dear
Ladies miseries: of which (until fates and fortune both agree for her
releasement) I know most assuredly, that I shall never, while I live be
remedied.

The Page having concluded his story, with a stream of tears trickling from
his eyeliddes; moved the noble minded Princes to great compassion; insomuch,
as they were about to comfort him with a promise of reuengement on Tirindantes:
but by reason of a certain lamentable noise of some distressed Lady that they
heard, they were enforced to keep silence for that season; and desirous to
understand more manifestly the whole complaint, they drew a little nearer unto
the east side of the garden, where they heard a sorrowful voice proceed out
of the iron grates of a prison window, which on this sort dolefully lamented.

O heavens when will you help my helpless self?
And by your sacred powers most divine, Oezimaes complaint in the dongeon.

Together when will you your aides combine?
Unto my saddest suites for to incline
Your hearkening ears; that Justice may refine
Her wicked faults, tirannous Atrielph,
That thus has sunk me on sad sorrows shelfe;
By her endeauours, and conspiring trains
(Supposing for to work my joys decline)
Condemning me unto a thousand pains,
Which here within this dongeon I sustain.
Within this dungeon full of nightbred dread,
Where naught but horror and despair should dwell,
I do in chains of steel fast fettered still,
(Orecloyde in senses with each noisome smell)
Remain in torment more then tongue can tell,
Wishing a thousand times that I were dead,
Rather than in this sort imprisoned:
Robbed of honor, hated in defame,
Vexed in soul, with bodies torture fell;
Still to revive, discredited in name:
The figure of dishonor, hate, and shame.
Help therefore (oh ye heavenly Governors)
And from the vertice of Olimpus hye
(Yielding regard unto my plaintfull cry)
Power down your mercies most incessantly;
Least, wanting that adiument heavenly,
And sacred auxill of celestial powers,
Like Biblis, I be turned into showers;
Through the effluction of my watery eyes:
Which having powered forth continually,
Whole ^iuerets of tears, denotifyes,
Dire death shall over my soul soon tyrannize,
Wherefore (O Gods) to you I do commit
The safe tuition of my greeuing soul,
Which here tormented in this prison foul,
Incessantly my prayers does unfold,
Unto your deities; for to enrowle
Within your breasts (where Justice still does it)
The memory of this foul fact, unfit
For any humane heart for to invent;
And graciously her malice nill permit
To bring my honor to so bad event,
As hitherto she has determined it:
But by your heavenly providence, prevent
Her will, that bends unto so bad intent.
The two Princes of Spain and France, were greatly mo^ed at this doleful
lamentation; and therefore turning them^^lues to the Page, they enquired of him
ye co^plainants name, as also the estate of torments, wherein she remained.
Whereunto, Noble Knight, answered the Lady, this is the Lady Duchess of this
City called Oezima; sister to my L. ye Duke of Hybla: who by ye insidious
dealing of her Aunte, the old Duchess Atrielpha, is here cast into this
prison, where she sustaines her weary life with only course bread and puddle
water; which with a wooden dish, she is feign to take out of the stinking
kennell, that runs clean thorough the dungeon: thus does she lie helpless
and hopeless continually, as at this time, imploring the heavens, to have
mercy on her soul, wearied of her earthly tormented body.

Herewith, entered the Duke of Hybla, into the Garden unto them; who, with
tears in his eyes, requested their knightly aid in the defense of his
imprisoned sister, against three wicked Knights, that wrongfully accused her
for the death of her Husband, the late Duke of Siracusa, and in defense of
their quarrels, taken on the behalf of the old Duchess Attrielpha; The
Princes accept the combat against Atrielphaes chalengers.
threatening to venture their bodies against any Champions. Which when the
valiant Princes heard, they bad him be of comfort; for in their own persons
they meant to combat the Knights Traitors; and yer long, by force of arms to
make them openly to confess their treason. And presently they departed to
their chambers, where endorsing on their armours, they were attended on by 4.
Dwarfes, who carried their Spears and Helmets.

In this guise, they came into the palace base Court, where they found their
adversaries (according to the wonted custom, which should continue for Five
months) attending the coming of any knights, that durst adventure to
challenge them for their treason: who praunced up and down the listes with
such infinite pride (daring the beholders with their threatening menaces) as the
heroycke minded Princes of Spain and France (unable to endure silent any
longer) began to thunder forth their deaths peale, into their ears.

At the last, O ye wicked traitors; at the last (I say) the just Gods from
their heavenly thrones perceiving your perpetrated villainies, have provided for
the safety of oppressed Innocent, and in his just judgments, will power down
vengeance upon the heads of the malefactors. Prepare your selves therefore (O
ye wicked men) to receive the just recompense of your treasons, by the hands of
them, who not for number, but justness of the quarrel, will offer you the
combat.

They enter combat.
Herewithall the Princes entered the lists, and the three Knights (whose names
were Licandro, Mirnao, and Rogesto) prepared themselves to the Careyre.

Licandro, and Rogesto fewtered their Lances at once against Alphortio, who
received them with such a fierceness, as, though they both brake their spears
upon his shield, yet he little or nothing moved, but answering them in their
own language, gave Rogesto such a wicked welcome, as piercing him clean
through the cuirace into the flesh, he made fall dead to the ground, Rogesto
slain.
where he lay gasping for life, until they had begun the second Careyr: which
being performed with Semitars was very notable, and of a pretty continuance,
until such time, as Licandro having wounded Alfortio, in the sword arm, so
enraged him, as the Spaniarde, little liking such a bargain, with a maine
blow striking of a great piece of Licandros helmet, and a piece of his brawne
of the shoulder, rendered him a sufficient requital for his proffered fury.
Licandro wounded.


In the mean season, Mirnao, who was in combat with Orthisius, seeing how the
world went with his companions, having received a great fall, and being likely
to receive the foil at his enemies hands, Mirnao yeildeth, and reuealeth the
treason.
fell down on his knees, and yiedling up his weapon to the Prince of France,
confessed openly his complotte, and how they were allured, by the old
Duchess Atrielpha, unjustly to accuse the innocent Oezima, of the murder of
her husband the good Duke of Siracusa; whom in a secret complot with the old
wicked Duchess, they had most cruelly done to death, and thrown him into the
Mediterranean Sea. Which discourse, so soon as the beholding people had heard
related, they cast up their hats for joy of the Dutchesses approved Innocence:
and not any longer withhoulding their furies, they leapt over the listes, and
in a rage, running to the overcome traitors, they set fiercely upon them, and
never rested, until they had torn their flesh from the bones, no man thinking
himself happy, but he that had rent some gobbet from the slaughtered carcases.

Cursed Atrielpha, in the mean while knowing by ye shoute of the people, how
the matter stood with her Champions, Atrielph determines to murder Oezima.
presently ran toward the prison gates, with a clubbe in her hands, meaning
to dispatch the innocent Duchess: but blinded with rage, not knowing where to
find the key of ye dungeon, she cursed her self, banned Fortune, and
exclaming against the Heavens, so said at the door with her iron beetle; as by
the reuerberation thereof, Orlardey, being advertised about what work the
wicked wretch was, called unto the worthy Champions, and conducting them unto
the dungeon door, surprised the old Traytresse, yer she were aware, She is
attached.
and carrying her in their arms, out unto the people, required their
judgments, to what death she should be condemned: whereunto, some answered
this, and others that, according to the common proverb; Quot homines, tot
sententiae.
How many men, so many sundry minds.


AT length they required her to be delivered them whereunto, at the Duke at
Hyblas intreates, the Knights consented, and yiedling her into their hands,
gave them power of her life and death. So soon as they had her among them,
they stripped her out of her clothes; Atrielph trodden to death by the people
and tying her hand and foot, ran up and down over her, until such time as
they had squiesed her to death by their often treading. Whom, being thus
dispatched, they cast into the Haven of Siracusa; rejoicing in their hearts,
that they had taken such vengeance on her treason.

Oriardey, in the while returned unto the prison, unto his pined sister: whom
loosing from her chains, he brought forth of the dungeon, into the upper
Chamber: where causing her to put on her best attire, and declaring unto her,
Oezima set at liberty.
the whole history of her releasement, brought her by the hand into the palace
Hall; in humble wise, to render thanks for her happy delivery, fro her
thraldom which a^ sone as she espied her h^ppy deliuerers, she so artificially
performed as, (although she was most bewt^full) she gave them more cause to
admire her wit, then wonder at her beauty; wherewith ye Princes were greatly
delight^d, but especially Alpho^t^o, who vowed in his heart never to entertain
any other paramoure.

Yet notwithstanding, she was grown so lean and meagre, with her thin diet
in the Dungeon; as she gave the Princes good occasion, to require ye occasion
of her disasters inition; Too which she (being unwilling to seem ungrateful)
with great facility co^discended: but, for it was now dinnertime, they washed
their hands, and sat down at the table: and having sufficiently taken their
due repast, they attentively hearkened to this relation of Oezima; who taking
them by the hands, began the history of her misfortunes, after this manner.

Oezimaes relation of her misfortunes.
IT is scarcely three months, since (Heroyck Champions) it be fortuned my
lucklesse Husband Tirocles was one evening a (little after the decline of
Appollo into the western Seas) found dead, all mangled, and massacred in the
Palace garden, and all covered over with Rose-leaues and other herbs; to the
end, he might not be perceived: when about that time my wicked Aunte Atrielpha,
Tirocles murdered by Atrielpha, and Oezima for it accused.
co^spiring with three other knights (who indeed, had murdered my Husband
Tirocles) ganne run up and down the Palace shreeking and crying out against
me, where is that same wicked woman? that same homycide? and that same
murderer of her Husband? what is become of her? whither is she gone? what,
does she think to escape condign punishment for her wickedness? God forbid;
and the Heavens themselves will frown, if so great a crime should be passed
duer so lightly: herewithall they rushed into my chamber, where I was reading
of my book, and all at once, rayled on me saying: Ah, ha, thou wicked woman,
and thou villainous wretch, for all thou could do it so cunningly, yet by
the just judgment of the Heavens thy treason is detected: I, poor soul, was
not a little amazed at these their outcries, but standing still in a sudden
passion, I gazed upon them, not knowing in my heart, after what sort to answer
unto their unjust accusatio^s: whereupon my infidious Aunte taking sufficient
advantage, said: See you not (O you worthy knight) how her shameful silence
detectes her, and how he heart pricked with the stinge of her infected
conscience, withhouldeth her tongue, from executing the function of an excuser?

Herewithall, I could with-hould no longer: But, O ye just dooming Judges of
Olimpus (quoth I) look down from your throanes of Justice, and with the eyes
of Truth perspect my unspotted innocence, that is accused wrongfully of what I
neither know, nor ever committed.

O, Callet (replied the deceitful wretch) do thou make as though thou
knew not of thy Husband Tyrocles murder, calling to the heavens to defend
thine Innocence, as though thou had not been an actor in this Tragedy?
thinking by thy protestations and bragging of thy guiltless innocence to
escape the due punishment yt by thy wickedness thou have deserved? No, no: For
assure thy self, that, as long as I live (the loving Aunte of unhappy
Tyrocles) I neither may, nor will suffer such a wicked malefactor as thou to
pass unpunished.

This her false accusation, not a little pinched me at the very heart:
wherefore urged by her exclaimes, I began to excuse my self for guiltless
of ye fact, as well as I could; with my tears and words, keeping a just Decorum
of a distressed Lady: But all in vain. For my Aunte, who before hadd prepared
a brest-place against all pity, replied upon me, with this (more then
severe) answer: Do thou excuse thy self (oh shame of all womankinde) of a
matter, making so manifestly against thee? What is it that leads thee unto such
farther folly? Do thou suppose (...) be cannot prove thee guilty? Or do
thou think, (...) thee, but only upon surmizes? O most vnpr^ ^t, and foolish
woman! if thou think so, thou ar^ ^^^ed; for behold here, how manifestly we
will con^^ ^hee: And therewithal (before a number of my loyal ^ens) she
pulled forth of my gown pocket, a bloody handkercher; and pulling out also my
knives, A subtle treachery.
she showed them all begored with blood, unto the behoulders: who, presently
not wading into ye depth of her treachery, applauded her cunning detecting (of
so close conuayed a treason; and with one accord, condemned me for to be an
homicide, and the inhumane murderer of my Husband. And therefore as a convicted
person, they condemned me unto the stinking dungeon, there to be kept as
prisoner until the next morning: Oezima condemned, and imprisoned.
at which time, I should be condemned, to be burned at a stake (according to
the custom) on the Market hill: where that same night they did nothing else
but erect a mighty stacke of wood, and make up a number of boorded scaffolds,
for my loyal Citizens, to sit and behold my undeserved martyrdom. Which the
next morrow had been effected, had not my loving brother Oriardey, partly by
his authority, as also by persuasion, reduced the Knights (sore against my
Auntes will) to defer the day of execution, only but for Five Months. In
which space, if by the valor of some hardy Champions, I were not by right of
Arms delivered, then at the time and place appointed, to suffer the deserved
punishment of a wicked malefactresse. Thus for a while was I repriued, and I
enjoyed unlooked for life: which how loathsome it was unto me, living in such
a desolate, stinking, and darkesome dungeon, I will omit at this time to speak
of. Only thus much I must rejoice at, that the Gods have at length heard
the ^^ee^^^^t prayers of their humble hand-mayde; and by the valor (...) ^ou
his servants, has in his infinite mercy, delivered me from the hands of my
oppressors. Wherefore unto their sacred deities all honor and glory; and unto
you his instruments, I yielde all hearty and humble thanks, both now and
evermore.

Oezima, co^^^^ded her discourse with a pair of kisses on the hands of the
^oble Princes: who receiving them very thankfully, ^^^ered her ^^ate
obedience. And hearing that the Estates ^re ar^ ^^ding at the Palace gate, to
awayte the Duchess, (...) her r^investment, in the government of the City;
the ^ll in have arose up from their enter coursinges: and the two Noble
Princes of France and Spain, taking the Duchess Oezima, by the little
hands, conducted her royally between them, in the company of the Duke of
Hybla her brother, into the Palace base court: where admitting the Citizens
unto her presence, she graciously with a smiling look and lovely gesture, A
gracious Nature.
proffered her bared hand unto them for the Bassient: who, with great shoutes
and clamours of gladness, rejoiced at the happy refruition of their wronged
Gouernesse. Herewith the Duchess mounted her Palfrey: whose trapping being of
a sad ash color velvet, hemmed about with twist of Goulde and Pearl, fitly
represented the terror of her heart, being as yet not thoroughly invested in
her authority: which, to be brief was with great solemnity yt very afternoon
performed; and with such royal and admirable manner effected, as the like,
neither before nor since that season, was never hitherto done, seen, or heard
of. But least we may seem, to far to have waded into this matter, we will
now leave these Siracusans in their iollity, and for a while treat of some
other story, which as yet we have left unperfected.

CHAP. 6.
How Oceander excited by the lamentable discourse of his foster-mother Kanira,
undertook to revenge her injuries done to her by the Tyrant Marcimodes, the
usurped King of Carthage: and how he valiantly assaulted and slew the Duke of
Thebes, younger brother to the Tyrant; and hung his carcass over the walls of
Castle Carzar, to the terror of his enemies.

FOrasmuch, as thou may peradventure (gentle peruser) desire to hear more of
the little Infant whom we left, safely delivered from the fury of the
waters, in the custodi^ of the Queen of Carthage, commended unto her, by her
brother Artimagus, we will now, a little break square with Decorum, and
(briefly ouer-passing all other occurrences) step boldly unto our Champion:
whose noble actions inflame me with such a fervent fury, as in post haste
(though absurdely) I approach, resolved to my power, to emblazon his heroycke
enterprises; which are so many and so wonderful, as without ye divine help of
the learned Muses, I shall never be able to declare his victories. But to be
short.

So soon, as twice nine Winters (which equaled so many Summers) had speedily
passed over the head of that orphanized Infant, and that he now was of the age
of Eyghteene years; he began to be so apt and towardly in each action, so
affably courteous to al people, and so gracious in his carriage toward his
familiars, as he not only won the love and liking of the Queen of
Carthage, but also gave her exceeding great hope, that only by his happy
means, she should be delivered from thraldom, and be at last thoroughly
revenged upon all her Enemies. Wherefore, Of procerous stature.
seeing him now to be of indifferent years to conceive of her offered wrong;
as also of sufficient stature (as being but 12. he exceeded in height the
tallest soldier in her garrison) to undertake the requital of so extreme an
injury; taking sit opportunity, while he was walking in ye Castle garden;
after many by-intreaties, to incite him to hearken unto her Tragic story,
and he having granted audience, she brake her mind, unto him after this sort.

The lamentable and tragical discourse of Kanira, touching the death of her
husband Aldrey, and her son Sigandes.
TWenty times (dear son) has the fruitful Goddess Ceres furnished the
naked earth with her hidden treasures, and so many times, has frosty-bearded
Hyems, with hibernall flowers, nipped down the flourishing tops of Lady Estas
fosterchildren, since the first time that I fell into misfortune, or saw the
decline of my glory, by the cruel tyranny of unmerciful Marcimodes; who, by
his insidious dealing and plotted treacheries, effected both my noble husband
Asdreyes, and my valiant son Sigandes tragedies.

For (after he had by his mighty power conquered all the best knights in these
quarters, and brought the greatest portion of the confines of Africa, The
insa^^able am^tion of Marci^^ede^.
under his subjection) his ambitious mind being never satisfied with
sufficiency, nor glutted with saciety; but still coveting the farther enlarging
of his dominions; caused him at length to affect the Carthaginian Crown, and
to desire the supreme government over so great a kingdom. Which he, knowing
the force of my husband, and by arms not daring to attempt, by a new devised
and unsuspected stratagem, in this wise effected.

He caused by the sea side, a huge theater of lime and stones so artificially
to be builded by most cunning workmen; as, it having but only one little
wicket to enter in at, seemed within to have an infinite number of fair
posternes, which being barred over with great iron plates, A stran^ stratag^
obumbred (from the sight of any stranger) the view of a number of great
pipes of lead, which dispersed themselves into every posterne so innumerably,
as being unstopped by the most cunning artifex, they would in a short time,
ouerflowe the whole compass of the Theater, and drown all, whatsoever was
therein contained.

This deceiptfull instrument, thus unhappily, by the great labor and toil of
most expert workmen, at last finished; Marcin^odes in most courteous and loving
manner, invited my Lord and husband Asd^ey unto that accursed Theater, to the
end to be hold the sundry fights of most strange beasts and t^rrible
monsters; Falsehood in fellowship.
whereof at that time he had provided a number, which were sent him from the
deserts of Arabia. With which his courteous embassage, my dear husband (enticed
to his destruction) repaired, accompanied with a royal troop of loyal
attendants, according to his promise, unto the forepointed place of the
beholding pastimes: into the circuit of whose fatal walls, being graciously
conducted by certain attendants of Marcimodes, they remained expecting the
performance of sundry promised pastimes. Which expectation was accordingly in a
moment satisfied, to their no small content, that least of all suspected any
following misfortune.

But when men think themselves most secure, then are they most subject to
danger: as it fell out with my dear Asdrey, and my suspectlesse countrymen.
For, in the very midst of their pleasures, when they were most intenciue to
their sports, the tyrant caused the leaden pipes to be opened by his
artificers: which spouting forth their streams all about the enco^passed
game-place, yielded no free room from the springing of their waters: which in
short while, swelling up as high as a man's chinne, gave the drenched
Carthagenians, a sufficient warning to seek shifts for their safeties. But
all was in vain: for out at the gates, they could not pass; by reason the
wicket was with water overwhelmed, and also so surely barred, as had Hercules
been in such a taking, his clubbe would have done him little service. What
then should they do? Get up the walls they might not: for, beside the danger
in climing, the Thebans with their warlike weapons so resisted the skalers, as
either armelesse, or headelesse, they sent them backwardes into the water. How
then should they save their lives? By a hard shift for they must either swim
or sink: and endure above water they could no longer, but until they were
weary: which (out of doubt) would be very quickly: for most of them already
had yielded up their ghostes, and with their heads dounewards, A woeful and
lamentable exigent.
bid adiewe to the world in the bottom of the water. In the mean while my
poor and loving Asdrey labored for his life; and being in a quandary, whither
he should sink or swim, was cheered up with this comfortable speech of
Marcimodes: Cold comfort.
Maintain thy weary life by swimming a little longer, O noble Carthaginian
king; and I shall fetch thee a sufficient supporter to hold thee up from
sinking. My innocent husband, though he was almost dead with ouer-labouring
himself in the water; yet hearing the Tyrant speak so gently, as well as he
could, he rendered him thanks for his unlooked for courtesy, and with all his
might, stayed his body against the side of the wall, expecting the coming of
the outrageous Tyrant: Sigandes beheaded.
who minding nothing but infidious cruelty, presently caused my sweet son
Sigandes, by his soldiers, before my husbands face to be beheaded. And then
taking the head in his hand, he called unto my distressed husband, saying;
Here, here, O king of Carthage, thou may perfectly behoulde the glass of
thy destruction: herewith he threw the head unto my dear Asdrey. Who for
grief he conceived by so sorrowful a sight, let go his houlde: and being
even at the midway betwixt life and death, he only brea^hed out these
speeches for a farewell: And is this (O Tyrant) the performance of thy plighted
promise? It might be sufficient to rid me from any further labor, replied
Marcimodes: But since you will needs challenge me of my promise, houlde take
this slaughtered carcass in steed of a logge to hold thee up from
destruction: And therewith his soldiers tossed ye headless body of my dear
son Sigandes into the water. Over ye which my noble Lord and husband (doing
ye exptations of a dear parent after ye death of his loving son) shed forth an
Ocean of pearled tears, and with his redoubled sighs, A sorrowful
intertaineme^t.
bedimming the air al about him, he made the very wild monsters which swam up
and down ye Theater to draw nigh him, and (in their manner) with mornful looks,
and doleful sighs and roares to make known, how deeply his sorrowful
shriekes had penetrated, into their unreasonable hearts; which proving more
pitiful than humane creatures, who stood obdurate at his miseries; most
straungely did relent at so great a punishment; into whose ears he dolefully
sighed forth these acclamations.

Asdreys imprecations for vengeance on Marcimodes treason.
High Jove, which fro thy throne do see my woe,
And sitting in thy seat celestial
Do by thy divine prescience foreknowe
Each deed of man that lives here below:
Look down unto this deed tiranicall:
Committed by conspiring Traitors skill,
Insidiously poor Innocents to spill:
Almighty King, and if it be thy will,
Before thy heavenly seat Judicial
Prepose this heinous fact done here below,
And in thy Justice, do requitance show
Unto the causer of our torments all;
Who traitorously has us betrayed so:
And subtelly infringing plighted faith,
Delivered us to this most cruel death.
But oh, that death had been the worst extreme;
And that our torments should have gone no further:
Then should we not have sung so sad a theme
Like dying swannes amids Meanders stream;
But chearily comforting each one the other,
We should have yealded up our wearied ghosts,
Unto the burning Acharontique coasts;
And undisturbed by a tirants boastes,
In quiet peace, unto thy coelique Realm,
Our innocent souls should flit; of worser murder
No whit affrighted, nor could think to deem
Men worse than senseless monsters for to seem,
Monstrous men, whom monsters exceed in pity.
And more obdurate, and from pity further,
As now they are. For beasts lament my greeuing;
But men look on, laugh, and yield no releeuing.
Therefore (O sacred, high Olimpique King)
Before thy heavenly throne maiesticall,
Condemn these tirannizers bestiall;
And do them forth to cruel judgment bring,
According to deserts in every thing:
And then shall I with thanks and praises meet,
Continually thy holy justice greet.
This said, he lovingly kissed whilome Sigandes breast, and clasping his
trembling arms about the breathless trunk, Asdrey drowned.
he gave himself down; and sinking with it to ye bottom of the water, he
there ended his woeful life together with a multitude of his most loyal
subjects: who seeing their Sovereign dead, and perceiving no remaining hope
of safety, desperately sunk themselves unto the bottom of the water. Which
doleful Tragedy of my dear husband so soon as the tyrant Marcimodes had
effected; he presently levied an army, and with ensign displayed, marched
toward my unprovided City of Carthage; which he son took, Carthage taken,
and Queen Kanira fled to her Castle Carzar.
and ouercomming my amazed and unarmed Soldiers, he enforced me with a few of
my most trusty Citizens, to fly for safety of our selves, unto this Castle of
Caezar; wherein I have already remained for the space of his twenty years,
without hope of any deliverance by any, but only your worthy valor, who are
chiefly preserved from ye rage of the merciless seas, for the preservation of
my Estate; and wonderfully outpointed by the secret and divine working hand of
Nature, for the sole regaining of my liberty, and reposing of my former
dignity in the city of Carthage: of whose happy fortune, and lucky effects
in this enterprise, it has been long ago fore-prophecied by my aged father
Artimedoro; who left unto me for his last will and testament, his only
precaution of my sorrows finishing. Herewith she drew from out her bosom, a
little square Table of Citterne wood, on the which was written in goulden
Characters these following presages.

Until betwixt two seas, by lucklesse chance
A sucking infant shall himself advance:
And, leaving in captivity his mother,
Shall safe arrive by cunning of thy brother.
Upon the shoares of Sunburned Barbary,
Marcimodes, with extreme tyranny,
Shall keep thee under stauish vassalage:
Yet, when that Sea-borne babe shall come to age,
By manlike force and worthy chiualry
He shall contend against his enemy:
And yer the Moon her course shall run, uneath:
He shall prove famous by the faitors death.
ARTEMEDORO.
Thus (dear son) thou see how my fortunes depend on thy forwardness, and
my chief comfort is soly comprised in thy chiualry. Say therefore, sweet
gentleman of the sea (for so he was there named) if in thy valor I may safely
repose my confidence, and by thy incomparable valiancy repossesse my kingdom?
Oceander, who was not a little tickled in the heart strings, that his valiant
proceedings were thus foreprophecied by so learned a Magitian as Artemedoro was
(glad also of such fit occasion to declare his good affection he had to do his
foster-mother any service) made no long pausing but presently rendered her this
comfortable answer.

Fair Madame, and my honorable mother, although my infant years forbids me
to be to bold, yet my good courage and the justness of your cause commands
me to abell all cowardly thoughts and putting on the armor of resolution in
trial of so manifest a quarrel, Oceanders virtuous eagerness to revenge the
treason of Marc^modea.
to dare manfully in arms to buckle with so fierce a tyrant, and to quell the
fury of so proud a presumer, so unjust usurper, and so unmerciful and
insidious a traitor. Cheer up your drouping soul therefore (dear Lady mother)
with this assurance, that on my fidelity both unto Gods and men, I shall never
be at rest, until I have cooled the courage of so wicked an oppressor; or else
(failing in my first attempt) left my carcass for a recompense of my bold
aduenturing; accounting always (according to the adage) that; It is the part
of worthy men,
In duty for to see,
That vicious and wicked wights
Justly corrected be.


Assure your self therefore (sweet Madame) of my aid, not only in this
action, but also in whatsoever enterprise else you shall willingly command me.

Kanira seeing his hardy resolution so well (yea beyond the hope of his
years) to fit her expectation; for very joy could not contain her self any
longer, but needs she must by her outward action demonstrate her inward
affection. Wherefore running unto him, and embracing him, after she had
sweetly kissed him, she said, O my dear son, now I see that my fathers
presage is true, concerning thy courage, and that the just judging heavens, in
mercy, have heard my plaintes and pitied my afflictions: to this did the Gods
send thee unto me, and to this end have I preserved thee, and hitherto thou
have given me sufficient hope of recovering my lost dignity, and
reinfranchising me from the tyranny of so vile and wicked an oppressor. Only
one thing as yet rests in trial to make up my wavering hope, a well assured
happiness (which if thou can not effect, I am resolved never more to expect
my deliverance) and that is this; After my father Artimedoro was dead, and
that he had resigned up his Cell and books of skill unto my brother
Artimagus, and his daughter Magartes; I entreated some strange effect of their
science to be framed for me; to the end, that thereby I might be the more
assertained of the person that should fulfill the prophecy. Wherefore, my
brother Artimagus with great study and labor endeavored to fulfill my
requests; and at length by his cunning, he fabricated a most strong and fair
well tempered shield; which he charmed so fast and sure, to the shoaring side
of a craggy rock, by his magical spelles and Nigromancy, as no knight (be he
never so strong) shall have the courage to approach it, by reason of an
infinity of invisible Furies, that withstand their endeauours; or having
approached it, can be able to pull it away; it is so firmly inchaunted. This
is the adventure, I would have you to attempt: of the which if you fail not in
your enterprise. I shall think me the most happy woman, and you the most
valiant and hardy Champion in this Southern Continent.

The forward gentleman of the Ocean, no sooner heard of this rare adventure,
Hazard exciteth the honorable.
of the inchaunted shield, but he presently burned with an ardent desire of
attempting so wonderful an enterprise. Wherefore, resolving his mother of his
will and courage that he had unto the trial, he concluded with her, as soon
as he could puruey him of weapons and armor, to go and courageously give the
aduenturing. Nay son (replied Kanira) if that be the worst, you shall soon
be provided for; and presently she caused a dwarf to buckle on his armor
(which she had hidden for that purpose in an arbor of the garden) and to
girde him with a trusty sword: which being performed, calling for their
Palfreies, they speedily mounted, and only attended on by the dwarf, They
journey ^o the rock of the enchan^ed shield.
and two other knights ( Lugonto and Piresty) they hastily took their journey
toward the rock of the inchaunted shield.

And as they were thus travailing onwardes, they espied a furlong before them,
a company of knights soldiers, who had gotten amongst them, the poor silly
fisherman Kalus, and were dragging him amongst them, into the neighboring
woods, Kalus reskew^d.
for to make him confess the estate of the Q. of Carthage, during her aboade
in the castle Carzar. Wherewith Oceander enraged, presently setting spurs to
his horse with his lance in his rest, Organio slain ^his knights ^ut to foil
^y Oceander, and Kaniras night.
he ruffled in so rudely among them, as making some for fear fly this way and
others that way, he leuelled his lance at the fairest, and by good hap he
hit Organio (the Duke of Athens, and brother unto Marcimodes) so sound a buffet
on ye helmet, as percing him clean through the beauer, into the face, he made
tumble over his horse croope, and measure his lubberly length on the dustie
earth: and then unsheathing his Curtelaxe, he laid about him so lustily, on
the helmes of his Enemies, as he wondered himself exceedingly of his furies
execution: for by this time, he had overcome, maimed, and slain outright,
five very valiant Knights and of some reputation. Which his havoc made of
the outraging Knights, so soon as Piresty saw, enraged with a worthy emulation
at ye young Gentleman of the Seas doings, he set spurs to his Palfrey; in great
fury he pricked forward unto the conflict, and after him Lugonto. Which two so
bravely behaved themselves in their assailing, as they sent a pair of their
foes to the ground; and with the self same Lances, they effected the second
encounter so valiantly, as each of them piercing quite through the brest-plates
of their oppone^ts, they quickly made the rest to take their heels; and
thereby, both freed themselves and the young Prince, from all further trouble
and contention.

But, for by this time Phoebus, the days cheerful directer, had taken his
decline unto the Western Ocean, and that the darkesome Night, with her sable
colored mantle, had ouer-spread the dusky Earth; the Q. of Carthage, with the
Gentleman of the Sea, and the rest, were enforced to frustrate their journey;
and for that season to return unto their Castle Carzar: so named for their
enforced endurance. Over the walls whereof, the next morning, having stuck ye
head on a bore spear, they hanged the dead carcass of Organio; to the great
terror of ye Thebans, his loving subjects, Organios body hung over the Castle
wall.
and the extreme grief of his brother Marcimodes: who vowed by maine force to
redeem his body from such shame of his insulting foes; or in hazarding the
attempt, to leave the bodies of his brauest soldiers, massacred in the ditches
of the Castle Carzar.

CHAP. 7.
How the Gentleman of the Sea, attempted the adventure of the enchaunced
Shield; which he atchiued: And how he was presented by a Dwarf, with a most
gorgeous inchaunted coate-armour, from the wise Artimagus; in the which he was
made Knight by Marcimodez, whose Nephew he combated: And how he left Marcimodez
and his Camp all in an vproare, for the death of Nigrasto his kinsman.

GReat was the joy and frolicking, that they of the Castle made, for the
victory of the young Gentleman of the Sea, over ye Thebans Duke, Organio (whom
they hung over the walls) which endured the whole nightime: Not only the
Queen her self, but also the rest of her loyal subjects, being greatly
assured by his first good proceedinges, that he would not only atchieue the
adventure of the shield, and redeem them from the tyranny of Marcimodez; but
also, if the Heavens granted him their Celestial favor, and divine auxil,
become the most heroyicke and valorous Champion in all the world.

But, as soon, as the blushing morning had brought assured tidings of the
approaching day, the noble Gentleman of the Sea (with a desirous mind of
finishing the adventure of the Inchaunted shield) arose out of his bed, Virtue
is impatient of delay.
and with all haste possible he shaped his way, toward his foster-mothers, the
Queen Raniraes, chamber: whom finding walking alone in a fair large gallerie,
very fairly hunge with right Tapistrie, he thus dutyfully saluted

My dear Mother, Gods grant you a happy day, and send you as pleasant a
downe-lying, as they have affoorded you an vnsorrowfull vprising. But Madame
what muse you on, thus early in the morning? Do you meditate of our following
adventure? or forethinke you of some future danger? Speak madame; but with
this Prouiso, that you do not gainsay my proposed proceedings; considering I
am resolved, either to loose my life, or bring away by force of arms, the
Inchaunted shield from ye Rocks of Africa.

Dear son (answered the Queen of Carthage) in this your resolute
determination, I do no whit dislyke your heroycke mind: But yet hereof I
assure you, yt you have mist your mark in so suddenly judging of my
cogitations. For I do not meditate upon any thing, but only walk here in my
gallerie, to drive away a little pernicious disease from me, which has sorely
troubled me all this morning, insomuch as I can scarcely refrain from
sleeping: For in deed I am so drowsily idle; as I should presently fall into a
slumber, if I should but sit still a little: But I know it would be very
sore against your mind, that I should any longer prolong our journey, to the
Rock of the inchaunted Shield. True madame (replies Oceander) and therefore I
beseech your Majesty, our Palfreyes to be brought forth. It shall be so
(answered the Queen) and therewith she caused the Horses to attend in the
Base court for them; when she with Oceander and Five or Six Knights more
(whose names were Lugonto, Piresty, Maruall, Gerardo, and Trosny) withal
speed possible departed to the Rock of the Inchaunted shield. But because the
tourney was somewhat long, and such extreme posting so exceeding painful,
and their accompanying would be tedious without conuersing; they agreed to
pass away the time with merry Stories; and that every one, according to his
turn, should deliver forth some pretty theme, for his following friend to
treat of. Purposes to deceive the weariness of their journey.
Content (quoth Oceander) and first of all, the Queen my mother shall propound
her question.

Agreed (replied the Queen) but then I must be exempted from telling my tale.
Be it so Madame, replied the Gentleman of the Sea, and on that condition, I
will begin; and therewithal he thus answered to his given question.

Whether, virtue or violence, is the stronger.
ALthough perhaps some man (whose insight might be more deep, and whose
wisdom and judgment be sounder to conceive more sharply of this matter the^
my self) might happily maintain violence to be the stronger, in regard it so
often (and almost ever) overthrows and ouerwhelmeth the vigor of Virtue; yet
not him which continually gives the foil: Virtue may be for a while dashed,
but not quite destroyed.
but him which longest endures, I account the victour. And although for a time
the beawtie of virtues forces be by violence ouershadowed, and in a manner
almost dashed, yet shall I needs judge virtue to be the stronger; since, even
in a moment, after so huge a tempest, her troubled sky being cleared of such
dark clouds of violence, Reuirescit vulnere virtus.
she at the last re-enioyeth a far more glorious splendor, and thereby with
speed overcomes her foe, and vnburdeneth her self of such violent
disgraces. And to the end, that thou shall not think, that with only my bare
words, I seek to prove it, I shall allege you a fitting example, of the
virtuous conquest of a bewteous Damsel, over the violent attemptes of wicked
iniurers.

The story of virtuous Ericlea, reported by Oceander.
IN the famous City Memphis (in former ancient time, the Metrapolis of the
Egyptian Monarchy) there governed as Vicegerent in place of the puissant King
Arcabanus, (who was departed into ye kingdom of Armenia, against Arsainez, to
revenge an injury) one Tantanez a worthy Knight, and of exceeding valor, and
reputation; who for his virtues was no less renowned, and for his Justice
honored, then any Memphian of what estate soever, within the Egyptique
territories: Notwithstanding as the wind cannot be always at one corner; nor
her horned Moon be all times in her waining; but the one must needs change,
and the other by the strict necessity of old antique Time, must decline unto
her wayning: So this unhappy Tantanez, could not for ever so observe a
moderation in his matters, but that at length he was convicted of injustice,
and his grave abearing found out at last to be turned into graceless
atte^ptings: For it was his (though most unlucky) chance one day as he was
going in progress, with great pomp and Majesty about the walls of Memphis,
to espy from out the chamber window, of a Knights house where he the^ reposed
himself, a most bewteous Lady (named Ericlea) to walk hand in hand, Tantanez
en flamed with Ericleas love
very lovingly with her husband Zarmez (a man whose deformity and ill favored
Vulcan like countenance, very ill befitted so fair and lovely a Venus) about
her Garden: with whose bewty he was suddenly so enflamed, as he could not be at
quiet, until such time as he had made known his passions unto her, by this
following Epistle, that he sent to her house by a most secret and trusty
messenger.

1
With pen in steed of pearled tears,
I do my passions paint;
Then ( Venus match) lend listening ears
Unto my sad complaint;
2
Complaint of my tormented heart,
Exhibited unto
Thy charming eyes, which work my smart,
And euer-during woe.
3
Therefore let graciousnesse proceed,
From vndisdainefull mind:
And what your beawty made to bleed,
Salve with your being kind,
4
Least fondly staying ouer-long,
From lending remedy,
I do complain of suffered wrong,
By double cruelty.
5
Seek not therefore (dear Dame) to cure
My sorrow with disdain,
Least that thereby thou do procure,
Unto thy self the pain.
6
For know if thou deny remorse,
Unto my kind entreates,
I will not woo; but i will enforce
Thee to my will, by threats.
7
Resolve thee therefore, and with speed,
What answer thou may make.
For I determined am, thy fruit
Of beauty for to take;
Or missing narrowly my mark,
To make the Tree to shake. Adieu.
He that may command, and yet
entreates thee, Tantanes.
ERiclea, poor Lady, having very well entertained the messenger of Ta^tanez
Letter, withdrew her self into her closet to peruse ye contents. Which so
soon as she had read, and thoroughly pondered ye meaning thereof in her
thoughts, and thinking verily that the Vicegerent writ it to no other purpose
but to try her honesty toward her husband Zamez; A wise determination.
whom (though none of the comelyest) she as dearly as her life affected; she
determined so to answer him, as if he meant in jest, he might know her
constancy: or if in earnest, he might thoroughly perceive her wife like
fidelity. Wherefore taking pen in hand, she answered him thus briefly.

Desist (dear Lord) to undermine the favor I do bear
Unto my husband; who^ I love, even the^ my self more dear:
And let not such polluted thoughts, once harbor in your mind,
As to request I false should be unto my Zames kind.
Were thou the mightiest amongst men, Artabanus himself,
Thou should not wrack my honesty upon dishonors shelfe.
A Lais, may a Lais play: but she that is a wife
(Like Lucrece, with her Collatine) should lead an honest life.
Therefore desist soliciting: but if it will not be,
Seek forth a Lais for thy lust, and not dishonest me.
She that scorneth thy threats,
Ericlea, the constant wife of Zames,

THis letter delivered to the messenger, who presented it unto the Vicegerent,
did so nippe the Memphian to the heart; as for grief falling sick, for a
great while he remained in great perplexity, for sorrow that he could not
obtain his hoped for favor at Ericleas hands, whom he so dearly loved. But
thinking that the cause of her refusal was, by reason that her husband was yet
living, he resolved with himself by some cunning stratagem, to make away
Zamez. And therefore he presently sent for him by an Herald to come unto the
Court. At whose summons he presently repaired unto Ta^tanez: Imbrobe Amor quid
non mortalia pectora cogis?
who causing certain knights of the post, hired with goulden coin, to accuse
him of high treason, against the Egyptian Majesty; without suffering him once
to answer or excuse himself, unjustly without any law or equity, he condemned
him to a most cruel death. Which being executed on him, Tantanez supposing he
could not now lightly miss of obtaining Ericlea, Zamez put to death.
betook himself once again to solicit his loves suites; not attempting any
more to win her to his lust, but wed her to his wife: And therefore with
purse and promises, he at once solicited her constant heart, and by all means
possible enticed her to yield to his affections.

But all in vain: for Ericlea still reserving the memory of her husband
Zamez death, freshly in her mind, and knowing, how by the most unjust dealing
of the Vicegerent Tantanez, he was against the order of law most rigorously
condemned and executed, determined utterly to refuse Tantanez offers, A
virtuous and honest resolution.
and rather to abide ye chaste widow of her first chose^ Zamez, then to be held
the changing concubine, or wretched (if she should be) wife of Tantanez.
Whereupon she not only denied his lustful suites, but firmly auowed if he
did ever again proffer her such an injury, either in word or writing; she
would not only be her own executioner, and by her death disappoint him of her
love; but also would by her acclamations, excite her friends and allied
kinsfolks to the reuengment of her husbands death, and her own wrong; to his
utter discredit and destruction.

All these absolute denials notwithstanding, Tantanes remained in his purpose
so resolute, as seeing he could not by fa^^e means, ^oue rejected and
despis^^n^ (...) to ^^^t.
he decermined by foul, to ouer-maister her reiections. Wherefore he sent for
her by certain Placeboes, who were the Pandors to his wicked lusts; and
having her before him he condemned her unjustly to be famished in a d^ngeon, at
the side of a great wood: where, for all his allurements and enticing words,
she remained, for the space of two days, ^^ricle^ con^emned and ^mprisoned.
free from any consent or thought of yielding to his wicked will; and so had
remained to her death, had not he (euerwhelmed in his last) the third day,
offered her violence, and by force attempted her chastities disparagement.

Which his wickedness she very illcontentedly brooking, se^ng by no other
means she could eschew dishonor, she determined to put her life in danger,
^mpatient vi^^ence repeled with in^omparable ^irtue.
rather then to yielde her bodies fruition to so manifest a ieopardy: and
therefore resolving her self of this remedy, she desired that before she
consented to this wicked intent, she might be suffered to meditate with her self
of her safest way of co^descending.

Which her request, Tantanez (little suspecting any stratagem) having granted,
the virtuous Lady arose up on her feet, and presently pacing unto a deep Well
of puddle water in the one side of the dungeon, standing upon the brinkes, she
said aloude unto the Vicegerent; Speak Vicegerent, whether shall Tantanes
leave his lust, or Ericlea her life?

Which words when Tantanez heard, and withal perceived to what end her
resolution tended, he presently fell down on his knees, and promising never
again to proffer her any violent wrong, with the tears in his eyes, he most
earnestly entreated her to desist from her so desperate enterprise; auowing,
never any more whilst he lived, to persist in his pretended purpose of her
surprisage, or once again so much as to harbor one ill meaning thought wtin
the secret closure of his pancing, penitent breast With which earnest spoken
words of reco^cileme^t, ye lady somewhat pleased, though not altogether pacified
for her husbands death, causing Ta^tanez to swear by the sacred deity of
celestial Jupiter, to forsake his intended villainy, ^hee removed from the
Well, and receiving humble thanks of the poor vicegerent, Ericlea delivered.
she was immediately s^t at freedom from imprisonment: and being returned home
unto her house she remained there quietly, without so much as once looking out
of her doors (for fear of the like surprisage) until cruel Atropos, having
shred her lives thread, gave a full period to her long-lasted languor. Thus
(dear mother) have you heard what I can answer unto your propounded question:
whereon if I have not sufficiently dilated, I beseech you save me checklesse,
by remembering my books are left at home, and that I am not come as a Scholar,
but a soldier to plead in arms before your majesty.

The Queen answered him very pleasantly again, some time reprehending him,
and some time rejoicing at his handsome saluing of his ignorante dispute, with
excuses and therewith she began to propound her second question, to Sir
Luganto; who excusing himself, by showing them the top of the rock of the
charmed shield, gave Kanira occasion to reprehend Oceander a little, for his
so long tarying in his related story, as also the rest to have a needful care
of both the Prince Oceander, and their own abilliments; to the end that when
they should attempt any dangerous adventure, they might not the sooner miscarry
by reason of some unlooked to miss, in their armor. In this like work they
busied themselves, until they might perfectly behold the stony rock glister
like the reflection of the Sun, all about the brims of the enchanted shield:
which ye gracious Carthaginian Gouernesse reputing as a sign of ye young
gentleman of the seas good fortune (goshopping her palfrey close unto him) she
thus began to assure him of good and happy finishing of his adventure:

O my most dear and loving foster-sonne, how happy may I think my self to
be, that have brought thee up with such care, from thy childhoode, and made
thee endosse on armor in thy young years; since to thy glory I see thy
actions to tend, and the very senseless things by the goodness of ye Gods, by
strange signs to prognosticate thy happy fortune. For to what other purpose
does the rock effuse so exceeding a splendor about the shield? but thereby to
manifest, how thy exceeding valiancy shall make thee wondersome, and thy
heroicke atchieuements shall make thy glory to illuminate the earth: as in a
summers day does the glorious rays of light-bringing Tytan, begild the
billows of the Ocean with his brightsome reflections. Fear not therefore,
noble gentleman of the Sea, to attempt, nay (by force of arms and thy well
boading fortune) to atchieue this strange adventure of this shield, which is
here (only for thy fame and honors increase) placed thus wonderfully, by most
cunning Inchauntments.

The forward young Prince, hearing his mothers comfortable excitements of him,
to undertake the performance of the enterprise, though he foreknewe it to be
somewhat difficult in atchieuing; yet with an undaunted stomach he determined
to hazard the adventure: and in this resolution setting spurs to his Palfrey,
he galloped a pase toward the rock, ^ceander vn^orsed by an ^uisible
op^onent.
determining in spite of his invisible resisters, on horseback to approach
the shield. But yet he came nigh it, by a metrodde he received so strong an
encounter from some unseen enemies lance, as with force of the pushe, he was
dispossessed of his saddle, and enforced whether he would or no, on foot to
try out the event of the adventure.

This notwithstanding, he was no whit at all abashed: but rather enraged at his
received fall, he leaped up lightly on his legggs again: and unsheathing his
good Curtelax (that for the approuednesse thereof was cleped Scindifer) he
mainly pressed on unto the rock, ^eatchieueth ^e adventure
and clapping his armed hand upon the shield (for all he received multitudes of
buffets on his gauntlet) by force he pulled it from the hard stone where it was
fastened; and clapping it before him, he supposed by the safeguard thereof, to
rush through the midst of the unseen defendants. But as he was so
indeauoring, he was thus staide by the sound of a voice, which proceeding from
the hollownesse of the rock, pronounced forth these words of comfort.

Perplex thy self no more, heroicke Prince,
To entertain thy vnresisting soes;
Whom by your valor you did erst convince.
For know that now wailing their overthrows,
They are inchaunted here by magic art,
Within this Rock to bide eternal sm^^t.
These verses drove such exceeding joy into the young Princes heart, as he
presently kneeled down upon his knees, and with great devotion, Nulli pietate
secundus.
he rendered thanks to the Gods, for that they had given so good success unto
his enterprise. Which his sudden gladness, so soon as Carthagininian Kanira
perceived, with the other six knights, she ran unto the young gentleman of
the Sea, and most kindly embracing, and kissing him, she gratefully rendered
him excess of thanks for his good atchieuement: which being thus happily
finished, with great joy and mirth, they mounted themselves (having before
alighted for the Bassient) and putting spurs to their Palfreys, they pased home
again withan indifferent celerity: and having forgotten to propound any more
questions, they counted it their propositum, to prattle only of the prince
Oceanders actions; which not only the knight, but the Queen herself; even
unto the very heavens, extolled with admiration.

Iourneying onwards in this sort toward their Castle in great iouisance, they
perceived a far off, a dwarf to approach toward them, A dwarf from
Artimagus.
leading a horse laden with very costly furniture for a warlike Champion:
which being of a new fair color very richly ennameled, and beautified with
diverse rocks of gould and siluery hew, interlaced here and there with sundry
sorts of Cristall scaled fishes, made such a fair show through ye pleits of a
loose Lawne (wherewith it was covered) as this troop of gallants were greatly
delighted with the beautifulness thereof. But so soon as the dwarf was come
something nigh unto them, he demanded, which of the^ was the young gentleman
of the Sea? Who being showed him, taking Oceander by the armed hand, and
kissing it, he in this wise saluted him from his master: Noble gentleman of
the Ocean, my Lord and master, the wise and learned Artimagus, knowing by his
art, of your noble finished enterprise of the inchaunted shield, and foreseing
by his cunning and skill in Nigromancy, the exceeding dangers, and inevitable
misfortunes, that you are hereafter to undergo, or hardly escape, has sent
you by me his servant, this rich coat armor (which by his magic art he
has so charmed, as it shall never fail you in the hottest conflicte) in token
of his firm friendship and love which he bears unto you, and as an
obligation to bind him as a most duetifull servant unto your Princely
safeguard.

Having ended his salute, he took down the armor from his hackney, and
uncovering it, gave it unto Oceander: who not a little joyful for being owner
of so gorgeous a piece of harness, Oceander presented with an inchaunted
coat armor from Artimagus.
rewarding the dwarf, sent him back with innumerable thanks to his master
Artimagus, for so rare a present: and causing himself presently to be
indossed with his inchaunted armor, he found it more fit for him then the
nine hide-folded Target for the vigorous arm of the invulnerable Greekish
Champion Achilles; and more gorgeous, then the Vulcan-framed armor of Aeneas,
fetched from the Cyclops forge by the Paphian Goddess Cytharea, when she
sought for her sons safeguarde (from the fury of Rutilian Turnus) fighting
for a kingdom, and his love Lauinia. Oceander being thus gorgeously armed in
the inchaunted harness, and stoutly advancing his shield (the device whereof
was the Neptunian kingdom) he praunced up and down before Queen Kanira,
being esteemed of his behoulders, to be the best accomplished gentleman in all
the territories of the Afrike continent.

But, by this time having sufficiently glutted their eyes with gazing on the
gorgeousness of the armor, Returned to the Castle they find diverse of their
knights wounded.
they once again set forward to the Castle: which, by the shutting in of the
evening, they entered; but alas, in an ill hour. For they no sooner came up
into the great hall, but they saw where eleven of their best knights were
sitting on their chaires, half dead with the dangerous wounds they had
lately received in a conflict, against the cruel Nigrestoe, Nephewe of ye
tyrant Marcimodes; who with a band of warlike Thebans, and Barbarians, had that
afternoon most furiously assaulted the Castle, Nigresto repriseth the body of
Organio, from the walls of Ca^zar.
and (wounding those knights) by force taken away from the walls, the dead
corpse of the treacherous Duke Organio, and carried it away unto Marcimodes; who
within a while avowes, for his brothers death, to take a more cruel and
sufficient reuengement.

The good Queen, hearing these sorrowful tidings, was exceedingly vexed;
insomuch as, sitting her down, she rested silent for a long while; for very
grief of heart not able to utter a word, and in that sort remained all the
other, both knights and gentlemen: But Oceander (whose stomach rather yearned
to wreake an injury, than wail a misfortune; coveting rather to cry quittance,
A noble mind makes misfortune a spur to virtue.
then to lament quite helples with his enemies) made Nigrastoes cruel dealing
an edge to revenge; and enraged wc the Thebans actions, in ye vehemence of his
anger, he plighted solemn promises, to requite Nigrastoe to the proof for his
so bold aduenturing: and therewith all he plotted forth a stratagem,
befitting to the night; and only made the Queen, and certain others of his
friends privy to his attempts; with only one dwarf named Trufidill. After his
repast taken, he departed from the Castle Carzar, and in the silence of the
pitchy night, he took his way speedily toward the sea side; where he rested
himself until the appearing of ye cheerful morning: whose due harbe^ger,
Lucifer, was no sooner mounted on the clouds, giving unfeigned notice of the
approperating day, but that this worthy Prince remounted his Palfrey, and from
the shore side directly travailed to the camp of Marcimodes (part whereof
being not able to be lodged within the city, was pitched, without the walls
of Carthage) where being admitted unto the presence of Marcimodes, he faining
himself (more truly then he thought) to be a Grecian; humbly requested his
orders of knighthoode at the tyrants hands, Oceander enters the camp of
Marcimodes.
to be given him. Marcimodes eying the young prince, and perceiving him to be
of an excellent feature, was very greatly delighted; and hoping thereby he
might win the Greek for his constant friend, taking his sword and striking
him three blows on the shield, he girded the knightly sword unto him, and
commanding him to rise sir knight, he schooled him to observe religiously and
loyally his orders of knighthoode: Oceander receives the honor of knighthoode
of Marcimodes.
and never but in a just quarrel to offer the combat unto any person.

School thy self tyrant with that lesson (quoth the gentlemyn of the Sea) and
teach not me those precepts, which thou thy self have dissoyally eschewed. For
assure thy self hereof Marcimodes; that I, only to correct such villainy and
injustice, have at this time taken upon me these knightly orders. Marcimodes
hearing the boulde (though true) speeches of the knight of the Sea, could in no
wise refrain from uttering his conceived anger by his hearts messenger.

Proud and indiscreet new made knight, how dare thou, being but even now
invested with the royal orders, once so presumptuously to vpbraid me with
disloyalty, who have (almost longer years, then thou have days) with my
sword, courageously maintained the honor of unstained knighthoode? Do but
stay a while (foolish hardy young springould) until I have but armed me; and
with my sword (to thy cost) I shall show thy dull capacity, how ill the insolent
words are befitting for thee.

Herewith, in a chafe, he went hastily into his tent to arm himself, thinking
in a moment to have made Oceander with his life to do penant satisfaction, for
his committed presu^ption. But he was deceived of his purpose, at that time, by
his Nephew Nigrasto; who, seeing the reproach that Marcimodes suffered, had
suddenly (and therefore slightly) armed himself, and came out unto Oceander
with a volley of threats, giving the watchword unto the combat.

By love, thou foolish strippling. I marvel how such foolishhardy audacity
could once enter into thy cowardly breast, Nig^asto.
as that thou should so much as dare to but behold a frown, much less
abide the fury of the most mighty Commander of all Africa? But since thy bold
presumption has drawn thee into so intricate a labyrinth of our displeasure:
by the heavens high Ruler, though I am nor my Lord Marcimodes; yet at my hands,
full dearly shall thou buy thy follies repentance. To which Oceander: Think
not Nigrastoe, that I am ignorant of thy name, or cursed conditions: But
letting this pass, know tyrant that I am destined to be thy death, and that
on my Lances point, as on the spear of Phtigian Hector, sits confusion to
my enemy; and dismal destruction to my despisers. Defend thee therefore; for
not thou, Oceander and Nigrasto encounter.
but I, am determined the assailant. And herewith they both set spurs to
their coursers, and encountered together with such a fierceness, as both their
Lances being shiuered in pieces, they provided them of fresh and stronger:
wherewith, returning to the second encounter, they crossed each others helmes
so rigorously, as Oceander was by the strength of his adversaries push,
enforced (in spite of his heart) to kiss his horse crouper. But Nigrastoe,
having his buckles of his helmet broken, by the fury of Oceanders affronting,
was deceived of his headpeece: and being cast out of his saddle (and yet loath
to leave his stirroppes) he hung backwardes at his horse heels: who, in
dragging him vy the feet along the fields, with his horned hooues, battered
his armor, so close unto his backeside and ribs; Nigrasto slain with his
horse heels.
as he soon made his weary soul with doleful groans and heartbreaking
sighs, to give his battered body a sorrowful farewell.

Which woeful Tragedy of Nigrastoe, when the knights of Thebes and Barbary
beheld, they cried to arms: and together by multitudes, even in a moment,
Tumult in the Camp.
getting them to their weapons, they clustered about the pauilion of their
General: and causing him to mount a mighty Bactrian Course, they furiously
pursued after the knight of the Sea, crying out, cursing, banning, and
outragiously exclaming upon Oceander: whom, calling the accursed new knight,
they wished might repasse home again with his life in safety. Thus rode the
traiterous frantic Thebans in a rage, after the knight of the Sea. Who (no
whit at all weighing their in vain spent curses, or bitter bannings) for the
safeguarde of his life, took his speediest way toward the Castle Carzar:
Oceander pursued by the Thebans, flies to the Castle, and is reskued by the
Carthaginians.
from the turrets whereof, being by the diligent watchmen a far off descryed;
he was presently reskued by twenty or thirty worthy knights; who coming
upon the spur unto his aid, encountered so courageously with the foremost of
the tyrants soldiers, as (sending at the least a score of Barbarians, and with
them Marcimodes, unto the earth) they made them by heaps, as fast to recoyle
unto their Camp, Marcimodes dismounted.
as they came by multitudes in pursuit unto the Castle; some of them for fear
hurting themselves, maiming their friends, and in such sort mischieuing their
companions; as more miscarried in their fearful flight, then fell by the
irresistable fury of their opposing adversaries. Which unlooked for foil,
when the tyrant Marcimodes perceived; he remained half in an ecstasy at his
misfortunes; exclaming against heaven, cursing earth, and blaspheming the name
of his Gods; Tyranny and impiety are still consociats.
in such irreligious sort, as he fully demonstrated himself to be as he was;
a Barbarous miscreant and a Godless Infidel. But yet at last (having already
given his rage sufficient scope) he somewhat pacified himself with full hope
of revenge. And therewith, causing the dead bodies of Nigrasto and Organio,
with solemn ceremonies (according to the custom) to be burned, he disolued
their ashes into little barrels of wine; whereof he every morning drank an
hearty draught, A strange cerimony of Sepulture most commonly used in many
places in the old time.
coveting to make his body their sepultures; whose weight and bones, the earth
and fire he judged unworthy to carry or consume. To which his proud
superstitiousnesse, we will for this time leave him, to proceed more forward
with our abruptly finished history of the knight of the Tigre, and the worthy
Grecian Prince, Olbiocles.

CHAP. 8.
Of the Knight of the Tygars arrival at the Hermits cell: and the comfort the
old Father yielded him by the relation of his own misfortunes: howbeit
notwithstanding, Troglader enraged with commemoration of his own wickedness,
with his own hands ended his life in the Hermites grove; and how the Prince
Olbiocles, finding his dead carcass, delivered it unto the Hermit to be
interred: of whom he received directions concerning his enquest.

Having with disgrace (as you have heard) in such unexpected manner, received
a due recompense for his villainies, at the hands of his most hated Enemy
Olbiocles: the vanquished Knight of the Tygar, with all might and maine
travailed from the Castle of the Round Island, Troglador enters into the
grove of Calander.
four or five days journey into the farther part of the Island: where he
entered into a large and a thick set grove, very pleasantly decked here and
there, with Dates, Oranges, and Olive trees; which rendered so odoriferous a
savor, as he was not only refreshed, but also exceedingly delighted with so
delicate objects; insomuch, as in his conceit he deemed it the sole Paradise of
Siluanus; who had planted those fragrant arbours, for the pleasant recreating
of his beawtious Clarian; or the silent grove of Calisto, wherein enamoured
Jupiter, in likeness of a woodnymph, did dally with her. In so great an
amazement, did he stand gazing on their quiuering branches, as at length an
extreme desire excited him to enter into the bowels of the wood; to see if
peradventure he might encounter with any courteous passenger, that of his mere
compassion, would charitably accept of him, for his companion. And herewith,
because the way was but only a small track of footmen, thorough the thick
set Bushes (whose narrowness was impassable for any trauailer on horseback) he
presently dismou^ted; and vnbridling his Palfrey, he turned him loose unto the
pastures; and on foot took his way toward the midst of the Grove; not of
a long while hearing or seeing any one, of whom he might receive but even the
common comfort; until about that time the days illustrator had in his goulden
chariot, fully mounted unto the toppoinct of the Zodiac. At what time, he
perceived coming from the East side of the wood, an old age wearted man, The
good he^mi^e Calander.
clad after a homely yet a comely) fashion, with a white long beard reaching
downward unto his girdle. at the buckles whereof hung a leatherne Scrip, a
book, and an holland handkerchiefe: wherewith, ouer-laboured with gathering
windfallen rotten boughs, he wiped the sweat from off his wrinkled forehead:
which was as proud of those trickling small drops, as the Pactolian sand-hills
of their most precious glistering Pearls, there left and forsaken of the
ebbing billows of the bubbling waters. To whom, the wandering Knight giving ye
time of the day, as courteously as his sorrows could afford him, the grave
Hermit in this courteous manner greeted.

His kind salutations to Troglador.
Welcome young Prince (for so I do suppose thee)
Unto this silent unfrequented grove:
Where after weary toil, you may repose ye,
In quiet hermitage, which here above
I builded have of mudde and straw compacted,
Suffitient enough to keep him free,
From showring rain and tempest, that extracted
From worlds abuses, willingly would be;
And from the restless and disturbing rage,
Of earthly wightes pernicious perturbations:
Stately in ough, for my declining age;
Who only do desire, in meditations
Of high Jehovah, and his sacred law,
The small remainder of my life to spend.
Which since to death I see so near to draw,
I nourish chatily to godly end.
In which my poor, simple, vndecked Cell
(Such one as Baucis, with Philemon had)
And if with me you shall vouchsafe to dwell,
I shall be of your company more glad,
Then can a Father be of his dear Son,
After he has him many years forgonne.
This welcome was uttered in such affectionate sort by ye good old Hermit; as
the Knight of the Tygar, perpending with himself, in what security, he might
there safely remain free from any pursuing Enemies, with that godly father; he
accepted willingly of his courteous offer, and rendering him thanks for his
adiument in such a time of tribulation, he went along with him to the solitary
Cell; He arriueth at the Hermitage.
in the way at full relating unto the Hermit, the whole history of his
misfortunes, from point to point as you have already heard it. Which ended, the
auntie^t Separiste, co^forting him up with an Exordium of good counsel, at last
wishing thoroughly his welfare; by declaring his own mischaunces, he went
about to exhort him to bear his miseries with patience, in hope of some better
following happiness,

(...) his relation of mishappes.
AT what time the mighty Emperor of Moscouia (named by reason of his virtues
and stayed government Basileon) waged intestine wars against the powerful
Corlordine of Caspia, I was not only in favor, Man's imbecilitie, to admire
great states, because they are gre^, not because they are virtuous.
but also in a firm conjoined bond of amity with my Sovereign: whose
gracious looks I accounted more worth then the world, and whose committed
secrecies, I retained with more inviolable affection, then my very soul.
Insomuch as if he smiled, I was joyful: if frowned, I accounted my self
ioylesse and unfortunate. For in his looks lay my life, and in his blithesome
brows my blessedness: so as I thought nothing good, but what he did: no
religion true, but what he embraced: nor no man happy, but whom he most
favored: All is not gold that glistreth.
so far did my affection lead my fancy, to esteem him above all earthly, and
honored him above the heavenly governors. But all Rivers bear not Tagus
goulden sands: neither was he whom I so adored, A fair face may hide foul
falsehood.
endued with the heavenly virtues (that I supposed) for any long continuance:
but making friendship, a visage for his villanye, he sought by such secret
means to effect my tragedy. The reason this; yt exceeding fame of my most
dear wives beawtye (for none was more beawtifull then my Albinoe) being by
pick thanks Pandors buzzed in his itching ears, he was so enflamed with her
features (as his lust suffering no longer stay) he presently sent a messenger
unto me, to declare by word of mouth, as also by his Majesty's Letters, his
Highness affection to Albinoe. The one I heard, the other I read: and the
Nuntio I courteously received, rewarded honorably, and humbly returned unto
his Master, with most wished tydinges of my consenting: who herein, without
making my poor Albinoe acquainted, sent her presently most honorably
attended, with a troop of my trustiest servant, to the Moscan Court,
Friendship abused.
to satisfy the unnatural beastly lust of the lascivious Tyrant: But seeing her
sad countenance at her departure, as she was mounting up into her coach, I
sought to comfort her with this kind farewell. Albinoe, my dear Albinoe,
cheer up thy drooping thoughts, affrighted with thy sudden departure unto
our Sovereign (for unto him it is I send thee) since thou thy self do know
and I can also assure thee, of his exceeding virtue: as thou need neither
doubt, nor I fear any following misfortune. God almighty grant it (quoth
she) but my soul is affrighted with the presage of some ensuing danger. All
must sort out as it pleased God and our King (quoth I) and herewithall
committed the innocent Lamb to the fury of the devouring Woolfe: Albinoe sent
un to Basileon.
who quickly made his pray of her unspotted honesty; without either regard of
her honor or exclamations. Which being done, he sent home again vntome, the
hapless wife of an unhappy husband: Returned to Calande.
rather repressing, the^ revenging my poor wives wrong on ye lascivious Tygre,
who abused my friendship by his filthiness; and distained my loyal love, with
the dregs of defiling lust: who was not contented by making me the Pandor to
his pleasure, Lust turned to loathing.
to rob me of my right; but also within a while, beginning to loath the thing
that he erst so earnestly loved, he sought my dearest wives confusion; and by
her death, my lives destruction: which in so cunning a sort he endeavored to
have effected, as neither by his look or gesture, could of any of us, be
either of my wife or me, (poor souls) once so much as suspected.

For having in a manner reconciled himself, by his feigned submission, both
with my wife and me, Ex ficta amicitia, Impudetia ex Impude^tia, livido: ex
libidine
he earnestly invited us unto a banquet, in a little pauilion, which he had
pitched by the side of a broad and swift running river: where welcoming us
very courteously, he entertained us with dainty cates to please the taste, rare
obiectes to inchaunte our eyes, and most sweet sounding Music to delight our
senses: insomuch as we thought our selves happy, to have so gracious a
Sovereign, and judged our chances fortun^ (...) enjoying so familiar a
friend. But long this our excel (...) joy lasted not: for his wicked lust,
having erst l^^^^ unto lewdness, brought his conscience to sorro^ (...)
committed villainy; yet not with repentance, but with ^uenge, seeking to blot
out his faults remembrance: Insomuch as now minding to manifest his malice, he,
under a feigned show of kindness, drank a Cleopatraes draught unto Albinoe;
and in delivering the boawle unto her, he touched the brims thereof with so
strong a poulder, as my wife no sooner tasted thereof, but she fell down
breathing; out, poylo^^ by Basileon.
together with her life, this sorrowful farewell.

Unkind, ingrate, cruel Basileon,
A former injury thus to requite.
Had thou no subject else to work upon,
But only me, poor miserable wighte?
What if thou had or not? Hereof assured
Be, that I joy in this my death procured.
In that I know remembrance of the shame,
That thou have wrought to me unhappy woman,
Shall here on earth commaculate thy fame,
And thee accounted make a Beast, no man:
And after death, my soul shall daily cry
To Saturns son, to venge thy tyranny.
AS soon as she had ended her speech and was dead, the cruel vnremorsefull
Tyrant Basilion arose from his seat, and with his fauchon struck of her neck.
Which, in such violent sort disseuered, left a bubbling fountain of bloody
goare between ye headless shoulders. Which sight made me exceeding sad: so as
I could not choose, but, with the tears in my eyes casting sorrowful glaunces
upon so dismal a spectacle, cry out (without either regard or fear of the
tyrants fury) Oh Albinoe, my dear Albinoe, how deeply thy heads smart
penetrateth into my loyal heart, let ye tears ^^sse the faithful messengers
of my miseries. Herewith ^ooke up my dear Ladies head, and causing her body to
be ^^ried in the sandy shoares, I was about to depart into the (...) ^os^o,
there with full determination to manifest my ^^^^ued injuries before the
Muscouian estates: whose justice I knew to be such as would quickly have
severely punished so great wickedness. But Basilion, jealous of my pretense,
sent after me, a band of his trusty servants; who, with their weapons
compassing me about made my heart astonished at that the^, which I afterward
most earnestly desired: and brining me unto Basilion, they made me in spite of
my heart, to swear unfeignedly, never hereafter whilst I lived to disclose
the committed murder: Unheard of barbarousnes.
but rather in a new made bond of friendship, to plight my self obliged to
his cruel Tyranny. Which I did: and thereupon license was given me, to depart
home. Where for a long season I remained secret, not daring to see; much less
to speak with any body. But only in the night season I would oft-times take my
walk unto the Sea side, where my dear Albinoe lay buried: where taking her
goulden haired head, from forth of a little coffin (wherein I had placed it) in
spite of my teeth, my thoughts Ambassador would utter forth my souls
extreamities.

Head.
O world of woes, wherein I once delighted;
Fair fashioned head, of naught but sorrows matter
Cala^ders lamentations over the head of his dear Albinoe.
Compacted, framed cunningly, condighted
By Natures self only the world to flatter;
With fruitless hope of thy fruition,
Which in a moment was begun and done.
Done in a moment may I rightly say:
For to thy cheeks, fair cheeks of yuorie hew, Cheeks.

Thy bewty was but joined for to betray
Thy souls dear gemme: which lost, ne'rs got anew.
For by th'attractiue vigor of thy beawtie,
He did obey, to pay a duelesse duty.
He did obey. Ah had he not obayed,
Then had I lived secure, careless vnscorned;
Which by his wicked lust, being now betrayed,
Am loue-rob'd, life-reau'd, hopeless, hap-forlorned:
And all by him, whom I to much believed,
Wicked etc. but ho; blab not his name though grieved.
Oh had he had remorse, or manlike pity,
He would not have enuenom'd those with poison, Lipp^.

From out betwixt whose ruby closet pretty,
He sucked with delight, his fancies foyson:
Which singing his souls music never misses,
But whilst he descanted on them with kisses.
But ruby those are pale, and her fair tapors,
Which like to Luna, heavens illuminated, Eyes.

Are dulled now by death, like Nilean Papors:
Whose force, and vigor, by the floods abated,
Do droope their hea dsnd circle to the ground:
Even so did lust these Lamps of light confound.
These Lamps of light confound; whose glorious shine
Would Jove himself, from Juno have enticed,
Are now become dull, iellied, not bright eyne,
Because their lights foundation being sliced,
The builded Architecture needs must fall,
Which then is worse then never built at all.
Thus this poor head, with cheeks and lips, and eyes,
Sliced, beawtylesse, pale, iellied, decays, dies,
And I (poor soul) in tears, do wish that never,
They had been so, not to continue ever.
IN this sort would I many times lament over the breathless body of my poor
Albinoe, with whom my joys, pleasure, liberty, and life, were in a manner
ended, thwarted, disturbed, and almost finished: wherewith, I, for so long a
time and so many nights, spent my self; as almost ouerwearied with such
extreme watching, I chanced to lay me down on the sandy grave of my
deceased wife, to take some sense-refreshing nap. Where I no sooner slumbred,
but there appeared before me the pale Ghost of my Albinoe, in such hideous and
horrible sort dismembered, Albinoes ghost appears to Cala^der.
as I rather thought it but my dreaming fancy then some true vision of any
risen body; until such time as I heard her with a soft hollow voice, to utter
forth these sighing lamentatio^s: which with so lively, though lamentable,
action she out-breathed, as my foolish fancy almost mistoke her to be living.

Unhappy wight, why do thou thus lament,
Over the body of thy wife in vain,
With dimmed eyes, and cheeks with tears besprent?
Since I (for whom alone thou do complain)
Am reaued of my simple sepulture,
Which thou (poor Calander with sorrows rent)
Amids the bowels of this sandy plain,
Did for thy slain Albino^ procure.
For know, no sooner had the sable Night,
Thrice with her hellish darkness ouerspread
The glorious splendour of Olympos light,
And thrice to Limbo, her black mantles led,
But that the Moscan Prorex, in a rage,
At such my simple burial took spite:
And taking from my grave my carcass dead,
Against it he cruelly new war did wage.
And in his fury, with his brandisht sword,
Worse then barbarous and beastly cruelty of Basileon.
Tyrannously he did my body spoil.
For why? therewith having my stomach gored,
With filthie-clotted blood he did defoyle
My stiffened limbs, which long death ouerspred:
Then with his curtleax (in sort abhord)
He all my carcass thus dismembered,
And all the joints did in a Cauldron boil.
And Lo, he means in far more cruel wise
(Erst as he has done unto me thy wife)
Over thy self yer long to tyrannize.
Wherefore some other place from tyrants strife,
Enquire thou forth; where thou in safety
May evermore remain. Therefore arise,
And swiftlier then the air, shift for thy life;
Least by thy stay thou breed thy misery:
But now farewell; I must to Elizye.
She no sooner ended her tale, but she presently vanished, leaving me (poor
soul) half distracted from my senses, for grief of my poor Albinoes
anguishe: insomuch, as the very vexation of my heart, caused my eyes to open;
and being broken out of my slumber, I pondered with my self of the wonderful
appearance of my dear wife: whose admonition of flight so peplexed me, as I
presently (finding indeed her body to be vngraued) resolved of my journey
into some other country. Whereupon, leaping into a boat which was fast floating
at the shore, I betook my self to the sea; never determining either to row
with the Oar, or turn to land for provision, until such time, as by the
course of the waters, I should be cast on land at some unknown and alien
kingdom: when having in that purpose resolutely a certain space continued, I
was at length, through the mercy of the pitying heavens, surged on the Coasts
of this same Island; wherein, erecting this poor simple Hermitage, I have for
these forty winters (thanks be to God) to my contentment, in quiet remained.
Thus (gentle Prince) have you heard my miseries, and seen the salve of my
misfortunes: which if with patience you shall willingly follow, no doubt but it
shall prove to your bodies ease and your souls eternal contentation.

The knight of the Tygre, hearing Kalanders relation, rather grew to be more
perplexed then pacified, with his remembrance of his miserable estate:
Troglador ^espaireth.
and the more the good old father desired his safety, the more Troglador
despaired of salvation. And therefore, as despair is the mother of damnation:
so his hopeless, restless, and tormented thoughts leading him to destruction,
he presently rushed out of the Hermites Cell, and entering a furlong or
thereabouts into the wood; with his dagger he ingraued upon the bark of an
Olive tree, whereon he hanged himself, these verses following.

Troglador ^ayeth violent ^ands on his ^wne life.
Black sin, oreloading my tormented soul,
With sad remembrance of my faults committed,
Enforces me, my wickednesses foul
Firmly to fear, never to be remitted:
In which distrust, this Olive I prepare
(...) devilish life, desperate ^eath.
To show the signal of my dire despair.
The godly hermit, for all his have he made to prevent this mischief, came to
late to provide a medicine for Trogladors miserable mischaunce. For, before he
could once find him out and have a sight of him, he was stark dead, his
lips black, his countenance cold, and his members stiff, and his lifelesse
body already cut down, by the Prince Olbiocles: ^lbiocles
who after all the good entertainements given him at Acconumboes castle (where
he instituted the good knight Aradinus governor) had followed in pursuit
after ye knight of the Tigre; and even at his last gasp, hanging on the Olive
tree, found him.

The Grecian prince was exceeding sorry, though not that Troglador was dead,
yet because of his hands (by reason of his self caused death) he escaped
unpunished. But seeing there was now no other remedy, he determined to suffer
his ghost to pass quietly over the Stigian Lake: and therefore with his dagger
(as well as he could) he endeavored to dig forth a sepulture. But perceiving
old Calander, with all might and maine, to approach him, he relinquished his
endeavor; and delivering the dead body of the knight of the Tygre, to the
Hermit (who in that place buried him) also having related unto him, his
undertaken charge for finding out of the surprised Grecian princesses, he
received from his aged mouth, these cunning directions, concerning his enquest.

My son, my son (quoth he) though sorrow makes me
Vnwontedly to tremble, and amazed
To stand, with both my mind and body crazed; Calanders predictions (...)
Olbiocles h^ following fo^tunes.

Yet shall I in mine Art not much mistake thee:
But by my knowledge gotten long ago,
I shall to thee some following chances show.
Listen therefore unto the words I speak,
And in thy heart imprint my declaration.
For why? those wonders unto thee I break,
That all the world shall have in admiration;
And only by thy woeful hapn'd chance,
Thou shall the fame of worthy knights advance.
For yet thou shall find out the gemme of Greece,
(Which is detained upon the Aegypticke shoares)
Thou shall thy bodies outward feature leese:
And in the forest among stif-bristled Boares, In the 14. Chapter.

Thou shall go grunting, grinding of thy tushes,
Making thy cabbinet amongst the bushes.
Twice seven years in such a monstrous shape
Thou shall remain, estranged from thy self,
Till by thy help thy son shall safe escape
From danger of of thy Sirtes, and sandy shelfe;
Who shall by chiualry the spells undo,
Of hellish hagge, that thee transmuted so.
Then shall thou joy, and then remember this:
But long your friendship with him shall not last.
For in the midst of your pleasures bliss,
Your joy unto annoy shall be displaste.
For him you shall in Ocean drowned misdeeme,
And to an Eagle you shall changed seem. ^n the 17. Chapter.

Out of which misery, by maidens hand
You shall be straungely set at liberty:
With whom, you shall depart to Afric land;
Where you shall see, amids her misery,
Your Lady freed, the captiuer dismaide,
By courage of strange knight, and English maid.
Then shall you joy, then shall you live in peace,
Within the bowels of your country Greece;
Until some worser fortune do befall you,
Which shall unto far greater mischife hall you:
Yet courage, gentle Prince: for through your grief,
You shall receive new pleasure, and relief.
Herewith the Hermit ceased, and Olbiocles rendering him hearty thanks for his
directions (by reason that by this time the fiery chariot horses of the Sun,
ouerwearied with their long labor, had drenched themselves in the western
Ocean, for the refreshing of their sweating members) departed with old
Kalander to his hermitage; where we will for this time leave him to his rest a
while, to return again to our Afric Champion Oceander: whose manlike heart
burned within the enclosure of his breast, with the ardent desire he had to
revenge the Queen Ramiras injury, upon that usurping and cruel tyrant
Marcimodes; who, all this while fretting with fury for his Nephew Nigrastoes
overthrow, has solemnly sworn by his great God Termagaunt, utterly to
ruinate that same pelting Castle of the Carthaginian runnagates.

CHAP. IX.
The assault of Marcimodes against the castle of the Queen; and of the cruel
combat between him and the young knight of the Sea: and how Marcimodes by
treason caught him captive; and was redeemed by the valor of a strange knight
of the five swords; by whose help Oceander slew Marcimodes, and ouerthrewe
all his army.

INflamed as yet with the extreme injury offered unto his foster-mother, the
gracious Queen of Carthage, the noble knight of the Sea could not choose, but
continually be devising and contriuing for the new complots, to wreake more
sufficient reuengement on the knight of the Round orbs (for such was the devise
in the shield of the tyrant.) wherefore, so soon as the days guidresse,
Oceanders preparation against Marcimodes.
Aurora, had the next morning appeared, he armed himself in his inchaunted
armor; and with the residue of the Carthaginian Champions, which bare true
loyalty toward their Sovereign, he prepared himself to depart toward the
pauilions of Marcimodes. But as he was in egresse from the Castle, he was
given to understand (by the watchmen from the battlements) of the assured and
present approach of the tyrant to the assaulting of the Castle; Marcimode^
marches to assault the Castle.
with such a mighty troop of soldiers, as they seemed in multitude to pass
the stars, and in number almost equal to the sands of the Sea. Wherefore
the baser sort of soldiers, at so unexpected an infinity of enemies, stood
amazed; and their courage failing them, they wauered betwixt hope and fear, to
whether side they should betake themselves. Which the valorous knight of the
Sea perceiving; like a good Captain, in this sort he cheared up the hearts of
his drouping soldiers.

O ye noble and courageous Carthaginians, my mates in arms, and worthy
followers; what cause has so cracked your credits? and what auke occasion has
thus cooled your undaunted courages? What is it at a rabble of tyrannizing
robbers, Oceanders oration to the dismayed Carthaginians.
that you are amazed? and is it at the sight of a few base and cowardly carpet
knights that you are in this unwonted sort troubled? O my friends, if so it
be; depell that fearful faintheartednesse, and trusting in the justness of
your quarrel, cry Canira for Carthage; and with your swords points write
your angry lessons courageously on the breast of your Barbarian enemies, in
blo^dy Characters; that either by death or victory, you may be renowned
through all following posterity; who shall Chronicle up your conquestes in
leaves of molten brass, with this title; Behold the men that dyed for
Countries good. Courage therefore brave competitors: and since Marcimodes is
come to fore us at our Castle gates, let us give him so hot a welcome, as he
shall but ill fauouredly brag of his entertainment.

The drouping hearts of the Carthaginians were so cheared with these
comfortable exhortations, as they presently with one accord cried out; The
justice of our quarrel for good Queen Kanira and Carthage: and therewithal
they fiercely assailed their approaching enemies: with whom they so valiantly
contended, The armies join.
as of a great while it could scarcely be judged to which side the victory
would incline: until, at last oppressed with multitude, their assailing in
every place without the warlike order, ye Carthaginians were in spite of their
teethes (yea though their General did admirable acts of Chiualry) enforced to
retire with shame into their Castle: The Carthaginians are ^eat back. The
Barbari^ns enter the Castle.
where, maugre their valiant resistance, the stout Barbarians entered, together
with them, in at the gates. Which caused such exceeding courage in Marcimodes;
as, not staying to enter with his soldiers, he caused ladders to be set
against the wall. Whereby mounting up to the battlements with his Theban
Champions, he had made it a bloody day to the Car^haginians; had he not been
the sooner espied by the knight of the Sea: who like a valiant Captain, being
vigilant to help all places, trauersed up and down the Castle, here aiding
and there succouring his distressed followers: and at length, perceiving his
dangerous enemy on the Battlements (who with his sword stood menacing
destruction) he speedily passed unto Marcimodes; and with his courtleaxe gave
him so sound a welcome, Oceander encountereth Marcimodes.
as had he not the better defended himself with his steel tempered shield,
he had at that time received a sufficient guerdon for all his cruelties.

But Oceander gained nothing by this bargain. For Marcimodes courageously
brandishing his fauchone about his head, he rendered the knight of the Sea so
sound an answer upon the crest of his helmet; as had he not caught the surer
houldefast upon the stones, he had gone nigh to have staggered off from the
battlements.

Yet recovering himself, Marcimodes tumbleth himself and Oceander down from
the wall.
he so furiously prepared his good sword Scindifer, for his requitance; as
Marcimodes loath to abide the doubtful fury of his descending blow, cast away
his weapons: and grappling close with Oceander, or ever he was aware or able
to prevent any such mischief, he cast both himself and his adversary down
headlong amongst his soldiers; with a loud voice calling unto them; Here,
here, O my worthy followers, here lies the enemy of all your happiness,
enclosed in the steely arms of your noble General, like conquered Hector
yielded to the ouermatching might of the warlike Ithacan. Hither therefore
bend your forces, valiantly to bereave him of liberty, who has against the
royal order of his Knighthoode, offered unto our lineage such heinous
injuries. Now therefore be you all thoroughly revenged of so public and
notorious a disturbing enemy.

The knights and soldiers hearing the exclaimes of their Theban General,
with an vndiscreat fury they circled themselves round about the worthy Greek:
who unable of so many to resist the forces, was feign (whether he would or no)
to yield himself to the fury of his enemies. For, Oceander taken captive by
the oppressing multitude, and led bound to Marcimodes pauilion.
although his armor was so excellent and of so fine a temper, as it could in
no wise be perced; yet he being but young, and his synewes not fully
strenghthened, and also engriped by the iron arms of his adversary
Marcimodes, could not choose but in a moment be oppressed by so huge a
multitude of unmerciful soldiers; who had neither pity nor compassion over
his youth or valiancie: who having in this wise caught him captive, with great
showtes, in tryumphant wise (with his hands bound, and his feet tied under the
horses belly like a base slave) they departed with him toward their pauilions:
where, what they would have done unto him, the latter end of this chapter shall
make manif^st.

Sorrowful state: the Carthaginians wholly dismaide.
But to return to the Castle; such shreekes, such cries, such clamours and
lamentations were there, as neither the Queen Kanira herself neither any of
her worthy Carthaginians could once lift up their eyes to the heavens, neither
cast a cheerful look on the earth; but with weeping and howling penetrating
the skies, they went up and down the Castle, striking their griefe-wounded
breasts with their fistes, ^he arrival of Medion, the valorous knight of the
five swords.
in such merciless manner, as they manifestly declared the little hope they
had of his recovery, or their own safety. And the worthy Gouernesse had fully
decreed to give over her life and interest in the kingdom of Carthage; had
she not been recomforted by the approach of a (strange) most fair
proportioned knight, all in black armor, with the device of the five swords:
who enquiring for the knight of the Sea, and being given to understand of his
enthralment, dashed his gauntlet on his head and therewith pointed to the
declyning Sun; in token that he vowed yet the same were set, either to leave
his life, or gain captiued Oceanders liberty. Wherewith, setting spurs to his
Pegasian Palfrey, and beckening to the Carthaginia^s for to follow him, he
galloped as fast as his horse could carry him toward the tents of the tyrant.
Where he was no sooner arrived, but he might perceive how busily the merciless
Barbarians were gathered in a cluster, Place of excecutio^ prepared for
Oceander.
to erect up an huge iron stake, whereon to torture their gotten Captive
Oceander: who, as yet having no understanding of the true God, sat lamentably
bewayling his miserable misfortune. To whom, the Knight of the five Swords
drawing near, he heard him on this wise to lament his mischaunces.

O most wretched and miserable Caytife, how unhappy a wretch art thou, even in
the April of thy aduauncements, Ocea^ders lamentation.
to to be thus disastrously crossed by disaduentures? Had not thou strength
when thou were assailed? did thy arm fail thee in the Combat? or did thy
armor deceive thee in the conflict? None of these: for my strength was fresh
my arm strong, and my armor vnperceable. Then why did thou not eff ct thy
thoughts affecting? or, because thou faylest, why do thou not banne thy
strength, curse thy arm, and blame thy armor. O no: they did their duties,
and only ill foresight and wicked fortune, has brought me to this mischief:
on whom (remediless) I must complain in the midd^st of my anguish, and at my
latter gasp only think my self wronged by her fickle deity: whose
furrowing frowns, I never once hope to see rechaunged into a fair calmed
countenance. Farewell therefore dear foster-mother my gracious Sovereign,
and your loyal succourers: for never again shall I reuise you, in perfect
mirth and iollitie. But dear friends, of this I would to the Gods you were
assured; that nothing does half so much torment my troubled soul, as that I
shall in this sort suffer death like a towardly caytife, and cannot coragiously
give up my life amongst the freely weapons of my compassion wanting Enemies.
Median cutteth Ocea^ders carde^
Herewith he offered to have knapped the cords wherewith he was bound, in
su^der. Which ye Knight of the five swords seeing, with his Courtleax he sliced
the bands; and, giving the enthralled Knights hands unexpected liberty, he
snatched a Lance from a stout Barbarian, and delivering it to Oceander, he
said:Now noble Knight take here what thou have so earnestly desired, and
courageously fight for thy liberty, and behold me here before thee; who will
rather loose my life, then not regaine thy freedom.

Oceander set free.
The good Knight taking the Lance in his hand, and joyfully kissing it, said:
welcome, O unexpected author of my liberty: now shall the traitors know, how
dearly they shall abie for my enthralment. And therwithall he gave the
Barbarian that was next him, so sound a buffet on the breast plate; as he made
him with tears of blood, to lament his so suddenly happened misfortune: the
like did he the second, and a third; the valiant Knight of the five swords,
continually equalling him in his actions. They make a massacre amongst the
Barbarians.
And herewith pressing unto the rabblement of vnsuspecting Thebans and
Barbarians, they rushed in among them so roughly, as neither of them both, but
had borne down in a moment six of their armed adversaries. Which the rest of
the remaining route perceiving, they suddenly encompassed them about, and with
their semiters so fiercely laid at the Champions (who were now weaponlesse,
except their Curtleaxes) as had not speedy rescue come suddenly from the
Castle Carzar, under the leading of ye five worthy Knights Lugonto, Piresty,
Maruall, Gerardo, and Trosney, they had in less then an hours conflict,
macerated both Oceander and the other knight, into a thowsande pieces.

A supply of Carthaginia^s from the Castle.
But now Oceanders side, being thoroughly relieved by this fresh supply of
soldiers, began greatly to triumph over the almost conquered Barbarians: who
like sheep before devouring Leopardes, fled for their lives from ye fury of
their following foes; who pursued the victory so hotly, as they made them in
heaps to fly for safety to the tents of Marcimodez, Thebans fly.
who being at his wits end for anger of so unexpected an overthrow, banned the
heavens, the earth, and his Goddess fortune, for working of his so sudden
misery. And in a rage buckling on his helmet, and taking a mighty lance in
his hand, he caused his soldiers to return again unto ye battle:
Marcimodez encountreth Oceander.
and espying the ringleaders of his enemies, he fewtered his spear; and
meeting enraged Oceander for his opponent, he smote him so strong a blow upon
the cuirace, as loosing both his stirrops, he was feign to embrace his
horsnecke, to save himself from falling: But quite scotfree notwithstanding
Marcidomez not escaped. For, besides yt he was wounded with the Knight of the
Seas Lance in the right shoulder, he was enforced by the fury of the
encounter, Marcimodez unhorsed.
to forsake his saddle, and as well as he could to save himself from hurt in
the falling. But enfired with the foil, he nimbly raised his wounded corpse
from the ground, and vnshcathing his fawchon, he thus angerly threatened his
contending enemy.

Alight, alight, thou disloyal and traitorous Knight, and on foot with me
try out the event of the battle, or else, by the divine Majesty of the Gods
I do swear, I shall slaye thy skipping Palfrey, and in my fury wreake the
extremest revenge I can against thee. Come therefore, and, an if thou can,
either leave thy own wretched, or bereave me of my wished life.

Now by the honor of Knighthood (answered the Knight of the Sea) thou shall
not die so fair a death Marcimodez. For neither do thy villainies deserve a
better, neither shall I do thee wrong in giving to thee a far worser. Now
therefore prepare thy self to die: for under my horses hooues will I trample
thy accursed carcass. Marcimodez trodden to death, by Ocea^ders horsemen.
And therewith he and his following soldiers trotted over him: who yielded up
his miserable life among the horse-heeles of his mightiest adversaries; who
rejoiced to hear the bitter groans that his heart dolefully breathed, from
the bottom of his bruised body. Which his overthrow when his amazed soldiers
saw, they fearfully betoke themselves to flight, shamefully leaving ye late
vanquished Carthaginia^s victors in the field. Who, having gathered together
the most precious spoil of the battle, most joyfully returned with their new
obtained victory, to their expecting friend in ye impregnable castle Carzar.

CHAP. X.
How Oceander departed from Carthage with the Knight stranger, to the Castle
of Briarostez: where he conquered the Giant, and dissolved the inchauntment of
the Sorceresse Mardigua; whereby he recovered the valiant young Prince Ptoladine
to his senses, and finished the adventure of the fountain; and what thereof
followed.

KAnira, the good Queen of Carthage, not a little ioyed at the happy recovered
freedom of her beloved foster-sonne, the Knight of the Sea: and therefore
rendered she exeeeding thanks, to the valiant Knight of the five swords, for
his happy adiument in so dangerous an enterprise. But the strange Knight,
knowing that it was more for his own profit then for hers, that Oceander was
so adventured for, in this sort answered.

Indeed gracious Madame, partly thorough my help he obtained the refruition of
his freedom: yet I assure your Majesty, that if his valor had been no more
tha^ mine, we might both of us perchance have bought our liberty with the
loss of our lives: and also it stood not only on my life, but also on my
dearest Cosens for whose cause I came to implore his valiancy) that he should be
thus luckily delivered. Wherefore, you are not behoulding unto me (dear
madame) but unto my Lord the Knight of the Sea; who, by his valorous actions,
is thus in an happy hour returned home to both our comforts. It seems then
(quoth the Queen, speaking very sadly) by your speech sir, that my son should,
within this little while, depart from me to the accomplishment of some
adventure. True Madame, replied ye knight. Unhappy woman as I am (then said
she) why have I thus ouer-liued my good fortunes? And then shed^ing a flood of
pearled tears, which in two small rivers ran from her eyelids, she most
ea^nestly entreated the strange Knight, at that time for to pardon her young
(and as it were newborn) foster son. But, seeing his impossibility of
condescending, yet (quoth she) since there is no other remedy but yt I must
needs forgo him, let my grieved mind be satisfied with the relation of so
desperate an adventure, as by necessity co^pels him, so suddenly to forsake us.
But, since ye tables are covered, we will omit it until after supper: betwixt
the which and bedtyme, I hope we shall have suff^cient leisure to give an
attentive auskult unto your history.

Wherewith, taking Oceander in one hand, and ye Knight of the five swords in
the other, she placed her self unto the table. When having sufficiently taken
their repast of most delicate provision, cloth being taken away, and their
night ma^tles put about their shoulders; the Queen, and her company,
diligently attended to the Knight of the five swords his pronounced history.

A declaration of Ptoladines misfortunes.
THere bordereth upon the East side of this Co^tinent of Africa, the famous and
fertile Kingdom of Nilewatered Egypt: over whose spacious and large limited
territories, at what time the mighty Alcaazo governed as Soulda^, there was a
most cunning Nigromancer named Cturidan: who having by his inchauntments
builded a most impregnable Castle, little or nothing cared, either to pill,
rob, or spoil any of his Majesty's most loyal subjects: yea, The tyranny of
the inchaunter Cturidan.
and dared sometimes, to proceed even unto the Metrapolis of Egypt, and
beseige the Soulda^, even within the walls of his royal City Cayery:
insomuch as all the subjects and commonaltie, unable to abide the inchaunters
so violent incursions, withdrew both themselves, their wives and children, as
also their goods, cattle, and whole substance, into the chiefest and strongest
Towns and Cities near adjoining. Whereby, Alcaazo makes peace with him.
all the Country being abandoned and left desolate of inhabitants (by whose
wants did follow diverse calamities) the Souldan Alcaazo was feign (after many
a foughten batt^ile, to no advantage) by making fair promises, and sending
right rich presents, to buy a composition at the hands of Cturidan. Who for a
pretty season remained a faithful performer of his promised bargain, until
such time, as by the wished consent of the parents, Ptolodine the only son
of the King of Mesopotamia, Ptoladine prince of Mesopotamia espouseth the
Egiptian Princess Ciafa.
was matched in the bonds of matrimony to the sole daughter of Alcaazo named
Giafa. At whose solemn concelebrated nuptials (all the estates of both the
Kingdoms being assembled, tylts and turneyes proclaimed, and all other
princely pleasures whatsoever, both royally and sumptuously performed) amongst
the rest that were thither assembled, the inchaunter Cturidan, with a great
troop of his attendants, repaired unto Cayry to solemnize that day of
feasting. When princely delicates being placed b^f^re him, and change of
outlandish wines filled out to him in glistering gobblets of Ophir gold, he
drank so many du^c^t draughts with Antony, as with him his senses being
^uer-drenched, (...) vnseem^y dalliance with Ciafa.
he fell to dallying with Prince Ptoladines, fair Cl^opatra, in such unseemly
manner, as the King of Mesopotamia (who sat next unto him) seeing his
misdemeanour, began to take him up after this order.

Do not deceive thy self Inchaunter (quoth he) by mistaking this bride for
Hipodamia: for assure your self, if so you counterfeit Lycus, here is a
Perithous in this company, that will play a revenger of thy villainies.

Cturidan, enraged at these speeches, being unable for anger to utter any
answer, swelling with wrath, and in his soul yearning to be revenged, gnashed
his teeth together; and with so strong an inchauntment he ouercast the face of
the bright-some heavens with a mighty darkness, Maridomir transported by
encha^tment, unto Cturidans Castle.
as no one was able to discern his friend, but only Maridomir; who, mounted on
the back of a charmed Dragon, was speedily transported through the air, into
places as yet never heard of.

No sooner were the heavens cleared of their darkesome clouds, and an
accustomed passage opened to the transple^dent rays of Tytan, but the estates
missed the K. of Mesopotamia: and the Prince Ptoladine (who had heard the
entercoursing of his father with the Nigromancer) assuring himself of
Cturadines vilanies, drawing out his Semitar, he doubled his blows so fast
upon the head of the cursed Inchaunter, as had he not all the better helped
himself by his Magic art, he might peradventure have but a little missed of
leaving his life behind him. And yet he escaped not altogether scotfree: for he
had received one wound so deeply into his braine-pan, Cturidan mortally
wounded by Paladine.
as being returned home unto his inchaunted Castle, he laid him on a soft bed
of down: and perceiving the same for to be mortal, and that he could not live
any longer season, he called unto him his nephewe Briarostez, a most terrible
Giant, and committing unto him and his old mother Mardigua (together with the
charge of the inchaunted Castle) an express commandment, either by force or
sorceries, to revenge his death, on the whole house of Ptoladine, he suffered
his cursed soul to depart out of his filthy carcass: He dye^^.
which (entertained with terrible cracks of thunder and lightning) was
transported in a sulphury superficies, unto ye burning bank of Phlegeton
prepared for such damned sorcerers.

Cturidans body was no sooner bereaved of his essential vigor, but that his
furyous nephewe Briarostez began set up his bristles, and threaten destruction to
the Egypticke and Mesopotamian territories; vowing with fire and sword,
Briarostez wastes the Kingdom of Egypt and Mesopotamia.
to make that desolate, that had made his haughty spirit so disconsolate. And
therefore he both privily and openly attempted to revenge himself of the young
Prince Ptoladine, and his beawtious spouse fair C^afa. Which his affecting,
Briarostez at length effecting, he surprised all (except the Princess Cyafa,
who, aided by my Lord the wise Artimagus, is hidden in the fiery cave of
Egypt) and carrying them all captive to his Castle, Ptoladine, Alcaazo etc.
surprised and imprisoned by Briarostez.
he there afflicts the^ with unknown tortures; whilst the baser sort of
Egyptians and Mesopotamia^s do lead their weary lives at rando^, hartlesse,
helpless, and hopeless, by reason of their detained worthy governors; of
whose upright and just ruling, it may well be verified.

Old time shall neuermore such kings bewray,
Their scepters with like justice for to sway.
Thus the Knight of the five swords having finished his story, with exceeding
earnestness craved the Queens consent to the Knight of the seas journey:
which (though with some unwillingness (at last being co^disce^ded, they arose
from ye tables: and taking their leaves of one another, by the grooms of the
chambers they were conducted unto their lodginges; where they rested all night
in such great quietness, as either could be thought, or wished for.

On the morrow, by that time Triton the shrill trumpettor to ye Sea-gods, had
lowdly sounded his Hunts up to ye Oceans inhabitants, the knight of the five
swords forsook his idle couch; and bethinking him of speedy dispatch for his
journey, he dismounted the marble stayres of his lodging, and entering into the
castle Hall, he attended the coming of the Knight of the Sea. Who, being
conducted thither by his mother ye gracious Queen of Carthage, was with tears
presently delivered unto the society of the Knight stranger. Who very heartily
thanking the Queen for her granted favor, Oceander and Medion emba^ke for
Egypt.
immediately departed from the Castle Carzar. And at the havens mouth of
Carthage, going a shipborde, they betook themselves to the the favor of the
winds. By whose pleasant gales they in short time, slyced through the billows
of the Mare Mediterraneum; and to their great comfort, happily arrived on the
shoares of Egypt: when, putting in at ye Westermost branch of the River Nylus,
Nylus.
they bare along the banks thereof, until they came to surge right under
the foot of an high declining mountain. Whereunto ascending, they espied a
league from the shore, The Castle of Briarostez.
a most beawtifull and strong castle: whose foundation being drawn by
Inchauntmentes out of the hardest rocky substance, seemed to the eyes of the
beholders, to be vnco^querable. Which also was in so strange a sort situated,
as not only the neighbor Regions, bordering the mountain it self, A goodly
prospect.
but also the farthest confines of the kingdom lay openly subject to the
prospect thereof. Which was so pleasureable, as if ever any Paradise was framed
by the hands of cunning Artificers, for the delighting of some mighty Princes,
then surely this same, excelled: with which neither ye Piramidez for height,
neither Babylon for bigness, neither the Memphian Temple of the Egiptia^
Goddess Isis, do once deserve to be compared. For besides the goodlynesse of
the building it self, the whole vertice of the Mountain was so adorned with
sundry sorts of fruitful Orchards, such an infinite number of sweet smelling
Gardens, through the midst of whose bowels streamed fair cristall riuerets
(which watered ye borders) and such unheard of diuersified plenty of al things,
as it was admirable to behold, and almost incredible to be reported. All which
things were in such exquisite order placed, as ye whole top of ye adorned
mountain seemed more like an artificial heaven, then any earthly building.

Wherewith Oceander was so delighted, as (had not the knight of the five
swords with the more earnestness urged him to the finishing of his journey)
he could have willingly remained in perspection, till the approaching of the
evening: so exceedingly was he amazed at the so cunning workmanshippe. But
being rouzed from his dumpes, he proceeded in his journey, until he came
unto a great drawe-bridge of the Castle; which, being let down by reason of a
certain messenger which was sent to inform the Giant Briarostes (who was then
on hunting) of the approach of the two Champions, they speedily entered: They
arrive at the Castle.
and being come unto the gate, they might perceive the picture of a most
terrible and monstrous giant most artificially carved out of the hard marble:
on whose brazen shield (which he seemed to behold with a most stern
countenance) they saw written in bloody characters, these following verses.

Be not too bold, foolehardy passenger, Ridiculum terriculame^ tum: et vanu^

For to adventure thy approaching hither;
Least by my dreadful angers messenger,
Thou wishest to have turned some other whether;
When thou shall see thy wisdom come to late
After thou have incurd my heavy hate:
Which once commote, with instruments of death,
It will inflict thy ouerweakned coarse:
And then in vain thou shall dispend thy breath,
To beg some kind compassion, and remorse;
Which at my hands thou never shall obtain
Til liuelesse thou shall conquered remain.
After which conquest gained by my might,
When as thy body is of life dispoyld,
The carrion Crows shall for thy carcass fight.
By whose flesh-renting bills thy limbs tormoyld,
Shall after that withouten sepulture,
Naked and fleshlesse on the fields endure.
Therefore be warned whilst thou may in time,
By him, which loathes to meddle with such gnats,
By spending of his vigor; which divine
Is counted for so many fierce combats,
And overthrows, which I to men of might
Have heretofore given in single fight.
Five times, five knights, within less than a year,
I have fordonne, and cast unto the ground,
And half so many monsters fierce, welneare,
By knight ly cheuisance I did confound:
Which lying live less on the dusty earth,
Pronounce me, Fortune-fauored, from my birth.
Therefore desist from this thine enterprise:
For whosoever does attempt it, surely dies.
BRIAROSTES.
Now in faith (quoth Oceander with a great laughter) this same burley piece of
man's flesh brags well: and if there came no better then I hither, in sooth they
should praise his scarbugge faculty; and yet in despite of his threatenings, I
remain here to try the event of this enterprise. What a devil, does he think
men of valor to be so foolish, as upon his bare menaces, and the setting forth
of his painted picture, so suddenly to terrify their senses? Now by the high
Gods of Carthage; I do verily auowe, that I shall never in my heart, joy
hereafter, if I cannot cool the courage of this boasting beast, Briarostes.
And therewith, taking the pommel of his sword, he bounced at the steely bars
of the gate so soundly, as he made all the Castle therewith ring again: and
then looking up toward ye battlements, he espied where the wicked witch
Mardigua, sat lasciuiously playing and dallying with the sense-reaued young
prince Ptoladine; ^ardigua.
who amorously entertained whatsoever loue-trickes she offered. Whereat the
knight of the Sea enraged, he said: Ah, thou wicked and lascivious woman;
shamest thou not with thy whordome, to abuse so noble a young gentleman? And
the^ turning his speech to Ptoladine, O worthy and noble offspring of the
Mesopotamian Prorex, in time call to thy remembrance, the miseries that thou
art moyled in and enraged, with the pernicious enticements of that subtle
sorceresse: give her a just recompense for her deserving. But seeing, how for
all his speeches, neither Mardigua, They which are quite drowned in vice and
sensuality, are endeafened to the good advice of the virtuous.
nor Ptoladine once glaunced their eyes upon them, or seemed to regard his
speeches; but rather to be the more pleasant and sportiue; he turned his face
from the^, and leaning upon ye rail of ye bridge, he there rested himself,
expecting ye coming of the furious giant Briarostes. Who by this time, having
heard the true report of the speady messe^ger, in a rage clapped up his beuer,
and casting his bewgle horn at his back, with his boarespeare in his hand, with
all his might and maine, he galloped home unto the Castle: where seeing the
two knights attending his arrival, before he spoke unto them, he thus began
to fall on chiding with Mardigua.

How comes it to pass (my honour-vnminding Aunt) that by the little regard
thou have unto my credit, thou have suffered the damned wretches, to enter so
near unto my Castle (whether never as yet, the best Champions durst approach)
without condign punishment for their aduenturing? And then turning him to the
knights (whose courages were never by words daunted) he thus shook them up
with this evil language (which proceeding out of a cancred breast, must needs
effuse a very crabbed salute)

O ye wretched death-seeking men, what fury has incensed your foolish
fancies, thus audaciously to attempt the indaungering of my dignity? at whose
feet, both the lives of you, and al other Egyptian Champions, are
submissiuely humiliated: Briarostes to Oceander and Medion.
in whose hands both your weal, woe, pain and pleasure is so surely engaged,
as with the bending of my frowning brow I could work your wretchedness, and
with the furious outbreathing from mine angry spleen, I could overthrow and
consume you.

What? have ye lead your lives at too much ease, and lived so pleasantly free
from the burdenous yoke of my afflictions; as now, growing careless of any
farther continuing consolation, you do dare the trial of his strength, whose
halfe-pitche vigor shall ouerwaigh your too weak bodies, to destructions

If so it be, proceed to your peril: but if, as wandering passengers, you have
in the midst of your journey gone astray unto this Castle, we willingly (of
courtesy, though not of custom) permit you to depart hence, to the
perfecting of your painful pilgrimage. Having thus ended, he sternely looked
on the two valorous knights, expecting their answer: which, with resolution,
was in this sort uttered by Oceander.

Think not Briarostes, that our coming to this thy Castle was by hap or
chance, Ocea^ders answer to Briarostes.
as waiefaring travelers, which in their need seek to relieve their
necessities at some neighboring hamlets. For know, that we are no painful
pilgrims, but honour-prizing Princes; into whose ears the true report of thy
horrible villainies being sounded, has caused us in this sort of set purpose to
approach this thy fortress: in arms to let thee understand of the extreme
wrongs thou have offered unto most mighty Potentates: and therefore we crave
at thy hands, restitution of injuries; or thou denying (utterly refusing thy
proffered pity, and scorning thy presumptions) we defy thee to the combat;
hoping yer the decline of Climenes Parramour, The giant defied to ^he co^bat.
to give thee the just recompense of an inhumane and butcherly tyrant.

Briarostes (having as yet never heretofore found any one that durst so bouldly
vpbraid him with his villanyes) was so angered at the heart with the knight of
the Sea; as, without bidding him beware, he flang his boare-speare so strongly
at him, as had he not all the nimbler leaped from his station, he had been
peppered for his presuming. Which (as God would) missing him, smote so deep
into an oaken post of the gate (which was ouercouered with iron bars) that
they might well perceive the devilish giants force was admirable. For, almost
four hand fulles, he had hidden the iron head, within the thickness of the
wooden propper, which was riuen even from the bottom, by the force of the
entering.

Which Oceander well weighing, he determined, as little as he could to hazard
himself to the Giants irresistable outward fury; and therefore, as soon as he
could, resolved to close with him. Where, although he received some small
disadvantage, he knew he could not greatly be harmed, by reason of the
goodness of his armor: which being impenetrable, could never be bruised by ye
crushing of his enemy: when praying the help of the knight of the five
swords, in his extremity, he unsheathed his good curtlear, and bearing his
inchau^ted shield before him, he courageously pased toward the giant: who as
furiously with his brandished fauchon with out-breathed threatenings advanced
himself as fast forward to meet him. Who incountred with Oceande^ so
fiercely, as he made him surely to understand the great power and strength that
lay enclosed within the sinews of his boisterous brawnie arms.

For, The comba^
with his fauchon he so lashed on the helmet of ye young Champion, as had not
the inchauntment stood him yt more in steed, for all his nimble auoidings, he
had in a moment been heawed into as small pieces as flesh to ye pot. And yet, I
believe, the giant had but small cause to boast of his winnings. For, being but
slightly armed, only with a single Corslet, Briarostes wounded.
as one who little fore-suspected any such adventure he was wounded so deeply
on the thighs, and under the left side, as by the great effusion of his blood
from out those wide gashes he was so weakened, as (perceiving he could not long
continue the combat) he determined at one blow to make an end of the conflict.
And therefore, casting down his shield, with his fauchon in both his hands, he
let fall so mi^^tie a blow on the shield of his adversary; as therewith
battering it unto his helmet, he made the worthy Greek, in spite of his teeth
to bend his knees and do him reverence.

But the courageous knight of the Sea, recovering again upon his feet, and
seeing that to endure any more such di^elish buffets, was but to hasten himself
to destruction, he resolved a through requital for the giants fury. And
therefore, flourishing his sword, Sc^ndifer, about his head, he lent such a
maine blow (with interest) upon the armed shoulder of Briarostes; as (paring
both harness and flesh, s^eare from the bone of his sword hand) he made him
humbly at his feet, to beg compassion at the hands of the valiant
vanquisher: vowing and earnestly promising never any more to use his tyranny:
Briarostes yields himself to Oceander.
but to live his humble and obedient servant in all vassailage, whenever he
should command him.

Oceander rejoicing at the calmed courage of the giant, gently took him from
the ground: Courtesy matched with courage.
and kindly embracing him in his arms, auowed, yt if he loyally performed his
promises, not only not to accept him as his vassaile: but also, lovingly to
receive him for his most constant friend Wherewith Briarostes was so
exceedingly well pleased, as for very joy the tears brast out of his eyes;
and in a sweet ecstasy, he manifested the great delight he conceived, by ye
Princes courtesy: and therewith commanding the gates to be opened, entered
with the two knights strangers into the Castleyarde: wherethrough they had
scarcely passed, but that wicked sorceresse Mardigna having raised all her
servants in armor, came marching toward the knight of the Sea shooting, and
casting arrows stones, borespeares, iauelins, and darts; so fast and furiously
against him, as it seamed for a while, that the heavens had rained them down
upon them: so thick they fell upon the armours of the Champions. Who enraged
with her villainy had made a bloody massacre of her soldiers had not Briarostes
(whom favor had won to frie^dship) upon pain of his displeasure, commanded
his servants to desist their enterprise: and then (being entreated by the
princes) Briarostes safely conducted them up into Mardiguas tower: They ascend
Mardiguas ^nchaunted Tower.
where they ascending up into the highest gallery, espied at the farther door
thereof the young Prince Ptoladine, dallying amongst a number of maiden
Musitions with a glorious Coronet of glistering pearls ouerpearching his
goulden lokes: which circling about the ridges seemed to the beholders to be in
love with the precious abilliment: which was so cunningly enchaunted by the
sorceries of Mardigna, as so long as the head was therewith engirte, ye wearers
brains were so distempered, as presently forgetting all former accidents,
^toladines ^rowne.
he should only betake himself to the dallying with beautiful damozels:
which made Ptoladine to give no regard unto the approaching knights: but,
having his mind still plodding on his pleasures, to stand still as one in a
trance: whose mind was ravished, and whose senses robbed, by sweet melodious
sound of the eare-delighting mufique of the delicate maidens. Whose sweet
warbled lullabyes entermixed cunningly with their instruments delectable
sounding, would have made any effeminate creature, to have adjudged it the
Olimpian melody that was consorted by the learned Parnassian Muses, at the
joyful overthrow of lascivious Venus, by their sovereign Gouernesse
Tritonia. True reason refuses to give ear unto the rauishing allurements of
voluptous Sirens.
Whereat, ye courageous knights were almost at the first amazed; but remembering
themselves of what they came for they ran unto the maidens, and wt^h their
swords shredding a^onder the string of their instruments, made them to cease
their Syren-like music: which was no sooner performed, but they suddenly
vanished away: and the sense-reaued prince Ptoladine, for anger of their
actions, fell in a swoune. But being revived by the knights diligent help, he
tare his hair, and in a rage he ran out at a back door, down into the Tower
garden, in his frantique resolution, determining in an inchaunted Well to
defend himself (as he had been well fore-lessoned by the wicked sorceresse)
from the sight of his pursuers. But with such exceeding celeritie was he
followed by the valorous knights, as yer he could effect his action, Oceander
took hold fast on the skirts of his doublet: by the which he vpheld him
strongly, until with the Mesopotamians struggling, ye seame of the skirt
rending, Ptoladine plungeth himself into the Well.
he suddenly plundged unto the bottom of the water; lea^ing both Oceander and
the good knight of the five swords, in a pitiful taking, for the worthy
young gentleman. Wherefore, with tears standing in their eyes they poared
down into the fountain, which seeming bottomless quite extinguished their
hope of ever attaining the young Princes safety.

Whilst in this sort they dolefully powered forth their lamentacions over the
fountain, they perceived about the brimmes thereof, these verses of comfort
following, by some cunning Artificer to be characterized.

Courageous knight that do the conquest gain
Over the cruel keeper of this tower;
By cunning skill I do demonstrate plain,
That, till th'inchaunted crown, by manly power
Be taken from the sence-reau'd princes head,
This towers inchauntments are unfinished.
Therefore proceed: if this thy valor winnes,
Thou shall behold strange and unthought of things.
The knight of the Sea, with great admiration, read these verses: and
perceiving how in the getting of the Crownet, consisted fini^^ing of the
inchauntment, he valiantly resolved to cast himself headlong into the
fountain. Oceander takes the inchaunted crown off, from Ptoladines head.
Which his determination he so speedily executed, as having taken off ye
charmed Coronet (after some striving) from the Princes head, in a moment the
Castle sunk, and all the rest of the fair Orchards, sweete-smelling Gardens,
and christalline Fountains on a sudden vanished: only he saw Ptoladine,
Briarostes himself, The inchau^tment dissolved.
and the knight of the five swords stand beside him (on ye plain and large
cha^peine vallie) amazed both at the things that vanished, and also at the
sudden approaching of the two mighty kings Alcaazo and Maridomir, attended on
by a great troop both of Egyptian and Mesopotamian knights and gentlemen: who
kneeling down at the feet of the magnanimous knight of the Sea, with most
hearty thanks rendered a grateful guerdon for his incomparable valor, showed
in delivering both them and their disiressed son Ptoladine; from the furious
abuses, and beastly cruelty of the wicked inchauntresse Mardigun. Which their
thanks the worthy knight rendering in orisons to the favoring heavens, showed
his great piety to the Gods, and his small delight taken in the transitory
praises of earthly creatures. But now for a while let us forsake him, to
return to the unfinished enterprise of the two valiant knights, Orthisius and
Alfortio: by whose aduenturous atchieuements, both France and Spain shall
eternally be renowned.

CHAP. XI.
How the Princes of France and Spain arrived at the kingdom of Volcama:
where they combated the usurper Termidantez. Who, seeing he should be
conquered, murdered the imprisoned Queen Mabina, and then desperately
throwing himself from the porch of the palace, being not altogether dead, was
afterward put to a most cruel torture.

LOng those valiant princes Orthisius and Alfortio (by reason of their desire
they had, both to do Justice, as also to follow in enquest, after the most
beawtious Grecian Princesses Almidiana and Eristama) could not remain amongst
their newe-wonne friends in the Cities of Hybla and Siracusa: wherefore
courteously (with thanks for their good entertainment) taking their leave of
Oezima, and her brother the Duke Oriardey. who with tears in his eyes giving
them a most kind farewell, with unfeigned orisons for their safeties, he
committed them to the Seas. Over whose calm bosom having sailed, they happily
surged on the coasts of Volcania. Where, being in the chief City by their
Page, provided of a requisite lodging, Orthisius and Alfortioariu^ on the Island
of Volcania.
they rested their weary limbs, for the space of two days: when giving notice
to the chiefest and most loyal fauourits of the wronged Queen Mabina^s cause,
the third day they repaired in arms, with the people flocking after their
heels, unto ye usurpers palace. Out at a window of whose gate house they heard
the sorrowful Queen, thus dolefully to effuse her souls sad lamentations:
Queen Mabinaes complainte.


And shall I still (O gods) in this distress,
With brinish tears, from mine eyes fountains spring,
Bewail my miseries remediless,
And wearying my hands with often wringing,
Continue in this dungeon evermore,
My sad mischaunces thus for to deplore?
Which being told unto these prison walls,
That are both reasonlesse and life-lesse things,
Whilst that my tongue me wretched caitife calls,
Their Echo from their bowels wretched wrings:
And when that I do tire them with exclaiming,
They answer sadly, as lamentinges framing.
I sigh, and say alas: they do reply,
Alas, alas: and when that I do groan,
They, seeming to lament my misery,
Do, ecchoing, reanswere me with loan:
So as, where I condole without relief,
They do lament, as partners in my grief.
And were it not for them, I should become
Heart broken, frantic, mad, and melancholy.
For by their woeful ecchoing alone,
I do receive my souls refreshing wholly:
Which only keep themselves from wanting pity,
To be sad consorts in my careful dittie;
Which evermore I sing with sobbing breath,
As prep'ratiue before approaching death.
She had no sooner sighed out her sorrows, but that the unmerciful usurper,
entering the prison, reprehended her sharply, for being so lavish in her
laments; with menacing words threatening her most cruelly to cut out that apt
and delicate organe of her speech if she continued any longer in her
lamentations. Which when the Noble minded Spaniarde heard, he thus began
canuasse him for his beastly and treacherous cruelty: In humane monster; and
uncivil tyrant, who has instituted thee a stern corrector of most
disconsolate Ladies? What, is thy heart waxed so haughty since the usurpation
of thy tyranny, as thou can not only be contented to disgrade and disgrace;
but also to sight-reaue: and not only that, but to speec^-ba^ thy wro^gly
oppressed prisoner? whose injuries cry for justice, and whose unregarded
wrongs invoke the high commander of the firmament to power down just
vengeance on thy accursed head: at whose hands we are come in arms, Quamuis
^e^a, veniet vinditta tamen. Terindantes appeached by Alfortio.
to require the respitelesse restitution of her right, and sufficient
satisfaction for all the outrages that thou have unjustly offered her Come down
therefore unto me, who will enter the Lists against thee, in defense of thy
Sovereigns just quar^ell, to whom thou have used such Satiricall actions.

Tyrindantez, though he was gallen to the very heart with these objections, yet
the better to make the common citizens to bear the better liking to his cause,
he very patiently seemed to brook these menaces. But, as the fire cannot long
lie hidden under the dry flax, but that by the smoke it should be discovered:
so, for all the tyrant sought by not answering, to cloak his anger; yet the
fierceness of his countenance so manifested his indignation, as both the
Prince of Spain himself, as also all the beholders, did plainly perceive out
of what metal the quintessence of his meekness was extracted. But (to say
the truth) he refrained from replying, till with his lance he might batter an
angry answers on ye stomach of his adversary. And therefore speedily causing
his Squires to arm him, he descended his palace-hall stairs, and mounting
h^mselfe on a mighty Courser, he praunce^ up and down proudly before the
Lists; till being urged by the Prince Alphortio, he presently rendered him this
disdainful answer.

Proud Knight, stranger, Terind^nces, answer in arms.
know that I so lightly account of thy brauing challe^ge, as were thou ye
Mars-like cha^pion to the gods, I should scorn to enter the listes against
thee; much more as thou art now a proud young Princocks, whom want of years
has made so vndiscre^tely attempt this dangerous enterprise. Come on
therefore (vainglorious young man) and at my hands receive thee a just guerdon
for thy foolish hardiness. Herewith, setting spurs to his hor^e, he gallop^d
so fast to the incountring of his enemies, as his Palfrey stumbling, he was
cast quite headlong out of his saddle to the ground. Malum omen.
Which he taking to be malum omen of any future good fortune on horseback,
resolved to try out the combat on foot. Wherefore drawing out his courtleax,
he pased toward Alfortio, to have stayne his Courser. Which he perceiving,
presently dismounted; and delivering his Palfrey to his Page, A foot fight
between Alfortio and Te^indantez.
with his shield advanced before him, he went to meet his approaching
adversary. Who, with his heavy sword smote so thick and furyously upon
Alfortioes shield; as, if he had in such sort long continued, he had not only
heawen his shield (wherewith he defended himself) in sunder, but also gone
nighe within less than an hours space, by wide-gashed wounds, to have made
his Volcanian grass of purple hew, by the effusion of Spanish goare. But
Tirindantez, being already awearied with his so thick bestowing of his vain
sent blows on the shield of his valourous enemy, began somewhat more lazily
to lift up his courtleaxe, as if he had more mind to have rested his weary
limbs on some downe-bed, then continued his resistance against approaching
danger.

Which the worthy Spaniarde with great dexterity turning to Tirindantez
disadvantage, with his sword of spanish steel he so courageously behaved
himself against the Tyrant, as having sliced his shield in su^der, within two
or three soundly sent buffets, he so cooled the Volcanians courage, as on his
knees he made his humbly to prostrate himself before his knightly feet. With
which his so sudden foil, the wicked usurper was so enraged, as rising up
again, he so courageously redoubled his blows on his adversaries shield, as
(having now sufficiently freed himself from the Spaniards fury, and fearing
some sower answer to his sharp objection) making way with his courtlear, through
the thick preasse of the behoulding multitude, Terindantez leaves the combat.
he left the combat: and despairing of any future good fortune, he speedily
ran up into the gate house; and burst open violently the prison door, where the
unhappy wronged Queen Mabina remained, in tears bewailing her misfortunes. To
whom with a fained penitency, as sorrowing for the wrongs that he had done
her, Now dear (though by my means wretched) Madame, said he, am I at last
(lame^ting my injustice, and tyrannous misdealing) come happily to release you
of your torments. And therewith lifting her up from the bare bords (by whose
ascending, coldness her limbs were chilled, benumned and stiffened) he
knocked off her manacles, which had so long time made her beawtious body
swell with their hard engriping: and taking her gentlye by the (once lilly
white) hands, he presently led her up to the top of the gate house; where she
(poor soul) vnsuspecting any such insidiousnesse (to her grief) heard him
with an hoarce voice, to sound forth the dreadful allarum, to her fatal
tragedy.

The deceitful Panther, before the destruction of his eye-gazers, does hide
his head; Terinda^tez to M^bina.
and set forth his delectable skin to the inticement of other wild beasts:
and ye deformed Porpisces, before the coming of some outrageous tempest, are
pleasantly sportiue before the shipmen: the one uses his insidie, to forwarne:
the other to devour: so I, unhappy Mabina, used pleasant gestures unto thee,
to refresh thy drooping spirits; but to let thee know that a procellious storm
comes after a pleasant Sunshine, I have with the Panther, allured thee to
thy destruction; which with my courtleaxe I shall execute on thee with
extreamitie: now therefore receive the last extreme of al my cruelties. With
which word, Mabina giving a most groanefull farewell to the faithless world,
The Q. Mabina beheadded by Terindantes.
he struck of her head: whose tongue wavering in her mouth, seemed (though
speechless) to call for vengeance at ye hands of the just judging heavenly
deyties. And then turning him self toward the amazed people, he on this sort
prognosticated his own disparagement.

O ye unhappy subjects of the deceased Volcanians gouernesse, why are your
senses amated, and your selves amazed, His oration to the Volcanians.
at this my merciless committed murder? What? are your hearts not your own?
or is your loyalty so lazy, and your selves so leaden, as cowardice is entered
where courage was once interested? that seeing the murderer of your Princess
(your minds sole meditation) Mabina, you can refrain from weapons; and
astoniedly gazing in my face, desist from wreaking vengeance on my accursed
treachery? What, do ye (in your thus still standing) expect that my self
should work my own destruction? If so ye do (amazed Citizens) assure your
selves, your expectations shall be satisfied. For first, behold, how like to
stony-harted Pirrhus (Achilles soboline) I cast down headless Polixena from
off ye battle me^ts, and after (contrary to ye worthy Grecia^) behold ye
downfall of her enemy.

Wherewith as desperate of any remission for his committed villainy, he threw
himself headlong from off the gatehouse; ^e throws ^imselfe head ^^ng from
the ^^tehouse.
thinking by his own violent action to have suddenly sent his Cimerian soul
to Acharon. But God, who sees al things, in his justice disappointed him of
his intended purpose, so as that, only being bruised, he was taken up alive,
by the rowte of the attending people, who with open mouths tried for judgment
against the traitor: with which their just entreaties, the worthy Princes of
France and Spain being exceedingly moved, to this effect before the
multitude, pronounced this terrible judgment.

The sentence of his judgment.
That first for the space of three days (if he lived so long) he should have
his flesh torn peece-meale with hot burning pincees from off his body; and
then his bones to be burned in afire of pitch and brimstone; that so consumed,
he might not have convenient sepulture, appointed for all dying christians. This
judgment against him, so well pleased the true hearted Citizens, as it was no
sooner pronounced by the two Princes, but it was immediately most severely
executed by the common people: who taking themselves to be highly bound unto
the courageous champions, with one consent, chose them to be their kingdoms
governors: Philocalus installed Ruler of Volcania.
but both Alfortio and Orthisius refusing, they remained the obedient subjects
unto Philocalus their late slaughtered Queens kinsman; whom for Ruler, the
noble Princes had over them appointed. But now another while let us busy our
selves, about some other matters, less impertinent.

CHAP. XII.
How the Knight of the sea, accompanied with Briarostez, and the knight of the
5. swords, in the way as they travailed to the fiery cave, encou^tred with
eleven knights who would have forced a Lady; whom they ouerthrewe: and how he
freede the Infant Ciafa from her fiery prison, and afterward departed from
them, in pursuit after the grande Cardigan with whom he entered combat for
the releasement of the Knight with the golden shield, who at the Inchauntresse
Mardiguaes entreaties combated Oceander; and how they were parted by a strange
accident.

MAridomer and Alcaazo with their son Ptoladine, and the rest of the
Mesopotamian and Egyptian estates, being thus happily delivered from their
miserable enthralement, by the incomparable valor of the Knight of the sea,
with great joy and gladness took their way toward Caiery, Cairo.
whose high topped towerets they no sooner saw, but kissing the ground, they
thanked the gods, for granting them the reuise of yt, whereof by reason of their
extreme thraldom, they had so long time despaired: and then embracing the
knight of the sea, by whom they had obtained conquest, and thanking Medion (for
that was the knight of the five swords name) by whose careful diligence they
were provided of a Champion, with great iouisance and shouting they ran toward
their hoped home: at whose gates they found their loving Citizens with
precious presents, The Cairoans joy for the s^fe return of Alcaazo and
Ptoladine.
and princely pageants ready to entertain them. But being entered into the
paued street of Cairy, to tell what hollowing, shouting, clapping of hands,
leaping, dancing, ringing of belles, playing on timbrells, harpes, and
clarions, sounding of horns, corners, tru^pets, sagbuts, and all other kind
of musical instruments there was, it both surpasses my pen, and accloyeth my
remembrance: but I am sure that all the rest of the remaining day, and all the
whole night was spent in nothing but in presenting their happy returned Princes
with most pleasureable pastime.

This notwithstanding, as the Heicfer, though she be in the midst of her
sportiuenesse, has a continual regard other houseld calfe, so these worthy
Princes in the midst of their pastimes, could not so forget their dearest
daughter the Princess Ciafa, Oceander, with Bri^^^ste^, and Medion undertakes
the adventure of of the fir^e cave of Ciafa.
whom (you have heard) Artimagus had hidden by his skill in the fiery cave of
Egypt, but that they must needs send immediately for her releasement: and
therefore, once more entreating the adiume^t of the valiant knight of the sea,
and obtaining his consenting, they presently dispatched him, with Briarostez,
and that worthy knight of the 5. swords, Medio^, toward ye euenting of the
inchantme^t: who taking their journey more Northwestward, toward ye city
Carthage, as they travailed over a ridge of mighty mou^tains, they espied,
where below in the valley, a sort of armed Knights were forcibly binding of a
beawtifull Lady, on one of their horses; to carry her against her will away
with the^. Whose sorrowful shreekes so penetrated into the thoughts of the
noble minded Knights of Africa, as enraged with the offered outrage, they
speedily galloped their horses, down the hill; and enterrushing roughly
amongst the rabblement of traitors, drawing out their swords, they
courageously commanded them on pain of forfeiting their heads to desist from
any farther prosecuting of their pretended evil enterprise: alleging them to
be a shame and foul dishonor to the order of knighthood, so uncivilly to
abuse any honorable or honest Damsel: and therewith the Knight of the Sea
began to lay his hand on the Ladies manacles, too unloose the^; when one of the
eleven Knights (trusting more the^ any of the rest, to his own valor)
unsheathing a mighty courtleax, began in this sort to terrify the undaunted
courage of the Carthaginian champion.

By heaven sir Knight, who made you so bold as to correct us in our actions?
Either let go your hould-fast on these damsels manacles, or (by our great god
Mahomet) with my sword I shall make your sea-shield spatter about your ears:
and therewith he let fly at the Knight of the sea, with all his might. Who
receiving the blow on his charmed shield, with his good sword Scindifer, he
smote Durdon so sound a buffet on the headpeece; as cleaving it to the beauer,
he made him life-lesse to kiss the cold cheek of his old Grandmother. Durdon
slain.
Wherewith the other ten Knights (ashamed for their ouermatching number, to
betake themselves to flight) grew so enangred with Durdons overthrow, as all
at once they stoutly assaulted the Knight of ye sea; but to their small profit.
For, what by his courageous well dealing of his blows, and the irresistable
adiument of his 2. companions, he gave the^ so sour a welcome, as having
slain and mortally wounded seven of the^, they enforced the other three, for
fear of their vnabidable-furie, to betake themselves to their heels; and in
the neighboring woods (by hyding their crauen head in ye thickset bushes)
fearfully to provide for the safety of their lives.

Oceander, Lidia freed from the villainy of Durdon and ten other knights.
glad that he had in this sort so quickly rid his hands of the wicked
Traitors, unbound the sorrowful Lady: who rendering him most hearty thanks
for her deliverance, most humbly entreated them, at a Castle of hers thereby,
for that night to take up their lodging. Which they accepting, she presently
conducted them unto her Castle: where giving the^ exceeding good
entertainment, she caused ye wounded corpse of her late murdered husband to
be brought before them. At whose unmercifully massacred limbs, the worthy
knights being in a manner amazed, she in this sort made the doleful recital
of her husbands Tragedy.

I am ascertained, magnanimous knights, Lidias relation of her husband
Zadelines death,
that in your hearts you do wonder at, and in your thoughts abhor this
detestable villainy; which only upon spite was in this cruel sort executed
upon my innocent husband, by those wicked wretches, from whose unmerciful
violence, your noble cheuesance of late defended me.

What the occasion of their conceived hatred against him, should be, I know
not: only I surmise it from hence to have his inition.

It misfortuned, Milodes slain.
that in a single combat between two knights (the one whereof was a stranger,
the other our near neighbor, named Milodes) by the variable chance of the
fight, that Milodes was slain: and the other (though sore wounded, yet not so
near death) to the end he might the more speedilier escape from the hands of
any following pursuers, cast off his battered and burdenous armor; and so
disharnished, he presently betook himself to flight: but whether, the Gods
do know, and not I: for as yet I never heard of him.

Which his unbuckled armor being found out by my (unhappy) husband Zadolin,
he caused his attending Page to gather all the scattered pieces together, and
wrapping them up in his cloak, to bear them on his back home after him;
which he did: and (thinking nothing of any following misfortune) he remained
quiet in his chamber all that evening.

But no sooner had the daughter of darkness, the light days enemy, ouercast
the heavens with a mourning mantle; but ye kinsfolks and allies of slaughtered
Milodes, with weapons, and torches, arrived at our Castle, and with great
violence rushing in at the gates, they killed my Porter, slew my servants;
Delirant Reges, plectu^tur Achiui. Zadolin murdered
and without either pity or compassion, with their swords and battleares,
they in this most cruel manner murdered and massacred my poor husband
Zadolin; whose thoughts legate unmercifully griped between a pair of pinsons,
was unjustly dissuffered to plead his masters innocence. Only I (poor and
unhappy Lidia) in my thin smock on the cold floor, with tears, sighs
and groanings endeavored to beg his pardon, pleaded his innocence, swear
he was guiltless; and in brief declared the matter, as manifestly as my
interrupting sobs would suffer me: But all in vain: they were obdurate to my
orisons; or could they by my pleading, have been made pitiful, it had been
to no purpose: for yer I could have half spoken, my dear Zoladin was
murdered; The rage of Durdon and his me^ against guiltless Lidia.
and only my agony appeased, with the threats of the treacherous villains; who
bad me be contented, for my turn was the next unto my husbands: and then,
haling me by ye hair, down the stairs, they rode away with me unto this
mountain; where they meant to have bound me to their horsetailes, and have
speedily dragged me to the burning Cave of Ciafa; whereinto they threatened for
to throw me: which they had surely performed, had not you by the gracious
appointment of the heavens, happily arrived at that instant for my delivery.

Now ow mine honor (quoth the knight of the Sea) I have not in all my life
heard tell of a worser villainy.

But thanks be to Mahomet (said Briarostes) they have sufficiently at your
hands paid for it; as better men than they have done before them: and had not
I tasted of better mercy then they did, perhaps my head should have fled
with a vengeance, where my heels should never have overtaken it. All things
go by the direction of the Gods (replied Medion) and so it is sufficient that
we all are living. True (answered Briarostes) but since it is so far in the
night, let us prepare our selves unto our lodgings: whereunto the knight of the
Sea, and Medion consenting, they gave the goodnight unto the Lady; and so
departed unto their provided bedchambers; where they all slept soundly: only
Medion, in this sort meditated on the Lady.

Divine Lidia (I call thee divine, Medions passionate resolve, for the love of
Lidia.
because like a deified Goddess thou gouernest my affections) would to the
Gods thy heart were as benign, as thy hew beautiful, and thy tongue as apt
to pronounce my content, as thy frowns (I fear) are about to prognosticate my
confusion: then should I glory in my good fortune, that am now grieved with
heart-gnawing languishment: yea but I fear the failing of thy favor, and that
in vain with the trauailer, ^ shall assault a Basiliske; by whose eyes
penetrating, I shall find my own confusion. But fool, why fear thou? will
the ambitious soldier lay aside his armor, and for fear of missing the
conquest, not adventure the conflict; where the precious price of the victory
is an Olive garland, amiddest whose wreathes sittes honor in her chiefest
dignity? No, rather will he die in the attempt, then, by not hazarding his
hap, to be bereaved of his happiness. And wilt not thou adventure a frown,
to obtain her favor? which is more glorious then a conquest, and more
high-prized, then the Olive garden: whose looks infuse life, and whose pretty
smiles, seem a petty Paradise of eternal pleasures: whose ruddy cheeks like
the rays of Cynthia refresh thy loves flower; and from out whose Rubilike fine
closurets proceeds a comfortable warm deawe, to infuse new mirth into thy
loue-massacred soul in the midst of thy martyrdom. But stay: the fragrant
flower, called Flos Solis, if it be nipped off at the top, by the Indians,
when it is but young, it will never bear any blossom: and the young Eagle,
that has his talents cut when it is but a nestlecocke, will never prove so
ravenous as his dam did: So Medion, must thou nippe the head of thy springing
fa^cie, in his infancy; and it shall never bear blossom in his age, to hurt
thee: and pare his griping talents yet he be fledge, and he shall never
lacerate thy heart in his fierce flight: and so shall thou live at freedom, by
being freed from maimed fancy. Nay rather, thereby shall thou work thy
confusion, then content; and kill thy own self, by quelling thy fancifull
cogitations. For, what be came of the branch that was nipped? it never bloomed?
true. For his opened juice being dried up by the hot reflection of the
scorching Sun, suddenly withered: and the talent-wanting Eagle, never after
prospered. Thus both perished: and so shall I, if I follow their example,
finish a like end unto my follies. Suffer therefore thy fancy to have his full
course; and curb it not in the waxing, least thou curse it in the waning: and
only rest herewith fully satisfied, ye Lidia is fair without compare, and
therefore worthy to be loved inco^parably: that she is gracious, and will listen
unto thy greeuings: she is kind, and may breed thy comfort: and lastly, which
I hold my sowles sole Axiom, she is a woman, and therefore to be won.

With this conclusion, he cloased his eyes, and in their slo^bers he quietly
accompanied his sleeping companions: in which quiet repose, they remained ye
remna^t of ye night: which no sooner was put to accustomed flight, by ye
appearing of ye brightsome morning, but that these exquisite Cheualiers,
Oceander, Briarostes, and Medion, forsook their graue-imitating beds: and
causing their armoures to be presently buckled on their shoulders, craving a
conductour to the burning Cave, they took their leave of their Hostess: which
was so soundly sealed on the lips of Lidia by Medion, as she had a suffitint
Item, to judge of his affections. And departing in all have from Zadolins
Castle, they shaped their journey back again unto the mountains. Along the
declining banks whereof, directly passing on their journey, within three days
(after their wearisome travail) they arrived at ye foot of a most high
cliffe: whose steep down chalkie sides beating back the rays of the
resplendent Sun, by his beams reflection they seemed to guilde the Ocean with
a new Phoebean glister. This the (...) Champions ascending, Oceander arriueth
at the fiery cave.
they perceived from the (...) thereof, a mighty fire to effuse himself into
so man^ (...) which licked their chalky architecture, as it (...) of them to
yield a sufficient heat for ye burning up of any indifferent ince^dible
substance. In which flame (which proceeded out of an artificial Furnace)
knowing the infant Ciafa to be enclosed, the worthy knights were exceedingly
grieved; but especially Medion: who dolefully lamented the miseries of the
beauteous Princess, whose fate he thought already to have failed, and whose
unhappy ruin he thought to be remediless and unrecoverable. Wherefore
prostrating himself upon the earth: Medions grief for the supposed torments
of Ciafa.
O dear ground (quoth he) I would I had bin engraued within thy bowels,
before I had lived to have seen this lamentable time of disaster. Ha my dear
Lady Cyafa, how greatly is improvident nature to be blamed, yt made thee, so
seemly beautiful, so suddenly to be burned. What will your loyal husband
Ptoladine say, when he shall hear of your end? and how unmercifully with his
beating hands, will he massacre his breast, when he shall understand of your
misfortunes! From any further proceeding in his plaints, he was cut off by a
sudden passion: whereout, being by the diligence of Oceander and Briarostes,
revived, he ragingly ran up and down the top of the craggy cliffe, to
find, if it were possible, which way they might safely get to the farther side
thereof: Oceander and the rest pursue a Bear.
which by no means they could effect, until by the pursuing of a monstrous
Bear, which had lately seized upon a young Kidde, they chanced happily to
happen on an unfrequented by way: which with their swords clearing from the
intercepting brambles and thickset prickly bushes, they speedily through
passed; and were by the sandy shoares soon directed unto the fiery cave of
Ciafa; which seeing in vain they should endeavor with water to quench, by
forcible fury they sought for to enter. Whereupon clapping their shields
before their faces, They attempt to enter the cave. Medion and Briarostes
enforced to return.
they all at once attempted the ingression: but such was both the ill fortune
of the giant and the knight of the five swords, and so exceeding was the
swelter of the inchaunted flame; as being therewith almost smoulthered, they
were forced to turn their faces from the fire ward, and hic themselves faster
out (by one half) then they entered: Only by the undaunted courage of the
incomparable knight of the sea, was the hot intending fume of the fiery
flaming, little respected, and wholly suppressed; though until egresse of
paragon of Egypt, his fury could not altogether be extinguished. Ciafa
delivered out of the cave by Oceander.
Which the noble minded knight suspecting, he presently took the fair
princess (who was there sitting in a chair of Alablaster) in his arms; and
with great swiftness issuing out again from the intrailes of the fiery Cave,
he no sooner rested himself safe on the sands; but incontinently, with a most
terrible clappe of thunder, the fire ceased, the Cauerne cloased, and all the
inchauntment was effinished. The inchauntme^t finisheth.
Whereat Medion exceedingly rejoicing, humbly kissed the Princess Ciafaes
hands; and in the best sort that he could devise, he joyfully welcomed her
unto her happy freedom. For the which, both he and the fair infant Ciafa,
so heartily thanked the valiant knight of the Sea; as Oceander almost ashamed
of their too great gratitude, promised them in lieu thereof, his duetifull
service in whatsoever they should command him. Which offer of his good will,
the beauteous infant of Egypt graciously accepting, with all humility,
desired their back conducting unto the famous city of Cayry; where her father
Alcaazo and the Mesapotamian Maridomir, in care expected their safe arrival.
Oceander would very willingly have condescended; had he not been prevented by
the sudden arrival of a Ship of war upon the shoares of the burning Cave:
out of the which hearing a most lamentable exclaming; to see the event thereof,
he was feign to part from his companions: Medion and Briarostes guard the
infant Ciafa to Cayro.
and leaving Briarostes and Medion, to guard the infant of Egypt safely unto
Cayry, he pased softly toward the seaside: where he perceived a mighty giant
of most monstrous bigness, and exceeding stature, with a massy iron mace on
his neck, having come on shore to mount up into a steely Chariot; Cardigan.
which was drawn by two fierce and big Lions, up unto the firm land; and
under his feet in steed of a footstool, to lie an armed knight: which in
iron chains being strongly fettered, effused such passionate laments; as the
tender heart of the valorous Prince thereby was so extreme touched with
compassion, as making anger his spurs to honor, he presently poasted after
the monstrous Giant; whom ouertaking, he began courageously in this sort to
enquestion.

It seems unmerciful Tyrant, by the outcryes that this captiued knight here
makes, Oceander to Grand Cardigan.
that thou have villanously offered him some outrage: which if it be, assure
thy self, incompassionate, infringer of the law of Nations, that vengeance is
already at this instant hanging over thy ungracious head; which powered on thee
by the judgment of the iustest Iusticer, shall make thee all to late to repent
thy committed wickedness.

Grand Cardigan (for so was the Giant named) hearing the Princes peart
challenge, could not choose but laugh at his (supposed) folly. And therefore
without speaking any word, for an answer; with his huge hands he thought to
have fastened upon his helmet, and so drawing him into his Chariot, to have
there carried him captive in company of his other prisoner: But he far failed
in his effects. For Oceander (whom use of arms had taught to know
adua^tages) seeing the incomparable pride of the haughty devil to exceed
reason so far, as with his weaponlesse hand to think to surprise an
harnessed knight; unsheathing his trusty Curtelax, he so curtold Cardigans arm
off at the elbowe; as the hand falling to ye ground he taught his haughty heart
a sound lesson, Oceander smites off the Giants arm,
for ye inconsiderate reattempting of any so dangerous an enterprise. But the
devilish Giant was herewith incensed with such an unspeakable fury; as for
very anger, his eyes seemed to sparkle fire, and out of his ribs of his beauer
his angry breath issued out with such a thickness, as therewith his eyesight
being dimmed, he sat still for a great while in a quandary, not knowing well
which way to bestir himself: till vexed wc ye extreme smarting of his wound,
he grew suddenly so enraged as dismounting his steely Coach, and furiously
advancing his iron we upon over ye helmet of Oceander, he let the blow descend
down with such a fury upon his inchaunted armor, as battering Oceanders
shield with ye mighty forcefull poyse thereof, unto his headpeece, he made him
sufficiently to feel the fury of such angry Giants. And to say the truth, A
dangerous combat between Oceander and Grand Cardigan.
had not the iron mace been somewhat more, then the maimed monster could well
have wielded, Cardigan had at that one blow, battered Oceander all so pieces.
For such was the invincible force of this giant before he happenned to be thus
dishanded, as young oaks plucked up by the very roots, scarcely sufficed him
for a mace, to ouermaster the most mightiest monsters: and with his own hands
he would subdue fierce Lions, and bring them to a wonderful tamenesse. But ye
heavens viewing his pride to be so incomparable, at last made him to be
humbled by a knight, whose stature (though not stomache) was far, to his,
inferior. For the worthy knight of the Sea (though he was beaten to the
ground, and sorely inly bruised by that devilish stroke of Cardigan) so nimbly
arose from the slippery earth, as before Cardigan could mount his mace to
redouble his blow, Oceander grappleth with the giant.
he was gotten within him; and running strongly against him to overthrow him,
he greatly bruised the giants armor; but by his vneffected policy, enwrapped
himself in a net of exceeding danger: which surely had been inevitable; had
not Cardigan, who with his boisterous arm endeavored to crush him against his
brestplate, in the midst of his action, for want of blood to maintain his
vigor, fallen down to the ground for faintness: and yet in his fall with
his huge body he so overwhelmed him, as Oceander for a great while, was not
able to recover himself from his fury, and heavy ouerpoise: but having at
last after much struggling, safely freed himself and remounted upon his feet,
he drew out Cardigans mighty and broad fauchon; wherewith smiting off his other
arm, Cardigans other arm ^mitten off, and ^anquished.
he left the ugly giant in a pitiful pickle, to expect his wretched lives
approaching period.

And then turning himself toward the Chariot, he unbound the enthralled
knight with the golden shield, ^hianora res^ued by Oce^nder.
who in this sort rendered him thanks for his liberty: Noble and courageous
knight, whomsoever thou art; the Gods, whom thou adorest, send thee as great
good fortune, as thou deseruest favor at my hands for this thy showed
friendship in delivering me from the hands of this devilish Giant, whose
infinite fury, millions of the mightiest Knights in this Western world could
never have abated. Herewith the Knight with the goulden shield offered to kiss
his gauntlet. But Oceander, in whose heart meekness and courtesy sat royally
enthronized) took him gently by the hand, and in this manner made refusal of
the proffered favor: what I have effected for thy freedom (Knight of the
golden shield) was by the favor of the Gods, and as I was obliged by the noble
order of my Knighthood: and therefore requires no thanks, at your hands;
since what I did, was not at your request, but for the performance of my
duty: wherein I hope I have honorably accomplished the part of a worthy
champion, by freeing the oppressed, and giving a bridle unto haire-brainde
presumption: desist therefore from such vnmerited requital, and let us both
rejoice for the fruition of our happy conquest. Now because that by this time,
it grew toward the approaching of the evening, they left the Giant to his
griefs, and took their ways toward the sea side where, in Cardigans
argosie, they determined for that night to take up their lodgings. Where they
were no sooner come, The sorceresse Mardigua arriueth.
but arrived an old withered woman (whose hairs being colored like ye midnight,
and stra^gely curled like the snaky wreathed tresses of ye Furies) putting to
the shore, landed, like helbred Alecto, to bring debate between the two
valorous Princes: Her name was Mardigua that wicked sorceresse: whose
inchauntments for spite that Oceander had happily effinished, she now by her
insidious craftiness (by undermining the Knight of the goulden shield, with a
feigned show of received injuries) sought a through reuengement on the knight
of the sea: and therefore coming to Phianora (for that was the name of ye
Knight with the goulden shield; though following adventures, she would not be
known to be the divine daughter of King Argamont of England) Noble Knight with
the goulden shield (quoth wicked Mardigua) if any pity or compassion be in
your princely breast, I beseech you of your knightly valor, She sows debate
between Ocea^der and Phianora.
to take a just reue^geme^t for me on a most wicked traitor, that has done me
the greatest villainy that ever any honest ears have heard of. Whereunto the
Knight of ye golden shield condescending, and with a religious oath confirming,
the insidious wretch, after some feigned tears, forceably wru^g out from her
hollow eyelids, in this sort began to task her champion to his promises
performance: Know then, most worthy Prince, that it was yonder Knight of the
Sea, that has so villanously outraged me, raced my castle, slain my subjects,
and (obdurate to my entreaties) carried away my kinsmen, captive prisoners:
chastise him therefore according to his deserts, and evermore be renowned by
being my courageous champion. Oceander very well knowing her, and hearing how
shamefully she had before his face belied him, could not for his blood
refrain; but with his sword drawn he must needs proffer to loppe of her
accursed head from her withered shoulders: whereof, the vnsuspecting Knight of
the goulden shield, taking advantage; nay, nay (said he) thou have too too much
already manifested thy malice against her: prepare thy self therefore to
receive thy just deseruinges at his hands, The knight of the golden shield
combateth Oceander.
who is sorry so soon to be thy correctour: And therewith, she struck Oceander
a sound buffet on the cuirace: wherewith he was so enangred, as leaving of
excuses, he soon requited the Knight with the goulden shield for his labor.
For he so notably behaved himself against him; as no occasion was offered,
whereof he took not advantage; and no part of his adversaries body which was
not so soon wounded as negligently defended: which caused the Knight of the
golden shield, somewhat to become faint, and in a short space to wax so
weary, as she was hardly able to continue her party good, for one only bout
longer; without taking some breathing space (for in their combat they had
continued, ye better part of an hour and three quarters, without breathing, or
once desisting from dealing of their deadly blows: whereof, on the contrary
side, the courageous Knight of the Sea (being no whit a wearied) took so great
advantage, as with his sword he thought at one stronge-fetched blow, to have
ended both the Knight of the goulden shieldes life, and the contention. Which
in^^^^ he had ^ndoubtedly done: An happy accident.
had not his good swo^^^ (...) by the providence of the highest, fallen flatly
on the crest of his enemy: and therewith the buckles being broken, have
empouerished the helmet, to enrich Oceanders eyesight with the aspecting of
the most beawtifull object, ye ever Dame nature by her deified cunning framed.
For so soon as the proud helmet was distennanted of so precious a head; The
Knight of the golden shield discovered to be a Lady-knight.
such a bush of goulden twisted tressalines rained themselves into the bosom
of the Princess, as the Ioue-sent shower of Pactolian gold into the lovely lap
of Danac: which being handsomely dissheueled about her armed shoulders, made her
resemble bright-shining Cynthia in the gray clear Welkin, in fashion; though
far exceeding her in favorable fairness; so angelical were the looks of
this divine and more then beawtifull Lady-knight: at whose sight, like the
sun-gazing Indian, Oceander was so amazed; as like one transmuted, he stood
still mute in a quandarie, being of a great while not able to recover his
ouer-rauished senses: till the Princely maid ashamed of her such discovery,
clapped on her helmet again, and leaping into the boat with Mardigua, she
hastily both carried away his hearts horror, and his eyes Elisian-like exceed
of pleasure.

CHAP. XIII.
How Norin and Nigramonde the sons of the grand Cardigan, ouertooke the
Infant Ciafa, whom in revenge of their fathers death they would have
murdered: but were repulsed by Briarostez and Medion; and how the Knight of
the sea was carried in his inchaunted boat to the Island of Malagda.

NOrin, in the mean time, and Nigramonde, the devilish issue of that damned
Giant Cardigan, being rouzed from their rests (which they took in a most
strong fortress) by the lamentable outcries (which bellowing-like thundered
into their ears) of their massacred and distressed Father, with all the have
possible they presently hyed unto him: whom finding both armelesse, and in a
manner lifelesse, they hoisted up into his iro^ chariot: and having carried him
unto their castle to be carefully tended by their Chirurgions, Cardigan carried
unto his Castle.
and causing their Lions to be humbled unto the servile saddle, they presently
mounted on them: and with their battleares on their shoulders, Norin and
Nigramonde haste to revenge the death of their Father.
they hastily galloped after their Fathers mischiefe-worker, to be revenged on
him for his too too audacious cruelty: but all in vain. For taking a clean
contrary way, they left their adversary Oceander (though unknowing) in his
combat against the Inchantresse cursed Mardiguaes champion; the beawtie
unmatchable, the fairer then fairness it self, Phianora: and with an angry
haste, they cut forth their iournies toward the neighboring mountains,
whither they vainly thought their adversary to be galloped. Now as the valiant
Briarostez, and the valorous Knight of the five swords, high minded Medion,
were with their princely charge, the fair Infant Ciafa, returning leasurely
toward ye castle of late wronged Lidia the woeful wife of Zadolin, whom the
eleauen Knights murdered for the death of Milodez, they were suddenly
recalled by one of the young Gyantes; who being come with in voice-reach, with
a hoarse throat in this sort sounded out their sudden retreat. Think not,
most vile and wicked traitors, by this your sudden taking flight, to pass
thoroughly unpunished for the cruel murder of our dear father the mighty
Cardiga^; whose princely blood, shed cowardly by your peasant blades, presents
a sorrowful remembrance of wrathful vengeance to be wreaked on your carrion
carcasses. In an evil hour (quoth Briarostez) art thou come thus unjustly to
challenge us: but since thou will needs be meddling, come on a gods name, and
by the power of almighty Mahomet (who guide my hand to gain the victory) I
shall give thy proud approach so pearcing a welcome, as thou shall with shame
wish thy farther safety, when by my Lances point thou shall be borne to the
ground, shamed, Norin and Briarostez encounter.
, foiled, and overthrown. Therewith they both met together so fiercely, as
breaking their pinetree spears against their pouldro^s, they were both sent
headlo^g from their horsebackes, to finish the rest of their Monimachy on
foot, who nimbly recovering themselves from the fall, presently drew out
their steele-heawing weapons; and so stoutly belabred one another about the
crestes, as it might well have made them dissy: for their intolerable
strokes, made the other four behoulders, very exceedingly amazed: Briarostez
with his broad fawchon Cordelue, sent such a strong blow on the shield of
Norin, as nigh therewith he parted it in two pieces; and then slyding between
the breast plate and the arme-hole, it straight descended unto the ground;
where doing no other harm it stayde: but so was it stricken into ye muddy
substance, as before Briarostez could thoroughly vnloosen it, Norin flourishing
his battleaxe with a strong whirle about his head, stroke Briarostez such a
sound buffet overthwart his shoulders, as with the fury thereof, he was forced
to stagger backwarde, at least three yardes from the place where he first
stood. But, as hap would, in his retyring he gave such a twitch at the hilt of
his sword Cordelue, as he unburied it from the bowels of the earth, wherein it
was so fast enclosed. And having recovered both himself and it in his hand;
now holy Mahomet (quoth he) and Termagaunt; on whose Meca^ altars, I
vnmissingly offer a precious annual sacrifice, but inspire mine arm at this
time, with some inresistable flauour of your sacred vigours; and I here make a
solemn vow for ever steadfastly to maintain your holy deity, and heavenly
laws written in your divine Alcaron, against any mortal man whosoever it
oppugning: as indeed he did: for in defense thereof he manfully dyed under the
resistlesse sword of Oceander, who had newly embraced the holy faith of Christ,
as you shall hear in the second part of this present history. Briarostez
having in this sort ended his short orisons, he added such a fierce fury to
his vigorous arm, as therewith mounting up his fawchon, above the helmet of
his strong adversary, the same descended with such violence between the
cuirace and the shoulder of Norin, as it not only pared away a great piece of
his left arm, but with such a devilish decline rushed on the hard temperature of
his steely gauntlet, Norin sorely wounded by Briarostez.
as with an irresistable fury it clean parted the hand, from the arm of
Norin: who instantly with hideous tears and bellowings, exclaimed upon his
brother Nigramonde, with an invincible courage to take just vengeance on his
ouermatching enemies; and herewith he thought to have fled. But Medion, who as
yet had not meddled in the conflict, Slain by Medion.
gave him such a recall with his courtleaxe on the cuirace, as he fetched him
down backewards from his fierce beast, with a vengeance, to try if he durst
to hazard the second combat; and therewithal aduauncing his shield before
him, he stood watchfully expecting the undoubted assault of enraged Nigramond:
whose stomach was so taken down by his brothers misfortune, and the Egyptian
honorable manhood; as horsing his wounded brother Norin upon his furious
beast, before him; he made fear add spurs to his feet; Nigramon de betaketh
him to flight.
and hastily flying from his vnpursuing enemies, he left the field open to his
foes: who, glad they were so well freede from their troublesome guests,
speedily hied them to Lydias castle; where we will leave the^ to their
recreation, and Briarostez to his wounds recuring; and return again to our
former forsaken cha^pion Oceander: who (as you have heard) being left all alone
by the witch Mardigua, and the worthy Princess Phianora, saving only
accompanied, with the approaching night, Oceander amazed, and enflamed with the
beauty of Phianora.
and the huge inuironing Cliffes; casting an admiring, amated and amorous sight
after the fleeting boat wherein the beauteous Princess sailed from him; his
thro^ging thoughts, amazed at the miss of their blessedness, began to charm
his trembling minds Ambassador, thus dolefully to lament his irreparable
misfortune.

Of sudden griefs and heart-amating wrongs,
Why sit I in this silence vncomplayning?
Since raciturnitie in griefes-explaining,
My inward heart with woe so ouer-thronges;
As if I had whole infinites of tongues,
They scarcely to my torments could give vente,
Wherewith my soul incessantly is wrong,
One sorrow would another so prevent,
Under my palates vault passing along.
Therefore must sorrow from his secret cell,
(Wherein amids the center of my heart,
He, captiue-like tied, does in terror dwell)
From out his prison house perforce depart,
To act a Libertine released part:
Who with exclaimes to my sense sorrowe-torne,
This axiom of my fortunes shall impart;
That in unhappy time, poor I was borne,
To sit and see relief, yet live forlorn,
IN these and the like musings he spent the time, until by the sudden
approach of the silent night (who in her pitchy chariot, had already coursed
over the face of the Element) he was forced both for his sauegard and his ease
to take up his Inn, for that night, in a little tilt-couered wherrie boat,
which lay hard at the shore: Artimagus counterfeiteth himself a fisherman, to
disport with Ocea^der.
wherein being entered, he found an old fisherman, who on a chaffingdish of
coals (which he had kindled by the light of a strange precious stone, which
with dropping on of salt water and oil stra^gely blazed) was broyling him a
few freshwater fishes for his supper: who seeing (as indeed none then he could
see better) the valorous Knight of the sea, coming toward him, presently
started from his stool, whereon Diogenes like he was set, and steadfastly
looking on Oceander (who gave him courteously the good even) he spightfully
threw the dish of fish down on the bords by Oceander, saying: By Mahomet I
would thy nose were slit, that thus unhappily has smelt out my hungry supper.
By Jove, had not years taught me ye better wisdom; I could find in my heart
desperately to ouer-turne the boat, and drown my self, because I would have
thee drenched in the Ocean: Herewith he so puffed and blowed for anger, as
Oceander, though he were somewhat choleric, at his curmudgenlynesse, yet he
could not choose but smile at the old fisher-mans vain anger. And therefore
bursting out into a great laughter, he thus began to pacify his angry host:
Why good old man, what meanest thou in this sort to cast away thy meat and
in this sort to be offended? as though I were such a base conditioned villain,
as to cut thy age-crazed weasand, for a few gobbets of homily broyled fish.
Fear not old father, for I am no such man: for by the almighty and great
prophet Mahomet I protest unto thee, that my intent is only here to get me some
safe harbor, and not in any wise injuriously to harm you I know it well
(dear Prince quoth he) nor am I ye man yt for a dish of homely broyled fish,
Artimagus reu^aleth himself.
would so iarringly stand at terms in earnest with so gracious a Lord, to
whom not only my boat, but my skill, my body and (if need so require) soul
is wholly endebted, and altogether devoted. And then discovering himself unto
the knight of the sea, to be ye most wise and learned Lord Artimagus, the only
brother (as you have heard) of Carthaginian Kanira, he heaped such joys on the
heart of Oceander, as both by tongue and pen are unable to be expressed:
only let this suffice, that they fell from their chat, to their cates; and
from their repast to their sound repose. Whilst they being in a sweet and
silent sleep, the wherrie, inchaunted by the art of Artimagus, stealingly
slyced through the salt waters of the Ocean: and in that only night (governed
by the supernatural skill of the divine Artist) it speedily crossed, from the
coasts of Africa, unto (which is almost incredible) the Inchaunted Island, of
the witch Malagda, whose devilish sorceries the following chapter shall
presently entreat of.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Olbiocles arrived on the Island of Malagda, where he was enchaunted; how he
was delivered from his transmutation, by the Knight of the Sea, to whom he
told his misfortune after his metamorphosing; and how he misdeemed Oceander to
be drowned in the boat of the Inchau^teresse.

OLBIOCLES, that worthy Prince of Grecia, thanking the good old Hermit
Calander; not only for his honest entertainment in the Cell, but also for the
strange relation of his following fortunes; departed from the Hermitage, back
again unto the Castle of the good knight Aradinus; Aradinus Governor of the
Round Island.
whom he (as you have heard) had created chief Governor of the Round Island,
on conditional fealty unto the Majesty Constantinopolitan: to whose desirous
ears, ye whole history of tyra^t Trogladors selfe-wrought Tragedy being
related, caused such excess of joy in his soul; as falling on his knees, and
kissing the armed feet of the worthy Greek, he most earnestly prayed for the
like success to second all his undertaken actions; offering his love, his
lands, his life, to be put in the hazardous and most pernicious peril, to do
his exquisite self any acceptable jot of pleasure. And to confirm his
profferings for unfeigned, he humbly entreated the willing acceptance of a
young son of his, named Tclio; for the good companion of his Page Curio:
whose service he would warrant on his life to be most trusty, loyal, and
humiliate. The knight of the Leoparde, seeing the affection of the good
Governor Aradinus, with thanks requited his good will: but for certain
seacret considerations of approaching casualties, he courteously refused Telio,
saying, that in his soul, he had vowed; until the regaining of his thoughts
sovereign, divine Almidiana, never to receive more company, or comfort, then
that only which his poor Page Curio could yielde him.

With which his answer Aradinus and his son Telio, being very well
satisfied, they left him wholly to his own determinations; when, after a few
days resting in the Castle, Olbiocles took his farewell of the Governor, and
going on ship-boarde, he hoysed up sails, and with his hearty comprecations,
to the heavens for his safety, he committed himself to the mercy of the
seas. Olbiocles l^ueth the Round Ilan^
Upon the crestes of whose mounting billows, how often he was tossed, and in
fearful danger of drowning; neither unto the shoares of how many alien
kingdoms by force of the waves he was driven; neither how many dangerous
adventures, both by sea and land he achieved; nor what strange conflicts,
combats, and contentions he entered for ladies, wronged Princesses, and
damsels; as, that against the arch-pirat Tolurnio, the brother of Marcimodes
the tyrant, for the Countesses sister of Corinth, Vpiora; (...).
I will not at this time make any tedious mentioning commemoration: only let
this suffice you, that his fame so far increased, as the great Gouernesse
Malagda, not only admiring; but also being enuiously enamoured with his
virtues, enited her self with the strongest spells, and straungest
Nigromanticke charms that either by art or nature she could practice, to
bring him by the irresistible vigor of her damned science, to the unhappy
surging on her accursed Island. Where Olbiocles, unfortunately apporting,
Olbiocles ariueth at the land of Ma^gda. ^alagdaes ^eleome ^ Olbi^cles.
he was no sooner landed, but he was thus encountered by this cunning
Inchauntresse: Mirror of magninamity, and prewe Patron of prowess and
chivalry: How long I have expected thy coming unto this my poor inheritance,
well may thou divine by the hollow sinking of my consumed eye-balles; which
have never ceased the continual effluxion of their tears, since the first
time their lights guidresse longed for thy to too long-abstained approaching:
and surely, had thou but prolonged thy coming a little longer, my eyes had
become blind; and my eye-balles been no bigger then pinnes heads, so dry
would I have drawn the almost empty fou^taines of visers: and all for grief
of thy absence, dear Prince of Constantinople: whose presence since I now so
happily at last enjoy; welcome, and thrice welcome be thou to poor Malagda;
whose loue-sicke thoughts have rent almost in sunder the concaue vamure of my
tender breast: and herewith taking Olbiocles by the armed hand, she conducted
him very honorably unto her castle, where she banqueted him so royally with
all kind of diversities of dainty delicates, ^ne fea^eth him.
whose knelles the warbling voices of an hundred heavenly nymphelike Damozels
so melodiously sounded; as the more the worthy son of Claranax did eat, the
more reliuing he felt his appetite: such admired virtue consistes in this
celestial art, which used by a cunning Orpheus, Can deade-mens ghosts (whom
death did erst surprise)
From black Cocitus lake, cause to arise,
And dance strange antickes on th'Elizian plains,
Libertinized from their suffered pains.


This sumptuous banquet being ended, after repast they went to repose
themselves in their lodgings: where for that night they slept so securely, as
until it was toward morning not any of them opened their drowsy eyelids; but
only the wicked Inchauntresse Malagda: who awaking about midnight, by her
cunning sorceries raised such a veil of darkness before the face of the
silver moon, as, at that time being unable to be seen of any mortal
creature, thinking herself safe in her wickedness, she approached the chamber
door of the sound-sleeping knight of the Leopard: which breaking open, she
(whilst she bathed his body in a most straungely inchaunted liquor) breathed
out this incantation over the vnsuspecting Constantinopolitan: My beldame,
Grandame Cyrces, help in haste, She exercises her inchauntment over him.

Thy daughter dear to wreake a full revenge,
Upon this wicked murderer of my son:
Whom he has slain by vigor of his arm;
Which was ourioy, which was our only hope,
Our only comfortable ages stay:
Whose soul does cry for vengeance to be wreake,
Upon his mischiefs worker: therefore lend
Your happy help; yet not to put to death,
This worthy knight: for know o grandame great,
Malagda loves him better than her soul;
Therefore agree to my enchaunting spells,
And let him live, though reaued of his shape,
The penant satisfactour of our wrongs:
Olbiocles metamorphosed into a Boar.
Therefore to tushes be his teeth ychang'd,
His breathing nostrels to a rooting snowte,
Prick up his ears, in length out-shooting straight,
His feet and hands turned into horny hooues;
And all his skin of Alablaster hew,
Discolored and turned to heary hyde;
Eeke all his body be transmuted so,
As what he was, no earthly man may know.
And let this spell, O Goddess, firmly stand;
Till he be vanquished by the strongest hand.


Ending her charms, she conueyghed him out of his chamber, unto the top of a
most high hill neighboring to the sea side: within whose enchaunted
promontory, she left the poor prince, in such strange sort metamorphosed; as
for the space of full fourteen winters, he has there remained without any
(even the least) hope of recovering his former manlike feature; greefully
casting for the ghastly grunts and groans in such strange manner, as the whole
Island oftentimes rang of his effused lamentations: whose fenses, though
charmed, were not so utterly reaued of their manlike wonted reason; but that
sometimes they would think on his misfortunes, sigh at his miseries; and
lamenting, reckon up his whole world of mischaunces; as, the loss of his
Lady, leaving of his country, etc; and now lastly his own unhappy and
monstrous transmutation: which though he no otherwise, then as one in a dream,
as yet perceived; yet he could not choose but exceedingly sorrow at (if it had
been) so dreadful an anatomy of misformitie. Such was the extreme
longlasting misery of this poor (once princely) creature, to whose so festered
sore, by the divine providence of the almighty Physician, a most precious
plaster is in preparing. Let us leave him therefore in his miseries, to fetch
with speed this happy and (if it might he) more then happy Oceander, whom
we lately left in his silent slumbers with Artimagus in the inchaunted boat,
which (as you have heard) so speedily apported this Island of Malagda.

By that time the sable night had banished all further aboade, and trussing up
her pitchy mantles, had yielded up her government to the approaching morn;
the thrice-exquisite and valiant Carthage fostered Oceander, bidding adieu to
his drousie slumbers, began to arise from his cabbinet: and looking up and
down the boat for the wise Artimagus, Oceander awaking misseth Artimagus.
and not finding him (for earnest occasion, as afterward you shall hear, had
from thence withdrawn him) he was so exceedingly amazed; as in a doubt, he
began in this wise to ponder of his proceedings.

What? have I dreamed that I have seen, or do I now dream that I do
perspect these strange accidents? have I been mocked with illusions? or are
my senses enchaunted; that I now do what I know not of, and remember what I
have but as yet surmised. Did I not set free thee beauteous infant of Egypt,
fair Cyafa, from the burning Cave of Artimagus? were not these hands employed
for the delivery of the knight of the goulden shield from ye tyranny of that
devilish Giant Cardigan? and did not these eyes (unfortunate because my eyes)
cast gentle loue-entertaining glaunces, on the diuinest perfecture of Nature?
and is not this the wherry-boate, wherein with Artimagus that counterfaite
fisherman I happily took up my lodging? yes, true; No, it is not so. But (O
Mahomet) if I be deceived, why have thou suffered such vain fancies to
inhabit my mortal brains? But if it be true, dear GOD of our forefathers,
why have thou so unhappily berest me of my loving and learned foster-father?
And eake Artimagus, if thou have been with me, whether art thou gone? after
thy departure leaving thy foster-sonne accoasting this strange and unknown
region: with this word, the warm tears trickled down his cheeks; but
remembering himself, he wiped his eyes, and buckling on his helmet, he went
to the forepart of the boat (which surged right under the foot of Malagdas
mountain) and taking his footehold, Oceander is cast on the shore of Malagdas
Island.
he assayed to leap a land: but in his rise, a boisterous (spel-raised)
billowe so unhappily turned the boat sidelong, as, his feet slipping,
Oceander fell into water, where he stuck knee-deepe in the sands where, by
reason his boat was suddenly departed, he was forced to stay helpelesse, not
being able, for the danger one way, and for his sticking fast, on the other
side, either by one means or other to relieve himself; until by the
providence of the almighty (who in his mercy pitied his miseries) sense and
shape-reaued Olbiocles, the unfortunate father of distressed though not known
to be) Oceander, according to his accustomed order, descended that inchaunted
hill, to take his morninges draught at the brinkes of the brinish Ocean; when
espying an armed knight unhappily suffering his lives shipwreck on the
swallowing quicksands, he set up his stiff backearming bristles; and with a
greisly grunt grinding his fomed tushes together, he wallowed into the water;
with open mouth thinking (as he had done diverse) to have crushed the armoure
of Oceander in a thousand pieces: Olbiocles delivers Oceander from drowning.
but seeing that by reason of the good temperature of the metal, as also the
strong enchauntment thereof, he could not hurt it, he grasped faster hold,
and in his mouth, he carried him presently out of the water, and shaking his
heary hide, he began to ascend the mountain, with intent to have borne him
unto his beastly Stye, which he had framed amongst the bushes of the
mountain. Which the valourous knight of the sea seeing, and withal perceiving
that now or never it was time to free himself; he striued to set his foot
on the ground: where obtaining sure footing, he on the sudden leaped out with
such a forcible spring, as in a moment he got himself from the jaws of the
inchaunted beast: which seeing hinselfe bereaved of his prey, gave such a
groan and gnashed together his teeth so irefully, as the whole mountain
trembled at the terrible noise thereof, and therewith he ran fiercely against
Oceander, and with his ironlike tushes, Oceander fights with the inchaunted
Boar.
he steake the defending shield with so irresistible a fury, as, maugre his
head, the knight of the sea was feign to forsake his houlde, and kneeling to
the ground, to cry, Ha most mighty Mahomet; and shall I now be shamed by a
sowes son, and after so many conquests, become the prey to a beastly swine?
Ah, God of our progenitors, if it be thy will, by thy dread power defend
me from my unreasonable, unmerciful adversary. This said, with his good
sword Scindifer, he pointed so sound a period on the gammon of the savage
beast, as had it hit upon an Anuille, it would undoubtedly have cleft it
asunder in the midst; so maine was the blow, sent by more then almost an
humane fury: which notwithstanding, no more entered into the inchaunted skin,
then an if the sword had been of wood, and the Boar of steel. Wherewith
the knight of the Sea was so amazed, as he was at his wits end, not knowing
which way well to clear himself of so dangerous a conflict: But seeing there
was no other worst (if the worst should come) but death, and that, (...),
Death is the end of every mortal man,


He determined to do his utmost to get the conquest and gain his freedom,
and once more to try the whole hazard of his good fortunes. But because his
good sword could do him but small avail, in that the Boares skin was
vnpierceable, he cried, help Mahomet: and therewith stepping to an Oak tree
(whose branches had already borne the bitter blasts of an hundred winters) to
pull some heavy clubbe from the withered stock, he perceived therevnder, the
vndisseuered bones of a man, Curio Olbiocles Pages bones found by Oceander.
covered over with sundry pieces of armor; upon the shield whereof (whose
devise was a Leopard) were raggedly engraued these few verses, Hard is thy
temper, harder is thy hap,
Poor shield, disfurnished of princely master;
Whose chance mischaunced, and whose sad mishap
If I should seem to wail in such disaster,
My pearled tears, then rain, should shower down faster.
For why, he is transmuted to a Boar,
From which he never shall be changed more.


And a little below.

Alas that women kind should have their will,
Since their conceits, bend only unto ill,
Unfortunate CVRIO.
Oceander perceives the Boar to be some enchau^ted knight.
As soon as Oceander had read them, he perceived, that undoubtedly that Boar,
wherewith he did combat, was the unhappy owner of that harness, for whose
metamorphosing the unfortunate dead Page had lamented in such his doleful
engraven Elegy. Wherefore, determining not longer to seek his destruction, but
redemption from the inchauntment; he endeavored himself to the finding out
of the hidden limits of that wonderful enchauntment: which, by the
vnapproaching of the, Boar unto him, effecting, he incontinently rushed upon
the Boar, and in his armed hands clasping his horny feet, the valourous
knight of the Sea, or ever the beast was aware of him, The inchau^tment
finished, and Olbiocles restored to his ^hape.
dragged him forcibly from out the circuit of the inchauntmente: which with a
terrible clappe of Thunder finishing, left the Grecian Prince to the fruition
of his former manlike shape and beautifullfeatures. And then Olbiocles; On my
knees (most valiant knight) I render thee humble and deserved thanks for this
my freedom; freedom (I say) from even the most wicked and devilish
imprisonment, that ever any mortal creature endured. For know, that not only
by the devilish spelles of a most damned witch Malagda, I was straungely
enstraunged from my manlike features; but also in such wonderful sort,
besotted in my senses; as, Those that are only led by the appetite, following
but what their outward senses lead them to, are no whit different from brute
beasts; who herein especially differ from man; In that he is endued with
reason. No pleasure but has his pain.
what I was, what was good, what was bad, I neither knew nor remembered: but as
I was so I lived, a swinish life, only preserved in life for the lustful
pleasures of the wicked inchau^tresse; of whose accursed body I had more often
beastly fruition, then the heavens of the sun since my metamorphosing: yet in
my pleasure, I was continually rated for slaying of her son Coaran, in
defense of the beawtious Princess Vpiora, as rather had I to have been dead,
then so to have endured such assiduous vp-brayding: from which (thanks be to
the almighty) I am thus happily by your knightly valor at length released: for
which I should think my self ingrate, if I should not stand obliged, in an
eternal bond of amity unto you, for this vnrequitable adiument: herewith
Olbiocles would have kissed Oceanders gauntlet, in token of gratefulness. But
he (in whom nature had happily planted chivalry and courtesy) would not
suffer such humility, but turning his back to him, he hastily ran unto the
seaside after the flying transfugant Malagda: with whom he no sooner leaped
into her ferrie boat, but that as seeming ouer-loaden, it suddenly sunk under
water: whereat leaving the noble minded Prince Olbiocles exceedingly amazed,
we will a while forsake this accursed Island, to turn our style a little to
the knight with the goulden shield, Oceander pursues Malagda.
and our worthy peers of Grecia.

CHAP. XV.
How Phianora arrived at the city of Constantinople, where she found the
Emperor Claranax his court in exceeding sadness, how she proclaimed a Just
for the precious mantle of Mardegua, her conquest over many Knights, and
combat with the Knight of the Sea.

PHianora in such sort (as you heard) being departed in the wherrie of the
Inchauntresse wicked Mardigua, from the shoares of Africa, as ashamed of her
disclosure of Oceander, in all have shaped forth her journey to the coasts of
Grecia, when surging within a short while before the havens mouth of
Constantinople, they perceived there neither ship, Phianora arriueth at
Constantinople.
nor men of any reckoning; but only a few fisher-boates for to apport there.
Which solitary spectacle so amated the young Princess, as for very grief to
see so famous an harbor, so little frequented now, which in times past, yea
even within her own fathers memory, had been the only receptacle for all,
both heathen and christian nations; ye tears trickled down so abunda^tly, by
her cheeks, as for very pity thereof the (though otherwise pitiless)
Inchauntresse, could not choose but comfort her up with these kind speeches;

Perplex not thy self in this sort (dear daughter) with the sudden sorrow
conceived for so strange an alteration. For of this I shall assure thee, that
yer I (as old as I am) should die, Phianora shall see the court of
Constantinople far more famous and frequented, then hitherto any enrowled
record has left in notice. With these words the Princess was somewhat
comforted: and taking heart of grace, as hoping for better fortune to befall so
fair a city, she entreated the witch to put to land: which Mardigua
performing, they both together passed up unto the Emperor Claranax his palace:
where they found the hall, parlour, and galleries, hung all with sable
hanginges; The Grecian court, in a dead quietness.
the Knights and Ladies, attenda^ts, clothed in mourning vestures; bearing in
their looks the signs of sorrow, and breathing from their hearts center
meteorized sighs, multiplied by the continual commemorations of their
misfortunes: at the upper end of the galleries, the lively images of the
Emperor Claranax and the Empress Basilia were engraued in alablaster in full
proportio^s, hanging their heads in their bosoms, and with their naked hands
instead of a Mounde, vphoulding a deaths head: whereupon in latin characters
was written; NOSTRAE SPES TANTA SALVTIS. This is our only hope of safety.


At this sad sight, Phianora was exceedingly moved to compassionate sorrow,
insomuch as she could not refrain from kissing the hands of the stony
pictures; saying, ha, my royal friends, how greatly is fortune to blame for
affre^ting you in such cruel manner! Once before have I vowed, and hear
again do I avouch, an eternal enquest after your most distressed children,
for whose loss you thus languish, and for whose mischaunces you are grown
thus miserable: with these speeches she effused her sorrows: which were no
sooner ending, but that the Emperor and the Empress Basilia, The Emperor and
the empress mourn for the loss of their children.
all attired in a sad suite of black velvet, entered into the gallerie, with
such cast down countenances, as (respecting only their sad entercoursings)
they never so much as regarded the two strangers Phianora and Mardigua; until
they so nigh approached them; as Phianora, doing her duty, in this manner
raised the Emperor from his melancholy; Mighty Emperor, and my dread
sovereign Queen Basilia, the gracious god of heaven, Phianoras salute unto
them*
for the love of his dear son Jesus Christ, comfort up your disconsolate
thoughts; and of his mercy, free you from your long-endured misery: by ye
happy resending of your hapless children. The Emperor hearing this
salutation, could not but in courtesy regreet the stranger: and therefore
kindly embracing Phianora about the gorget, with his eyes full of brinish
tears, Knight of ye goulden shield (quoth he) how much I am endebted unto thee
for thy continual deprecations to the highest, for my happiness, I am not
able to explain: only with thanks I must needs express the great good will
that I bear unto thee, whose demerits have more then firmly obliged me, in
an vndissolvable bond of eternal amity.

Ha, my good Lord (answered Phianora) I thank your Majesty that you do so
graciously accept of my poor and humble service: which since with such love it
is recompe^ced, I protest before the almighty, never to slack, until by Gods
gracious help, I shall regaine your, almost irrepairable and vnhopeable
comfort; that once again I may with joy behold the Court of Grecia to be
replenished with as many valiant and undaunted Champions, as ever hitherto,
you may remember it. And to that end, I beseech your Highness, to grant me
a commission, to proclaim solemn tiltes and tourneis to be houlden on the
plain before the city, whereunto under safe conduct and assurance, the
worthiest Knights of all nations may safely repair: thereby not only to know
what valorous warriors your Grecian Dominions may affoorde, but also to make
known unto your neighboring Potentates (that wonder at your glories dimnesse)
that even in your greatest misfortunes your knightly royalty cannot be
repressed. Later anguis in herba. A treacherous purpose under the mask of a
gorgeous prize,
Grant it (great governor quoth Mardegua) and for the accustomed victors
prize, I shall propose a gorgeous mantle of my own making, so curiously
wrought, and costly enchaced with precious stones and pearls, as he that
wins it, shall think himself blessed to be the wearer of so rich a
garment. The good Emperor thanking them for their courtesies, granted them
their requests; with promise that himself to the second vanquisher, would
give as rich a collar of gould as ever came about any Princes neck in
Christendom: al which being concluded on, they conducted each other into the
parlour. They had not talked any long time of their intents, before the tables
were covered; and the meat being served in, they fell to their victuals: from
ye which after a little recreation of walking in the Emperors garden, they
departed to their lodgings, giving charge unto certain trusty knight-heralds,
to proclaim a Just to be houlden for all comers on the plain before the
famous City of Constantinople. Iusts and tourneis proclaimed.
Wherein to be brief, such was the exceeding diligence of the messengers, as
the rumor thereof spread both far and near unto the Courts of the most
mightiest christian Princes: Insomuch as by ye time appointed (which was 6.
months) the whole haven of Constantinople was almost choked with multitude of
ships of all neighboring nations: Many princes and kings repair to the
Tourneme^ts. Rubaldo. Anaxia. Morcauill. Fiardon. Zaama.
such an infinite number of Knights and Gentlemen arrived, within that short
time, on the fertile shoares of Grecia. For first, from Hungaria, came the good
King Rubaldo with his Queen Anaxia, and his young son Morcauil; who being
newly dubbed a Knight, most earnestly excited his father unto that journey:
with these also came the old knight of Bohemia, Fyardon his Queen Zaama, and
his son and nephews, Arcanio, Arcanio.
Tholon, Tholon.
and Thiorin. Thiorin
The aged king of Transiluania also sent a cousen of his named Kauiscon,
Kauiscon.
his heir apparent adopted, with a great troop of that country knights and
gentlemen for his attendants. Thither also came a strong Pagan, with a great
retinue of his country knights, from the shoares of Danuby, son to the
mighty Orbirrohell, called by ye right name Xanzimar; Xanzimar.
but in his pride usurping the title of The Christians Terrifier. All which
being (as aforesaid) arrived at Constantinople, pitched their tents (after
their salutations to the Emperor) round about the plain before the walls of
the City: which were placed in such order about ye Lists, as they seemed like
a company of petty villages, about some great borough Town. With which sight
not only ye Emperor, Empress, and the Knight of the goulden shield, but also
Mardegua (as she whose cunning invention had conspired some worthy knights
destruction) greatly rejoiced: insomuch as now with great preparation they stayed
for the day of pleasure prefixed. Which being approached, they no sooner espied
the morninges mistress, with disheueled tressalines to mount her iuorie
chariot, but they endossed on their armours; and on their foming coursers,
they praunced up and down before the Listes, awayting the arrival of the
Grecian Challengers: who by reason that that morning ye Emperor found himself
somewhat ill at ease; and also the King of Bohemia, by reason of his late long
journey, was faint and weary, as yet had no leisure to come. And in the mean
time, the alyen Knights doing their deuoyres, spent the whole fore-noone in
Iusting: Iusting among the stranger Knights.
which was very valiauntly performed, to the foil of many good Knights, and
the brasting of many strong lances. At the end whereof, a lusty knight
attendant of Xanzimar (for he scorned to just with the basest himself) named
Martio, remained with the honor of the field; having since his first
encountering, overthrown sixteen Transiluanian knights to the ground: from
whom (though against the law) he took away both horse and harness.

After dinner was ended in the Emperors palace, the day grew so serene and
pleasant by reason of the bright ascent of the days illustratour, into the
top-front of the Zodiac; as the Emperor Claranax his feeble mind was
exceedingly refreshed: and therefore taking the oulde King Fiardon, of Bohemia
(to whose cheeks also the estiue heat had added a crimoson blush) by the
age-wrinkled hands, Claranax and Fiardon go to behold the Journey.
he chearefully said; Brother of Bohemia though even now fainte sickness
made us give small respect unto our Princely pastimes: yet now again, the
fair sunshine inuiteth us to the conspecting of our royal feats of
late-renewed Knight-hoode. From the view whereof I protest I would not be any
longer absent, for twice the price of the inestimable Mantle of Mardegua; such
heroicke encouragement, I know, my presence will infuse into the undaunted
hearts of my Grecian Companions. Accompany me therefore dear friend O cousen
Fyardon, with a merry countenance, unto the behoulding of our prepared Iustes:
which only to relieve the drooping sadness of sorrowful Greekish souls, was
purposely proclaimed, by the worthy Knight of the goulden shield: whose
exquisite a bearing against these repaired forrainers, shall win him the
deserved name of the flower of Chivalry. In this sort the good Emperor
invited the old Bohemian King, to the behoulding of the Iusts: who gladly
granting his highness request, staying his feeble joints with an Iuorie
staff, presently departed with him unto the great Towers of the City gate;
which had been in former times erected to the same intent and purpose: to
the top whereof ascending, they might at ease ouer-view ye whole circuit of
the newe-suburbized pauilions: which being of sundry Nations, and therefore of
diverse fashions, drew great delight unto ye hearts of the great Potentates, who
now had fresh occasion of calling to mind their wonted such like pleasures.

The Kings, Queens, and Ladies placed.
The Emperor Claranax, in this sort, with the Kings of Hungary, and Bohemia,
the Empress Basilia, the Queens Anaxia, Zaama, and an infinite number of most
beautiful Ladies, amongst whom (as Cynthia amongst a troop of stars) the
fair young Princess of Sparta, Rosamyra, Rosamyra of whom you shall hear
more in the second part of this history.
eldest sister to the toward Knight Ismerion, shone forth her silver rays,
which (seconding unmatchable fair Phianora) was only admired of the amazed
gazers; but especially of the exquisite Prince of Transiluania: whose hap if it
had been to have had her, had been most happy: but or ever he could come
to solicit her, she was unfortunately slain by the cruel Pagan King of
Danuby; as you shall hear related in the second part of this present history.

The Emperor and Empress being placed, there entered up into a high
scaffold, for Judges of the field, Judges of the field.
four very ancient Knights of Constantinople, named Sornio, Florido, Sanio,
and Sigando: who commanding the trumpets to be sounded, gave license to the
knights that would, to do their deuoires. Then entered there into the Lists,
three Grecian Knights, Grecian knights, unhorsed by Martio, Iperom, and Peronu.
with their lances in their reastes; who were encountered and unhorsed by
Martio, and two other sturdie Pagans, Iperom, and Perronu: who abore themselves
so valiauntly against the Greeks, as in less then a quarter of an hour, they
vanquished a dozen worthy Constantinopolitans, approved Knights. Whereat the
Emperor looked very sad, saying; I pray God we have a better ending then we
have had a beginning: or else shame and woe to the Grecian Knight-hoode.

Herewith he turned about to the King Rubaldo, with intent to require his
help toward the recovery of his Grecian credit. But yer he could utter
his mind, he was recalled to the battlementes, by the old King, of Bohemia;
who showed him him three exquisite young Knights all in white armor (who by
their hero^call demeanours gave perfect notyce of their wonderful valor)
whom when the Emperor saw, he highly commended their courageous carriages;
and therefore earnestly wished to see them run their carriere: which he no
sooner wished, but they performed it with such irresistible fury; Martio and
^pecom, Pe^o^u, vnhors^ed by the Bohemian princes. Kanzimar en^reth the ^istes.
as at their forceable fierce shockes (without any resistaunce) both their
enemies and horses, were overthrown to the ground. Which Xanzimar the devilish
Pagan perceiving, with a monstrous clamor he cried out to his aduenturing
knights of Danuby, to withdraw themselves from the combat; for he only
would be the executioner of the young Greek Champions tragedies: and with a
mighty Pinetree lance in his reast, he ran such a strong carryere against
Thyorin, as although the Bohemians spear gave him a shr^wde shocke in the
encounter, he so roughly rushed his Lance against the young Knights gorget,
as (giving him a sore wound) he bare him topsy turuy over his horse croope to
the ground: Thioron dismounted.
and then rushing in with the other two Knights Arcanio and Tholon, with his
fauchon he so stoutly behaved himself against them, as many times not only
Tholon, but also the Bohemian Prince himself, he made grieffully to groan
under his heavy strokes. Nevertheless so exceeding courageous was the
resistaunce of the valiant Knights, as in spite of his heart he was sometimes
enforced to confess his foolish hardiness, in attempting so dangerous a
conquest.

But, now too late he stood to repent him: and therefore, seeing how it
stood upon his safety to rid him speedily from two such fierce enemies,
he raised himself upright in his stirrops, and (casting his crooked shield
behind him) with his sword in both his hands, Tholo^s arm disiointed from
his shoulder.
he struck such a resistlesse blow on the shield-arme of Tholon, as
disiointing it from the shoulder, he made him for safety of his life to turn
his horse head, and fly amain for some succor to the Surgeons of the
Emperor. Now God of heaven (quoth the good Emperor weeping) since the time of
my youth have I not seen a more fiercer combattante, then yonder mighty and
valiant Knight of Danuby: of my life, he is unmatchable; and from him, no
Grecian, shall be ever able to receive honor. Ha, my dear son and friends
Olbiocles, Orthisius, and Alfortio, that you were but here to behold this
terrible Champion; for well I know, you would leese your lives, but you would
wreake vengeance on the head of you proud insulter. Thus lamented the good
Prorex his misfortunes, thinking assuredly, that never again the Grecians
should fend the Listes with victory: for also, by this time was the brave
Bohemian Prince Arcanio beaten off from his horse, and grievously wounded.
Arcanio beaten from his horse, and wounded.
Which the prince of Hungary perceiving, he stepped before Xanzimar, and with
his courtelax he distributed such sound buffets on the helmet of the
Danubian, as had he not the better defended his head with his steely shield,
his curled Peticranion had been crazed: but the furious Pagan, rather
incensed, then daunted with the young knights strokes; brandished his fauchon
so strongly over the helmet of prince Morcauill, as paring away his whole plume
of crimson colored feathers, and a great part of his crest, Morcauill smitten
dow^
he sent him headlong to associate his fore-foyled friend Arcanio. But now
were the cheerful clamors huge and mighty of the Pagans attendants, for joy
of their Princes victories: which had so daunted the Grecian knights, The
Grecian knights daunted.
as Xanzimar for more than half an hour trauersed up and down the Lists,
without disturbance of any one offering the encounter. Wherefore, by reason of
the fast approaching of the night, he was permitted with honor of that days
Just to return for that night unto his tents: where leaving him, a joyful man
for his gotten glory, unto his rest; in the mean while, convert we our style
to our stories only subject, the heroicke and valorous knight of the Sea: who
(as you have heard) being departed from the knight of the Leopard, into the
boat of the Inchauntresse Malagda, was thought of Olbiocles, to be drowned in
the surging Ocean: wherein, indeed he was exceedingly deluded by the cunning
of the Inchauntresse. For she knowing the great love that Olbiocles did bear
his worthy deliverer, had by her cunning framed that monstrous billow, to seem
to ouerswallowe the enchaunted wherry-boate; to the end that thereby she might
perplex the friendly thoughts of the worthy Greek; who she knew would
extremely bewail the death of so good a Champion. But (to be brief) she
loved herself too well to be her lives only abbridger: and therefore she
refrained from such a dangerous reuengement. But knowing by her art of the
subtle dealing of the wicked Inchauntresse Mardegua, she determined to bring
Oceander, to the aduenturing for so mischievous a prize, as the rich proposed
mantle: The inchaun^ed mantle of Mardigua.
which was so cunningly enchaunted, as if he did but wear it, he should
presently, become frantic, to his own destruction. Wherefore (after a long
sailing) turning herself toward the knight of the sea (as if amazed at his
presence) she suddenly started back, and then falling prostrate on her knees,
she most pitifully with floudes of effused tears, Malagdas submission.
besought him of mercy for her misdeedes; beseeching him by the duty he owed
to his dear fostermother Kanira, that he would slack his incensed fury, and
not in his anger execute any evil against her, whose life was subject to do
his liking, ^aire pretext ^f a foul pre^nce.
and whose art and learning tended only unto his advancement: and therewithal
she up and told him of ye great Iousts at Constantinople, and the rich prize
proposed; which she was assured he should conquest, by reason of his
matchless fortitude: and with these fained fair words Syren-like charming
the anger of Oceander, she kissed his armed foot, and with a trembling heart
expected the doubtful answer of the valourous Prince. Who irefully knitting
his brows, Oceander.
Minion (said he) take heed, that what thou say, be true: for else I vow
by Mahomet the deified Prophet of our holy ancestoures, that with my sword I
shall disseuer thy body into as many pieces, as thy withered hide is enwrapped
into wrinkles: make have therefore to Constantinople, that, for thy lives
safety, I may speedily find thy actions according to thy plighted
protestations. The cunning woman laughed in her sleeue at the foolish pity of
the worthy knight: whose doleful tragedy in her wicked thoughts, she already
(though vainly) supposed acted. And therefore using her might and maine, art
and skille, to the forwarding of the journey, she made cross ye seas with such
celeritie, as by that time the beauteous Aurora had, with vermilion-blushing
cheeks, forsaken the saffron couche of her loathsome age-wearied lover Tython;
Oceander and Malagda apport at Constantinople.
they safely apported the shoares of Grecia: where they no sooner landed, and
pitched their Pauilion; but that they were visited by an infinite number of
Pages, who enquired of him both his name and country: whereto he answered, he
was called of his countrymen, the knight of the sea, brought up in Africa,
under the virtuous and noble Queen Kanira of Carthage; for whose sake he was
thither repaired, by force of arms, to win away the prize-proposed mantle,
from the proudest that dared to defend it against him. The Pages hearing his
speeches, and judging him to be of small force, because of his few
attendants, laughed at his boldness; saying, they hoped yer it were noone, to
see him foiled by some base cowardly carpet knight: and therewith departing,
The second days iustes.
they left him to the expecting the second days Ioustes inition. To the which
(the Emperor, Empress, and Judges of the field being placed on their
scaffolds, as aforesaid) the trumpets sounding, lent license to the attending
Champions, to give their valourous onsets. And therefore Xanzimar and Phianora
fewtring their spears against each other, Xanzimar and Phianora just.
with a strong carreire met together so fiercely, as both their Lances
breaking, without any harm, being not so much as once diseased by their
shocke, they passed by each other; and either of them, lightly providing
himself of new weapons, prepared himself to the second encounter: which was
performed so courageously by the Knight of the Olive branch (for such was the
device, by the advice of the wicked witch Mardegua, of the English Princess
at this time) as pearcing with her steely pointed Lance quite through,
Xanzimar borne out of his sadle by Phianora.
both sheelde and cuirace of the furious Pagan, she bare him at her spears
point clean out of his saddle, laying him almost breath less upon the cold
earth: from whence in a swoune, he was speedily conveyed by his attendantes,
to his Pauilion, to he healed from his deep struck iction.

For anger of their Lord Xanzimars overthrow, the misbeleeuing Pagans, thick
and threefould, clustered to combat the worthy knight of the Oliue-braunche:
The Danubians pel-mell assault Phianora.
but so valourously did the worthy English Damozell distribute her iron alms
amongst the thickest of that rabble multitude, as in a moment she brought more
then nineteen of them, with crased crowns to their Beso las tierras:
insomuch, as now, their courages being somewhat cooled, they began to keep
somewhat more aloof from her, then they were wont. Wherefore at pleasure she
might praunce up and down the Lists, without any disturbance. In which ease
having continued the better part of two hours (seeing no more to adventure the
combat) she dismounted her courser; and leaning against the railes of the
Listes, she there rested her wearyed limbs: which mild Zephirus with gentle
breath, so pleasingly cooled, as (the hot swelter of her sweat abated) her
late-enfeebled body began to be refreshed; and anewe to receive, as it were a
second force and vigor. Which, that choice flower of vnmatchfull Chiualry,
Oceander, sufficiently peceiuing; with ye old witch Malagda, in steed of a
Page to carry his sword, excellently accoustred in his admirably-inchaunted
watchet armor, he praunced in most stately manner, toward the Pauilions of
vanquished Xanzimar: and taking out a strong and mighty spear, cut out of the
heart of a hard knotty oak, Oceander enters the lists against Phianora.
he entered into the Lists; and clashing the trunchion end of his Lau^ce, with
great force against his shield, he gave signal unto the combat. Which the
worthy maiden knight understanding, she presently remounted her bit-champing
Courser, and taking a sturdie tough Lance in her hand, with a swift carryere,
she spurred toward the knight of the Sea: A sharp combat.
who regreeted her with as great forwardness; insomuch as the very earth
seemed scarcely to bend under their horses hooues; with such exceeding
celeritte they passed to the encounter. Their meeting was wondrous sudden:
and though the shocke was most fierce and forcible; yet only on their
shieldes, they brast their knottie staves, which in a thousand pieces flewe
shiuering unto the Element; and without moving in their saddles, they passed
by each other, without any other harm, the^ a small wound, which Phianora
received, through her shield into her shoulder; Oceander by reason of the
incomparable goodness of his armor, scaping scotfree from his femall enemies
fury. But now are they providing for the second encounter: and the trumpets
sommoning them to do their deuoiers with new refreshed courages they spurred
their ready Palfreyes to their swift carreiring: Phianora both horse and man
borne to the earth. Oceander virhorsed by her.
and leaueling their Lances at each others helmet, they met with such a
mighty and irresistible felnesse; as the knight of the sea, having borne his
adversary both horse and man to the ground, was enforced by his foes fortitude
(though against his will) to caper over his horses croope for company.

In this sort being both dispalfreyed, they lightly leapt upon their feet,
and unsheathing their trusty Curtelaxes, with their advanced shieldes before
them, they menacingly marched unto each other, and with their swords, laying
load upon their steely burgonets, each endeauored his uttermost against his
adversary; so as neither of them having the victory, though Oceander had the
better, they continued an whole hours combat, in such courageous, never
ceasing sort, as both Greeks and aliens stood by, all amazed at their so
long-endured contention: which (no doubt) had lasted longer, had not the
glorious Princess Phianora, by reason of her bloudes effusion, out of her
deepe-gashed wounds, on a sudden, fainted before the feet of her enemy; who
sorrowed at her disparagement more then if he had lost the conquest. And
therefore sending her by her attending sorrowful Pages to her chamber, he
repaired unto the scaffolde; at the hands of the Judges, to receive his honor
of the Just, conquered in so dangerous a conflict. Oceander ^^^neth the h^nour
of the lusts.
The judges hearing him demand but what was just, allotting to the wounded
knight of the Oliue-braunch, the second; they willingly tendered unto him then,
for winning the first place in ye conquest, ye gorgeous and precious mantle of
ye deceitful Inchau^tresse Mardigua: who, together with Malagda, inwardly
rejoiced at their so well (vnforeco^plotted) performed stratagem.

CHP. XVI.
Oceanders delivery from the inchaunted Mantle of Mardegua, by the coming of
Artimagus his messenger: with whom the knight of the Sea departed to the wise
man's cell: of the death of Artimagus, and the sorrowful mourning of the
Carthaginians for him.

QVestionlesse the wickedness of these two mischievous women was exceeding
monstr^us, in such a villainous sort to entangle such rare Parragons of prowess
within the nets of their inuentiue consp^racie: who brought about their drift
so cunningly, A mischievous treachery, almost inevitable.
as needs, and of force, either Phianora, or Oceander must perish by their
contriuements; which only in their hearts the Inchauntresses desired: and
therefore Mardegua caused Phianora to change her shield of gould which too
well was known to ye knt^ht of ye sea, into the shield of the Olive branch; to
ye end, that by Oceander (of whose arrival by her art she fore-vnderstoode)
she might receive her deaths wound; and (herein joining with Malagda) the
valourous knight of the sea, by adorning him self with the precious mantle,
might by the operative force of the strong enchauntment, become his own cruel
executioner. Which indeed, he had done, had not their wicked complets been
cunningly ouerreached, by the more then natural inventions of Artimagus: whose
special regard over his dear foster child caused him in have to prevent
these mischiefs, by sending his daughter Magartes Magartes.
in present embassage, to the famous City Constantinople: who, only attended
on by a pair of Dwarfes, pressed through the multitude, toward the knight of
the Sea: to whom (after duty to the Emperor) she in this wise delivered the
message of her father:

All health and happiness be restored to the wise man my father Artimagus:
Her message from Artimagus to Oceander. Wisdom providence, and good, counsel
preuenteth the greates^ mischief.
who, tendering thy safety; by virtue of thy obedience unto him, charge thee
by me, that leaving the pernicious glory of the prize, thou presently depart
with me unto his Cell; where he lies between life and death, sorrowfully
expecting thy speedy repair unto him: and therewith snatching the mantle
(which he was casting about his shoulders) out of his hand, she clapped it
over the back of the wicked Inchauntresse Mardigua (who little thought of such
a mischief) and presently poasting away with Oceander, she never ceased till
they were all embarked in the Inchaunted whery-boat: wherein, having put from
the shores of Gretia, they committed themselves to the finishing of their long
and dangerous journey; to the great joy of Magartes, whose repair had thus
happily repriued Oceander Oceander delivered from Mardeguas mantle.
from so great a mischief; and on the contrary, to the exceeding grief of
the miserable and wretched woman M^rdegua. Upon whose body and boanes the
enchaunted p^yson of the mantle took such operative power; as all her body
swelling monstrously, her hair standing upright upon her head, and the very
skin crumpling into little roules upon her ^nuenomed members, put her to such
extreme pain, Incidit in praprium frau^ ^^^lerata caput. Mardegua whipped
(...) her own (...)
as enforced by the intollerablenesse of her cruel tormente, and anguishe,
she galloped up and down the Listyarde, with hideous shrickes and roaring,
emploring every particular amazed behoulder, with his death-working Cortelaxe,
to rid her (most wretched wight) out of her most miserable languor. But
finding none so hard heart^d, as to work her tragedy, she dismounted her
Palfrey; and mounting up the top of the City walls, from the highest
Battlementes thereof, She waxes frantic with torments of her mantle, and
throws her self into the sea.
she desperately cast down her excruciated carcass, into the ditches: which
loath to bury so badde a creature, in their speedy current, they presently
conueighed her unto the Adriaticke sea; where what became of her body or mantle
afterward, was never since, either known or heard of. But in the mean
while, the good Emperor Claranax, and all the worthy order of knighthoode
there congregated were so amazed at that sudden happenned sorrowful accident, as
without any word speaking they stood for a great while gazing one another in
the face; not knowing whether to their left hand, or to their right (they were
so astonished) for to turn themselves: to which their amazement, well we will
leave them, to welcome our worthy knight of the sea, to ye sunburnt coasts of
Africa: with with his tears he joyfully saluting, Oceander arriueth at Carthage.
he speedily poasted to the fair City of Carthage; where he found the
inhabitants in exceeding sadness, for the assured report of the extreme
sickness of the wise Artimagus; Artimagus sick.
whose age had brought such anguish, and whose approaching death would
prognosticate their dreadful destruction. The valorous knight was stricken to
the heart, with this rumor; and therefore hasted the faster toward the Castle
Carzar: where he was kindly (though sorrowfully) entertained by the woeful
Queen Kanira: Queen Kaniras salute ^o Oceander.
who kissing his cheek very tenderly, with her eyes fraught with tears, and a
trembling voice; I would to the Gods (she said) that either thou had come
sooner, or else not repaired so soon to this so dispaireful a Castle; whose
hard walls harbor none but heavy hearts, ready to break in pieces for
thinking of their approaching miseries. For know (dear fosterchilde) that my
dear brother the wise Artimagus (whose welbeing was my souls comfort) has
his life dated at a present period, and lying panting and almost breathelesse
upon a down soft Pallade, leaves us poor wretched creatures, fearfully
expecting his latter gasp: which least it be finished before you see him. I
shall hastily lead you into his chamber; that into the closure of your bosom,
as he most desires, he may with ioyfulnesse yielde up the vnlasting lease of
his lingering life.

With these words, the woeful Queen conducted Oceander, unto the lodging of
her brother Artimagus Oceander in presence of Artimagus.
^on whose armed personage the good old man, no sooner cast his dim eyes, but
that they perceived how his color freshly revived in the pale cinders of his
thin cheeks, and a vermilion tincture, already ginne plead a new
possession in his sunken mansions; also his spirits to receive fresh vigor, by
the life enfusing presence of Oceander: by whose armed hands the wiseman
shaking him; with an hollow voice and a deathlike sound, Artimagus his welcome
to Ocea^der.
on this manner (weeping for very joy) he softlye breathed out this welcome.

Ha, ha, my dear foster-sonne Oceander, dearer unto me then my very souls
essential substance; sweet Oceander, how welcome art thou unto me! and how
exceedingly is my departing spirit refreshed by thy happy presence! Infinitely
surely am I bound to thank the heavens arch-ruler, for thy safe and happy
delivery from ye mischievous co^plots of most wicked sorceresses: who had
laid deceitful snares by their cunning enchauntme^ts for to intrappe thee;
without either respect of thy valors virtue, or the highest Mahomets
reuengeance. Alas my sweet son, little did thou suspect yt when thou
had conquered ye mantle, thou did with the improvident trauailer, seek
for shelter under the bright scales of a venomous serpent. For, if thou had
but worn it, thou should have endured stranger tortures, then did
Prometheus (fastened to the mountain Caucasus) under ye crooked beak of ye
never ceasing heart-deuouring Vulture: only herein, your torments differed,
that with your own hands you should end your miserable life, when this languor
shall last unfinished.

This, yea this only, was the cause of my grief; and only to release thee
from this wretchedness, did I send my daughter Magartez unto thee, to fetch
thee speedily unto me: for whose good and prosperous fortunes I have spent my
life and used my learning in such sort, as when ye times shall fully be
expired, the whole world shall wonder at thy chances. For in this same little
scrowle of gilded parchme^t, Read of this in the last Chapter.
which thou see here covered over with these leaves of brass, is contained
the rarest (...) approved skill: whose leaves are fast bound with so strong
Enchauntments, as they never shall be opened, until a certain secret time
prefixed by the Gods: wherein after thou have done thy parents the most
extreme wrong that may be offered, thou shall by this, come to the true
knowledge of thy pedigree, and the true and ever living savior, to thy own
great happiness, and the wonderful astonishment of all creatures, that shall
hear of so strange an happened accident. But dear son, though the time be
somewhat long yer these things come to pass, tempt not thy fortune by the
ardent desire of knowing these secrets, yer the time is fully expired of the
accomplishing of these wonders. For, at that very instant; shall my dear
daughter Magartez (to whose use I leave both my Cell and learning) present the
same unto thee: and then thou may bouldly vaunt thy self to be the most
happiest knight that ever was borne of any mother. Also dear Prince (for now
it concerns me to entreat thee) since every creature is subject unto death,
let me request thy patience for my departing out of this wretched life: and
though thy love thou bear unto me for my manifold adiuments in thy
necessities, be incomparable; yet when thou shall with those clear shining
glasses of thine eyes, behold this crazed carcass and withered body of mine,
both cold and liuelesse, suffer not thy sorrows to go beyond their bounds:
but with a moderate mean in greeuing, with some few tears trickling from thy
eyes fountains, bathe over my cold, pale, age-nipt cheeks, in token of thy
unstained affection; that Marga^tez (to whose artfull tuition I betake thee)
may the more willingly oblige her self in an eternal duty to thy preseraance,
and preferment in the field of glory, and triumphant honor, won by the
virtue of thy never ouermatched chivalry: and, now hoping that you will rest
somewhat satisfied with my sad departure, I humbly print on your steely
gauntlet the last signal of my affectionate and loyal friendship:

when, sweetly kissing ye iron glove, Artimagus depar^eth this life
he plucked his arms down into the bed, and turning his face from the
attendants, he quietly y^elded up his ghost; whilst his daughter Margartez,
with a cast-down countenance and a trembling voice (equivalent to ye cunning
couch of a sweet sounding Lute) dolefully sighed forth this sorrowful knell
verse; O Prophet great, which in the heavens above,
Thy residence do keep eternally,
Look down upon his soul with eyes of Love,
Which languishing in mickle misery,
With sighs and groans would to compassion move
Thy sacred soul; that since he needs must die,
His fleeting ghost may to the skies remove;
There to attend upon thy deity.


As soon as he was thoroughly dead, they most dolefully lamented over his
dead body, with such greeful groans, Carthaginians lament the death of
Artimagus.
cries and clamoures, as the whole Castle rang again of their mourning; so
loudly did their shreekes echo, and penetrate even into the vnder-cloudes of
heaven; so dolourously they bewailed the death of the most wise and learned
Lord Artimagus. Which their sad ceremonies being ended, they pretiously
embalmed his disentrailed body; and perfuming it with infinity of most sweet
odoures, they caused it, the very same night, to be carried in an Ebon Chariot,
into the midst of the market place of Carthage; where, before the sorrowful
Citizens, they consumed it unto ashes: and over the place where it was burned,
the loving Carthaginians, with a huge mass of pearls and treasure, Artimagus
funeral rites.
speedily erected a most fair Chapel, consecrated unto Mahomet: wherein for
many years together they kept sad ceremonies, in commemoration of this most
wonderfully wise Artimagus. Whose departed soul leaving to the censure of the
Highest, let us again r^^eit our speeches back to the famous Court of Grecia;
where, after her dangerous combat, we left the beauteous and warlike Phianora
in a pitiful plight, under the hand of well-experienced Chirurgeous.

CHAP. XVII.
How Phianora, being recured of her wounds, delivered the Knight of the
Leoparde from the enchauntmentes of Gola, and her sons Norin and Nigramounde;
whom she vanquished, and departed with him to the Rocky-Iland of
Ortolomorgantell.

RIght sore and dangerous were the wounds, that ye worthy daughter of
Argamonte, K. of fertile England, received in her late-foughte^ combat, with
the Knight of the Sea: nevertheless they nothing so much in comparison,
grieved her, as the vexation she received, by reason of the great care she had
to keep her self vndiscloased from the cunning Surgeo^s; Phianora still
co^celeth her self.
whom only by the continual wearing of her helmet, she kept from the
knowledge of her sex and features. But, as the more the mistrusting spy seeks
by his subtle carriage, and honest, fained conversation, to hide his secret
intent from his entercoursers, the more he is suspected of all men, and his
wicked drifts far narrowlier looked into: so with how much the greater diligent
care the beawtious Princess conserved her self from the knowledge of all men,
by so much the sooner insearching liar she was watched by the suspicious
Surgeons; who used all indifferent means possible to find out the cause of
her concealing: but to no purpose; though at length they espied her in her
secret closet, with her helmet unlaced, The Princess discovered by her
Surgeons.
and her yellowe golden lokes, such as the Poets have fained Ariadnes, smoothly
dissheuelled adowne her shoulders, proud to bear the burden of such
sun-excelling beauteous tressalines. Which so admired wonderment so soon as
they descried, they presently ran to tell the Empress and the Queens Basilia
and Zaama; who were then walked abroad into the royal ga^den. Who no sooner
heard the humiliated Surgeons, to man^fest the worthy knight of the Olive
brannch to be a Princess: but that, all amazed, they held up their lilly
hands to heaven, and shedding tears of joy; Oh God (quoth they) and is it
possible that in our sex should remain so invaluable valor? now God forbid
but that we speedily go and see so peerless a paragon. And therewith in all
have they ran unto the lodging of the Princess Phianora: Phianora departs
in secret from the Court.
where they found her missing, her armor gone, and only one Page in all the
Palace that could tell any tidings of her departure. Wherefore with great
grief they searched about the chamber, to see if they could find any thing
of her, for to reserve as a lasting remembrance: and finding nothing but only
a ruffled-vp piece of paper, they unfolded it open, and with tears in their
eyes, they jointly read these verses, in manner of a sonet, following; The
Mariner amid the Marine deep, Phianorae* Epitimen.

By boystrous blast of wind unkindly tossed,
His mounting bark from ragged rocks can keep,
By cunning skill of every neighboring coaste:
Eake trauailers amongst their dangers most
Can shield themselves in sured safety,
From bird, from beast, from fiercest fomans host,
In quietness and ease: and only I
Of creatures every one, in misery
Done lead my lingering life, which evermore
Is subject unto each calamity:
To nightly pain, the day does pain restore,
Which pitilesse of my endured spoil
Does add increasing torments to my toil:
To which false Fortune never shall lend ease,
Until my death procure her freakes appease.
Mundi nulla quies. Wretched Phianora of England.


Now on my faith (quoth the good empress Basilia Basilia.
) I had rather then my life, that she had not thus suddenly departed; that
before she had left us I might have done her more honor then I have done: for
which I am most heartily sorry. But since I cannot now pleasure her, I will
earnestly pray for her speedy return, that once again yer I die, I may in
part recompense her princely courtesies. Truly madame (quoth Anaxia Anaxia.
) if she have not received that honor from you, as befitted the estate of so
high and worthy a Princess, she may thank her own self for it, that of so
long a season held such a nice point to discover her self: and for my part I
do rejoice, that I flacked my courtesy to her; since (as it should seem) she
scorned to make her self known unto us.

But the good old Queen Zaama, Zaama.
being of a more milder nature then the Queen of Hungary, with a smiling
countenance began gently to excuse the young Princesses departure: auerring,
that she rather thought the young valorous Princess wise, in concealing her
self in such a place; considering that that happens in a day, that chances
not in seven years; and perhapps she had some secret intelligence of
conspiring traitors: whose lascivious lusts shaddowed under the smoth veil
of love, might call her chastity in question: moreover what knew she, whether
my Lord the Emperor would royally entertain her? considering she came so
vnacco^panied of attendants, such and so many as befitted the train of so
great a Princess. And for her sudden absenting of her self in this sort from
her lodging, peradventure it was, by reason she feared, being discovered, to
receive some check of the Emperors highness for her such a-bearing.
Therefore we are rather to be blamed for finding out her driftes no sooner:
and not she for not discloasing her self no speedilyer.

Phianora embarqueth for the coast of A^a.
In this sort excused the old Queen Zaama the sudden departure of the English
Princess: who by this time, was far enough departed on shipboard from the
shoares of Grecia; and with such speed and celerous haste she sailed, as (to
make a brief report in steed of tedious descriptions) she very quickly
arrived on the coast of Asia: where only refreshing her sea-sicke self (in
the city Tripoly a port town of that same country) she took ship anew,
and dancing on the mounting billows of the Mid-land Sea, she safely put a
shore, at the territories of the huge Gyantesse Gola, the woeful widow of the
mighty gya^t Cardigan. When travailing all alone in her armor, with her goulden
shield on her arm, farther up into the country, wherein she wearily iourneyed
so long until such time, about the third appearance of Appollos radiancie, she
was mounted up (though not without great toil) the tree adorned vertice of a
most steep and rocky mountain. From whence despecting, she beheld a most
goodly strong built Castle right at the foot thereof: whose high towers,
almost equalling her cloude-menacing station, gave her sufficient cause to
wonder. Gazing at whose artificial greatness she had surely for a great
space remained, had not her ears, conducted her eyes, to a place of far
greater wonderment. For in the Orcharde of the Eastermost Tower, she espied
the most pittifullest spectacle that ever eye looked on. For, Phianora arriueth
at Golas castle.
by the uttermost boughs of a large spreading and high Cedar tree, she saw
a lean scraggenly, flesh-consumed creature, hanging by both his hands, as
fast as could be: which, a most hunger-starued, ravenous, Vulture or Eagle
continually with his sharp horned beak unmercifully pecked; The terrible and
intolerable torment of Olbiocles and Huguy.
whilst about his own neck and feathered wings, a thousand slender, long,
and venomous Aspides (a most pernicious kind of Serpents) incessantly pierced
his own body and pineons quite through and through, with their paine-procuring
stinges. Wherewith he then being all empoysoned, did swell so monstrously, as
it was almost impossible yt his skin should vncracked contain any longer his
puffed up intrailes. Which putting him to more then an infinity of torments,
made his troubled soul to breath out such sorrowful sighing shreekes without
ceasing, as the neighboring ecchoing the doleful sound of his sad canzons
(as shaken by the violent motion of some sudden earthquake) instantly trembled
at the shrilnesse.

Certes if the magnanimous English maid was amazed hereat, it was no marvel;
since had that big boand tamer of usurping tyrants, Hercules himself, heard
such an hideous and fearful yelling, his very ears would have ringled
thereat, and his heart have little mist of failing him. Wherefore, with a long
silence, Phianora sadly sighed at so sorrowful a spectacle: which brought her
wits almost to an end, and her white alablaster body to a sudden shiuering:
such strong possession had faint fear taken in her heart, until (remembering
her self that what she either saw or heard, was but a false illusion raised
by ye strange enchantments of the wicked governor of the Castle, whosoever)
she resolved putting her confidence in her almighty redeemer Jesus Christ;
Phianora resolves to redeem him.
and next unto him in the rare virtue of her golden shield (under whose shadow
she was safe from all hellish sorceries) to dissolve so hard, doubtful and
dangerous an adventure. And therefore (seeing there was no safer way unto the
Castle) she submitted her soul to the mercy of her savior; and then casting
her shield at her back, with her hands she let her self down by little and
little, by the steepie side of that mighty mountain: where, by that time, the
brightsome rays of Phaetons fair father reflected so sweltringly; as the
wearied Princess, all to scorched with such hoatenesse, began to wa^e faint
for lack of water to cool her wesand, which was all to wrinkled with the great
thirst yt sun had caused. And knowing not well how to provide for the remedying
of her want, she determined to put all to the regard of the highest: and then
passing, by little and little, to the one side of the rock; she espied, where
out from between a quarrey of red marble, there sweetly issued a most swift
running riueret; which intruding in here and there betwixt the hollownesse of
the hill, made many pretty semicircles in his speedy descent unto the valleys
vnderbounding it. To this brook the thirsty Princess no sooner approached,
but that in her steely helmet she drank whole carrouses to her following
fortunes: and being well refreshed, with this (as thirst taught her to think)
Nectarean liquor, she relaced on her helm again; and all along the side of
the little brook, she softly slid down safely; until coming within a fathom
and a half to the ground, she was forced, by the right down steepness
thereof, to disfurnish herself of her shield and other troublesome raiments;
and then leaping down into the valley, by reason of her former weariness she
lighted so heavily on her feet, as all her body shrewdly shaken with the
fall, caused that her late cured wounds fell fresh on bleeding: which for to
stint, with great toil and pain she sought forth certain great and broad
leaves of a sort of strange shrubbes which there grew: which plaster wise
applying to her soars, Phianoras wounds fall a fresh on bleeding.
within less then a quarter of an hour she found herself in indifferent
state to proceed on in her intended journey, which without delay she spedily
ended; and coming to the gate of the inchaunted garden, which was all of
steel, she might perceive thereon written in vermilion letters; Within this
garden, in an Eagles shape,
The Son of Claranax inchaunted bides*
From out the which he never shall escape;
Till eighteen winters from his feathered sides,
Empoysoned Serpents with their forked stinge
(To glut their greedy mawes) the blood shall bring*
Nor then shall cease his more than cruel pain.
For when those years are spent of all his trouble,
Unless th'Inchauntresse be by virgin slain,
His former suffered torments shall redouble.
Therefore o thou that shall this writing read,
Pray for the aduent of some help with speed,
Written with the tears my wide wounds wept,
HVGVY.


The worthy English Princess at the perusing of these verses was diversely
perplexed: for one way she sorrowed for the miserable misfortune of Olbiocles
(ye worthy son of a more then thrice worthy father) who was so wickedly
bereaved of his manlike proportion: another while, she rejoiced that she had at
length found out the chiefest subject of her enquest and occasion of many
loyal Grecians sorrow: whom, seeing that God had so happily sent her, she
solemnly auowed either to redeem from such mischief, or to spend the best
blood of her body, in her thoughts affecting: and herewithal, commending her
self to God; she fiercely bounced at the gates with the hiltes of her Courtelax,
so as all the castle rang therewith: and then leaving herself upon her sword,
she stood expecting some sudden answer: but all in vain. For as the
cruellest mastiues bite before they bark: Treachery of Golas sons.
so whilst the wicked witch Gola and her two sons Norin and Nigramonde
delayed their answer, they busied themselves in furbrushing of their arms:
wherewith accoustred, they presently departed out at a back posterne; with
intent that whilst their mischievous mother Gola should open the door and
entice the knight of the golden shield into the garden, they would encompasse
her about; and then make her sure enough for ever going out again. Which
indeed they had done, had not the worthy princess, by chance lifting up her
eyes, espied the dust which was abounda^tly raised by the beating hooues of
Norins Lion horse: who poasting forward faster the^ his brother Nigramond,
caused that betwixt him and Phianora, began a sudden combat; which speedily
was ended by the valourous Princess: who at one blow seuering the left leg
of the young Giant from his brawny thigh, ^orin ouer^ome and ^re wounded
made him to tumble off from his huge beast. Whose unruliness was so
exceeding; as almost half mad, it galloped back again, dragging the aid
destitute body of the lim-lopt Norin, by the right foot hanging fast in the
stirrope, round about the Castle walls: until Nigramond perceiving it; for
anger of his brothers mischaunce, with his broad fauchion (which sometime was
his father the Grand Cardigans) he smote off the Lions head, saying in this
manner; By the aid of Mahomet, will I be revenged on my ouerdaring enemy: and
thererewith putting spurs to his horse, he never ceased galloping till he
had sight of his undaunted enemy. Whom approaching with his broad sword in his
armed fist; By Mahomet, foolish hardy knight (quoth he, with a hoarse voice) in
an il hour have thou adue^tured hither, to harm us: for with my slicing
sword, within a moment I shall so heaw thee, as thou shall never hereafter
stand in need of any Chyrurgeon: when lifting up his heavy weapon, he struck
a mighty blow at the valiant princess. Encounter between Nigramound and
Phianora.
Which lighting upon her well tempered shield made the air to reeccho the
noise thereof: which sounded as a world of waters in their fierce co^bats
against some co^caue rock. To which his furious prayers, Phianora with her
cutting Curtelax lent such a forceable Amen, on the spacious target of the
Giant; as cleaving it in two pieces, she pared away therewith half his hand.
Which so incensed him, as with such a devilish fierceness he let his fauchion
descend upon the shield of the^ worthy virgin, as it being battred to her
helmet, she was forced for her safety to stagger backward. From which, with
much ado recovering, she smit at Nigramound so terrible a blow, as the fine
edge of her Curtelax paring away a piece of his beauer; in descent, Nigramound
Lion-horse slain by Phianora.
alighted with such wonderful force upon the curled head of the Lion-horse, as
parting it both from neck and shoulders, ye ugly beast suddenly sanke down
to the ground, and in the fall, ouerwaighing his master, did exceeding pleasure
to the worthy princess. Who presently unlacing Nigramounds helmet, and setting
her point of her sword against his throat: Nigramound vanquished.
she threatened him with present death, unless he would become a true
Christian: and leaving all his cruel and heathenish complots (which would lead
his soul to hell) would presently deliver the valiant Prince of Grecia from
his extremest torments. Whereunto he, for fear of death subiecting himself,
promised that both he would become a Christian, and unfeignedly believe in the
right Redeemer: and also, as far as in him lay, cause his old mother the
Gyantesse Gola, to do the like; and speedily set at liberty, the two enchaunted
Champions Olbiocles and Hugui. On this condition (quoth the Princess) I
release the: and therewithal raising him up from under the Lions belly, she
went with him toward the gate, whereout he issued. Nay (said she) yonder is
a gate of iron, that is far nigher then that you lead me unto. True said
the Giant, but therein I would not wish you to enter, for it is so inchaunted,
as whosoever goes in thereat, shall never enter out again. I pass not for
that, (replied Phianora) for if it were ten times more perilous; yet would I
enter into it, and assuredly think by the grace of Jesus Christ, safely enough
to proceed out again; or if I do not, yet I know the worst, and so long it
makes no matter. The young Giant, though (by reason of his passed promise) it
somewhat grieved him to see the knight of the goulden shield so mad minded as
to hazard his life to such manifest destruction; yet, he not greatly sorrowed
at the same, because that thereby he hoped of a just revenge to be wreaked
upon him by the strength of the inchauntment. And therefore conducting him to
that posterne gate, he causes his mother Gola to open the same. Phianora
safely enters the inchaunted gate.
Whereat, when she saw the noble Princess to enter, she swelled for very
anger: and stepping to a Pollaxe (which underpropped a piece of the wall)
calling her son Nigramond, base, bastardly, cowardly minded slave, she
presently pasht out his brains; and then taking her flight toward her
lodging, Nigramond slain by Gola
she supposed by her swift running to save her wretched life. Which her intent
she no sooner put in execution, but Phianora (remembering Olbiocles deliverance
consisted in Golas destruction) spedily pursued after her; Gola is beheaded.
The inchau^tment dissolved.
and ouertaking her, she presently smote of her wicked head from her withered
shoulders. At which wound her life finishing; with a sudden thunderclappe
(which made the whole valley to tremble) she allotted a final end to the
whole inchauntments: which being thus happily dissolved, restored Olbiocles to
his former features, and Huggui to some better ease: Olbiocles and Huguy regain
their former shapes.
both whom, Phianora returning from the place where she flewe the Gyantesse,
found, by reason of their long-lasted torments, so weak and feeble; as
neither of them being able to stand, she carried them into the Castle: where,
laying them in their warm beds, she caused them to be so carefully tended by
the servants (who were submitted to her favor) as within short time she
brought them on foot again so well, as they could now walk into the fields,
or into the gardens, for an hour, or two hours, if they so pleased. Which
brought great joy to the worthy and virtuous Princess: whose mind greatly
yearning, to know the whole occasion of their inchaunting, received this
satisfying answer from Obiocles.

Olbiocles tale of his transmutation.
EXcellent princess (quoth he) understand you, yt by birth I am a Prince, and
borne to great patrimony, as the only son of the mighty Emperor Claranax of
Constantinople; in times past, reverenced for his virtues, and famourized for
his fortunes; until such time as that fickle deity by whom he grew most
happy, made him most infelicious; by permitting a most monstrous and deformed
Giant, at unawares to reaue him of his joy, by robbing from him the most
chaste, constant, and amiable Princess Almidiana, the unhappy wife of me, most
unfortunate husband: after whom having in vain long travailed in enquest, I
misfortuned after many other mischaunces, Olbiocles and Hugui driven by
tempest, on the shores of Gola.
by forcible fury of a most terrible tempest (wherein the lightning with the
thunder equally contended which should excel the other either inlightnesse or
in lowdnesse) to be cast ashoare upon these territories; where together with
Hugui, this my faithful companion seeking for some kind comfort at this
Castle, we were suddenly assailed and vanquished by the devilish sons of
that dead and damned Gyantesse: who, with their furies oppressing our feeble
forces, took us prisoners, and (first most pitifully scourging us with whips
of twisted wier) told us how the cause of their malicious cruelty was, Taken
prisoners by her sons.
for because that in single combat they knew me by my shield (which indeed
was a most worthy Pagan princes, called the knight of the Seas) to have
traitorously slain their dearest husband and father, ye terror of the world,
Gran Cardigan: and afterward (not satisfied with our former undeserved
punishment) they strongly enchaunted us into this garden. Where, They are
inchaunted. Olbiocles by reason of Oceanders shield (which for have to follow
Malagda, he had left behind him, at the mountain) being mistaken to be the
knight of the Sea.
in what strange shape my self was metamorphosed, and reason-reaued, and with
intolerable torments both I and my unhappy companion were tortured, is
altogether impossible to be by me expressed: considering, that whatsoever my
trembling tongue should tell thereof, my inward thoughts would continually
recall; because with too too much lenity, it would demonstrate my unspeakable
perplerities. Only thus much. I may avouch, that never yet poor christian
suffered half so many mischiefs under the hands of such misbelieuing
infidels, as we have done, for wearing the mistaken shield of that most
magnanimous Pagan, the knight of the Sea.

Most true (quoth Phianora) and with him that owes this shield, I fought two
combats (though to my danger, as I deserved) and only for my sake slew he
that monstrous Giant Cardigan: which I but euilly requited. But letting it
pass with my repentance; since we have all hitherto endaungered our lives and
safeties, for so gracious a Lady, as is the fair Princess Almidiana; you (my
Lord Olbiocles) playing the part of a loyal husband, and we of most loving
friends, let us never break league, but unto our lives ends continuing
resolute (our wounds being whole, and our selves healthy) still stoutly persist
in our undertaken enquest; Phianora resolves still on the search of Almidiana
and either to find and free the beauteous Princesses of Hungary and France,
from a cruel and unknown oppressor; or failing of our purposes, lead our
lives like banished pilgrims, in everlasting exile. Infinity of thanks did
Olbiocles render the knight of the goulden shield for that favor: and relating
unto her the whole history of his foretold fortunes by the good old hermit
Kalandar, he persuaded her that now the time was fully accomplished of his
approaching happiness, They embarque for the Rocky Island.
and earnestly excited the Princess to take shipping; which the next day she
did: and with Olbiocles and Huguy in her company she pleasantly sailed toward
the rocky Island: where, of their arrival and proceedings against
Ortolomorgantell, some following chapter shall speedily treat of.

CHAP. XVIII.
The great and cruel combat, Olbiocles and the Knight of the Olive branch had,
with Ortolomorgantell the giant of the Rocky Island; their distress by their
devilish adversary, and unexpected help of the Knight of the Sea; by whose
aid they slew the Giant, and released the distressed princesses, Almidiana and
Eristama.

SO soon as that devilish and dreadful Giant Ortolomorgantell, had conflicted
(as before ye have heard) the proud arch-pirate Tolurnio (the middle brother
of Marcimodez, Ortolomorgantell landeth on the Rocky Island.
whom the valourous Oceander conquered in defense of the good Queen of
Carthage) and was safely surged at ^he haue^s mouth of ye Rocky Island (so
called by reason of the invincible strength thereof, ensituated amidst a
multitude of stony promontories) he presently landed all his prisoners of
Grecia: whom he caused to be numbered unto him. And finding them to amount to
fifteen, he laughed exceedingly at his good luck: and rendering thanks unto
his great god Mettath Agorah for his happy fortune, he vowed by his obedience
unto his sacred deity, customarily as he had begun, A detestable and wicked
custom.
so for ever to continue a yearly sacrifice of christian Ladies blood, unto
his godhead. And then rising up from the bare ground, where he kneeled to make
his oriso^s; for an earnest pe^nie of his promises performance, Hebitha
sacrificed to Mettath Agorah by Ortolomorgantell.
he presently with his battle axe smote off one of ye Ladies heads, named
Hebitha: which burning on a pan of Cypress coals (co^mixt with Cinnamon and
diverse other sweet smelling shrubs of Africa) to ashes, he mingled the hot
cinders with ye new shed blood: and therwt bepainting his heart and hands, he
fra^tickly daunced toward his Idol of his God, which stood right before the
gates of his castle Lapidine: The castle Lapidine.
where babbling out, with a loud voice, certain blasphemous words, he all to
benoynted the image (which in the likeness of a Giant was made of hard marble)
over and over with bloody fingers: and then returning unto the sorrowful Ladies,
he caused them to be carried to prison, in a most dark vaste, and stinking
dungeon; where they were daily fed only with bread and water; until such time
as either they dyed, or by one and one, were by ye a cursed Giant yearly
offered up in sacrifice unto his diuel^sh Idol. Only amongst all the rest, and
out from all the rest, of that wretched company of worthy Christian Ladies, The
two princesses Almidiana and Eristama presented to Duronda.
he excepted the two beauteous Princesses, Almidiana and Eri^ima; for precious
presents, to bestow upon his wife the Gyantesse Duronda. Who, like the swine
that knew not how to use the precious Hematite, most villanously abused these
two more the^ angelical creatures; by making them slaves to moyle and toil,
and putting them to all kind of continual beastly drudgery: insomuch as their
iuory brows began to banish beauty, A woeful change.
their pretty ruddy cheeks to be changed to pale roughnes, and their lilly
white hands (whose slender fingers were like the roots of the Daphne-changed
Baye, whose cunning wavering on the well strained Lute strings, had so many
times heretofore caused amazement to ye hearts of ye happy hearers) now
changed to a swart blacknes, and began to be hard, great and rugged:
insomuch, as being thus (in a manner) metamorphosed from themselves, they stand
gazing with wonder upon themselves mistaking themselves, Whatsoever miseries
and misfortunes happen unto us, they happen not undeserved for our sins
continually merit ex^rcamest punishments: Though, (Non quoties peccant homines
sua fulmimittit Jupiter) God strike not so often as we offend him.
not to be themselves: so straungely they were estranged from themselves. All
which notwithstanding, they bare so patiently as always incessantly calling on
the holy name of Christ, they accounted these miseries worthily to be chanced
unto them; such multitudes of sins, with woeful hearts they confessed
themselves, daily to have committed; and in all matters never more to have
misdane, then in cleansing of the accu^sed Idol from the slimie filth of the
Christian blood offered sacrifice: whereunto they never at any time repaired;
but on their bared knees, with sobs and sighs they would earnestly ask
forgiveness at the hands of the Almighty, for their enforced wicked doing: as
in a pretty verse which the Princess Almidiana wrote on the walls of ye
dongeon, wherein the Grecian Ladies lay enfettred, is manifestly declared.

Almidianas prays.
Sweet Savior of the world (whose precious blood
Was shed on Cross for all believers good)
Down from thy heavenly throne, with gracious eye,
Behold (O lamb of God) my innocence,
Which is enforced here by tyranny,
Against my will (O Lord) for to digress,
From thy commandments, to wickedness:
Therefore, O savior, more then merciful,
Seek not according unto my misdeedes,
For to wreake vengeance on my soul at full:
But with a countnance that kind comfort breeds,
Look courteously upon my black offenses,
When hell against my soul his suite commences.
IN this great misery did these two beawtious and virtuous Princesses (whilome
the glistering Comets of Europ) lead their lives under the cruel thraldom of
Ortolomorgantell and Duranda: Along and miserable thraldom.
which with great extreamitie having now lasted 23. years; by the providence
of the most merciful Jehovah, draws now at length to a full conclusion. For
by this time are those three worthy gallants, Olbiocles, Phianora and Huguy
land at the Rocky Island.
apported and landed at the haven of the rocky Island of odious
Ortolomorgantell; and prosperously proceeding onwardes to the Castle, have both
read Phianoras Catalagy to the highest commander, and revenged their angers
that they bear to blasphemers of the faith and gospel of Christ Jesus,
sufficiently on the bloud-sprinkled Idol of Mettath Agorah: whom with their
swords having all defaced, The Idol of M^^tath Agorah defaced.
cast down to ground, subverted and utterly raced; they all fell prostrate to
the earth, and with one accord they cried out;

O almighty God of our forefathers, and holy savior of the world Christ Jesus,
behold we beseech thee, Their devour prayer for a prosperous proceeding.
with the eyes of pity and compassion, us thy poor penitent and distressed
creatures, the work of thy holy hands, according to thine own image; and as
our wretched lives lengthe^ or lesse^ to thy liking, so with a tender and
fatherly care have regard over us, thy poor children: who not for our own
glory, but for the aduauncing of the holy name of thy son our savior Jesus
Christ, have endangered our safeties to the hands of our faithless and
merciless enemies: into whose bloodthirsty throats (unless adiuved by thy
heavenly potency) we are like to enfuse our dearest lives. Having ended their
prayers, they remounted on their feet again, and buckling on their helmets,
they began cheerfully approach the Castle: but in ye gates, before they could
enter, they found such shrewde resistance by the Giants servants, as maugre
their heads they were for a great while debard of their entrance. A conflict
with the Giants servants.
Which struck such an anger into the courageous hearts of the worthy Princes
Olbiocles and Phianora, as like the Ram, recoyling to give ye fiercer butte,
with their trusty curt leaxes in their armed fistes, they gave so fresh and
furious an onset upon ye unarmed slaves; as, or ever they rested, they sent
some armelesse, others leggelesse, and more headless, but all lifelesse, to
take up their cold lodgings under the black mantle of everlasting night. Which
dreadful destruction of her servants, when the monstrous giantesse Duronda
saw, out of her chamber window, with a loud thu^dring voice she cried unto her
husband saying: How long, how long, ah thou mighty corrector of ouer-daring
christians, will thou suffer thy self to be abused by their feeble forces? Up
Ortolomorgantell, up I say, and with thy mighty arm, like ye blustering blast^
of Boreas, ouerturn ye slight glory of these simple shrubs: whose corages I
see already to fail, and whose hearts to tremble for fear of thy inplacable
wrath; wtin whose limits their lives are already entered. With these words, she
brought to him a mighty and massy Mace: ^uronda armeth Ortolomorga^tell.
which being armed, both for offense and defense, with long nails of steel,
seemed altogether death-working, to whomsoever the fury thereof alighted: and
then buckling on his iron arms, which were almost 3. inches thick, she thrust
him out at the doors by head and shouldere: who no sooner espied his enemies,
but with a mighty frown and fume, like a smoke, issuing out at his wide
nostrells, he set himself in this sort to check their ouer-daring:

Ortolomorga^tell to the 3. knights.
By my soul (audacious knights) your foolish attemptings will lead you to
destruction. What, were your wits not your own? or are you mad? that having
slain my servants, you dare not only stay here in my castle-yard, but also
menace my mightiness with threatening shows, the sooner to incite me to the
combat. Well then, since you will need prove courageous and hardy, hardly come
on: and, being you have thus far provoked me, proceed on in your enterprise;
that by my irresistible fury, you may quickly feel the force of my mighty
arm, which shall assuredly pash your bones in pieces: if my holy God Mettath
Agorah fight not against me.

Your dumb, dead Idol (quoth Huguy) can neither fight with you, nor against
you now: for not an hour since, in spite of his holy deity, he was laid in
the dust, from whence he is like never to be recovered. When the giant had
heard those words, he was so exceedingly enraged, as his teeth gnashed
together, and his eyes for anger sparkled with fire: and lifting up his mighty
Mace (which was as big about, at the knottie end, as a man's middle) with both
his hands, he sent such a deuilish buffet at Huguy, Huguy is slain.
as battering his head and helmet down flat unto his shoulders, he made him
without any farther ceremonies, to yield up his sodaine-sent soul into the hands
of his holy savior. And then converting his fury to the other 2. Knights (who
were loath to abide the weight of his unwieldy weapon) he coursed the^ round
about the Castle court; they, like hares before the hounds, not daring to
turn again; until such time as Ortolomorgantell exceedingly wearied with his
traversing, leaned upon his clubbe to rest his weary limbs, and to wipe of
the sweltring sweat from his swollen face (which, ouerdropping his eye-lidds,
made him in a manner blinded with a mistie vapor) the worthy English Princess
le^t him an indifferent iction upon the left leg: Ortolomorgantell wounded by
Phianora.
which though it did no great harm, yet it did him but little good. For,
e^tring into his boots of maile, it sliced away, at least an handful of the
calfe of his leg: which not smally grieved the huge monster; so as betaking
him again unto his clubbe, he pursued Phianora so hoately, as driving her
into a narrow corner between two conioyning pillars, he put her to her
trumpes. And even there had she acted an untimely tragedy, had it not been
for ye approved goodness of her golden shield: with which, as under a canopie,
ouercouering her helmet, Phianora driven to a deceitful e^igent.
she pretily preserved her self from wounding; though her crest of her
headpeece was almost battered to her skull, with ye weighty blows that
forceably descended from her enemy. But on the other side, why does not that
worthy admired Prince of Grecia, by his inresistable valor, give happy help
unto ye Princesses imminent danger. Alas, what should he do? rather then his
life he would redeem her: but good Knight his way is hindered by a number of
the Giauntesses slaves: which having been by this time sufficiently armed, had
encompassed him about and all at once with their sharp weapons laying
incessa^tly at him, Olbiocles assaulted and distressed by the giants servants.
have, though not wounded him, yet wearied him; so as his arms being weary
of striking, and his feet of standing, he (though with much a do) withdrewe
himself unto the stony steps of the Image of Mettath Agorah. On the upper
staire whereof, resting his ouerlaboured limbs, with only his inchaunted shield
(at his most ease he could) he resisted his remorselesse assailants: who in a
moment had undoubtedly oppressed him (whose feeble hands, now began to decline
with the weight of his inchau^ted shield) had not that renowned and admirably
valorous Knight of the Sea, Oceander, in his enchaunted boat, the only
legacy yt the wise Artimagus left him, Ocea^der arriueth.
happily arrived at the instant of Olbiocles feeble fainting. Who, seeing such
a multitude of servile cullio^s, to ouerpresse so ouer-weakened a knight (who
now was ready to yield up his life unto ye Lord, and his body unto their
butcherie) grew immediately so enraged, as unsheathing his good sword
Scindifer out of the curiously gold wrought scabberde, He rescueth Olbiocles.
he suddenly sheathed it in the boiling bowels of an unmerciful slave, yt
stood next him: Slays Linguaro,
and then turning himself at one side, he lent such a blow to one Linguaro
(who with terrible words threatened death and destruction to Olbiocles) as
slycing off both tongue and chaps (before he had half ended his babbling) he
gave a full period to his oration. At which buffet the worthy son of Grecian
Claranax received such exceeding comfort, as (in a manner relieved from his
languor) taking up his charmed shield, he cried to Oceander; Here, O worthy
knight o^th^ Sea, receive again the weighty weapons which on^ (...) or thee to
wield: which notwithstanding, until I can deliver up unto thy worthynesse, I
shall make once more to endure ye heavy blows of my hateful enemies) he smote
so fiercely upon his encroaching assaulters; as full quickly he made the^ to
feel ye refreshed fury of his vigorous arms. The worthy Knight of the Sea,
on the other side, so valia^tly behaved himself against those that opposed
themselves against him; as having with his keen courtleaxe cut asunder the
thread of thirteen of their lives, Thirteen slain the rest fly.
he made the rest (which were in number, half as many more) to betake ye
safeguard of their lives, to the swiftness of their heels: whom Oceander with
an honorable anger, so speedily pursued, as, or ever they could get into the
Castle, he made some of them shorter by their heads. In the mean while, so
great was the care of Olbiocles, for the Knight of the goulden shields safety
(whom before he saw in such extreamitie of danger) as he presently pased
toward the stern Giant Ortolomorgantell: whom, having laid aside his mighty
mace, he espied with might and maine to be pulling the swowned Phianora out of
her corner. Wherewith he was so agrieued, Olbiocles closes with
Ortolomorgantell.
as nothing respecting the greatness of the danger, he ran and closed within
him, thinking by wrestling to have withstood his enterprise. But alas, his
arms and legs are so weak and weary, as he was not able to grapple and
keep his ground, at one time. Which Ortolomorga^tell perceiving he cast the
worthy Grecia^, with great impatiencie, to the earth: and setting his foot
upon him, he there kept him down; until having dragged the body of the
English princess, cross over his breast, he took up his heavy club, and
breathing out most beastly blasphemies against the savior of all Christian
souls, he menaced the heavens in his haughtiness, and lifting up his wicked
weapon with both his hands above his temples, he now menaced e^ernall night to
the trembling Princes. But Oceander grieuing to behold her whom he best
loved, the fairest of all faires, fair Phianora, sorrowfully ouer-canopyed
with such imminent cruelty (stepping between the Giant and the Knights) in
the declining of the dreadful blow, he encountered the Giants arms, so
sou^dly; as paring the^ both together at the elbow, he left the devilish
tyra^t armelesse to prosecute his intended execution. Whereat, Olbiocles (though
by his late peril greatly perplexed) laughed a good: but Ortolomorga^tell
(quite dashed out of countenance with his late arme-curtalling cut) sending out
of his huge throat horrible roaringes, ran up and down the castle to find
some ease, for his curelesse disease. Whom the worthily enraged knight of the
sea, so fast followed, as ouertaking him at the chamber door (where the wicked
Gyantesse, his wife Duronda, woefully bewailed him) with his sharp pointed sword,
he bored both him and her clean thorough the entrails: Ortolomorgantell and
Duronda slain by Oceander.
wherewith falling on the floor; they impenitently yielded up their
sinne-bespotted souls into the black hands of Beelzebub, their adopted
Grandfather.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the dangerous combat of the Knight of the Sea, against the barbarous
Pyrate Tolurnio; his peril and conditional yielding to the fleetes of Tunis
and Tangur as Champion of the Alcharon against the christian Emperor of
Constantinople; and of the original of the hatred of Tomarin to Claranax, for
the death of Tumanto.

TO whose wicked ends, the two Princes Olbiocles and Phianora (being
recovered and raised from the cold pauement) no sooner arrived, but that
Olbiocles offering him his shield, and the worthy Phianora proffering him her
eternal friendship; with desire of pardon, for her former offensive
contentions, they in this sort heartily tendered him most humble thanks, for
safe delivering of the^ from so perilous and dangerfull a labyrinth of loss;
wherein, their lives had been so ensnared, as only by his incomparable power
they were to be delivered.

Glorious in thy conquestes, and gracious in thy mercies, (most illustrious
knight of Carthage) alas poor sielie creatures as we are, how shall we be able,
ever to requite thy manifold deseruings? which are so infinite, as our tongues
are unable to tell: much less, our thanks for to regratifie. Yet (noble
knight) such as we can at this time tender, take thou; that in some part we may
satisfy our own souls, saluting thee with these poor presents. Which if thou
shall please to accept, we shall ever think our selves in honor obliged, to
your virtues; which have not only freede us, but (also as we hope) released ye
2. most mighty, yet miserable Princesses, from whole multitudes of mischiefs
wherein they were enwrapped. Oceander (whose heart yearned after soe-got
honor) refused this friendly humility of so valorous knights: whom raising
from ye ground, he most lovingly embraced, and delivering up unto the^ the
tuitio^ of ye Castle Lapidine, as also the full government of the whole Rocky
Island of Ortolomorga^tell (commanding them to do his duty to the distressed
Ladies, Oceander departs from them.
for whom they conflicted) with his enchau^ted shield on his arm, he presently
took his leave of the two Knights (who sorrowed exceedingly at his so speedy
departure: but especially Phianora, in whose thoughts, love had already placed
his imperial throane) and descended to the water side: where not finding his
inchaunted boat, he greatly meruailed. But hoping yt al was done to the best,
he pacified himself; and walking up and down the shore, he at last espied,
where his boat lay at surge, under the hollownesse of a Rock: which greatly
rejoiced him. But seeing it ready to put from the shore, he made the more haste
to it; He puts to the Sea.
and with much ado getting on bourd, he launched out swiftly into the Egyptia^
sea. Wherein he had sailed very swiftly for the space of 3. or 4. days, without
meeting with any adventure; until about midnight the Moon being in the meridian
of her course, he perceived right before him, 3. call ships furnished very
fitly with all appu^tenances; and on the hatches only one mighty bigbaned
Mariner: who calling unto him, commanded him to yield unto the mercy of ye
mighty and most magnanimous Tolurnio, least his head smarted for his hearts
haughtiness. Whereunto, the Knight of the Sea seemed to give little heed;
until the Mariner vexed at his vnregarding, with a long grapple pulled the
boat unto the side of the ship: and then drawing out a mighty courtleaxe, he
vainelye spent his spirits to Oceanders Oceander encountered the fleet of
Tolurnio.
spoil. Who, sorrowing to meet with so unmeet and mightelesse an opponent
made no more ado, but only with his gau^tlet-armed fist, he smote ye braggart
so stinging a whirret under ye temples, as striking him stark dead under the
hatches, he gave his drowsy fellows a foul fore signal of their following
destructio^s. Whereupon they were so enraged, as (without any tarrying to arm
themselves) only in their shirts, or hose and dublets, they fiercely mounted
upon the hatches* but seeing, but one only knight to oppose himself against so
many of them, they presently brast out into a loud laughter, thinking with
their very looks to have quickly made him su^missiuely to repent him of his
too too audacious aduenturing. But alas, poor souls, therein they were
deceived: for he no sooner espied their retchlesse issuing, but with his good
sword Scindifer, Slaughter of Tolu^ios soldiers.
he so dreadfully behaved himself amongst the^, as having stricken to the
ground (never to rise again) sixteen of them, he made some to hide their
heads under the hatches, and others, for safeguard of their lives, desperately
to cast themselves into the sea: whose open mouths made such pitiful
exclamatio^s, as ye soldiers of ye other ships awakened with their wailings,
approached speedily to aid their want. Of these, there were in number at the
least thirty well approved and sturdie Pagans: who with hoarce voices crying
on ye name of their earthly God, and King Tolurnio, presently closed with the
ship wherein Oceander remained victour: and all at once encompassing him
about, with their naked swords, they for a great while fiercely assailed the
worthyest flower of all chivalry. Who, seeing that to stand idle, was
unprofitable to a man in his peril, placing his back against the shippemaste,
with his sword and shield he made such defending offensive resistaunce, as
when they most looked for victory, they still felt the greatest extreamitie of
his virtue: so as, therewith amazed and atterrifi^d, they by their great
wounds, learned more wisely, and less wilfully, to keep aloof off from the
sway of his confounding sword; which like the firebrand of some hellish fury,
flourished forth nothing, but sorrow and confusion,

Tolurnio Tolurnio armeth himself
himself, in the mean season having endossed on his armoure, with great
grief perceiving how daungerously the world went with his soldiers (for, of
thirty, were scarcely three and twenty left alive, and unwounded) grew into a
great rage with them: and bidding them, like cowardly dastards as they were,
to retire themselves back unto their cabbinets, with a shrill voice he
thundered out these threatening menaces against undaunted and interrifiable
Oceander: Poor Pilgrim, by the divine issue of almighty Ops, for thy
audacious adue^turing to our disturbance, thou shall demerit thy own
destruction: which shall be so duly executed on thee in my anger and
unplacable fury, as thou shall never need to boast of thy excessive winnings;
unless by a more then a deitie-defended wonder, thou shall admirably escape
the hands of more then most mighty Tolurnio; who I am: and whose very frounes
the mightiest Monarchs of the world have trembled at. For with my Battleax I
shall, like Hercules, batter thy brains in pieces about thy shoulders: and
with that word, Tolurnio assaulteth Oceander.
he lifted up his heavy harchet above his head and with all his force he smot
so strong a blow on the inchaunted shield of ye knight of the sea; as although
it could not enter, yet he was greatly endaungered with fear of falling into
the seas. For with such fury the blow descended, as he was feign to save
himself both on hands and knees, from toppling over the hatches. But by his
nimblenesse soon recovering his feet, he advanced himself so fiercely
against the Pirate, and with his Scindifer, he struck so strongly on ye helmet
of Tolurnio; as having battered the creast to his scul, he made him to admire
at his irresistable valor. Nevertheless, Oceander gave not so stout
objections but he received as strong replies: for Tolurnio rendered him so
rough requitals on the inchau^ted azury helmet, as he made him many times to
stagger and reele (in a manner astonished) so resistlesse almost was the Pirates
fury. Wherewith the worthy Grandsonne of thrice worthy Claranax, grew so
impatient; as, casting his shield at his back, he struck so sound a buffet,
with his swords in both his hands, at Tolurnio, ye he parted his shield in
two pieces, Tolurnio overcome by Oceander.
and in the descent of the blow battering his gorget (which was of pure
steel) close unto his neck-boane, he left small vent unto the Pagans
breathing; who had there presently yielded up his life, had they not been
parted by the sudden approach of a mighty navy of Barbarians: A navy of
Barbarians.
who in a moment boarding them, commanded their submission unto the most
mighty kings of Tunis and Tangur, ay-dreaded Tomarin, Tomarin of Tunis.
and undaunted Tangut. Tangut of Tangur.
Whereat, the two combatants were so amazed, as they knew not what to say;
until Oceander (whose magnanimous courage, no accident could control) with a
stout voice answered; that unless right commanded him, though reason bad him;
yet he would not yield himself unto his enemies, whose Justice or Injustice
he never as yet saw balanced. For, Multa pericla petit, noto qui fiderit
hosti: and therefore he demanded pardon of them for not yielding; unless in
Parle, they could allege sufficient reasons to induce him, to do so base a
duty. Whereunto the king of Tunis in this wise replied; Know sir knight, that
the cause of calling for thy submission, is not as a servile slave scornefully
for to controwle thee; but, in the honor of our most holy and sacred Prophet
Mahomet and his never to be confounded Alcharon, to request thy help, to
maintain his h^sts, and wholly to supplant the fatned Religion of the Europan
Christians: who under the government of the Grecian Emperor Claranax, have
heretofore entered and invaded our territories of Tunis and Tangur, The cause
of the Barbaria^s expedition into Christendom.
slain my dear, and only dearer son Tumanto (whose virtues ouershined
their valors) under most fained friendship, and colored treason. And
thereupon he began to relate at large his own imprisonment by the Grecians,
the besieging, assaulting, and taking of the great City of Tangur, Of this
thou must read in the history of Claranax praecedent.
and la^^ly with tears he told his son Tumantos tragedy: first, how he
was conjoined in friendly league with the Emperor; then how he labored for
peace between the king Tangut and Claranax, and then the insidious trains of
the worthy Governor, which were laid to betray his too too trustfull and
credulous child. Which fault objected to the good Emperor, though it were not
altogether true, yet it seemed so unto him, because his eyes of Justice were
blinded with fatherly favor. To all his tale, he added such infinity of
tears, as he greatly moved compassion in the hearts of Oceander and Tolurnio:
who hearing his quarrels justness, quickly condescended unto their requests;
Oceander and Tolurnio accorded, and join with Tomarin against the Christians.
Oath taken.
protesting with all their power and strength to maintain the honor of their
holy Prophet Mahomet, root out the gospel of Christ, and thoroughly to revenge
the wrong offered him by the Greekishe Emperor: to all which, they swear
themselves on the Alcharon. Wherewith king Tomarin and Tangur were so well
pleased; as at the report of Oceanders courageous behavior in his late
foughten combat, Oceander chosen Champion of the Alcharon.
they joyfully created him the inuin^^ble Champion of all the territories of
Tunis and Tangur; as also the sacred defender of the holy Alcharon; to the
great rejoicing of Tolurnio (who of a furious foe, was now become a faithful
friend) and the general contentment of the whole fleet. Which gracious
offers, the knight of the sea accepting most gratefully, gave them exceeding
encouragements to proceed in their intended voyage; whereby he doubted not,
Deus auertat,
but to see all Christendom happily converted either into blood, or turned to
the obedience of their highest Prophet Mahomet: under whose ensign we will
resign them, and assign our style to the perfecting of our former story.

CH P. XX. How Olbiocles Phianora, Almidiana, and Eristama arrived on the Island
of the Hermit Calander: from whom they carried news to the Emperor, of the
kings of Tunis and Tanguts proceedings: of his joy, for the recovery of his
long absented children, and politic preparation for the repelling of his Pagan
enemies.
VEry sorrowful were the Christian Princes, for the sudden absence of the
uncontrollable knight of the sea: but seeing that they could not remedy it,
they somewhat calmed their desires of his accompanying. And therefore Olbiocles
arming his left arm with the battered shield of Oceander, and Phianora
resuming her trusty Courtleaxe keen Calibine, they descended back again
into the Castle court: where, on the pauements, they found fourteen of
Ortolomorgantels servants, Submission of the rest of Ortolomorgantels servants.
with their weapons scattered, and hempen haulters about their naked necks:
whose ends delivering into the hands of the Princes, they trembling^ expected
yt doubtful answers of their lives or deaths. With whose humble submissions,
their tender hearts, were soon moved to compassion: therefore uncasing their
necks of such unkind collers, the Prince Olbiocles in this sort pronounced
the sweet sentence of their safeties.

Olbiocles oration to them.
Well wot I, well wot I (poor Paganized souls) that, not only against your
consciences you became the false adorers of Mahomet; but also against your
wills, you were enforced for fear of death to be the cruel keepers, and (as I
fear) killers of the most beautiful Princesses of Christendom. Wherefore, we
here mercifully pardon you and forgive your offenses: for only as instruments
you served to satisfy the insatiate mind of your bloud-thirstie master: whose
soul, by this time, has participated with such malefactors, the endless
torments of never to be extinguished fire and brimstone. In regard of whose
sorrows, we charge you to discharge your souls of all such wickedness, as
makes you to incur hels wretchedness; where that monster to mankind,
lurking Leuiathan, reigns in his ever damned royalty. Repent therefore (dear
brethren) and relinquishing all further remembrance of your long retained false
Alcheronticke Acharonticke religion, submissiuelie and unfeignedly, in your
souls, subscribe unto the suspectlesse supremacy of our dear Savior Christ
Jesus; whose precious blood has bought you, and whose fatherly patience has
preserved your souls (as I hope) from the gaping gulf of Gehenna: whose
tushes are unable to touch you, and whose roaring throat shall never swallow
your souls, if by your unfeigned repentance you obtain your sins remission
at the hands of your righteous Redeemer; who (though we pardon your bodies) can
to your souls add infinity of everlasting torments. Speak therefore, and
that truly, whither (alive or dead) our worthy mistresses are remaining within
your custodies?

These words they willingly answered, that of all the fair Ladies of Grecia,
Only Almidiana and Eristama alive of all the Grecian Ladies.
onele but two of them were living, whose virtues were unspeakable, and whose
beauties were far more brightsome, then the eye-bedimming sunbeames; named (as
with tears they often told them) the unhappy daughters of the two most happy
kings of France and Hungary: and therewithal one of the slaves ran
speedily unto their (loathsome) lodgings, to fetch them, whom he knew he
should make happy bp the two Christian knights reknowledgement.

If the good prince Olbiocles were exceedingly rejoiced with the tidings of his
true-loues happy health, A joyful meeting of Olbiocles and Almidiana.
it is not to be wondered at; since his newly coceiued joys then, were but as
shadows to following substance of his sovereign gladness, received by the
sudden approach of his sweetest spouse Almidiana: whose entertainementes
bredde such astonishment in the hearts of the amazed beholders, as even the
veriest butcherliest Barbarian thought his heart, for joy of their kind
embracements, would leap out of the mansionized concaue of his breast; and in
conceit being rapt into the court of heaven, he clearly commemorized the
pleasing daliance of great Saturnes son with his sweet Semele, enwrapped
within the misty mantles of the crime-co^cealing clouds: so heavenly and happy
were the sweet embraces of the regreeted lovers: who in a moment, Viewed,
embraced, kissed,
Sense failed, falled, swounded,
Relieved; yer they wist,
That so they had been grounded:


But to be brief, their loving encounter being ended, they all together
kindly embraced each other: and on their knees, rendering most hearty thanks to
the Almightiest, for such their fortunate remeeting, after so many multitudes
of mischievous miseries, they pased into the Castle hall. Where causing
themselves to be unarmed, they were presented by the Princess Eristama
Eristama.
(who was not a little glad that the worthy knight of the golden shield, by
unlacing his helmet, had discovered himself to be a Lady) with a most rich
basen and Ewer of massy Silver: whereon were cunningly engraued the victories
of Ortolomorgantels ancestors. Wherewith, the fair Princess of England
bathing her bloody and bolne face all over, Phianora feels her self ill at
ease.
found herself somewhat fainte by reason of a sudden chillness which
assaulted her sweating temples: whereby, in a great distemperature, she was
conducted into a costly chamber. Where wrapping her in warm mantles, they
somewhat refreshed her feeble senses: which notwithstanding could not that
night be so thoroughly recomforted, as that, with joyful hearts they could
betake themselves, either to their repast or repose.

So soon notwithstanding, as the Celestial waggoner had in a frantic fury,
forsaken the watery lap of his well-beloved Goddess Thetis, and issuing out at
the latticed portals of the eastern Ocean, had swiftly followed the flying
darkness (which with sable wings had taken her speedy journey to the western
India) the worthy Phianora was wholly recovered of her sickness; and with
infinite incitements, They embarque for Greece
so well prevailed with her companions, as they al consented that morning to
take shipping. Which their determination in such a happy hour they performed,
as (their sails full filled with a gentle gale of wind) they in great safety,
and with no less speed, furrowed over the azury face of the midland sea,
toward the Island of the good old hermit Calander; of whose habitation before
has bin declared. At whose sandy shoares, by that time, that Triton, the
trumpetter of the seagods, They arrive at the Round Island.
had eleauen times shrilly sounded the Hunts up, on his shelly Shackbut; they
pleasantly approached. Where, what was their entertainment by the good old
father, welcome unto his solitary Cell, or entercoursings with him, about more
then most strange accidents, I will not at this time tediously treat of: only
let this suffice; Eget qui cupit: qui non cupit habet.
that they were so well contented with his kindness, and so well pleased with
his plainness; as for the space of five days they continually conuersed in
his company; repairing from their ships to his Cel, and from his Cell back
again, every morning and evening, Content a kingdom is.
as duly and with as great delighte, as if they had pased to the
pleasure-abounding Palaces of the most mightyest monarche in Europe. But,
Remembrance of the Parents cannot be easily rooted out of the minds of the
children.
as the Fawn cannot be always weaned frum the company of the Damme: so these
fair ofsprings of most famous parents, could not now any longer remain absent
from their dear father: whose death they feared would (if it had not already)
deprive them yer long of all earthly comfort. And therefore giving the old
Hermit to understand of their departure, they (early the sixth day) awaited his
coming on the shoares side, where the holy father (after morning salutations
ended) with tears like pearls bespangling his snowy bearde, delivered them,
together with a letter of import unto the Emperor their father, this kind
farewell. Cala^ders farewell to the Grecian Princesses.
Dear friends, and my royal Lords and Ladies of Constantinople, how many and
diverse dangers are incident to al trauailers; as well by sea as land, I will
not at this time dispute of: but leaving such strange secrets to the sole
alcommaunding potency of the highest directour, with thanks for your gentle
acceptance of my homely entertainment accordant to my poor ability, I tender
your excellencies all hopeful assurance of a most happy journey to the
fertile territory of Greece and Hungary. Tto whose inhabitants, what infinity
of intestine casualties shall shortly occur, my tongue does tremble to tell,
and my heart rende almost in sunder to think on: but God for his mercy shall
at last (yea even at the last gasp of good fortune) deliver it. The right
relation of al which this same Letter, within this little casket, so largely
discloaseth; as I hope, the good Emperor Claranax (to whose highness hands I
most earnestly entreat you to deliver it) shall have, A Letter from the Hermit
to Claranax.
though not altogether sufficient, yet indifferent time to provide himself of
all things necessary, for the repelling (if it might be possible) of so
inevitable a mischief. These words, not without weeping, ended, he commended
them all to the protection of the most powerful; and then humbly taking his
leave, he presently departed back again unto his melancholy mansion; where
for a while we will let him rest, and return to our trauailers: who with fair
words and rich promis^s so incessantly allured the toyling mariners; as with
a never slacking celeritie they sliced through the salt seas (as it were) in a
moment, They arrived at Constantinople.
unto the haven of Constantinople. Whose wide womb, they no sooner espied
impleate with a great sort of swift-sailing ships; but that, with wondrous
gladness they clapped their hands, and with excess of joys they speedily
entered into the harbor. Where the fame of their arrival was no sooner spread
abroad, but that in great multitudes the citizens clustred about them to
behold the only hopes of al following good fortune. When, they had not any
long space, through the cristall casements of their eyes, fed the couetize of
their fancies; but that the aged Emperor Claranax with his good Empress
Basilia, the kings of Hungary and Bohemia, with their loving bedfellowes Anaxia
and Zaama (who accompanied with Rosamira the beautiful Princess of Sparta,
and a huge multitude of worthy attendants, both Ladies, knights and gentlemen
of all states and conditions) approached gallantly unto the haven. Where, after
the Emperor had lovingly embraced his most be loved children; Their joyful
and loving entertaineme^ts by their parents and dear friends.
and after him, both Kings, Queens, and Ladies having joyfully given their
loving welcomes unto the late arrived Paragons, they altogether (not without
excess of gladness manifested by their sundry stoppes of heart-delighting
harmonies) conducted the Prince Olbiocles, the knight of the goulden shield,
Absentia reuersos reddit amicis chariores,
Almidiana and Eristama, to the greatest Temple of Constantinople: where,
divine service ended, amongst ye rest, ye Emperor in this sort, powered out his
grateful thanks before the Majesty of the most maiesticall: Tha^ksgiuing of
the Emperor for the return of his long absented children.
Glorious God, who for thy love of thy dear and only begotten son Jesus
Christ, have had a gracious and fatherly care over me, thy poor and base
hanidworke, thanks, yea unfeigned thanks does my submisse soul render unto thy
divine majesty that with the incomparable power of thy mighty right hand have
thus mercifully released me, at last, from so many multitudes of miseries,
which encompassed my soul, and in a manner overwhelmed me. Having finished his
thanksgiving, he turned toward his obedient offspring: of whom (after many
kisses bestowed) he received this following Letter of Calander.

To the sacred Constantinopolitan Majesty, all health and happiness.
MIghty Emperor, The hermit Calanders Letter,
and most puissant Princes of Greece and Christendom etc. Understand you by
these presents, that at this time the whole Knighthood of Tunis and Tangur, are
in most warlike manner well accoustred, safely shipped, and swiftly sailing
toward the territories of Sicilia: which by arms co^uerting to the false
worship of their heathenish Mahomet, they will celerously surge on the coast of
Constantinople: unless By the providence of God they be speedily prevented.

From my solitary Hermitage, CALANDER.


NOw upon my honor (quoth the Emperor in a maze) by this letter of the
Hermit, I wotte of wonders: Belike these barbarous Barbarians are grown of
late to conceit a conquest over Constantinople: thinking Claranax, by reason of
his approaching age, to be grown to so cold a constitution, as he is either
too feeble, or too much affraide to enter any combat. Well, well, let Tomerin
and Tangut commence their conflicts: by the help of God and his good grace, I
shall never be said to fly their furies, as long as my withered body is able
to bear armor against their forces. But considering, Claranax preparation
against the invasion of Tomarin.
that not words, but wariness was the repelling of war, in great wisdom
he caused his havens mouth to be chained up; that they might not with their
iron Rams, by water any whit endaunger the city walls: and as for the city it
self he engarisoned it with infinity of approved and undaunted soldiers, of
that same Religion. Also to all his neighboring Princes of Christendom he
presently sent ayde-requesting letters: as, to Sparta, Thessaly, Transiluania:
the kings Rubaldo also and Fiardon spedilie departed unto their several
provinces of Hungary and Bohemia, to leauie a competent number of their country
soldiers, for the defense of Greece and Christendom. To which their warlike
expedition, we will leave those worthy Princes, to return unto our huge host
of the Pagan Potentates.

CHAP. XXI.
How Tomarin of Tunis, Tangut of Tangur, the knight of the Sea, Tolurnio, and
the rest of the Pagan army accoasted the Island of Sicilia; where they slew
the Duke of Hibla, took Alfortio and Orthisius prisoners: and enforced King
Dionine and all his subjects, to forsake the Gospel of Christ, and become
Mahometans.

Wonderful was the joy that ye cruel Barbarians conceived in their hearts for
the notable conquest that they hoped to gain against ye Christians; whom they
thought utterly either to convert or convince, by the fierceness of their
devilish furies: whose irresistible forces they first and foremost bent against
the poor inhabitants of Hybla and Sicilia; where at this time reigned that
terrible Tyrant Dionine. Dionine. The fleet of Tunis arrive at Sicilie.
Upon whose sandy shoares landing whole millions of mischievous miscreants,
under the safe conduction of the most invincible Knight of the sea, and the
four eldest sons of the great Giant Gawdramound, Brammadon, Brammadon.
Camaru, Camaru.
Xamaru, Xamaru.
and Hollobron. Hollobron.
Who, in company of thirteen other of their brethren, all mighty membred men
(having vowed to revenge their father Gawdramounds loss of both his hands, in
his combat with the Emperor Claranax before the gates of Constantinople, to
their powers, upon all Christendom) began first of all in the expedition
against the City of Hibla, to manifest the rancour, their cankered hearts had
until this season obliuionized. For with so straight a siege, Hybla besieged.
they suddenly engirt the christian Citizens wtin their walls, as there could
not any one so much as pass or repasse through ye armed troops of these
merciless miscreaunts: whose bloody hands no sooner laid hold on any
stranger, but that presently stripping his body naked, they would
incompassionately strangle him before the faces of the behoulding citizens.
Whose hearts were so at terrified at these remorselesse actions of their
barbarous enemies; as many times, they would be ready desperately to destroy
their hunger-pinched bodies, with their own proper hands. Which in deed many
had done, and more would have begun, had not that worthy Duke Oriardey, with ye
tears trickling down his pale cheeks, provoked by pity, in this wise
counseled them to provide for their safeties.

Loving friends, Oriardeis oration to his discouraged Hybleans.
and my most dear countriemen and loyal subjects, turn hither your faces,
and on me your more then most miserable Duke, convert your careful ouerclowded
countenaunces. What though the fury of our faithless enemies force us to this
straight, shall we therefore fear? though they seek to destroy us, shall we
therefore in a desperate mood, distrusting to the mercy of our savior,
dispossess our bodies of living, and our souls of the life everlasting? God
forbid. For (si paruis componere magna licebit) which of you all, my loving
Citizens, having and holding a sure fortress, whose situatio^ was your
safety, would willingly race it to the ground and ruinate it, ever after to
live in the wide fields, or in the woods, subject to crosses, cold, calamities,
dangers, and destruction? If any of you should do so, were you not worthy to
be accounted foolish, or stark frantic? Yes verily. Why then (O ye amazed
inhabitants of Hibla) are your minds infected with such poisonous madness, as
to make away your selves, to eschew your oppressing enemies, without regarding
your sweet souls; which is subject to our Saviors eternal enmity? O
remember, remember, that you are not Pagans (as those that perpetrate your
perils) but rightly believing Christians. Then for his sake whom you serve,
fear, and salute by the sweet name of Savior, depelle those heathenish
fancies from the center of your hearts habitacle: and let not ye subtleties of
the deceitefull Devil so much surprise you, as to make you by your own
selves, the sequesterers of your souls from that heavenly paradise, which is
prepared for those that faithfully believe in ye holy name of Jesus Christ.
Furthermore, were you forsaken of the Father, refused by the son, and left
reprobates on ye face of the earth, would you lay violent hands upon your own
lives? He that kills himself (says Aristotle, an heathenish Philosoper)
does not so much wrong unto his own life, We are born especially to do good
to our country.
as injury to the common wealth. For being so dead by his own despair, what
profit can he do unto his country? for which alone he lives, and for
whose good he ought to make small spare of his life. Therefore (O my loving
friends) desist, I beseech you, for doing that double wrong, both to your
selves and to your City, by your proper-caused destruction; but only at my
request, laying aside such wicked thoughts, cheer up your drooping
cogitations: and since there is no other remedy, but we must need die, let us
sallie out at the City gates; and with our swords bedyed with the purple gore
of our Pagan enemies, let us lustily lavish out our lingering lives; bought by
the bloods of our hateful adversaries. A good Captain.
The good Duke no sooner finished his exhortatorie oration, but that he
speedily enraunged his willing soldiers in order of battle: and with such
great care, and kindness, he went from one band to another, exhorting every
particular person to adventure his life courageously, for the aduaunceme^t of
their true religion. Which he had no sooner done, but they heard a sudden
alarm in the camp of the Pagans. A wise General turns every accident to
an occasion of encouragement.
Which the worthy Duke thinking to be some mutiny risen amongst his enemies;
courage (quoth he) courage my loving countriemen. For our God, moved to mercy
by our miseries, has made the way open by his mighty arm, for us to wreake
vengeance upon our enemies. God and our Lord Jesus Christ therefore be your
savior and defender, in the enterprise that we attempt for the glory of his
gospel: A Sally upon the Pagans.
and therewithal they courageously issued out of the City gate, upon their
Pagan enemies. Who (being preaduertised of their attempt, as of al other
accidents besides, by the traiterous dealing of a Hyblan Knight named Nequion,
Nequion through ambition, betrayeth the Hybleans.
who affected the principality of ye Hyblean province) were by this time
sufficiently armed against their approaching adversaries. Whom they encountered
with so irresistible a fury; as although like Oxen, the valiant Duke Oriardey
felled almost five and thirty Pagans stark dead to the ground (and amongst
the rest three giantlike brethren, of the seauenteene sons of Gandramounde,
whose names were Trybart, Roron, and Pyramon) yet were the Hibleans, The
Hyblea^s fly.
like sheep before the face of the pursuing wolves, made to fly from the
fury of their following foes: who yer they could regain the city gates,
enco^passed the^ in, so strongly on all all sides, as having slain Oriardey
Oriardey slain.
and an infinite sort of other soldiers, took four thousand of them
prisoners. With whom it had been a bloody day, had not ye (incomparable for all
virtues) most exquisite Oceander, appeased the anger of the enraged sons of
Ga^dramound; and opposing himself against their attempts (as it were) enforced
Bramadon (who was both the eldest and mercifullest of the^) to entreat his
brethre^s patience, for the preserving of ye lives of the submitted christians:
who, Hibleans yield and turned ^ahometiste.
yielding unto their mercies had consented to receive the holy Alchero^ of
their great prophet Mahomet, for their faith and defense: wherewt ye brave
brethren were indifferently satisfied. And all commotions appeased, and
circumstances finished, they suffered the Paganized Hybleans, in quiet
continually to possess their lives, livings, and habitations, without any
further disturbance.

Now, notwithstanding all these things were brought to this unlucky pass, by
ye traiterous dealings of that disloiall Nequion; yet was he never the more
regarded, but rather (according to his wickedness) worse ent^eated at the hand
of the most just co^querour Oceander. Who judging al things according to
Justice and equity, caused him to be presently stripped out of his clothes,
Proditionem amo, non proditorem.
and (by a slave being led thorough the streets of the city of Hybla) to be
whipped unto death by the betrayed Citizens. Who after they had scourged him
sufficiently, Memorable Justice executed on so monst^ous a traitor) Nequion.
carried him unto the marketstead: where commanding his head to be smitten off
from his shoulders, they flayed his body: and, letting his carcass be cast unto
the dogs, they made a displayed ensign of his skin; thereby to terrify
hereafter traitors, from the perpetrating of any such villainy against their
country. But alas, it does little avail: for even in these our days, does
treason in more plenty abide, and treachers more abound then ever heretofore
has been denotified. Which mischievous malady, I beseech you a while to suffer
me thus briefly to bewail.

Whither is duty f^ed? and unto what desert
Of Arabia, or groves unfrequented
By daily haunt of men, does faith depart?
As that without thinking on desert,
Or to the Sovereign, godly obeysaunce;
Multitudes of christians don them auaunce,
Against their Kings, and Gods laws to stert:
As, in their mind clogged with mischaunce,
Trait'rously to conspire to work great grieuaunce,
Against their God and mighty Sovereign:
Under whose check they should rightwise remain.
Soon after these things were thus luckily by the Pagan power performed, the
valorous knight of the sea, Brammadon, The Pagans match up into the country.
Camaru, Zamaru, Hollobron, Sylias, and an hundred thousand of the chiefest of
the Barbarian army, marched under the banner of Mahomet (which was advanced
by a sturdie knight of Tunis, named Oridor) by long and speedy iournies,
farther into the bowels of the vpland country; taking all the Cities,
Castles, Towns, and provinces; and bringing them under their yoke, caused
their consciences to be confounded, and their souls spotted with ye deuillish
doctrine of the Alcharo^; which for fear of death they were forced to embrace:
to such extremity were these poor and miserable creatures driven, by the
remorselesse cruelties of their most wicked oppressors.

Even unto the promontorie, abufting the Hesperian City Rhegium, reached the
limits of their conquestes: from whence with great toil and laborious travail
they passed in battle array, along the Eastside of the fire outbreathing
Aetna. From whence they might perceive the ship-engorging gulf of Charybdis,
at one side; on the other side calm danger-colouring Scylla: on whose mossie
vertice a sort of deceiving Sirens were set in consort, and right before them
an huge rank of unconquered Cities relinquished, Cities abandoned.
and left desolate by ye cowardly flight of their fearful Inahbitants. Of
whose abode, together with the tyrant Dionines (the bastard son of Dionisius)
the true report being related unto the^, by a captive christian (whom they
had taken in the mountains) to be in the strong city of Syracusa; they
presently dislodged their army by great iournies, to that side of the Island:
against whose towering walls being approached, they courageously displayed
their ensigns of defiaunce. Which being answered with as great stoutnesse on ye
adverse part by the christians, they caused their camps to be pitched and
fortified round about the west, south, Syracusa besieged.
and north sides of the city: wherein, they remained quiet for the space of
three whole days, without giving any attempt against the christians. But on
the fourth day, with the sun, they began to set themselves i^ warlike
order, expecting sound of the shrill trumpet, to ^^t^^ ^o^ them to their
assaultings: The city assaulted.
which no sooner breathed, but it runge out the sorrowful knell of a thousand
christians. For, in so good and martial order, the stout Barbarians, with
their steely weapons, approached the gates of the City (from out the which
the undaunted regime^ts of Alfortio, Orthisius ^^ the tyrant Dionine sa^lied)
as, Alfortio Orthisius and Dionine make a ^ally.
the Christians unable to ^f array their ranks, were forced (though not without
some loss unto their enemies) with great disad^^ntage to return unto the
City again: which had been there assuredly surprised, had not ye worthy hopes
of France and Spain, with more then invincible courages, even in the
entrance into the gates, stoutly repelled the devilish disturbers; and twice
grappling with Bramadon and Oceander, by divine auxill no doubt fairly freed
themselves from mischief, and the whole City from that days misery.

On the morrow again, Hollobron, and Camaru with sixteen thousand approved
Knights of Tunis, were sent by the commandment of the Knight of the Sea,
valiantly to rea^aile the walls of the city by land; whilst himself with
Brammadon, and the residue his brethren sat in consultation about the bringing
of their ships and little pinnaces of Tangur to assault the same by water.
With great shoutes and cries, Hollobron and his followers approached unto ye
ditches of the City: over the bridge whereof, having courageously won
passage, they stoutly assaulted the issuing christians. Between whom there
began so bitter a bickering, as within less then an hour, by the valorous
virtue of the worthy Spaniard and his battalion of Syracusans, fifteen hundred
Pagans were laid breathless on the earth. Whereat Hollobronso extremely
chaufed, as for very wrath his nostrills gushed out on bleeding: and then
taking a mighty lance in his rest he fewtred it against Alfortio: who did the
like to him. But with such a strong fury they at the front of the bridge
encountered, as the Prince of Spain (being in the disadvantage, by reason of
the lower ground) was forceably borne over his horse crouper to the ground in
a swoune: Alfortio unhorsed and taken prisoner.
and Hollobron was with ye head of Alfortios lance (which more then an
handbreadth lo^^^* as entered into his shoulder) so extremely grieved and
torm^^ted as causing the enpasmed Prince to be speedily conveyed (...) his
soldiers unto his tents, he would abide no longer amongst his enimies^ but in
post have he fied to his pauilions, leaving his brother Camaru, who was in
combat with Orthisius, in great perplexity, for the safe recoyling from hi^
^nemies, without giving any disadvantage.

Who (though not without some danger) speedily sounded the retreat unto his
soldiers. Whereof Oceander understanding, his ears glowed to hear of their
cowardice, and his heart for anger began to swell so big, as if it should
have beaten open ye lattices of his ribs with his furi^us panting: and
suddenly rising from the table, with Brammadon and all the worthiest approved
knights in the whole army, he furiously hasted to the assault. Which he gave
so forcibly against the Christians in Orthisius his regiment, as (having
boysterously beaten the French Prince, Orthisius beaten from his horse by
Oceander.
from of his palfrey) they put the residue to fearful flight: whom the
worthy knight of the Sea, with a huge troop of Sarazens, followed in such hot
pursuit; as entering by force of arms into the city gates, The Siracusons
overthrown.
they slew and spoiled all (of what degree or sex soever) that made any
resistance against him.

Which sudden sack, brought such exceeding terror into the hearts of the
Sicilians; as, together with their King Dionine, Dionine and his Sicilians
yield and become Mahometists.
wives, concubines, children, goods and lives, they submissiuely yielded
themselves to the mercy of their mischievous molestours. Who, pardoning their
bodies of any farther damages, caused them to forsake their dear Savior,
renounce his holy gospel: and finally, by obliging their selves in obedience
to Mahomet, to deliver their souls up to multitudes of endless miseries, and
to everlasting damnation. God for his mercy forgive the Author hereof, who
rather of ignorance, then of envy, perpetrated so unpardonable a wickedness.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Pagans arrived at Constantinople, and sent Ambassadors to summon the
Emperor to personal appearance before the Estates of Tunis: and how the knight
of the sea, slew the young Prince of Sparta, for his stout reply in the
behalf of his master: and of the resolute answer of Claranax to the message
of the king of Tunis.

Hollobron dies.
XAmaru, Brammadon, and Hollobron were very grievously wounded in this exployt;
but especially Hollobron: whose shoulder rankled so exceedingly, by reason that
a piece of ye Lances heed was broken in the boane; as for very pain his life
was in great peril, and at last (by the way on the seas as they sailed to
Constantinople) perished, to the no little heaviness of his brethren: who in
revenge thereof would diverse times have destroyed the two worthy Christian
princes, prisoners; had not the diligent endeauours of Oceander, caused them to
desist from their devilish determination. Notwithstanding, this conquest
obtained, and the state of Sycily subverted and converted to their obeisance;
the knight of the sea returned his Camp, to the shoares of Hybla. Where
recounting unto the kings of Tunis and Tangur, the happy success that
seconded his attempts, with great congratulations and joy (having in this
enterprise spent the best part of the spring) they reembarqued themselves: and
hoysting up sails, they speedily committed themselves to the doubtful mercy
of the Seas: on whose mounting bistowes, they were for some fo^er or five days
very daungerously tossed, and mightily dispersed (as upon the neighboring
shoares of Italy and Naples) where Brammadon (as you shall hear in the second
part of this history) did suffer shipwreck. But within a seven hours after
the tempest ceased, there arose so fresh a gale at the poupe of the ships;
as, having sufficiently recovered the third part of their Navy, they
chearefully proceeded on in their voyage toward Constantinople: which they
prosecuted with so good fortune, The fleet of Tunis arriueth at Constantinople.
as they arrived within less the^ a month after, at ye havens mouth thereof.
Which finding it by the providence of the good Emperor debarred from the^; as
well as they could, they unchained, emptied, and with such facility entered; as
before the Grecians could prepare for their resistance, the whole haven was in
full possession of ye Pagans. Nevertheless they were so continually pestred with
multitude of garbage, as stones, blocks, and such other like weapons, as they
were feign to retreat their vessels a little backer into the seaward: which
greatly gladded the Grecia^s, who were thereby freed from a many sore gallings.

The Kings of Tunis and Tangur were wonderful wroth with their displacing from
the haven: and therefore he determined (knowing the invincible courage of the
Christians) by land wars, and single co^bats, to weary and disanimate his
enemies. Wherefore, putting to the shore, he alanded his soldiers: They enca^pe.
who in this order, enca^ped themselves beside ye wilderness of Grecia: The
whole army of fierce Barbarians, was divided into four several battles,
conducted under the ensigns of the kings of Tunis Tomarin, Tangut of Tangur,
ye vnco^trouleable knight of the sea, and the undaunted sons of the giant
Gandramound: who in warlike array marched about the country to find out fit
place for to enca^pe themselves. But not knowing any, more adiuvable for their
army, the^ the plains under ye wilderness of Grecia, they there incontinently
pitched their pauilions: which, garnished with plumes of sundry colored
feathers, on ye crests of their well tempered helmets, raised such a luster by
the rays of the earths illustratour, as heaven it self seamed to blush at the
excelling gorgeousness of ye enritched earth; whose duskie face was so
admirably adorned with such a glorious army.

Whose greatness, albeit amazed a multitude of most cowardly meacocks;
notwithstanding, no whit amated the excellent courage of the good Emperor
Claranax: who only reposing his confident hope in his righteous Redeemer Christ
Jesus, Constant courage io^ned with careful providence.
never changed once his countenance for fear of his huge number of enemies:
yet, therefore did he not neglect, like a careful Christian and a loving
Captain, prouidently to puruoy for the safety of his signiorie; but with
great watching and vigilancie, he strongly engarrisond the city with
sufficiency of Soldiers, and munition. And filling all the storehowses with
corn and victuals for a whole years provision, he not only made restraint of
cates (where superfluity drew them to riot) but also by his strict
commandment, he caused all his subjects very straightly to observe fasts, and
offer up continual oblatory orisons, with singular devotion, unto the majesty of
the most Highest.

These matters being with wonderful discretion and wisdom ordered,
intelligence was given him by his most trusty espials, of the approach of the
King of Barbaries Ambassadors unto his Palace. Wherefore commanding them
admittance unto presence, there entered into the great Hall, the knight of the
sea, Ambassadors from the kings of Tunis and Tangur.
with Camaru, Tribart, Vibrant and a great company of knights of Tunis, all
armed saving their heads, whereon they ware light hats of Taffeta. Who, seeing
the Emperor sitting under his Canopy of Estate, with the whole knighthoode of
Greece about him; without any reverence fit for so mighty a Monarche, in this
wise (by the mouth of Oceander) proudly saluted him. A bold embassage


Our great Prophet Mahomet maintain and defend the most mighty kings Tomarin
of Tunis, and Tangut of Tangur, and grant them happy victory over all their
enemies: and confound Claranax of Constantinople, and all the damned
Christians, that tendered the defense to the destruction of the worthy Prince
Tumanto of Tabaroa; whom thou most traitorously flewest before the walls of
Tangur, under a fained color of counterfaite friendship, against all equity,
and contrary to the promise that thou plightedst to the honorable orders of
knighthoode. Which, being manifest before the eyes of the Estates of Tunis and
Tangur, has urged them at this time, by me, to summon thee (in all humble and
submissiue sort, disroabed of thy royal vestures, with an halter about thy
neck, and a white wand in thine hand) presently to repair unto the pauilions
of the Barbarian Potentates. Before whom, if proudly thou refuse to make thy
personal appearance, we here (in the names of our dread Sovereigns)
proclaim utter ruin and destruction against thee and all thy kingdom; within
whose territories no Christian shall be left alive: so extremely and
rigorously shall our Pagan Curtelaxes, within these few days, punish thy
inconsiderate contumacy.

With such presumption and hautinesse was this speech delivered by the knight
of the sea, against the Emperors honor and fame; as for very anger at his
boldness, his eyes waxed bloudshot, and his forehead was furrowed with so
fearful a frown, as all the lookers on trembled at ye terrible aspect of his
bunched brows: which notwithstanding were but the very shadows of his hearts
substancified impatience. Whose choleric humor so choked up the mouth of
his voices organ, as he was unable to render any reply unto his expecting
enemies. Which Oceander perceiving, he turned unto his fellows, and in great
derision; See ye not (quoth he, Bold and bitter.
with a loud laughter) with what patience the Emperor endures our Embassage? No
doubt but by that time he has studied a little longer, we shall receive some
stout answer: he struggleth so mightily to speak to us. The young Prince,
Ismerion of Sparta, and the brother to the fair Rodasilua, with little
patience brooked this shameful indignity offered unto his Sovereign: and
therefore doing his obeisance to the Emperor, with an high voice, he began
thus to correct their in civility.

It better befitteth the gravity of Ambassadors, to use themselves with
reverence before a Potentate: and not in such injurious manner, to miscarry
theirselues before so mighty a Monarch, as the Emperor Claranax, my dread Lord
and Sovereign. Whose sword, like ye mowers sith, being discontinued from
correcting of your misdemeanors, has given leisure to your careless
co^ceits, in your prides, to perpetrate new controversies: which with a
greater vengeance will speedily procure you a more dreadful destruction.

By Mahomet (quoth Oceander very scornefully) the boy prattles pretily: and on
mine honor it were pity to let the little vrchin to die of a consumption;
that craved his present confusion so pithilie. And therewith he smote the young
Spartan Prince such a buffet under the temples, with his armed fist, as he
quite felled him to the ground: Ismerion slain by Oceander
and with his feet there prosecuting his pitiless fury, as he made his
mouth together with a stream of clotted blood, to belch out his miserable life.

O who has seen the sad countenances of Priam, Heccuba, and Polixena
(bedeawed with the tears of true sorrow, for ye death of their dear son
Hector) saw but even the very tipe of the torments, that Claranax, Basilia, and
most wretched Rodasilua endured, at the woeful sight of so sorrowful a
spectacle: whose conceived grief was in such excess of sadness, as No
Rhetoricians tongue in words can paint
The sorrows great, that did their souls attaint.


For with tears their azury eyes were drowned, with trembling their arms and
hands shaked, their hearts for horror panted from out their places, their
tongues faultred, their temples travailed with sweat, and (to conclude) all
their bodies were distempered, they shrieked at the sight, they left their
throanes, thronged about him, threw themselves upon the ground, felt his
pulses, found no life, fainted under him; revived (not to relieve) but renew
their lamentings over his cold carcass; whom they most loved being alive, and
most lamented being suddenly sequestered from himself, and from those he more
affected then himself. In this doleful sort they passionatized themselves
over the departed Princes body: which they bathed in the deawe of their tears,
until anger and magnanimity, drawing the good Emperor from such wailing
effeminacy, enforced his cogitations Ambassador, The Emperors resolute
answer to the Ambassadors.
to utter forth this couragions resolution. Sleep in thy souls security
sweet Prince of Sparta: whose untimely death, as my eyes have relented over
thee, so mine ire shall revenge with an unplacable fury, on the heads of thy
wicked enemies. Harken therefore (O ye merciless miscrea^ts) and behold my
more then deserved clemency toward ye: that I should harm Ambassadors, is
against the laws of Nations; yet you manifestly see, that your misdemeanors
have merited no mercy: which notwithstanding (though even contrary to justice)
I willingly and graciously grant you; that in my rage it may not be reported,
rather of your words (wherein your masters wrong me highly) then of your deeds
(wherein your selves have proffered me most intolerable indignity) I took
reuengeme^t. Which though it be warranted in all religious both Christian and
Pagan, yet with multitudes I will not wreake it, nor with so many as I might
command to punish ye, Honorable patience.
will I oppress ye: but quietly permitting you to depart my Palace, remit the
trial of our causes to our fortunes followed in the field: where fierce Bellona
shall decide ye Justice of our quarrels without partiality.Depart ye therefore
in peace (discourteous knights) to your Pauilions: where, humbled on your
knees, you shall denotifie unto your Sovereigns, yt they show their pride, and
inconsiderateness; so presumptuously to command one, that is far better then
their selves; so basely at their sole summons to submit himself, and safety,
unto their doubtful censures; since what they lay unto my charge is altogether
untrue, and of malice falsely forged, to pick quarrels against me. For, where
Tunian Tomarin infers treason unto me, The Emperor Claranax wrongfully
accused, to have treacherously murdered Tumanto.
practiced against his son Tumanto, he should have said (and that rightly)
that I was too trusty unto his treacherous son: whose Barbarian manners grew
so barbarous, as after I had promoted him to the highest dignity in Grecia, he
falsely (having feloniously stolen away my Niece Marinda of Moldauia from me)
fled over to my foes of Tripoly and Syria. Under whose banner he bouldly
bandied against me; until by the just judgment of the heavens, he in the
Adriaticke seas (according as he had deserved) by a sort of servile
sea-roauers, Tumanto taken by Rouers and slain.
received the right recompense of a traitor (to wit, plain hanging) yet nether
by my consent nor countrymen. Therefore tell your misinformed masters of Tunis
and Tangur, that they done injury to my innocence, by inuading my
territories, under the pretense of my committing treason against Tuma^to; since
(in my conceit) they rather complot the co^prizing of my Crown and city of
Constantinople: yet I will not take knowledge thereof. But since they will needs
accuse me thus wrongfully in words, tell them, I will yer long excuse with deeds
rightfully and willingly: for with my sword I hope on their gorgets to plead
guiltless, to their peril and destructions.

CHP. XXIII.
Of the great battle between the Pagans and the Christians, cut of by the
coming of the night, begun a-fresh the next day: wherein the Grecians went by
the worse: and their revenge by the death of 17000. Barbarians, and how the
Pagan Potentates enraged, concluded the speedy destruction of the whole City.

IF the Pagan Ambassadors admired the unheard of clemency of the royal
Emperor, it was no marvel: since both for magnanimous prowess, and merciful
patience he was unmatchable. Wherefore with the greater reverence they
respected his highness; courteously replying, that whatsoever he had
commanded them for answer, they would, on their honors truly refer unto
their Sovereigns: and thereon engaging their credits, they presently departed
(after honorable entertainment) from the Palace of the Emperor, to the tents
of the kings of Tunis and Tangur. Where, to the relating of the good Emperors
answer, we will leave them; to return to the (by this time, returned)
Commanders of Christendom. Who with a mighty navy having passed over the
Adriatike seas, speedily alanded their troops of trained soldiers (in sight
of their envious enemies) upon the plains of Constantinople, to the exceeding
comfort of the Constantinopolitan Christians: Aid of Christians in succor of
Constantinople: with Morcauil 3000. horse, Rubaldo 1200 foot. Fiarden Arcanio
100. horse, 9000. foot, with Curanand Kauisco^ ^0000.
who from their walls battlements espied, where first the stout young Prince
Morcauill of Hungaria, with his battalion of 3000. horse (after whom followed
the king Rubaldo with 2000. Huns, and stout Bulgarians on foot) proudly passed
along the forefronte of the Pagans pauilions. Next whom the old king of
Bohemia, with his forward son the Prince Arcanio, marched with a strong
battaglion of an hundred horse, and 9000. foot, all worthy knights: from
Thessaly and Transiluania, came also forty thousand sturdy soldiers, marching
under the ensign of the valiant princes Curan and Kauiscon: at whose arrival
the Constantinopolitans so loudly showted, as ye whole city trembled therewith.
Then a great Lord of Sparta with 4000. under his leading, well approved
Grecians, disembarqued themselves. Who hearing of the timelesse death of their
young Prince Ismerion, solemnly vowed to make a slaughterhowse amongst the
pauilions of the pitiless Pagans: with whom also the like swear the
thrice-excellent Erimaro and Orbano the worthy Governors of the French and
Spanish armies; protesting till the death, resolutely to wreake vengeance on
their misbelieuing molesters, who had encaptiuated, their young Sovereigns. All
these in martial order courageously passing close by ye pauilions of the
Pagans, marched 3. times round about the plain before the City: where (though
greatly against the mind of the careful Emperor Claranax, who forewarned
them of some treacherous mischief that might there befall them) they straight
ways strongly encamped their companies; whose courages yearned to be grappling
with their Pagan enemies,

With exceeding gallantnesse they marched in this order into the City: where
they were graciously entertained of the good old Emperor Claranax. Who with
great gentleness gave to every several soldier such singular welcomes, as
every one vowed, willingly to spend their lives in defense of him and his whole
countries: such and so unheard of was the forwardness of the Christians in
Constantinople: who no less comforted the drooping spirits of the Grecians,
then discouraged the stout hearts of the rude barbaria^s, Kings of Tunis and
Tangur. Whose hosts, as they were huge in multitudes, so they were haughty in
manners, diverse in dispositions, and contrary in condition: and therefore not
only gave often occasion of quarrels and debates, Tumult in the Paga^s Ca^pe.
but also of sudden destruction to the whole army; had not some malicious
malefactors been the more speedily corrected, by the good advice of the Knight
of the Sea. Who, assuredly seeing how many multitudes of mischiefs were likely
to second each mutiny, (causing a fit place by the ha^dy-works of painful
Pyoners) with a loud voice and an undaunted courage, in this sort played the
Proloquutor, to the Pagan princes: who encompassing him about with their armed
chariots, yielded an attentive auscult to his oration.

Sacred Emperors of Tunis, Tangur, and Tabarca, Oceanders oration to the kings
of Tunis, T gur and Tabarca.
if I were able in words, like a cunning Orator, or another Hermes, but even
halfewise to express the very colon of my conceit; your mightiness should
thoroughly pe^ceiue the great pity, that I would plainly prostrate before
the eyes of your excellencies, of the sudden confusion of our complotted
enterprise. But (alas) I am insufficient to perform my pretense: and
therefore, in plain terms, I shall truly lay open unto you my proposed
purpose. Understand you therefore, my Lords, that not only ever since our
arrival, but even at this instant, our army has been, and is so pestered
with pernicious traitors and conspiratours; as never a day, nor hour, nay nor
scarcely at this present, our friends and loyal followers can rest free from
their disturbances: whose hearts are still conceiting, whose heads ever
complotting, and whose hands are ready to the acco^plishing of all wickedness
and treasonous insidies, that can possibly be plotted or performed.

Such conspiracies were contrived by Cascar and Ombator against the holy
Alcheron of Mahomet: and such was the blasphemy of Blandulon against his
deity. The like was that of Raphan, who enterprised the sudden surprisage of
your majesty's lives in your pauilions: and no whit differed that same
abominable action of A^tior Esson, who in arms openly oppugned against the
profitable proceedinges of your potencies. Infinite more of molestours could I
number, that within these few days, have traitorously conspired against the
common good of our glorious army. But what became of them? They dyed either by
perishing or punishment: and more vndoubledly will follow them; should not our
holy prophet Mahomet, the better provide, by his divine providence, for our
perfect prosperity. Let us therefore on our knees, magnify his holy name; and
with our hands, manfully maintain his true belief against all his
misbelieuing adversaries, that peruersly oppose themselves against his holy
heastes, and against our hosts for his sake. And so shall we not only
profit the perfectness of our religion, but also preserve our camp and
country from the traiterous complots of some wicked wretches, whom idleness
and ambition egg on, to the work of their deserved ends, and our doleful
confusion.

The Knight of the Sea, with so great vehemency of spirit pronounced this his
speech; as the Barbaria^s, being exceedingly amazed at his bold and brave
behavior; in token of their great good liking of his counsel, rendered him a
grations applause, with excessive shouting: all in general rejoicing that they
had so good a chieftaine, and courageous a champion to conduct them; except
Ebator. Ebator.
Whose heart yearning for anger of the remembrance of his brother Ombators
treachery, caused him secretly to conceive no small hatred against the Knight
of the Sea, for ever after. And therefore, with all his Moroccans, he stoutly
opposed himself against the opinion of Oceander, Private hatred hinders
public proceedings.
in a great rage saying; that he neither could nor would give grant unto the
graceless disposing of the wars of Tunis, after the desperate devising of so
inconsiderate a Punie: whose lack of discretion, had brought him to such an
ill determinated disposition. Whose plottes if they prove not rather
prejudicial then profitable to your holy practice and religious proceedings, I
shall think hereafter, that aged experience may breed expense; but never be
able to work that effect, as youthful rashness is able to effinish. Ebator,
ending his speech, speedily poasted to his tents: and packing up all his
pauilions, with his band of Moroccans, Ebato^ forsakes his Pagan a^^ie.
he presently embarked himself: and, without any far word, or farewell, he
set up sails toward the shores of Barbary: where, leaving him to his
wilfulness, we will return to the wars in Grecia.

Though the Knight of the Sea were gauled even to the quick, with Ebators
spiteful quirke; yet seeing neither the time, nor place to be fit for
revenge, he wisely retained his anger: and, with the subtle Serpent Echidnon,
ceased hissing until some better season, wherein he might safely hitte the
Moroccane home, with a full requital. But in the mean while, defiance being
denounced against each other; as well the Pagans as the christians drew forth
their forces into the midst of the plain, before Constantinople: whose
walls and warlike battlementes being emburdened with a multitude of beawtious
Ladies, set on the same so fair an embellishment; as had the Sun shone
never so brightly, they would scarcely have sent so splendent a luster into the
eyes of the admiring soldiers: whose hearts, thorough their cristall
casements, were so deeply enflamed, as they thought nothing able to quench the
hot fire of their fancies, but only the heart blood of their hateful enemies.

Wherefore, by the commandments of the governors on both sides, ye dreadful
signal to ye fight being sounded, there no sooner approached the King of
Tangur with his Fessians from the army of the Pagans; but that Prince
Morcauill, with his Hungarian The battles of Fessians and Hungarians affront.
horsemen, pressed furiously against the^. Between whom there was so strong an
encounter as king Tangur, breaking his lance upon the gorget of the young
Hungarian, was quite unhorsed, and fifteen of his best knights at the same time
in the like sort served. Where they had ended their lives, had not a fresh band
of Barbarians bosterously buskled in amongst them; and overthrowing a great
number of christians, made the residue to retire themselves, until the King of
Tangur was rehorsed. Who no sooner found himself repossessed of his his
saddle, but that setting spurs to his palfrey (like an angry Lion) he lashed
with such fierceness into the thick troop of his enemies, as the prince
Morcauill being unable to withstand his force, by little and little he
retreated from the Pagans fury. Which his dear friend Arcanio perceiving, A
supply of Bohemians.
he called amain to his Bohemia^ Martialists; and putting his strong spear
made of knotty Cornel, in his rest, he ran so swiftly against a prue pagan
knight named Rodorin (who was one of the K. of Tangurs guard) as, bearing him
quite over his saddle, he made him to take a new and more uneasy seat on the
crooper of his palfrey. Whom leaving to his shame, with the same spear he bare
to ground seven other sturdie Pagans, before his arm or aim failed. In which
his enterprise he was so bravely seconded, by his battaglion of Bulgarians; as
in spite of the king of Tangur, they not only wan ground of his Barbarians,
but in a moment made them, maugre the might of their commau^der, to betake
themselves unto most fearful flight.

At which their cowardice, the Knight of the Sea was so exceedingly enraged, as
for very wrath, he waxed so wood as uneath any Sarrasen was able to behold
him: until, taking Xamaru and Brammadon by the gauntlets; How long (said he)
shall our generous hearts trust our honors, in the hands of these heartlesse
soldiers? Until our christian enemy shall joyfully triumph, in our
overthrow? Our holy Mahomet fore-fend it: and then in what I can, I shall
defend it. For rather had I die, then suffer our selves to be thus cowardly
sacrificed unto all misfortune by these unbelieving christians.

Ending these words, he caused Brammadon and his brother to follow him* who,
with his lance in his rest, Oceander Brammadon and Xamaru enter the battle.
and his shield on his shoulder, leauelled so strong a stroke against the
helmet of Arcanio, as beating him quite from his horse, he left him to seek
for succor, among a number more of Bulgarian knights, whom his fellows
sent down headlong to associate him. Whereat the good Prince of Hungary waxed
so wroth, as with a hundred of his best and couragiousest warriors, he
presently encompassed the three Pagan knights within their armed angle: and in
such sort behaved themselves against them, as though Oceander was most
excellently armed, and of a most invincible courage; yet had he much ado to
match so many worthy Martialists. Whom though many times he exceedingly
endammaged, hurt, and beat off from their horses, yet he could not so quietly
rid his hands of them, as he should (without some sound knocks) escape scotfree
from their furies: especially Prince Morcauill, who three times though he were
felled to his horse mane; yet so many times he revived: and recovering his
vigor, sealed such sorrowful quittances on the helmets of his adversaries, as
he made them in an ertasie, to decline their heads, and leaning on their
palfreyes creastes, quite forget to execute their intended enterprise. But in
vain it is to contend with ones stronger: a mightier manageth arms against
Morcauill: and therefore no marvel, though any longer he cannot withstand his
furious and weighty blows: which, in such irresistible sort, and vnceasing
manner, lashed against his burgonet; as the buckles being broken, and the armor
brast in pieces, he was forced for want of defense, to loose some of the best
blood in his body; Morcauill flies.
and by swiftness of his horse speedily to escape from the fury of his
unmatchable adversary Oceander: who, with his good sword Scindifer, did cut
such broad lanes cross the battaglion of Bulgarians, as there was not any one
that durst once so much as oppose him self against him: so like a
neuer-matchable Martialist, or rather Mars himself, he behaved himself
amongst the amazed christians. Who had presently been foiled, had not the
strong King of Hungaria, with the Princes Kauiskon, The battle of Huns,
Thessalians, and Transiluanians set forward.
and Curan, with their unbroken bands of Rutters, Thessalians, and
Transiluanians, incontinently come to their rescue. At whose angry assault the
battle began, once more, to be so fortunate unto the christians; as the
knight of the sea was on a sudden beaten back; and his, and Brammadons horses
slain under them; and Xamaru, with the scattered legio^ of Sarasens, enforced
violently, to betake themselves, by little and little to the retreat. Whom the
King Rubaldo pursued so courageously, as the whole company of christians
(as well within, as without the city of Constantinople) clapped their hands,
and shouted for joy; praising god for giving them such good prosperity, and
almost an assured victory over all their misbelieuing enemies: whom at that
time they had utterly vanquished, or at least exceedingly foiled; had they not
for greediness of getting the conquest, disarraunged themselves, and run
headlong after their enemies. Through disorder of the ch^istians, they lose
advantage over their enemies, and fall into disadvantage themselves.
Which, ye courageous and wise leader of the discomforted Sarasens, no sooner
advised, but he presently took thereby occasion of advantage. For, horsing
himself again by pure force, on the palfrey of a sturdy Knight of Thessaly,
named Radoron (whom at one blow he severed to the breastbone) he spurred
speedily into the midst of his daunted soldiers; and there strongly
brandishing his courtleaxe, with a loud voice and a commanding action, he
stoutly recalled his slying fellows, saying; For shame, for shame (my worthy
country men) fly not so fearfully before your following enemies: but,
remembering the justice of your quarrel, and for what cause ye undertook this
enterprise ( viz, for the death of Tabarcan Tumanto, and the exalting of the
holy Alcheron) cheer up your disconsolated courages; and turning your faces
toward them, like a stream dammed up, make your recoyling be the recovering
of more fury; and on the sudden with far greater violence break out upon
their resisting troops; and by the resistlesse vigor of your arms, make them
to break now, who erst made you to bend: or, refusing to perform it, prepare
your selves to receive the guerdon of your cowardice, at the hands of him, who
esteems his life less, then the loss of so assured and glorious a victory.

These wrathful words, were so excellently graced with irefull actions, as his
Pagan soldiers, partly for shame, partly for fear, were incontinently
enforced to follow him. Whereupon, joining himself with Xamaru, Tribarte,
Vibrante, and Cammatu, he thundered in, with such fury amongst the disarayed
troops of the suspectlesse Christians; as at the first brunt, there were
overthrown, to the very ground, The Transiluanians and Thessalians recoyle.
thirty of the most approved Transiluanians, and Thessalians; and the valourous
Princes Curan and Cauiskon, both at once, enforsed to loose their stirrops, and
embrace their horses necks, to save themselves from falling.

The dismayed Christians, with wonder, made way for the Paganne Champions: who
never rested, until such time, as they approached unto the strong garrison of
Bulgarians; who, had all this while encompassed in the brave knight Brammadon;
though in vain: who had so courageously maintained the combat against them,
The Bulgarians give back
as eleauen of their fellows being slain, the rest stood a loofe off,
without once daring to approach him. Whereof the good king Rubaldo being
advertised, he presently poasted unto the Paganne, and with him hand to hand,
entered to sore a combat; as, had they not been both of the most approved
Knights in the whole army, the battle had in a moment on one or other side
been finished. But, ha good good, that Rubaldo was so far in years; for had
he been in his prime, two Brammadons could scarcely have matched him.
Nevertheless, he so bravely behaved himself against the Barbaria^; as,
despoyling him of certain parcels of his empaired armor, he had in a short
space put him to the worst; had not the Knight of the Sea and the whole
knighthood of Morocco (seconded with forty thousand Tabarcan soldiers, A
supply of Tabarcans.
brought freshly in, under the conduct of the Arabian Argostas) set so fiercely
upon the garrison of Hungaria; as making a bloody lane quite thorough them,
they presently parted the combat: and having (though not very easily) taken
Rubaldo Rubaldo taken prisoner.
prisoner, sent him pinioned back unto their pauilions, by a strong band of
Sarasens, and Brammadon; whilst they hotly pursued after the discomfited
Hungarians: The Hungarians disco^forted.
who, like sheep before the wolves, fled fearfully from the fury of their
merciless pursuers. Who followed the^ so fiercely, as, before they could gain
the gates of Constantinople, there fell three thousand christians, under the
slaughtering swords of the merciless miscreants: against whose endeauours the
Lord of his mercy oppose his power; or else the peril of all christendom is
perpetrated in their proceedings. Which brought extreme sorrow to the very
souls of the controwled soldiers: who entered the gates of the City with
such sad gestures, and heavy countenances, as if the destruction of Phrygian
Troy had been counterenacted by the woeful Grecians. For, some came in with
their arms off, other with their helmets cleft, and more with their bodies
wounded: all hanging down their heads, and houlding down the points of their
weapons, and trayling their pikes and lances by the club ends on the ground,
in such sorrowful sort; as who had seen them, and would not pity their
perplexities, Duris genuit se cautibus horrens
Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera Tigres.
Hard Caucasus within his marble maw had got him first:
And by the milk of Hircan Tigres, he was after nursed.


Curan and his Transiluanians put to the retreit.
As Soon as these were in this sort entered, there came flying unto the City,
Curan with his Thessalians and Transiluanians: who brought such a sorrowful
relation of the conflict, as there was never the like terror within the amazed
hearts of the woeful Constantinopolitans, before. But, oh; when the Emperor
Claranax, the Empress, and all the rest of that worthy rout, heard the taking
of Rubaldo prisoner, and the death of Kauiscon related; with what an irefull
geasture did they tear their tresses, beat their breasts, and bewail their
miseries! But in especial, the Queen Anaxia so extremely bewailed the
captivity of her dear husband, as, for agony of heart, she fell into such an
hot burning ague, as she never while she lived, recovered perfectly thereof
again. And surely at that instant, she had yielded up her weary life, had she
not been the better comforted up, by the sage councellings of the Princesses
Almidiana and Eristama; who had (as you have heard) proved by experience, that
the only remedy in adversity was patience. If these were woeful, how wroth on
the other side was the good Prince Olbiocles? who was angry at nothing so much,
as yt he was so shrewdly taken down by a fever; as, like another Hector, he
could not patronize the notable performances of his country men; whose body
should have been the buckler to his Christian followers. Wherefore, Olbiocles
impatient for his extreme weakness.
he smote himself sorely on the stomach, and beating his head against the
boulster, he continued for a while almost in a frantic passion. Unhappy
wretch (quoth he) and most accursed caytife that thou art; why was I borne to
see the ruin of my Country and Religion, and not be able in such extremes to
succor them? If so, I would I had never rather received life, then thus have
lived to behold such irrepairable misfortunes. And therewithal he suddenly
threw the sheets over his face, as if he had been ashamed of what could not
be salued. For, by the providence of the Highest he was prevented in his
princely purpose; least by courageously defending himself, he might have more
offended himself, then by man's foreprouidence could be perceived. For, had he
and the knight of ye sea, once entered the combat; who knows not, yt their
undaunted courages would have brought one of their confusions? whose near
affinity being once known to the relieuer; who then would be more sorrowful
then the vanquisher? and more care oppressed, then the conqueror? But to
return, together with the day; that days destruction of the poor Christians
being ended, the knight of the Sea caused the retreat to be sounded:
whereupon, all of them retired to their tents. Retreat sou^ded by the Paga^s.
Where, how graciously each courageous soldier was guerdoned for his
valiancie, and what wonderful rejoicing there was generally through the whole
Camp of Pagans, I take it to be both tedious for the reading, and superfluous
for the relating: and therefore, I will back address me to the bruised bands
of sorrowful and disconsolate Christians. Whose hearts as they were full of
sorrow for their recoyle, so were they hopeful of wreaking a full revenge on
their inhumane and devilish enemies. And therefore, calling their young Prince
Curan, and the sage and strong Lord Labasto, with all the worthiest of the
Spartane knights and soldiers, into counsel; they spedily concluded on a
sudden revenge, to be wreaked on the vnsuspecting Pagans: which they no sooner
co^triued, but they put it in execution. For, by that time ye heavens had bin
hidden thrice three hours, in the sable colored mantle of that same goddess
of obscurity, and that by the crowing of the wakefull cock, The Christians in
the night, sally out into the Camp of the Pagans.
they knew that it was past midnight; these two worthy Captains, Curan and
Labasto, closely conducted their bands of Transiluanians, Thessalians, and
Spartans, out at a posterne gate of the city: and with such advised secrecy
and silence they marched unto the Camp of the Pagans, as before the scoutwatch
could descry them, they were within a furlong of the Royal pauilions of
Tangur. When, bearing the alarm to be suddenly given to the Saracens, they
rushed into the midst of the amazed Pagans, with such a sudden fury; as if Mars
himself accompanied with infinities of his equals, had broken out of ambush, to
take them at advantage: for on all sides, the fiery Spartans, following their
Lordly leader, made such slaughter amongst the Infidels, as they met not with
any, for the while, that were able to withstand the^. And the first that
encountered was Brammadon, and his two brothers Tribarte and Vibrante: who
hurtled, like wild bulls, against Labasto and a strong Sparan knight, named
Tellador. Who in ye like sort received them so valiantly, as they made their
steely point^d Lances to strike sparkles of fire, from out their well tempered
beauers; never a one of them scaping scotfree, from the fury of his adversary.
For, Labasto and Telador, by reason of their opponents incomparable strengthes,
were exceedingly bruised; and Brammadon and his brother, for default of their
hastily endossed armours, were both exceedingly wounded: yet they passed by one
another, with such invincible demeanours, into the thick press of each others
enemies; as on all sides in a moment they massacred multitudes of resisting
soldiers, A great havoc both of Christians and Pagans.
as well Pagans as Christians. But oh, who had seen the wonders were wrought by
Curan and his Thessalians, against the armed troops of their numberless
enemies, he would have thought he had been irresistible in his angry action.
For in less then an hour, he and his followers had given such a bloody
banquet to the Saracens, under the king of Tangurs regiment, as with ease they
might approach unto the Royal pauilion: where, they had surprised Tangut
himself, had not Oceander with a strong band of Tunis, with Xamaru, Oceander.
with a supply of Pagans.
and diverse others of the noblest of the Barbarian knighthoode, with such
unheard of valiancy repugned them; as, seeing themselves unable to resist their
innumerable forces, by little and little, they advisedly retreated to their
fellow followers of Sparta: who, having by this time slain, at the least,
17000. Barbarians slain.
seauenteene thousand Barbarians, with no little joy returned speedily unto the
city of Constantinople. Where, what joys, what triumphs, and what
thanksgiving there was generally amongst al Christians, I will not at this time
stand to recite; least I should make my book big only with superfluous
descriptions.

The hurly-burly in the mean time continued still, A tumultuous hurly-burly in
the Pagans Camp,
in such disorderly manner in the Camp of the Pagans, as no man knowing well
who was his friend, he took every one to be his enemy. Wherefore there
happenned exceeding bloodshed amongst them: which had not been possibly
pacified; had not the knight of the sea caused his guard, with their battleaxes
in their hands, in the names of the Kings of Tunis and Tangur, charged every
one particularly to return unto his station. Which being (with much ado)
performed, and the tumult appeased; the knight of the sea, by the commandment
of King Tomarin and Tangut, causing silence to be proclaimed, called together
Brammadon, Xamaru, Vibrante, The Pagans sit in counsel.
Tribarte, and Zabieir the Duke of Alcazer, with diverse more of the most
valourous, and wisest of the Affricane knighthoode, unto secret counsel. Where
many and diverse verdictes being of diverse given, and diversely censured; at last
the eldest son of Giant Gandramond (with a fierce look, an hautie courage,
and an high voice)

Had I thought (quoth he in a rage) that so glorious an enterprise, as the
invasion of all Europe, had been undertaken by such a sort of white liuered
milksoppes; by Mahomet, Brammadon Brammadons advice.
would never have once stirred a foot to aid you.

For, where I thought, that not so much as the meanest soldier, if a Pagan,
but that he was invincible; what may I now think? studying (unhappy that I
should find so) the noblest, most heroicke, and most worthiest knights (yea
even the Generals themselves, whose virtues should be as a pattern to the
baser Barbaria^s valor) to be become such simple meacockes and of such
cowardly resolutions. What? for an assault made by night upon us, by a sort of
misbeleeuing Christians, who, like Arabian thieves, have even in our sleep set
upon our soldiers, and surprised them, shall we, as my degenerate brother
Tribarte counsels us, break up our camp, leave our attempts, and surcease our
endeavors, even in the midst of our enterprises? Mahomet our holy Prophet,
and great Termagant forefend it; and defend me from those, who for a flea-bite
(in respect) will change their minds, and (unmindful of their eternal
honors) refrain from finishing, even the last act of these Christians
tragedies: who will not stick to think and talk, that their God in whom they
believe, has by his heavenly power dedefended them, and preserved their city
from being sacked by such an infinity, of (as they call us) misbeleeuing
Pagans; whose holy Gods are not in potency half equal to their Christ Jesus.
Oh holy and most mighty Mahomet, what a blemish will this be to thy divine
majesty? To the dimming of whose resplendent glory, rather then any accident
should ankly happen, I would first tear down the stony walls of Constantinople
with my nails; or hazard my self to a doubtless destruction. Brammadon uttered
these last words with such a wondrous vehemence of spirit, as the whole
assembly both admired and admitted what he had counseled. And thereupon, with
great joy they steadfastly resolved, so soon as the blushing morn appeared
next; by their sudden assaults, to bring confusion on the Christians, and by
the speedy conquering of Constantinople, to make all Grecia destitute of any
fortified place of refuge, for to repugne them in their attemptings.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How the Christians, by the politic counsel of Duke Zabier of Alcazar, were
vanquished by the Infidels; the Emperor Claranax, the Empress, the king of
Bohemia, and all the Estates of Greece put in strong prisons and manacled; the
Constantinopolitans forced by tortures and fear of death, to believe in
Mahomet: And how by the sudden arrival of the wise Magartes, the knight of
the sea knew himself to be a Christian.

ZABIER, the good old Duke of Alcaazar, though he well had proved by
experience, that haste brings wast; yet he determined willingly not to
affront either Brammadon, or any of the others, in their resolves.
Nevertheless, as one somewhat displeased, that ye whole counsel had so rashly
consented unto the youthful unadvised devise of Brammadon; as to surmise the
sudden surprise of Constantinople (wherein the better part of the powerful
prowess of Christendom was strongly engarrisonned: he turned to the one side,
as a male content, from the company of such young Counselors: and leaning his
arm upon his helmet, he there rested in a melancholy dumpe; until, seeing
both the kings, Tomarin and Tangut, with silence to expect his verdicte (as one
whom they knew most prudent) with his snow-white hand, smoothing down his
whiter beard, he gravely endeavored in this sort better to advise them;

It is not unknown unto ye (my noble Lords) how at that time the Emperor
Claranax, Zabiers sage counsel unto the Pagan Princes.
with his millions of manful Christians, embattelled himself against the armed
bands of Tunis, I bouldly met him in the face, and not only co^batted him, but
wounded him in the head very sorely: yet I but little prevailed: for I escaped
not scarrelesse (I assure ye) in my enterprise. Also at the battles of Tangur
and Tabarca, I bouldly bad him battle, and hand to hand three times in one
afternoon affronted him; but to no purpose. For by my unadvised rashness, I
still lost more then I gained, and went away with the disadvantage; yea, even when
I had my enemies at most advantage.

The Christian Emperor Claranax (my worthy Countrymen) is not only warlike,
but wary, wise and wily: and is not therefore to be dealt withal so rashly and
headily, as any of our neighboring nations, in Barbary, Lidia, or the rude
Arabians, ye foster themselves in the desert wildernesses, by base pillage and
petty pilfry; whom in a moment, with a band of Lau^ciers, or at the most with a
small army, ye may presently put either to the flight or the foil. But, this
nation with whom we now contend, are Christians: whose forces we have (to our
costs) so thoroughly felt, as they seem in arms, rather to be like those
valiant Heroes their ancestors (on whose helmet creasts, is engraven Assured
victory) then to have fetched their pedigree from puling Paris, who more
delighted in amors then in armours; as one who cared not for bloody Bellona,
so he might enjoy his harmless Helena, to dally with. These are no such
simple souls (O ye worthy knights of Africa) and therefore not to be dealt
withal scarbugge-like, as young Brammadon would have the^. For it is not one
battles loss will overcome them: but sundry slight skirmishes, yt must first
weaken them: for they are both prewe and pollitique, Where the Lions skin will
not serve, we must piece it, with the soxes case.
having some of their knights in arms, whilst others be in ambush. And
therefore, it is ill for us, with the eagre mastiffe, to venture to far in
pursuit after the subtle Panther; least, unawares entangled within his
renting paws, we find our selves subject to inevitable danger, and
destruction.

Oceander harkened most attentively to the brief oration of the good old Duke
of Alcaazar; who had no sooner ended, but by ye holy Alcheron, Zabier (quoth
he) thy counsel is both politic and profitable: for hereby we may both
weaken the Constantinopolitans, and yer long ( Mahomet and his holy Angels
favoring us) take them at such advantage, as all the prisons in Greece may
easily be filled with their captive carcasses.

Hereunto the whole counsel condescended: and thereupon each one departed to
his own pauilion; except Tomarin, Tangut, the knight of ye Sea and Zabieir:
who, The Pagan princes go to view the city.
with their pages and six other attenda^t knights, secretly stale out of ye
camp, and poasted to the city: which they saw so exceedingly well watched and
warded with bands of soldiers at that time, as they all wondered to see the
Christians so vigila^t in their defe^cings. Whereupon, Tomarin (quoth Tangut) I
would to the Gods my men had bin Christians, on yt condition they would thus
safely have guarded themselves from their Grecian surprisements. Whereat they al
fetched a deep sigh, and speedily departed to their camp again. Where they
were no sooner entered, but they might perceive on their pauilions, the
brightsome glimmering of the blushing morning, to bid good morrow to those
Martialistes, whose eyelids ye drowsy slumbers of ye former night had never
closed. When, speedily and prouide^tly embattelling their soldiers, before it
was fully daylight. Brammadon, Xamaru, and Taliertez took their way, with a
strong battaglion of 3000. stout and valiant soldiers (as speedily as they
could) unto a little nooke of ye forest, adjoining wtin half a league of
Constantinople. An ambuscado of Pagans.
Within whose bushy entrails they closely enambushed themselves; whilst ye
knight of the Sea, Bamaru, Tomarin, and a selected battaglion of Tunis marched
celerously forward, to encounter their Christian enemies. Who (under the
general conduction, of the wounded Prince of Hungary, Labasto of Sparta, and
Prince Curan of Thessaly, with their eager bands of Huns, Moldauians,
Bulgarians, Bohemians, Budans, Transiluanians, and angry Spartans) had
warlikely enraunged themselves in battle array, against the approaching of
their reproachful adversaries of Tunis and Tangur: whose hearts were enflamed
with such an ardent desire of revenging their Religion, and the death of their
slain friends and brethren in the last days conflicte; as like enraged Lions
(running furiously to pray upon an heard of Neat, or Buffins) they marched
fiercely against their Pagan foes. When, with their Lances in their rests,
each side charged the other so strongly, as at ye first encounter, sixteen of
either part, were quight borne out of their saddles: amongst whom Curan and
Tomarin accompanied their foiled fellow soldiers. But Tomarin in a moment
received his horse again, at the hands of Oceander: who with almost an
hundredth courageous knights, endeavored with all might and maine to repel the
irresistible fury of the Spartans. Who (having hemmed in strongly on all
sides, amongst them, Bamaru and the knight of the sea, whom they most envied)
crying all aloud; The death of Ismerion of Sparta, shall this day be revenged:
with one accord they lashed so furiously on ye misbeleeuing Sarasens; as, though
the knight of the sea wrought wonders, in wounding and killing them without
ceasing; yet they so desperately pressed upon him; as, had not Brammadon,
Xamaru, and Taliartez discovered themselves the sooner out of their ambushe The
ambushe breaks out.
(maugre his magic armor) he had been in a moment, either taken prisoner,
or heawen into a thousand pieces: so exceeding dreadful were the angry forces
of the enraged knights of Sparta, for the reuengement of the untimely death of
their young Prince Ismerion.

In the mean time, Tomarin and Bamaru were neither idle nor knightly occupied:
for with multitudes of pitiless Pagans, they environed the good Prince Curan
in such strong, and strange manner amongst them; as, being on foot, and the
Sarazens all horsed, he had much ado, of a long while, to settle one sound
blow upon any of his adversaries: until by the happy help of the young
Prince Morcauill, his enemies thick set troops were forcibly broken: and
four of the mightiest Sarasens being quite unhorsed, he was speedily
remounted on a strong Barbarian palfrey, whose masters head he paid for ye
horse hire. When with his coursers heels making some rome amongst them, he
smote a big knight named Tleas, Tleas slain^
so smart a blow over the left thigh, as cutting it quite from the loins, he
made him quickly to leave his saddle to the sauegard of some unhorsed
Christian. And therewithal, joining side to side with the Prince of Hungary,
they heawed such a lane, through ye thick troops of the misbelieuing enemies,
as within the space of a quarter of an hour, they quite freede themselves from
the furies of the devilish Pagans.

But alas, they could not long enjoy such happily enfranchised liberty.

For now approaches the pitious period of all their generous proceedings.
Oceander is at hand (freede, and having foiled and confounded his Spartan The
Sparta^s foild.
opponentes, slain Labastoe, Labasto slain.
and slaughtered almost every of his soldiers) with his faucheon Scindifer,
reaking with lukewarm blood of new-slaine christians. Who bra^dishing it
above his helm, lent such a right-downe blow upon the Hungarian Princes
helmet; as, battering it into his braine-panne, Morcauill slain by Oceander.
he sent him headlong unto the cold earth. Whose yellowe dust (as pitying
the innocent young Princes death) gathered into clottered balls, before the
mouth of his bleeding wound: which straungely seeking to stop, it never ceased
till it self was drowned in the bloody gore of the slain young Gentleman.
Whose executioner the God of heaven forgive: for when he struck the stroke,
he knew not that he wrought the downfall of his dearest kinsman. At whose
death, the Prince of Thessalie was so enflamed with desire of revenge, as (not
regarding the multitudes of his mischieuing enemies) he roughly rushed into the
thickest squadrons of Barbarians: and with his trusty courtleaxe he laid so
lustily about him, as he never lent blow that lighted in vain; his brandished
sword bringing assured death to his opponents: so as, before he once so much as
rested, he brought eleven of his resisting foes to ground; with his own
hands, still making an easy way, for his almost slaughtered soldiers, to
follow him through. But what prevail doughty deeds, against death? or a
warlike Martialist against a more worthy Mars? Ocea^der, with a fatal fury,
has crossed him thorough the troops, and by the brandishing of his cutting
courtleaxe, has summoned his sweet soul to take flight from his earthely
prison house. For, with such an irresistible fury the faucheon descended upon
Curans Curan it slain.
cuirace, as parting it in pieces, it buried his cursed blade in the bowels of
his christian stomach: which, belching out his life together with his blood,
bad a sorrowful farewell to his more then sorrowfullest soldiers. Who like
good subjects never ioyed, unrevenged to after-liue their slaughtered
Sovereign: but, desperately dispersing themselves amongst their enemies, they
joyfully dyed, in effecting of their reuengefull resolutions, Thessalians
slaughtered.
after the slaughter of more then fourteen hundredth stout Barbarians.

In this sort, from day to day, did the good fortune of the christians
continually decline; so as, the good old Emperor, perceiving no happy help
for his helpless hap, remained in a most mela^choly pensiveness, as one who
had lost himself in some desert wilderness; where, not having what to relieve
him he determines to banish his breath from his body by doleful dumpishnesse:
such and so sorrowful was the good Emperor, for the emprisement of Rubaldo,
death of prince Morcauil, loss of his friends, slaughter of his subjects, ruin
of his Realm, and sudden confusion of all christendom. The meditating on
which miseries so mightily massacred his soul; as, had he not been of the
greater wisdom, and had ye surer confidence in the power of his God, to whom
nothing can be impossible, it had been almost impossible for him, to have any
long time, kept his life and body togith^r. Nevertheless, with ye assiduous
thought of his thronging misfortunes, he was so exceedingly vexed, as in his
agony he seemed more like some anatomy; then as he was, the generous, worthy
and thrice excellent Emperor Claranax. Whose sorrows daily more and more
increased, in such abundance, as it was a wonder to see the excess of his
extreamities, like an vnhealeable ulcer, still to increase; whilst his power,
pleasure, and princely pomp decayed, ceased and decreased.

And even in the midst of these his mischiefs, his enemies pressed, and
oppressed, toward his City, and subjects, in such huge multitudes; as,
having encompassed Constantinople in, on all sides, Constantinople straight
engirt on al sides.
and by their narrow watchinges, disappointed the Citizens of all further
provision of victualling necessaries, they penned them in, like a flock of
silly sheep, within the encompassing circlings of devouring Leopardes: whose
staying brought staruing, and whose egresse assured danger, destruction and
death. In these infinities of extreamitie; O God therefore, at last take pity
and compassion of thy distressed servants pitious perplexities; that by their
foil received of their remorselesse enemies, thy own honor, and thy sweet
Son Jesus Christ's glory may never fall, or be defiled with the filthy and
horrible blasphemies, that will proceed out of the malicious mouths of
misbelieuing and faithless Sarrasens: from whose power, if of thy gracious
goodness, thou do not protect thy dear children, undoubtedly, even in a
moment, all christendom shall be converted unto Maumetrie.

But, least we seem herein too redious, let us now reuert our style to the
last act of this lamentable story, or rather doleful Tragedy.

After that (to their no little joy) the plagues of Europe, yt misbelieuing
Pagans, had in many skirmishes (by the unmatchable chivalry of that same
choice flower of Knighthood, thrice exquisite Oceander) sequestered all good
fortune from the proceedinges of the pent up Grecians; and that they perfectly
perceived the quondam power of the christians, to be in such strange sort
diminished; as only wtin the circuit of the walls of Constantinople, there were
remaining but thirty or forty thousand fighting soldiers (most of which
number were either pined with hunger even unto the boanes, The misery of the
christians.
or prejudiced so in their bodies by wounds, as they were not able to make any
strong resistance) they waxed continually more boulder and boulder in bidding
battle to their vnabiding enemies: who rather sought, if it were possible, by
peace to procure some happy conclusion; the^ by conflicting any more, to bring
their Cities and religion to confusion. Yet notwithstanding, such was the
uncontrolled courage of the old Emperor Claranax: as though he should have
dyed, he could not in such cowardly sort refrain from affronting of his
furious foes. And therefore commanding his soldiers to speedy arms; with the
good aged king Fyardon of Bohemia, the courageous Princes Arcanio, Tholon,
Thiorin, and the young Duke Siranius of Athens, brother of murdered Meroander
(whom ye Emperor Claranax Claranax leads his army against the Pagans.
the self same day, with other three of his his companions named Riscian,
Lebarano, and Yponto, had ennobled with ye honorable order of Knighthood) he
marched warlikely out of the gates of Constantinople, toward the camp of the
Africans. With whose numberless multitudes, before he would join in conflict
(causing a little mount of turues to be raised by his pioners) with a strong
voice and a cheerful countenance, he in this wise began to comfort up his
almost disconsolate soldiers: who having settled themselves in order round
about him, with greedy ears attended, to his following oration.

Claranax his oration to his army.
My dear friends, and faithful followers, though I am assured of your high
valors, and that your courages are uncontrollable: yet, that in your haughty
hearts center, no one thought of childish and cowardly fear might (by reason
of the multitude of your heathen enemies) once enter, I can in no wise refrain
or retain my tongue, from telling you your duties in such distressefulnesse.
Hearken therefore unto the words of your dear sovereign, my most dutiful
subjects: and embrace, with joy, what I shall relate with ioyfulnesse of soul:
if to your souls comforts my exhortatiue speeches may penetrate into your
hearts, which misfortune has macerated, and unheard of hard mishap has made
(I feare-me) heavy unto destruction. At which word, ye tears fell in such
abundance from his eyes; as, for a while being unable to proceed any further,
he leaned himself on the arm of the young Prince Arcanio: but by the
sorrowful sighing of the christian soldiers, being somewhat moved, at last
(sighs lending leave) he once again prepared himself to his former proposed
task: But God be our guide, and as his will shall be, so let our wills be: and
though he have a great while turned his face aside from us, yet let us still
hope that he has not cast us into these perrils, to cast our lives into
perdition: but rather, by making our foes to triumph over us, at the last by
their sudden confusion, to work his name everlasting glory. Which though for
a space, I see it must be dimmed with the darkesome dreggs of Paganry and
Barbarism; yet I hope he will not altogether forget the faithful, or suffer
his chosen children to bear the intolerable yoke of heathenish thraldom.
Which (if it be his holy pleasure we should endure) let us not shrink aside,
or be dismayde at the matter: but rather with vnaffrighted hearts, and
constant courages, let these same baser parts of our selves (our souls
hateful prison houses) willingly sustain the shameful servitude, whereto our
maker, has appointed us. I speak not this nevertheless (dear friends and
associates) to dissuade you from your heroicke and worthy resolutions, or to
persuade you to most cowardly yielding unto your enemies, or to prostrate your
selves submissiuely, before the proudest of the Pagan Potentates. For, far be
it from me, to wish your thraldom, especially, seruilely to subject your
selves (yea, and also your sweet souls) to such shame and slavery: for whose
liberty and the glory of our Religion (against the proudest he, that dares)
even from my cradle. I have v^wed to loose the dearest member of my poor
carcass: which this day (God willing) shall either be heawen in pieces amongst
my enemies, or else return victorious in the happy overthrow of the common
adversaries of all christendom: which God, of his goodness grant unto me.
The good Emperor Claranax having ended, his soldiers shut up his oration with
such a shr^ll iteration of Amen, as both hills and dales ecchoed with
resou^ding. The army of the christians march joyfully to the battle.
When (by reason of the fast approaching of the Pagan army) every one
repayring unto his ensign; before the rest, the four new made Knights
Siranius, Riscion, Libarano, and Yponto, stepping out before the Emperor
Claranax, fell down on their knees, and most humbly begged to be honored
with the first encounter. Whereunto the Emperor condescending, they speedily
mounted their strong limbed coursers: on whose backs, at once, each seemed to
the behoulding Grecians (like as a second Perseus on his winged Pegasus) to
fly before their fellows for greediness of the first onset: with such a
furious swiftness their virtuous emulations caused them to poast unto their
enemies squadrons. Against whom came pricking out Zamaru, Vibrante, and two
other mighty Pagans, with such wondrous fierceness, as the very ground seemed
to tremble under the battering houes of their well timbred palfreyes: betwixt
whom the onset was given with such his resolution: They encounter.
as, brasting their knottie spears even to their gauntlets, they seemed to
have dymmed the air with the several shiuers of their stiuered lances;
whilst they passed by each other, not without sufficient tokens of their
approved valors, encharactred upon their gorgets. When at once, unsheathing
their keen Courtleares, they renewed their cruel combat: wherein each one of
them behaved himself with such dexterity; as the whole armies as well
Africans, as Christians, wondered at their angry actions.

The battaglions of Arcanio and Brammadon encounter.
And now by this time, ye battaglion that was led by the Princes Arcanio and
Tholon, joined so strongly with Brammadons regiment of Barbarians; as at the
first shocke, sixteen of their side were quite thrown to the ground, and
Tholon and Bawrant (with whom he encountered) enforced both to make a pillowe
of their palfreyes croupes, to save themselves from a shameful falling. On the
other side, the strong battaglions of Tunis and Tangur, under ye conduct of
incomparable Oceander, marched forward, The battalions of the Emperor and
Tomarin meet.
to cope with the Emperor and the King of Bohemias regiments. Betwixt whom
there began so hot a conflict, as not any of them (except the Knight of Sea,
whose spear bare death unto his opponent) escaped hurtlesse from the
encounter. For the old King Fiardon, being the first (by reason of the
swiftness of his horse) that incountred, met Tomarin so strongly upon the
cuirace, as pearcing his brazen armor, he brake off the head of his lance,
against the breast bone of the Pagan potentate: who on the other side, so
aduenterously affronted the Bohemian King, as he bare both horse and man almost
on the earth. Wherewith, Fiardon Fiardo ouerthrown horse and man.
was so greatly bruised, as he was feign presently to depart aside out of the
battle, for to breath himself. Which the Emperor Claranax seeing: Ha, dear
God (quoth he, with a great sighe) what pity is it of my dear cosen of
Bohemias age-caused weakness! good old man, I shall revenge thee on thy
boisterous opponent: and therewithal (thinking to have learned the Pagan King,
a lesson for his ouer-bould encounter) he leaueld his lance with such unusual
strength against him; as, had not Bamaru the sodainlyer st^pped in between
them, he had fully requited the foil, received by the King Fiardon. For he so
courageously charged Bamaru, as (for all by the Pagans assault he lost the
stirrops and was wounded in one of his thighs) he bare him, without once
breaking of his lance, clean out of his saddle to ye earth: where, had not a
band of sturdie Sarase^s come speedily unto his rescue, he had there been
either slain or taken prisoner.

In the mean while, the vndomptable Knight of the Sea, and Thiorin met one
another with such a strong carreiere; as, Thiorin breaking his lance in a
thowsande shiuers upon the Knight of the Seas helmette, he received Oceanders
spear upon his three-foulde shield. Which unable to withstand the death
bringing sharpness, Thiorin slain.
yielded way to the steely point; until (having peirced quite through and
through the Bohemia^s armed body the same stack half a yard out behind his
back, to the great wonder of the christians; who, never since the combat of
the Emperor Claranax and the king Fyardo^, against the stern Giants Rhombort
and Ramorin, in defense of the Queen Gyloria, of England had once beheld so
strange an accident.

The knight of the sea does great deeds of arms.
But, the Knight of the Sea never stayed with that encounter: but like a wood
Lion, or some mountain Tigre, he fiercely rushed into the thickest troops of
christians, and with the self same spear, wherewith he slew Thiorin, he so
valourously assailed his resistantes, as before it brake, he unhorsed eleauen
Constantinopolita^ knights: and then, wresting a strong lance from an
attending Moore, he so courageously behaved himself therewith; as, without
resting, he sent three Bohemian Knights, both horse and man, to measure their
lengthes upon the ground.

Which Fiardon aduising, Oh, dear Lord of Heaven, (quoth he) what wonders does
yonder Knight in the watchet armor, with the golden rocks perform against us!
Surely, if his arm fail him not the sooner, I shall stand in doubt of our
utter overthrow: wherewithal, the Knight of the Sea charged a strong
Athenian named Maxetes, with such sure, as he bare him up by plain force, at
the p^int of his spear, welnigh three quarters of a yard, from his horseback.
Who was no sooner recovered upon his feet again, but that, Knight of the Sea
(quoth he) now will I try, whether thy fortune be so good on foot as on
horseback: and therewith running his sword up unto the hiltes, in Oceanders
Steedes belly, he made ye valorous Knight of the Sea, in spite of his teeth,
to dismount himself unto him. Whose haughty heart, unable to brook such an
horrible injury, incensed him with multitudes of angry thoughts: which boiled
in such wondrous wise wtin his breast, as his eyes sparkled with fire, and out of
his mouth (together with these dreadful words) proceeded abundance of smoke;
which like to a thick miste, conducted these terrible tidinges, out at the
loope holes of his beauer; Now by Mahomet (vnknightly Christian) if my good
sword hold, thou shall full dearly aby thy perpetrated villainy, in slaying
of my palfrey. Wherewith the furious fostersonne of Carthaginian Kanira, Maxetes
slain by Oceander.
smote such a stroke upon the helmet of the Athenian; as, cleaving his helm
and head asunder, the biting steel never stayed, until in the bowels of poor
Maxetes body, The Christians give ground.
it had buried it self in a bloody sepulture. At which sorrowful spectacle,
the Christian soldiers were so exceedingly amazed, as by little and little
they gave ground to their following foes; and in short time would have fled;
had not the god king Fiardon, after his breathing space, once more put in
amongst them; and like a good Chiefetaine, sought rather to forsake his life,
then forgo his soldiers, in such extreamitie. Wherefore, with his faucheon in
his fist, and his shield on his arm, he speedily rode unto the place where
Oceander remained unhorsed: when, calling unto him; Sir knight (quoth the good
king of Bohemia) induced thereto by thy virtue, though thy foe, and hostile
enemy; yet envying that any one should triumph in thy misfortune-caused
overthrow, I shall quickly deliver thee from the danger of thy enemies horses
feet; that with the greater glory I may bouldly boast of my gotten victory.
Hold thee therefore (quoth he) and on the preposed condition, remount thee on
this same Barbarian Palfrey: Fiardon horseth Ocea^der
and therewith he delivered him a strong and tall Courser, which he had won
at one full blow from a stout Moroccan: whose shoulder deprived of the head,
spewed out a stream of bloody goare, upon the dustie ground; which willingly
drank up the purple floude that flowed, from such a forced fountain.

Oceander, though he could not choose but wonder at Fiardons unprofitable
courtesy; yet he would not refuse his so gentle offer, especially standing in
need at that time of such an happy adiuver. And therefore, taking the horse
by the reigns, he lightly mounted up into the saddle: and then approaching to
the king of Bohemia, Now sir knight (quoth he) will you I should perform the
promise I made unto you? Yea, replied Fiardon. Surely (answered the knight of
the sea) then, thought it might seem a point of discurtesie to do so; yet
since you will needs have it so, I shall willingly condescend to satisfy your
fancy: prepare your self therefore for the encounter. You shall be welcome,
said Fiardon: and thereupon they buckled together so fiercely, as if two hungry
Panthers had bin contending for some gotten prey: Combat between Fiardon and
Oceander.
and with such exceeding strength, with their keene-edged Curtelaxes, they
vnceasingly lashed on one another helmet, as it seemed they were al on fire,
with the sparkles that were raised by their furies. When, Fiardon (angry to be so
long in such a simple combat) lifted up Queen Gilorias sharp slicing fauchon,
and therewith smote the knight of the sea, so sound a buffet on the beauer; as,
had not his age made him crazed (for all his enchau^ted armor) he would at
that same blow, have either slain him outright, or so amazed him, as all ye
Surgeons in Europe, with their Esculapian skill, should never have been able
to heal him again. Nevertheless, the same descended not so lightly, but yt
it made the knight of the sea not only to stagger, but also to embrace his
horse neck, to save himself from falling. But recovering himself, now by ye
holy Alcheron (quoth he) I shall not be behind hand with thee for my paiement:
and therewithal raising himself up in his stirrops, he lent ye good old king
of Bohemia so sound a blow upon the shield; as, parting it quight in two
pieces, the sword never stayed, til it vncreasted his helmet. With the
heaviness of whose fall, Fiardon Fiardon carried captive to Tomarins pauilion.
was so amazed; as in a swoun he lay still on his Cou^ser, until, by the
commandment of Oceander, he was carried captive unto Tomarins pauilion:
whilst ye more then thrice renouned son of Olbiocles, followed eagrely after
his flying enemies; whom to the very gates of Constantinople, The Christians
go to wrack.
with a great slaughter, he swiftly pursued.

As here, so in all parts of the battle, the Grecians and Bohemians went to the
worst. For, where the four new dubbed knights of Athens, Siranius, Riscion,
Libarano, and Vponto were in combat against Xamaru, Vibrant, Accoell, and
Norlas, the battle went so disastrously against them; as, though Siranius and
Libarano, had slain their opponents Vibrant and Norlas, Vibrant and Norlas
slain.
and the other two had sorely wounded Accoell and Xamaru; yet they were at last
so wonderfully weakened, not only with the offending and defending of their
enemies, and friends; but also with ye abundance of blood that issued in no
small quantity out of their broad wounds at the beginning of the combat,
their strengthes so exceedingly decreased, as in spite of their uncontrolled
courages, they were feign submissiuely to prostrate themselves, and their lives
to the doubtful mercy of the misbeleeuing Pagans. Who, not a little glad of
their gotten victory, sending them altogether (with the dead bodies of
Vibrante and Norlas) unto their brother Brammadons tent Royal, they presently
rushed into the midst of the Athenian regiments, with such puissance; as,
maugre their courageous magnanimities, the Christians were feign to grant
themselves conquered; and by base flight, The Christians fly.
to seek to save their wretched lives, from ye furies of their wicked
oppressors. Which when yt prew Prince Arcanio Arcanio with his Bohemians give
a supply.
(who was doing miracles of Chiualry against his Pagan enemies) perceived, with
such a fell fury, he stoutly opposed himself, and his band of Bohemians,
before the face of the Pagan pursuers; as, at the first shocke, he ouerturned
Accoell, Accoell slain Arcanio overthrown.
both horse and rider to the earth: and then, puissantly passing on further,
with the self same Lance, he charged a gyantlike Saracen, so full upon the
breastplate; as, piercing him into the stomach, he suddenly made him tumble
headlong unto the ground Which Bawrant (who was in combat with one-armed Tolon)
aduising, he at unawares assaulted Arcanio behind, with such vnknighty
fierceness; as, pearcing him quite through the right shoulder, he bare him
half dead, clean to the ground. Which vnchampion like assault, and
treacherous stercenesse, braue-minded Brammadon, not without blushing, Virtuous
valor. Bawrante slain.
behoulding; with his sharp sword he so sou^dly executed his vigorous virtue,
upon ye traitor Bawrantes helmet; as, parting it to the beauer, he made him
too late repent his but lately offered injury. With which his virtuous valor
and true knightly prowess, Acanio was so amazed, as he presently delivered up
his sword unto his hands; and yielded himself and his safety, Arcanio prisoner.
prisoner to so praise worthy a va^quisher; who speedily sent him to accompany
Fiardon, his distressed father. Between whom, and the king Rubaldo of Hungary,
and other Christian Captives, what sad congratulations passed (for that I have
toward an end of this my first part of the history) I will not stand to
relate, neither can they long remain in it. For within less then the third
part of a quarter of an hour, Tomarin wounded.
there entered Tomarin all wounded into their pauilions, in such grievous,
sort; as with a joyful hope of some better fortune, to betide the good
Emperor Claranax, against his Pagan foes, they were half amazed: each one in
his heart most earnestly soliciting the Almightiest of all mighties, to send
his happy succor, at last to second the cruel conflict of the discouraged
Christians, against the barbarous Barbarians: when presently they heard such a
joyful shout in the Christian armies; as, if the victory had wholly vaded from
the Moors, and advanced it self miraculously among the Grecians. Wherefore,
their hearts daunced for joy within their breasts; which held an assured hope,
that now at length their happy freedom should be regained, their oppressors
repelled, and so great a plague as (if God defended not) was likely to infect
all Christendom, should be quite and clean, even before the declyning of the
days illuminatour, into the western Ocean, be abelled, and expelled. But
alas, such their hope was suddenly frustrated. For, as by the approaching of
the Prince Olbiocles (whose ague the fearful agony of the subversion of all
Christendom, had straungely banished) together with the old Queen Zaama of
Bohemia (who hearing of her husband Fiardons harms, had taken arms
Amazon-like, for his reuengement) the retiring Bohemians and Athenians were
again reduced into their martial order; The battle renewed by Olbiocles and
Zaama.
and the battle on the Grecians side, was rank by rank courageously begun a
fresh against their enemies; so as those that got ground lately, were now
grown to be good enough for their pursuers; whom they continually chased,
with a new increased slaughter: Even so again, the stout Queen Zaama of
Bohemia, being ouermatched, by the valor and youthful vigor of a lusty
African, named Caliartez (who had quite unbuckled her habergeon) in one place;
and in another, the worthy (though sore weakened) Prince of Grecia, fighting
courageously, in the reskewe of his captiued father Claranax, with Oceander;
being ouermastred, and made captive; Olbioce^ captive.
the fortune of Christendom began to show a new face; and the dicomfited
soldiers, casting down their weapons, to betake themselves to most speedy
retreat. Wherein, The Christians retreat, are sharply pursued, and yielde.
being swiftly followed by the Infidels, after great slaughter, they were
forced to submit themselves unto the mercy of the bloudthirstie Barbarians; who
would have put them every mothers child unto the sword; had not their devilish
furies been contradicted, by the dreadful frowns of their knightly
conductours: who, by the commandment of the illustrious knight of the sea,
causing all the Christian prisoners, as well noble, as ignoble, to be manacled
together, marched fair and softly toward the gates of Constantinople: where
what multitudes of mournful Matrons, A sorrowful time, full of calamity and
pity.
angellike companies of beautiful Ladies, and sorrowful troops of oppressed
Orphans, and age-wearied fathers, came basely cre^ping on their bare knees, to
beg their lives pardon at the hands of their hauty conquerours, it were both
tedious to recite, and incredible to be believed.

For none there was, but those that scornd
To bow at fortunes frown,
That did refuse for to confess
Themselves for overthrown.
Wherefore in anger all enraged,
The Pagans them apply,
To set resistants to a task
Of long captivity:
So as that prisons every one
Were filled with Christians store,
As none should have been empty left,
Had there been many more.
Amongst the rest, is Claranax,
Fiardon, and their wives,
With children, friends, and subjects chief,
Adiudg'd to lead their lives,
In dungeons deep, where darkness still
does light of heaven expel,
Whilst that they justly represent
The lightlesse caves of hell.
Where they must fettred still remain,
Until to Mahounds law,
They would become obedient,
And live in fearful awe.
Which whosoever did embrace,
With willingness of mind,
Not only life, but lawful love
He did amongst Pagans find.
Which was the cause, that multitudes
Forsook their Saviors best,
And to the patched Alcheron,
Their confidence addressed:
Which to the good, what grief it caused,
It cannot be expressed.
OF which their endura^ce, God (of his infinite and incomparable goodness) at
last taking merciful compassion, he graciously stretched out his hand to help
his servants; and lent leave, that at last his chosen people might be
miraculously defended by him, by whom their state, religion, and liberty, had
been erst so exceedingly endammaged and offended. For now was the time come,
when to know his father, and acknowledge himself unto his kinsfolks: whom
he had no sooner emprisoned, manacled, and enthralled, but that there arrived
before him, in the base-court of the Emperors palace, the wise woman, and
learned Lady enchauntresse, Magartez, Magartez arriueth happily at
Constantinople.
accompanied with a great troop of most valiant Carthaginian Knights (whose
spangled plumes of diuerse-coloured feathers, chumbrating ye steely creastes of
their gilded helmetts, showed in semblance, like warlike Mars his burganets,
ouer-shadowed with golden tressalines of his Paphian fair paramoure) who falling
prostrate before his armed feet, in this sort delivered she her Embassage:

Brave Knight of the Sea, that God that rules all that he made, and made all
that is, preserve (for his dear sons sake Jesus Christ, the sacred savior
of all believing souls) preserve I say, the gracious Kanira, the happy (yea
thereby thrice happy) mother of thee so fortunate a foster-child.

Oceander, hearing the wise woman to greet him with such a christian salutation,
knew not what to judge of the matter: but wondering at the manner, he stood
still in a maze; until Magartez proceeding on forward in her speech, in this
sort, awaked him out of his melancholy muses.

What? do you wonder my gracious Lord at this? only because I greet you like
a christian? Madame, quoth he, I do and stand amated at the strangeness of
the accident. Then will you marvel more, replied the wise Lady, when you
shall assuredly understand, that you your self are a christian; and with your
valor, shall hereafter defend the decayed estate of christendom; yea, and
that thou shall be heir to the Empire of Greece and Constantinople.

Surely (answered Oceander) it may be so: but I assure you I cannot easily
believe it. No? quoth she, you will tell me another tale, by that time you
have perused the contents of this scrowle: and therewith she gave him the
brazen scroule of Artimagus: The scroule of Artimagus.
(which you before heard, was given to the custody of Magartez, being charmed
with such admirable skill, as it could never be opened by any man, but
Oceander; neither by his own self until such time as he had done his
parents the greatest wrong that could be) which the Knight of the Sea
receiving at her hands, and with great and speedy facility opening, he might
perceive therein, not without great art encharactered, this following relation
of his royal birth and noble Parentage.

TO THE MOST EXQVISITE OCEANDER.
I
Happy atchieuer of each hard adventure,
Illustrious Sea-knight, unto thine assaies
Fortune is bound to cross each disaduenture,
That shall oppose it self against thy praise.
II
For that great God that rules the azure sky
By mighty hand and power puissant;
As he for thee has given his son to die:
So let him his grace in thy heart emplant.
III
That after thou shall come to be of power,
And matchless force, thou may be known to be
The worthy Grandchild of that Emperor,
That rules all Greece in Christianity.
IIII
Thou may give honor to his deity,
That has preserved thee to this happy time,
To free thy country from the tyranny
Of strong Usurpers, of a stranger clime.
V
Which when by these lines thou shall understand,
See that thou straight it to redress endeauer:
But first thy parents free: then out of hand,
In thy attempted enterprise persevere.
And then that God that made and gouerns all,
Shall make thee famous by thy foemens fall.
ARTIMAGUS.
Oceander. knows his parents.
Oceander, not without amazement, having perused this pleasing poem of his
parentage, grew on the sudden to be both glad, and sad: glad, that he knew
his friends, kinsfolks, and parents: sad, that he had caused the ruin and
destructive downfall of his worthy countrymen, in whose faces he should be
ashamed ever hereafter for to look; were it not that through ignorance his
fault being committed, thotough repentance, his punishment might be remitted.
And therefore (after on his knees he had powered out his orisons of thanksgiving
before the throne of his heavenly maker, An happy change.
for his gracious mercy, at last compassionately bestowed upon his wretched
and unworthy self, to wit the revealing unto his terreane thoughts, that he
was one of the happy members of Christ Jesus, his holy redeemer and savior)
taking the wise Magartez Oceander delivers the keys of the prisons to
Magartez.
by the hand, and leading her into a secret chamber, he gave unto her all the
keys of the prison houses, wherein his unhappy countryfolkes were enclosed,
he bad her dispose of all things at her pleasure, and according to her great
discretion; whilst he himself, would cause the Townsmen and converted
Citizens, against the next morning to be ready in arms, to defend the
rightnesse of their religion, and liberty of their consciences. Whereupon,
till toward the evening, she departed unto her lodging (which was in a very
fair tent of needleworke, wrought most artificially with diuerse-couloured
silk and pearls) whence, after the shutting in of the silent evening, she
took her journey, first from one prison unto another (without any let or stop
of the watch, because the Knight of the Sea himself, for that night, by the
commandment of the Kings of Tunis and Tangur, watchfully guarded the streets
in armor, with a band of his most valiant soldiers) where finding a number of
the Grecian nobility, sitting in sad consort, with their dear sovereigns.
Claranax, Rubaldo, Fyardon, Olbiocles, Magartez reports of Oceander to the
captiued christian princes.
the Empress, the sick Queen Anaxia, wounded Zaama, sad Almidiana, wise
Eristama, and diverse more of that doleful company; entering hastily in among
them, she first gave a willing greeting, and the^ sitting her self down
amongst ye Princesses, she there briefly related unto them, from one end to the
other, the whole and almost incredible history, of the Knight of the Seas
adventures; assuring them that he was their son, and would (when time served)
most willingly acknowledge them for his parents. Which pleasing story brought
them all into such excess of delight and pleasures; as before it was
altogether ended, they all sanke down in a swo^ne, Vnhoped-for comfort.
upon one another necks: such wonderful joy does the reobtaining of a lost
friend procure, unto the kind hearts of the loving father, and kinsfolks.
But, after the space of a quarter of an hours wondering at their admirable
fortunes; Oh dear God (quoth Almidiana then with tears trickling down her
fair cheeks) and have thou thus graciously, then at length (yea even at the
last gasp) taken compassion on thine handmaide? as to send me my dear son,
whom in the hands of a poor fisherman, Almidianas tha^ksgiuing.
I left to the mercy of the Ocean? O great God, for ever and ever shall I
praise thee, and thy mighty power shall be magnified amongst al nations. And
then turning her to Magartez: yea but (dear Lady quoth she) when shall my
unworthy eyes enjoy ye happy sight of my most worthy Son? Replied Magartez;
It will not be long, most beawtious Princess, before he come and visit you:
for toward ye morning I do expect him. Whervppon they brake off their talk,
Oceander enters into the prison, and is known to be Olbiocles son.
until the breaking out of the blushing morning, from the lattic'de portals of
the Eastern- Ocean; when the Knight of the Sea, together with ye sun, entered
into the prison house unto them. Whom Almidiana and Eristama no sooner beheld,
but they disarmed him of his breast plate, and vnbuttoning his doublet, which
hid ye secret signal yt he was their son: this is he, this is he O my worthy
parents and companions, for whom my heart has more then ten thousand times
been ready to rende in pieces: welcome my son, welcome Oceander, my more then
sweetest son. Wherwithall she kissed him so sweetly, that Rubaldo could not
refrain from tears, thinking of the timelesse death of his dear son Prince
Morcauill. For whose slaughter, his heart a great while wrestled, whether with
anger he should revenge his disaster on the Knight of the Sea, as his enemy:
or, forgetting the mischief, kindly to entertain him for his dear and loving
Graunde-child, In which conflict of contrary cogitations, kind love obtained
the conquest: for, Anger, from a fathers heart,
Will in a moment soon depart,
Wherefore rising up from the cold pauements, where he was sadly set, he
presently ran to Oceander: and with the pearled tears trickling down his
snow-white bearde; Suffices it (quoth he) my dear son, that thou art yet
living: for as dear art thou to me, as was Morcauill; though through thee, my
sad soul mournes for his destruction: and therewith they fell both in a pasm^
vpp^n one a^^^h^rs b^s^me: so (...) were th^^^ ^^y (...); but e^p^c^^l^y of the
Emperor Claranax, the Empress, Olbiocles, and the Queen Anaxia. Who for very
gladness sat silent in their places on the cold pauements, not being able to
utter one word, or so much as becken unto their souls Elisium, more then
thrice happy Oceander: such pleasure able passions his presence caused, in the
hearts of all his loving friends. To whose courteous embracings, kind
kissinges, and loving entercousinges, we will at this time leave him: as at his
loosing we did begin, so at his happy finding, reviewing, and reinioying of
his royal Parents, now also determiing to finish this first part, of the
famous History of his admirable, and heroycall Adventures.

FINIS.
R. VV. To the author of this HISTORY.
LIke as the poisoned Spider and the Be,
In summers time from off one fragrant Rose,
To suck sweet juice and venom we do see;
Yet not the herb her virtue for to lose:
Even so, what sielie Innocent not knows,
That among men the like effect is found?
As some from Truth it self, others from shows,
Will reap both good and ill, from off one ground.
Wherefore (perhaps) some men will limits bound,
Unto thy praises with sufficiency:
Others (perchance who will seem more profound)
Will count thy writings but a foolerie;
And will it scandilize injuriously:
Yet let not such despite thy heart confound,
But suffering them to pass such as they be,
Care only for to please the honey Be.
R. W.


