OBSERVATIONS TO BE FOLLOWED, FOR THE making of fit rooms, to keep
Silk-wormes in: As also, FOR THE BEST MANNER OF planting of Mulbery trees, to
feed them. PVBLISHED BY AVTHORITY for the benefit of the Noble Plantation in
VIRGINIA.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston. 1620.

ADVICE FOR MAKING OF CONVENIent rooms to lodge Silk-wormes in, and for the
most commodious planting of Mulbery trees, to have the best leaf to feed them.
BEcause that these two things, First, the making of lodgings for the
Silk-wormes: Secondly, the abundant planting of the best Mulbery trees in a
requisite distance one from another, whereby to have the best leaf to feed the
Worms, require some good time for the due preparation of them: Therefore that
no time be lost for so great and so gainful a business, (the profits whereof
will be most certain, and that with small charge, after that these two
provisions are once for all well accommodated) we send you these necessary
instructions aforehand, till you receive a book which shortly shall be
purposely printed for you and store sent, to teach all there, the exact usage
and ordering of Silk-wormes, the skill whereof may soon be learned, and
presently put in practice.

The lodgings of the Silk worms
Of these two preparations then, which require some length of time to fit them,
the first is, that you must make the lodgings and rooms for the Silk-wormes, so
commodiously and conveniently for them, as they may easily do their work, to
yield you abundance of silk: which is but a vain hope, if you lodge them in a
place improper, and contrary to their nature. The Chambers for to lodge and
bring up the Silk-wormes in, must be made spacious, lightsome, pleasant,
neat, and wholesome, far from ill sents, damps, fogs, and humidities: warm
in cold, and cold in hot weather: they must not be lodged in the lowest room
near the ground, nor yet in the uppermost room near the tiles, because of
the distempers of these two contrary situations: the lowest room may be too
moist, and the uppermost too windy, too hot, or too cold for them, according to
the seasons. Nevertheless, the lower room is the better of the two, and may
be borne withal, if the floor be dry and boorded, and that upon it you erect
one only single Stage for the Worms, three or four foot high from the
floor, for the avoiding of cold dampes and moystures, and so as there be too,
one room above it close boorded, to the end the Silk-wormes may be still
placed far off from the tiles, which being near them, are always hurtful
to them, because that the wind and the cold pierces through them, and the heat
of the Sun is there also insupportable, when it lights upon the roof in his
full force. Thatched leafes naught
Thatched roofes are also naught for them, because they harbor Mice and Rats
in them, which are great deuourers of the Worms.

The most proper and commodious rooms for the Silk-wormes then, Middle rooms
best.
are middle chambers, which must be spared for the^ two months only in the
Spring: or else if your house-roome be too straight, you must build new
lodgings expressly for them, in which they will soon quit the cost, and that
durably after; but otherwise to expect profits of them in bad rooms, will not
be worth your labor.

You must cast the proportion for their rooms after this manner: The
proportion of the rooms.
The Silk-wormes coming of ten ounces of seed, to be kept and fed well at ease
for the best profit, must have a middle chamber of forty two foot in length,
eighteen foot in breadth, and twelve foot in height; and for more or less
Worms you keep, ground your self thereafter, upon this proportion.

The houses wherein you keep them, Situation of the houses for them.
would be situated in a good, clear, dry air, for moisture is a great enemy
unto them: the chambers wherein you feed them, must have casement windows to
open and shut on both sides the room, being opposite one against (...) being
black, is greater, and better to taste, than that of the white, which is
lushious; besides all this, the black is of far slower growth than the white
Mulbery tree.

Three sorts of white Mulbery trees.
Of the white Mulbery tree there are manifestly known three kinds, which
nevertheless are only distinguished by the diverse colors of the fruit, which
are white, black, and red, and severally brought forth by several trees: all
which three sorts, notwithstanding the difference of the color of the fruit,
bear but one name of the white Mulbery tree. These three sorts resemble all
one another, both in leaves which they bring forth, all of a mean greatness,
and a smooth feeling, the wood of all being yellow within, and the difference
only to be known by the fruit, as aforesaid.

The white Mulbery tree better than the black.
The black Mulbery tree leaf makes gross and course silk; but the white
Mulbery tree leaf makes fine, and high-prized, (for according to the finenesse
of the leaf, will the finenesse and goodness of the silk be:) Therefore
always where it is in your power to make the best choice, store your self
with the white Mulbery tree; which as it is far better than the black, so
also it springs faster, growing more in two years, than the black in six.

The white Mulbery tree, bearing the black berry, best of all.
Yet among the three sorts of white Mulbery trees, there is choice also to be
made; for by the searching of some it has been found, that the leaves coming
of that white Mulbery tree which bears the black berries, are (...) than any
of the other white Mulbery trees, bearing either the white, or the red berry.
Wherefore if it be possible, furnish your ground only of this kind, that the
food of the Silk-worme, and so withal, your silk may be the more exquisite.

Next to this, is the white Mulbery tree, bearing the white berry, which some
(according as there are diverse fancies) holds to be the better: nevertheless
the former is generally held the best.

Above all, A Rule.
keep no tree in your Mulbery yard, which bears leaves very much indented;
for it is neither of so great substance, nor yields so much food as that which
has less nickes: but yet this tree will be made good by grafting upon it.

Having chosen your best plant of the white Mulbery tree bearing black
berries, Soil of the Mulbery, for good leaf.
the next choice to be made, is of fit ground to plant them in. Secondly, to
have wholesome and profitable food for your Worms, you must plant them in
such a soil as is best fitting for your Vine, namely, not in too fat a ground,
nor yet in too barren and lean, but in a middling soil: rather in a dry than
a moist, in a light than a heavy, in a grauelly than a clay. For the quantity
of the leaves, true it is, the far and rich ground is the best, but not for
the quality; for the leaner ground breed the leaf, of the most profitable and
perfect nourishment: the Mulbery tree having that in common with the Vine,
which brings the best Wine in the like soil to this; so then the lighter
ground brings forth the more exquisite, delicate, and sauoury leaf for the
food of the Silke-worme, and the fat ground a more rank, gross, flash, and
unsavory leaf, which being an unwholesome kind, seldom fadges well with the
Worm or never, unless it be helped by an excellent good season: whereas the
leaf of the leaner and midling soil, never fayles the effecting of your
desired purpose. The leaf of the Mulbery will be then well qualified as is
fitting, if you plant them in an indifferent soil, somewhat dry, far from
springs of water, and from bogges, and from watery and foggy places; What soil
best.
provided also, that they be exposed to the Sun, and kept as much as may be
from the annoyance of the North and East Winds: for with the Vine too, the
Mulbery hates a cold, shady, and watery situation. And though the Vine and the
Mulbery bring forth more in a fat strong ground then in a leaner, yet so it is,
that the little of the fruit of the leaner ground being delicate, is more
esteemed and of better price, than the abundance of that out of the fatter
soil, which is coorse and gross.

The third thing, is to show the best time and order to plant and remove the
Mulbery tree, and at what age the leaf is good. Considering there be such
store of grown Mulbery trees, small and great in Virginia to be taken up,
nothing shall be said now of planting the suckers or branches, nor yet of
sowing the Mulbery seed (which though it be the slowest, yet it is held a sure
and a good way) but we will only advise you to take choice of such well-growne
Mulberies, as may soonest bring profit by their forward flourishing. Experience
teaches, The leaf of the old Mulbery, the best.
that the leaves of the old Mulbery trees are far more healthful for the
Worm, and more profitable than those of the young ones, in case they be still
vigorous and not fallen into extreme decay through age: the Mulbery tree, as in
many things, being in this also like to the Vine, which brings better wine old
than young. And as the Vine begins to bear good Wine after the seven or eight
first years of his planting, so likewise the Mulbery tree in the same age,
brings forth so good leafage, whereof you may be sure to reap certain profit.

The time and manner of remoouing of the Mulbery tree, is much after the
fashion of others: you may remove and plant the Mulbery in September, October,
November, December, February, March, or April, and in January too if it be not
frosty weather. When to remove the Mulbery tree.
Take them up in fair weather, being neither frosty nor hot, with such care
and curiousness that you may have all the roots whole and entire, without any
being broken or bruised if it be possible: which to do, you must neither
spare cost, nor pains, nor must you want patience, which is necessary for this
action, for fear lest through rude hastiness and carelessness, your trees ill
taken up, prove lost charge and labor. Before you take them up, head them,
cutting off all their branches, leaving some forked arms of them only with
snags, of such length as is fitting for new growth, as usually is done in
removing of other trees. How to remove Mulbery trees, and to prepare the ground
for t^em.
To do well, three months at least before you remove them, you must make
holes in the earth ready dug for them, where you mind to set them. The
longer the holes are dug before you set them, be it a whole year, so much
the better; for the more the earth is seasoned and prepared by the weather, the
easier the trees take rooting, and draw the better nourishment from the earth.
But if necessity constrain you to dig the holes at the same instant that you
are to plant them, then must you burn some small wood, bushes, or straw in the
holes, that the fire may supply the want of the Sun and the frost, for the
fit preparing of the earth: if otherwise, you must not fill up the holes with
that earth which was taken out of the^, but with other seasoned earth, pared
and taken only from the very top of the ground, which is better seasoned by
the Sun than that raw earth which lies deeper. The holes must be made very
large and wide for them, for to contain the roots at full ease; you may be
sure you cannot make them too big. The roots must be set as deep in the
ground, as they were then when they were taken up; so shall you plant them
after their natural manner, which is best, neither too deep, not too shallow.
There must be left half a foot of small loose earth in the bottom of the
hole, to set the roots upon; which earth, if it be not well prepared before by
the weather, must be taken from the top of the ground, and by this means, they
will the easier and sooner take root downward. The roots must be set down
easily, and put into the earth as near as may be, to the same site and
natural posture that they were when they were growing, taking heed that in
placing them, you make not the roots to press and cross one upon another:
wherefore see that you cover the roots well, and handsomely, putting between
them all soft and fine earth, pressing it down, and covering them by little
and little patiently with the hand, and not treading them with the feet, or
using rammers, and beaters, as some do, which spoyleth them, but filling them
up rather, and kneading the earth about them gently with the hand, as is said;
beginning first from the lowest roots, and so going on to the middlemost, and
then at last to the highest, till the ground be leuelled. So shall all the
roots be covered, without any hollownesse being left between them; for this
closeness keeps the roots from taking wind, and from water standing about
them, which rots them. If in the negligent taking up, part of the roots be
vnbarked, bruised, or broken, that part must be cut off before you plant it,
and you must put earth close about that place which is thus hurt, that water
and air come not between it and the earth, to rot it.

For Mulbery trees to spread and grow bigger.
To have your Mulbery trees grow big, and fair spread, you must shred off some
two inches of the tops of all the branches round about, and especially to cut
the master bough of the stock, in lopping the top of the tree, so as in the
whole height of the growth, the tree be not above six, or seven foot high
from the ground: for keeping your trees always at that height by shredding
them, they will spread the more: for the substance going back, will be
employed in nourishing of the stock; whereas if you let the branches grow at
will, there will be much rank and unprofitable wood.

In what space to plant the Mulbery tree.
The fourth point requisite for the goodness of the Mulbery leaf, is, the
regard to be had in the planting of them in fit distance and space one from
another, whereby the Sun may come every way freely to them, to give you a
well-concocted and wholesome fine leaf for your Silkworms. The more space of
ground the Mulbery tree has freely by himself, and the more frankly the air
and Sun comes to it, the greater it grows, and brings the better leaves.
Therefore if you will make, as it were, whole Forests and Woods of the Mulbery
trees, you must plant them in a straight line, and comely figure of a quincunx,
every tree being distant one from another every way, at least four and twenty
or thirty foot. Or otherwise, having such store of Mulbery trees as you have
somewhere in Virginia, you may take up all trees between them, that hinder
this distance from thirty foot, to thirty foot, that the Sun may come
thoroughly to them.

But if you will plant them in ranks in the hedges, and out-borders of your
plough-lands, or other grounds, then may you plant them nearer together, yet
always without pressing them too near one another; for that is ever to the
hurt of the tree, and the loss of the owner. But considering that the only
outskirts of arable lands, vineyards, and other parts of your demean lands,
though indifferently large, are not sufficient to contain Mulbery trees in so
great a number, as is fitting to feed the Worms in abundance; and for that on
the other side, the leaves of the trees which are in the thickets and woods,
are not so good and wholesome for them, as those that are set in due space in
the out-borders, because the other neither have Sun, nor wind at will: a mean
between these two extremes is found, conveniently to plant the Mulbery trees
for the profit of good leafage, and yet without much hindering the tillage and
use of good land. And this is to plant the trees amidst your grounds by line
and level in double rows, one single row being even distant from the other
sixteen foot, and so likewise every tree to be set in the same distance from
one another; which being thus planted, the two rows on each side make one
fair alley. The best way to plant Mulbery trees in good order: like to the
first of More field walks.
And you must dispose these allies on this manner; namely, both along, and
acrosse the field, the one alley thwarting and intercrossing the other, leaving
on the outsides on them great empty squares of ground, every square containing
an acre, or more, as a man pleases, for to sow corn there, which may be
reaped, without being trod down by the gatherers of the leaves; for when they
gather the leaves, they shall tread only on the allies, or near them; which
allies taking up but small room, there will be but little loss of ground,
either for your come, or for other uses. You must also plant the trees in these
allies in such sort, that they be not set just right over one against another,
lest they be pestered together, but set a tree of one row, still against the
empty space of the other row: so shall they have room and air enough to grow
lustily and freshly, having thus the benefit of the Sun, which will always
come most freely upon them, especially upon the open sides of the great
squares. In which squares you may, if you will, conveniently sow corn,
specially O^es, and field Pease, or such like; which though they be trodden
down in the gathering of the leaves, yet can they have no great hurt, by
reason that the blades of these grains will be then backwards, and they will
rise again, though they be beaten down to the ground; so will not Wheat, Rye,
nor Barley, which for that reason would not be sown in your Mulbery-yard, but
upon necessity.

There is another commodity comes also of ploughing your Mulbery grounds: for
the Mulbery tree prospers much better in the loose ploughed or dug ground,
then in the hard cloddy meadows and pastures, so as you take heed lest in
ploughing or digging about them, you hurt not the roots. In the same squares
you may also plant Vines, where they will profit, as being not much hindered by
the shade of the trees; or you may, if you had rather, have meadows or pastures
in them, after the trees have had four or five years rooting, so as you dig
the earth loose about the roots, and sometimes dung them. In this sort, without
hindering your demeanes better, than any other way, near to your house (for so
is most fitting) may you plant your Mulbery yards with great profit, both for
the goodness of the leaf, and for the pleasure and beauty which will be in the
walks, in which also if you please, you may sow, or set somewhat, that may be
for use and profit, and quit the cost of laboring the ground.

Now you must not content your self in planting a few; for the Mulbery trees
being the maine foundation of this revenue, that must be the chiefest thing
whereat you must aim, for to plant so great a quantity of them, and so soon,
that in a short time you may reap the sweetness of this rich profit to your
contentment.

Those that are perfectly experienced in this business, advise a man by all
means to have as great abundance of Mulbery trees as is possible, and for one
that is a good husband to reap good profit, they prescribe the quantity of two
or three thousand trees; One man should have two or three thousand Mulbery
trees in hi^ yard for good profit.
for with a less number a man that will be a master of this work, ought not
to enterprise this business; for here is no question of good profit which must
grow out of a sufficient number of trees.

Therefore it is necessary to employ this work here in a great volume, or
else the play will hardly be worth the candle. It is only for women wantonly
to keep a few Silk-wormes, with a few Mulbery trees, more for pleasure, than
for profit. So then, if you mind to be very rich indeed in this commodity, you
must not stay at that number of trees aboue-named, but always still augment
your Mulbery yard, adding thereto certain hundreds of trees yearly, both for
feeding plenty of Worms, and also for the succor of the trees, whereof you
shall do well to let some part of them every year rest vnleaued; as Lands
that be fallow, to have them in better heart. Now the profit rising by the
leaves, is thus estimated: A thousand weight of leaves feed an ounce of seed.
A thousand weight of Mulbery leaves, is sufficient to feed an ounce of seed in
Silk-wormes: and an ounce of seed, if the race in goodness, the conuenience of
the lodging, the perfectness of the leaf, and the seasonable time for the
work of the Silkwormes, and the careful diligence of the Governor, all agree
together, (for there must be a consort of all these) then (I say) an ounce of
good seed, makes easily five or six pound of silk, which what it is worth
every one knows. And this thousand weight of leaves, some twenty, or five and
twenty trees of a mean size, will always bring forth. Yea a much less number
of trees suffices for so much weight, if they be old and great. As there are
some Mulbery trees in some places near Auignion, so large and so abundant in
branches, One great tree sometimes bear in thousand weight of leaves
that one tree will furnish leaves sufficient to feed an ounce of seed. The
cost and charge of the business yearly, is thus rated in France, a fourth of
the total defrayes it all, and so there remains three parts of clear revenue
to the owner.

Besides this profit of silk to be made of the Mulbery tree, which is of
infinite commodity alone; it is also good for many other singular uses. By
trial made, it has been found, that the bark of the white Mulbery tree makes
good linen cloth, Other profits of the Mulbery tree
and Cordage. The wood also is good to make hoopes for tubs and barrels, and it
is fit for all Ioyners work, and for any use that is yielding and pliant: it
is also good about ships and botes: the boughs shred off, are excellent for
Conies: the berries are much desired of poultry, and is good feed for them; and
the leaves, all that fall of themselves to the ground in the end of Summer,
being laid by in some place, and taken thence day by day, as you need, and
given boiled to swine, keep them in good state, and begin to put them into
flesh. These, and diverse other commodities come of this excellent tree; which
above all others therefore, you must preserve and multiply still in Virginia.

To this abouesaid shall be added and taught the way how to make Silk-wormes,
which is reported by some, the experiment whereof is so much the more necessary
to be tried, because there is great danger in carrying of the Silk-wormes
seed, so long a journey by Sea to Virginia. The Sea by contrary qualities
corrupts the Silk-worme seed.
For the Sea is much contrary to the nature of the Silk-worme seed, and easily
corrupts it, by reason of the moisture, and cold rawnesse, especially carried
in winter time; and therefore it is very hard to send it by Sea in his
perfection. Now then, besides the gathering together of the natural
Silk-wormes, said to be in Virginia, (which out of all question must needs be
the best, both for work, and for to have good race of seed from them) you
shall do well to try this experiment commended by some Authors.

In the Spring time, How to make Silk-worme^*
shut up a young Calfe in a little dark and dry stable, and there feed it
only with Mulbery leaves some twenty days, mean while let it not drink at
all, nor eat any other thing; at the end of this time, kill it by strangling,
and put it whole into a tub, to rot there, and cover it all over with Mulbery
leaves: out of the corruption of this carcass, come forth abundance of
Silk-wormes, which you may take up with the Mulbery leaves, they fastening
themselves unto them; these fed and handled according to art and common
fashion, in their due time bring forth both silk and seed, as others. Some, to
lessen this charge, take only the leg of a sucking Calfe, and cut out of it as
much flesh as weighes seven or eight pounds, and putting it in some wooden
vessel with Mulbery leaves about it, leaving it to rot, take the worms
coming out of the flesh, from the Mulbery leaves to which they cleave, and so
use them in like manner as others. Considering, that Bees are made but of the
rottenness of a young Bull or Heifer, and according to the Scripture of the
Lion, and that we see daily many creatures come of putrefaction: this is no
improbable thing, and therefore is worth the trial, to save the labor and
danger of sending Silk-worme seed by Sea, which to do well, would be changed
every four years, as you use to do your grain that you sow.

Other things concerning the ordering of Silk-wormes, you shall know by another
book which is to be printed. Mean while, with all speed make these timely and
necessary provisions aforesaid, for the groundwork of the business, as to
plant store of the best Mulbery trees, in a good air, in proper soil, and fit
distance, and dig store of holes in the ground betimes for the preparing of the
earth, the better to plant the trees in: provide also fair and fit middle
lodgings for the Silk-wormes: for this delicate creature, which clothes
Princes, and pays his charges so bountifully, cannot endure to be lodged in
base and beggarly rooms, but in those that be large, sweet, neat, well ayred,
and lightsome. It is a thing well known, that a few Silk-wormes, fed at large,
and ease, make far more silk than a greater number, pent in narrow and
ill-sauoured rooms. No ill smells must come near them, they must be kept
sweet, and often perfumed; therefore having such store of sweet woods in Virginia
as you have there, you shall do well to make their rooms and tables of those
woods: sweet sents being a thing most agreeable to them. Be careful to do
things curiously and thoroughly well for them at the first, for your more
plentiful and certain gain after: considering the charge to you is all one:
and a thing once well done, they say, is twice done, which will thereby also
bring you twice double profit, with long continuance.

FINIS.
A valuation of the Commodities growing and to be had in Virginia: rated as
they are there worth.
IRon ten pounds the Tun.

Silk Coddes, two shillings sixepence the pound.

Raw Silk, thirteen shillings four pence the pound.

Silk grass to be used for Cordage, sixepence the pound: but we hope it will
serve for many better uses, and so yield a far greater rate, whereof there
can never be too much planted.

Hemp, from ten shillings, to two and twenty shillings the hundred.

Flax, from twenty shillings to thirty shillings the hundred.

Cordage, from twenty shillings, to four and twenty shillings the hundred.

Cotton wool, eight pence the pound.

Hard Pitch, six shillings the hundred.

Tar, five shillings the hundred.

Turpentine, twelve shillings the hundred.

Rozen, five shillings the hundred.

Madder Crop, forty shillings the hundred, course Madder, five and twenty
shillings the hundred.

Woad, from twelve shillings, to twenty the hundred.

Annis-seeds, forty shillings the hundred.

Powder Sugar, Panels, Muscauadoes and Whites, five and twenty shillings,
forty, and three pounds the hundred.

Sturgeon, and Cauiare, as it is in goodness.

Salt, thirty shillings the weigh.

Masticke, three shillings the pound.

Salsa Perilla wild, five pounds the hundred.

Salsa Perilla domestic, ten pounds the hundred.

Red earth Allenagra, three shillings the hundred.

Red Alum, called Carthagena Alum, ten shillings the hundred.

Roach Alum, called Romish Alum, ten shillings the hundred.

Berry grain, two shillings six pence the pound: the powder of grain, nine
shillings the pound: it grows on trees like Holly berries.

Masts for Shipping, from ten shillings, to three pounds a piece.

Potashes, from twelve shillings the hundred, to fourteen.

Sope-ashes, from six shillings, to eight shillings the hundred.

Clapboord watered, thirty shillings the hundred.

Pipe staves, four pounds the thousand.

Rape-seede oil, ten pounds the tun, the cakes of it feed Kine fat in the
winter.

Oil of Walnuts, twelve pounds the tun.

Lin-seede oil, ten pounds the tun.

Saffron, twenty shillings the pound.

Honey, two shillings the gallon.

Wax, four pounds the hundred.

Shomack, seven shillings the hundred, whereof great plenty in Virginia, and
good quantity will be vented in England.

Fustick young, eight shillings the hundred.

Fustick old, six shillings the hundred, according to the sample.

Sweet Gums, Roots, Woods, Berries for dies and Drugs, send of all sorts as
much as you can, every sort by it self, there being great quantities of those
things in Virginia, which after proof made, may be here valued to their
worth. And particularly, we have great hope of the Pocoone root, that it will
prove better than Madder.

Sables, from eight shillings the pair, to twenty shilling a pair.

Otters skins, from three shillings, to five shillings a piece.

Luzernes, from two shillings, to ten a piece.

Martins the best, four shillings a piece.

Wild Cats, eyghteene pence a piece.

Fox skins, six pence a piece.

Musk Rats skins, two shillings a doozen: the cods of them will serve for good
perfumes.

Beuer skins that are full grown, in season, are worth seven shillings a piece.

Beuer skins, not in season, to allow two skins for one, and of the lesser,
three for one.

Old Beuer skins in Mantles, gloves or caps, the more worn, the better, so
they be full of furre, the pound weight is six shillings.

The new Beuer skins, are not to be bought by the pound, because they are
thick and heavy leather, and not so good for use as the old.

Pearls of all sorts that you can find: Ambergreece as much as you can get:
Cristall rock: Send as much as you can, and any sort of Mineral stones, or
earth that weighs very heavy.

Preserve the Walnut trees to make oil of, and cut them not down: so also
preserve your Mulberry and Chestnut trees very carefully.

In the month of June, bore holes in diverse sorts of Trees, whereby you shall
see what gums they yield, and let them be well dried in the Sun every day,
and send them home in very dry Caske.


