The first part Of the true and honorable history, of the life of Sir John
Old-castle, the good Lord Cobham. As it has been lately acted by the right
honorable the Earl of Notingham Lord high Admiral of England his servants.

LONDON Printed by V.S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Catte and Parrots near the Exchange. 1600.

The Prologue.
THe doubtful Tule (Gentlemen) prefixed
Upon the Argument we have in hand,
May breed suspense, and wrongfully disturb
The peaceful quiet of your settled thoughts:
To stop which scruple, let this brief suffice.
It is no pamperd glutton we present,
Nor aged Councellor to youthful sin,
But one, whose virtue shone above the rest,
A valiant Martyr, and a virtuous peer,
In whose true faith and loyalty expressed
Unto his sovereign, and his countries weal:
We strive to pay that tribute of our Love,
Your favors merit, let fair Truth be grac'te,
Since forg'de invention former time defac'te.
The true and honorable History, of the life of Sir John Oldcastle, the good
Lord Cobham.
In the fight, enter the Sheriff and two of his men. Sheriff. MY Lords, I
charge ye in his Highness name,
To keep the peace, you, and your followers.

Herb. Good M. Sheriff, look unto your self.


Pow. Do so, for we have other business.


Proffer to fight again Sher. Will ye disturb the Judges, and the Assise?
Hear the Kings proclamation ye were best.

Pow. Hold then, lets hear it.


Herb. But be brief, ye were best.


Bayl. O yes.


Dauy Cossone, make shorter O, or shall mar your Yes.


Bay. O yes.


Owen What, has her nothing to say but O yes?


Bay. O yes.


Da. O nay, pie Cosse plut down with her, down with her,
A Pawesse a Pawesse.

Gough A Herbert a Herbert, and down with Powesse.


Helter skelter again. Sher. Hold, in the Kings name, hold.


Owen Down e tha ka naues name, down.


In this fight, the Bailiffe is knocked down, and the Sheriff and the other
run away. Herb. Powesse, I think thy Welsh and thou do smart.


Pow. Herbert, I think my sword came near thy heart.


Herb. Thy hearts best blood shall pay the loss of mine.


Gough A Herbert a Herbert.


Dauy A Pawesse a Pawesse.


As they are lifting their weapons, enter the Mayor of Hereford, and his
Officers and Towns men with clubbes. Mayor My Lords, as you are liege men to
the Crown,
True noblemen, and subjects to the King,
Attend his Highness proclamation,
Commanded by the Judges of Assise,
For keeping peace at this assembly.

Herb. Good M. Mayor of Hereford be brief.


May. Serieant, without the ceremony of O yes.
Pronoune alowd the proclamation.

Ser. The Kings Justices, perceiving what public mischief may ensue this
private quarrel in his majesty's name do straightly charge and command all
persons, of what degree soever, to depart this city of Hereford, except such
as are bound to give attendance at this Assise, and that no man presume to
wear any weapon, especially welsh-hookes, forest bills.


Owen Haw, no pill nor wells hoog? ha?


Ma. Peace, and hear the proclamation.


Ser. And that the Lord Powesse do presently disperse and discharge his
retinue, and depart the city in the Kings peace, he and his followers, on
pain of imprisonment.


Dauy Haw? pud her Lord Pawesse in prison, A Paws
A Pawesse, cossone live and tie with her Lord.

Gough A Herbert a Herbert.


In this fight the Lord Herbert is wounded, and falls to the ground, the Mayor
and his company go away crying clubbes, Powesse runs away, Gough and other
of Herberts faction busy themselves about Herbert: enters the two Judges in
their roabes, the Sheriff and his Baileffes before them, etc. 1. Iud. Where Is
the Lord Herbert? is he hurt or slain?


Sher. He Is here my Lord.


2. Iud. How fares hid Lordshippe, friends?


Gough Mortally wounded, speechless, he cannot live.


1. Iud Convey him hence, let not his wounds take air,
And get him dressed with expedition, Ex. Herb. and Gough
M. Mayor of Hereford M Snriue o'th shire,
Commit Lord Powesse to safe custody,
To answer the disturbance of the peace,
Lord Herberts peril, and his high contempt
Of us, and you the Kings commissioners,
See it be done with care and diligence.

Sher. Please it your Lordship, my Lord Powesse is gone,
Past all recovery.

2. Iud. Yet let search be made,
To apprehend his followers that are left.

Sher. There are some of them, sirs, lay ho^d on them,


Owen Of us, and why? what has her done I pray you?


Sher. Disarme them Bailiffes.


Ma. Officers assist.


Dauy Hear you Lor shudge, what resson is for this?


Owen Cosson pe puse for fighting for our Lord?


1. Judge Away with them.


Dauy Harg you my Lord.


Owen Gough my Lord Herberts man's a shitten ka naue, Both at once all this


Dauy Ise li^e and ^e in good quarrel.


Owen Pray you do shustice, let awl be preson.


Dauy Prison no,
Lord shudge I wool give you pale, good suerty.

2. Judge What Bale? what suerties?


Dauy Her coozin ap Ries, ap Euan, ap Morris, ap Morgan, ap Lluellyn, ap
Madoc, ap Meredith, ap Griffen, ap Dauy, ap Owen ap Shinken Shones.


2 Judge. Two of the most, sufficient are ynow,


Sher. And't please your Lordship these are al but one.


1. Judge To Iayle with them, and the Lord Herberts men,
We Will talk with them, when the Assise is done, Exeunt.
Riotous, audacious, and unruly Grooms,
Must we be forced to come from the Bench,
To quiet brawles, which every Constable
In other civil places can suppress?

2. Judge What was the quarrel that causde all this stir?


Sher. About religion (as I heard) my Lord.
Lord Powesse detracted from the power of Rome,
Affirming Wickliffes doctrine to be true,
And Romes erroneous: hot reply was made
By the lord Herbert, they were traitors all
That would maintain it: Powesse answered,
They were as true, as noble, and as wise
As he, that would defend it with their lives,
He namde for instance sir John Old-castle
The Lord Cobham: He^bert replide again,
He, thou, and all are traitors that so hold.
The he was given, the several factions drawn,
And so enragde, that we could not appease it.

1. Judge This case concerns the Kings prerogative,
And^s dangerous to the State and common wealth.
Gentlemen, Justices, master Mayor, and master Shrieue,
It does behoue us all, and each of us
In general and particular, to have care
For the suppressing of all mutinies,
And all assemblies, except soldiers musters
For the Kings preparation into France.
We hear of secret conuenticles made,
And there is doubt of some conspiracies,
Which may break out into rebellious arms
When the King's gone, perchance before he go:
Note as an instance, this one perilous fray,
What factions might have grown on either part,
To the destruction of the King and Realm,
Yet, in my conscience, sir John Old-castle
Innocent of it, only his name was used.
We therefore from his Highness give this charge.
You master Mayor, look to your citizens,
You master Sheriff unto your shire, and you
As Justices in every ones precinct
There be no meetings. When the vulgar sort
Sit on their Ale-bench, with their cups and kannes,
Matters of state be not their common talk,
Nor pure religion by their lips prophande.
Let us return unto the Bench again,
And there examine further of this fray. Enter a Baily and a Serieant

Sher. Sirs, have ye taken the lord Powesse yet?


Ba. No, nor heard of him.


Ser. No, he is gone far enough.


2. Iu. They that are left behind, shall answer all. Exeunt.


Enter Suffolk, Bishop of Rochester, Butler, parson of Wrotham. Suffolk Now
my lord Bishop, take free liberty
To speak your mind: what is your suit to us?

Bishop My noble Lord, no more than what you know,
And have bin oftentimes invested with:
Grievous complaints have past between the lips
Of envious persons to vpbraide the Clergy,
Some carping at the livings which we have,
And others spurning at the ceremonies
That are of ancient custom in the church.
Amongst the which, Lord Cobham is a chief:
What inconvenience may proceed hereof,
Both to the King and to the common wealth,
May easily be discernd, when like a frenzy
This innovation shall possess their minds.
These vpstarts will have followers to uphold
Their damnd opinion, more than Harry shall
To undergo his quarrel against the French.

Suffolk What proof is there against them to be had,
That what you say the law may justify?

Bishop They give themselves the name of Protestants,
And meet in fields and solitary groves.

sir Ihon Was ever heard (my Lord) the like til now?
That thieves and rebels, s blood heretics,
Plain heretics, I Will stand toote to their teeth,
Should have to color, their vile practices,
A title of such worth, as Protestant? enter one with a letter.

Suf. O but you must not swear, it ill becomes
One of your coat, to rappe out bloody oaths.

Bish. Pardon him good my Lord, it is his zeal,
An honest country prelate, who laments
To see such foul disorder in the church.

Sir John There Is one they call him Sir John Old-castle,
He has not his name for naught: for like a castle
Does he encompasse them within his walls,
But till that castle be subverted quite,
We never shall be at quiet in the realm.

Bish. That is our suit, my Lord, that he be taken,
And brought in question for his heresy,
Beside, two letters brought me out of Wales,
Wherein my Lord Herford writes to me,
What tumult and sedition was begun,
About the Lord Cobham, at the Sises there,
For they had much ado to calm the rage,
And that the valiant Herbert is there slain.

Suf. A fire that must be quenched; well, say no more,
The King anon goes to the counsel chamber,
There to debate of matters touching France:
As he does pass by, I Will inform his grace
Concerning your petition: Master Butler,
If I forget, do you remember me,

But. I will my Lord. Offer him a purse.


Bish. Not for a recompense,
But as a token of our love to you,
By me my Lords of the clergy do present
This purse, and in it full a thousand Angels,
Praying your Lordship to accept their gift.

Suf. I thank them, my Lord Bishop, for their love,
But will not take their money, if you please
To give it to this gentleman, you may.

Bish. Sir, then we crave your furtherance herein.


But. The best I can my Lord of Rochester.


Bish. Nay, pray ye take it, trust me but you shall,


sir John Were ye all three upon New Market heath,
You should not need strain curtsie who should ha'te,
Sir John would quickly rid ye of that care.

Suf The King is coming, fear ye not my Lord,
The very first thing I will break with him,
Shall be about your matter. Enter K. Harry and Huntington in talk.

Har. My Lord of Suffolk,
Was it not said the Clergy did refuse
To lend us money toward our wars in France?

Suf. It was my Lord, but very wrongfully.


Har. I know it was, for Huntington here tells me,
They have bin very bountiful of late.

Suf. And still they vow my gracious Lord to be so,
Hoping your majesty will think of them,
As of your loving subjects, and suppress
All such malicious errors as begin
To spot their calling, and disturb the church.

Har. God else forbid: why Suffolk, is there
Any new rupture to disquiet them?

Suf. No new my Lord, the old is great enough,
And so increasing as if not cut down,
Will breed a scandale to your royal state,
And set your Kingdom quickly in an vproare,
The Kentish knight Lord Cobham, in despite
Of any law, or spiritual discipline,
Maintains this vpstart new religion still,
And diverse great assemblies by his means
And private quarrels, are commenst abroad,
As by this letter more at large my liege,
Is made apparent.

Har. We do find it here,
There was in Wales a certain fray of late,
Between two noblemen, but what of this?
Follows it straight Lord Cobham must be he
Did cause the same? I dare be sworn (good knight)
He never dreampt of any such contention.

Bish. But in his name the quarrel did begin,
About the opinion which he held (my hege.)

Har. How if it did? was either he in place,
To take part with them, or abette them in it?
If brabling fellows, whose in kindled blood,
Seethes in their fiery veins, will needs go fight,
Making their quarrels of some words that passt,
Either of you, or you, amongst their cups,
Is the fault yours, or are they guilty of it?

Suffolk With pardon of your Highness (my dread lord)
Such little sparks neglected, may in time
Grow to a mighty flame: but that's not all,
He does beside maintain a strange religion,
And will not be compelld to come to mass.

Bish. We do beseech you therefore gracious prince,
Without offense unto your majesty
We may be bold to use authority.

Harry As how?


Bishop To summon him unto the Arches,
Where such offenses have their punishment.

Harry To answer personally, is that your meaning?


Bishop It is, my lord.


Harry How if he appeal?


Bishop He cannot (my Lord) in such a case as this.


Suffolk Not where Religion is the plea, my lord.


Harry I took it always, that our self stood out,
As a sufficient refuge, unto whom
Not any but might lawfully appeal.
But we will not argue now upon that point:
For sir John Old-castle whom you accuse,
Let me entreat you to dispense awhile
With your high title of pre-eminence. in scorn.
Report did never yet condemn him so,
But he has always been reputed loyal:
And in my knowledge I can say thus much,
That he is virtuous, wise, and honorable:
If any way his conscience be seduc'de,
To waver in his faith: I Will send for him,
And school him privately, if that serve not,
Then afterward you may proceed against him.
Butler, be you the messenger for us,
And will him presently repair to court. exeunt.

sir John How now my lord, why stand you discontent?
In sooth, me thinks the King has well decreed.

Bishop Yea, yea, sir John, if he would keep his word,
But I perceive he favors him so much,
As this will be to small effect, I fear.

sir John Why then I Will tell you what you are best to do:
If you suspect the King will be but cold
In reprehending him, send you a process too
To serve upon him: so you may be sure
To make him answer't, howsoere it fall.

Bishop And well remembered, I will have it so,
A Sumner shall be sent about it strait Exit.

sir John Yea, do so, in the mean space this remains
For kind sir John of Wrotham honest Jack.
Me thinks the purse of gold the Bishop gave,
Made a good show, it had a tempting look,
Beshrew me, but my fingers ends do itch
To be upon those rudduks: well, it is thus:
I am not as the world does take me for:
If ever woolfe were clothed in sheep coat,
Then I am he, old huddle and twang, in faith,
A priest in show, but in plain terms, a th^efe,
Yet let me tell you too, an honest thief.
One that will take it where it may besp.
And spend it freely in good fellowship.
I have as many shapes as Proteus had,
That still when any villainy is done,
There may be none suspect it was sir John.
Besides, to comfort me, for what is this life,
Except the crabbed bitterness thereof
Be sweetened now and then with lechery?
I have my Doll, my concubine as it were,
To frollicke with, a lusty bounsing gerle.
But whilst I loyter here the gold, may escape,
And that must not be so, it is mine own,
Therefore I Will meet him on his way to court,
And shriue him of it: there will be the sport. Exit.

Enter three or four poor people, some soldiers, some old men. 1 God help,
God help, there is law for punishing,
But there is no law for our necessity:
There be more stocks to set poor soldiers in,
Than there be houses to relieve them at.

Old man Faith, housekeeping decays in every place,
Even as Saint Peter writ, still worse and worse

4 Master mayor of Rochester has given commandment, that none shall go
abroad out of the parish, and they have set an order down forsooth, what
every poor householder must give toward our relief: where there be some
ceased I may say to you, had almost as much need to beg as we.


1 It is a hard world the while.


Old man If a poor man come to a door to ask for Gods sake, they ask him
for a license, or a certificate from a Justice.


2 Faith we have none, but what we bear upon our bodies, our maimed limbs,
God help us.


4 And yet, as lame as I am, I Will with the king into France, if I can crawle but
a ship-boorde, I had rather be slain in France, than starve in England.


Old man. Ha, were I but as lusty as I was at the battle of Shrewsbury, I
would not do as I do: but we are now come to the good lord Cobhams, to the
best man to the poor that is in all Kent.


4 God bless him, there be but few such.


Enter Lord Cobham with Harpoole. Cob. Thou peevish froward man, what would
thou have?


Harp. This pride, this pride, brings all to beggarie,
I seru'de your father, and your grandfather,
Show me such two men now: no, no,
Your backs, your backs, the devil and pride,
Has cut the throat of all good housekeeping,
They were the best Yeomens masters, that
Ever were in England.

Cob. Yea, except thou have a crew of seely knaves,
And sturdy rogues, still feeding at my gate,
There is no hospitality with thee.

Harp. They may sit at the gate well enough, but the devil of any thing you
give them, except they will eat stones.


Cob. It Is long then of such hungry knaves as you, pointing to the beggars
Yea sir, here is your retinue, your guests be come,
They know their hours I warrant you.

Old. God bless your honor, God save the good Lord Cobham, and all his house,


Soul. Good your honor, bestow your blessed alms,
Upon poor men.

Cob. Now sir, here be your Alms knights.
Now are you as safe as the Emperor.

Harp. My Alms knights: nay, they are yours,
It is a shame for you, and I Will stand to it,
Your foolish alms maintains more vagabonds,
Then all the noblemen in Kent beside.
Out you rogues, you knaves, work for your livings,
Alas poor men, O Lord, they may beg their hearts out,
There Is no more charity amongst men,
Then amongst so many mastiffe dogs,
What make you here, you needy knaves?
Away, away, you villains.

2. soul. I beseech you sit, be good to us.


Cobham Nay, nay, they know thee well enough, I think that all the beggars in
this land are thy acquaintance, go bestow your alms, none will control you
sir.


Harp. What should I give them? you are grown so beggarly, you have scarce a
bitte of bread to give at your door: you talk of your religion so long, that
you have banished charity from amongst you, a man may make a flax shop in
your kitchen chimnies, for any fire there is stirring.


Cobham If thou will give them nothing, send them hence, let them not stand
here staruing in the cold.


Harp. Who I drive them hence? if I drive poor men from your door, I Will be
hanged, I know not what I may come to my self: yea, God help you poor knaves,
ye see the world in faith, well, you had a mother: well, God be with thee good
Lady, thy soul's at rest: she gave more in shirts and smocks to poor
children, then you spend in your house, and yet you live a beggar too.


Cobham Even the worst deed that ere my mother did, was in releeuing such a
fool as thou.


Harpoole Yea, yea, I am a fool still, with all your wit you will die a
beggar, go too.


Cobham Go you old fool, give the poor people something, go in poor men
into the inner court, and take such alms as there is to be had.


Soldier God bless your honor.


Harpoole Hang you roags, hang you, there is nothing but misery amongst you, you
fear no law you. Exit.


Old man God bless you good master Rafe, God save your life, you are good to
the poor still.


Enter the Lord Powes disguised, and shrowde himself. Cobham What fellow's
yonder comes along the grove?
Few passengers there be that know this way:
Me thinks he stops as though he stayed for me,
And meant to shroud himself amongst the bushes.
I know the Clergy hate me to the death,
And my religion gets me many foes:
And this may be some desperate rogue,
Subornd to work me mischief: As it
Pleases God, if he come toward me, sure
I Will stay his coming, be he but one man,
What soere he be: The Lord Powis comes on.
I have been well acquainted with that face.

Powis Well met my honorable lord and friend.


Cobham You are welcome sir, what ere you be,
But of this sudden sir, I do not know you.

Powis I am one that wishes well unto your honor,
My name is Powes, an old friend of yours.

Cobham My honorable lord, and worthy friend,
What makes your lordship thus alone in Kent,
And thus disguised in this strange attire?

Powis My Lord, an unexpected accident,
Has at this time inforc'de me to these parts:
And thus it hapt, not yet full five days since,
Now at the last Assise at Hereford,
It chanst that the lord Herbert and my self,
Among other things, discoursing at the table,
To fall in speech about some certain points
Of Wickcliffes doctrine, against the papacy,
And the religion catholic, maintaind
Through the most part of Europe at this day.
This wilful teasty lord stuck not to say,
That Wickcliffe was a knave, a schismatike,
His doctrine devilish and heretical,
And what soere he was maintaind the same,
was traitor both to God and to his country.
Being moved at his peremptory speech,
I told him, some maintained those opinions,
Men, and truer subjects then lord Herbert was:
And he replying in comparisons:
Your name was vrgde, my lord, against his challenge,
To be a perfect favorer of the truth.
And to be short, from words we fell to blows,
Our servants, and our tenants taking parts,
Many on both sides hurt: and for an hour
The broyle by no means could be pacified,
Until the Judges rising from the bench,
Were in their persons forc'de to part the fray.

Cobham I hope no man was violently slain.


Powis Faith none I trust, but the lord Herberts self,
Who is in truth so dangerously hurt,
As it is doubted he can hardly escape.

Cobham I am sorry, my good lord, of these ill news.


Powis This is the cause that drives me into Kent,
To shroud my self with you so good a friend,
Until I hear how things do speed at home.

Cobham Your lordship is most welcome unto Cobham,
But I am very sorry, my good lord,
My name was brought in question in this matter,
Considering I have many enemies,
That threaten malice, and do lie in wait
To take aduantange of the smallest thing.
But you are welcome, and repose your lordship,
And keep your self here secret in my house,
Until we hear how the lord Herbert speedes:
Here comes my man. Enter Harpoole.
Sir, what news?

Harpoole Yonder Is one master Butler of the privy chamber, is sent unto you
from the King.


Powis I pray God the lord Herbert be not dead, and the King hearing whither I
am gone, has sent for me.


Cob. Comfort your self my lord, I warrant you.


Harpoole Fellow, what ailes thee? do thou quake? do thou shake? do thou
tremble? ha?


Cob. Peace you old fool, sir, convey this gentleman in the back way, and
bring the other into the walk.


Harpoole Come sir. you are welcome, if you love my lord.


Powis God have mercy gentle friend. exeunt.


Cob. I thought as much, that it would not be long before I heard of something
from the King, about this matter.


Enter Harpoole with Master Butler. Harpoole Sir, yonder my lord walks, you
see him,
I Will have your men into the Celler the while.

Cobh. welcome good master Butler.


Butler Thanks, my good lord: his Majesty does commend his love unto your
lordship, and wills you to repair unto the court.


Cobh. God bless his Highness, and confound his ennemies, I hope his Majesty
is well.


Butler In health, my lord.


Cobh. God long continue it: me thinks you look as though you were not well,
what ailes you sir?


Butler Faith I have had a foolish odd mischance, that angers me: coming
over Shooters hill, there came a fellow to me like a Sailer, and asked me
money, and whilst I staide my horse to draw my purse, he takes the advantage of
a little banck and leapes behind me, whippes my purse away, and with a sudden
ierke I know not how, threw me at least three yards out of my saddle. I never
was so robbed in all my life.


Cobh. I am very sorry sir for your mischance, we will send our warrant
forth, to stay such suspicious persons as shall be found, then master Butler,
we will attend you.


Butler I humbly thank your lordship, I will attend you.


Enter the Sumner. Sum. I have the law to warrant what I do, and though the
Lord Cobham be a noble man, that dispenses not with law, I dare serve process
were a five noble men, though we Sumners make sometimes a mad slip in a corner
with a pretty wench, a Sumner must not go always by seeing, a man may be
content to hide his eyes, where he may feel his profit: well, this is my Lord
Cobhams house, if I can devise to speak with him, if not, I Will clap my citation
vpon's door, so my lord of Rochester bid me, but me thinks here comes one of
his men. Enter Harpoole.


Harp. Welcome good fellow, welcome, who would thou speak with?


Sum. With my lord Cobham, I would speak, if thou be one of his men.


Harp. Yes I am one of his men, but thou can not speak with my lord.


Sum. May I send to him them?


Harp. I Will tell thee that, when I know thy errand.


Sum. I will not tell my errand to thee.


Harp. Then keep it to thy self, and walk like a knave as thou came.


Sum. I tell thee my lord keeps no knaves, sir.


Harp. Then thou seruest him not, I believe, what lord is thy master?


Sum. My lord of Rochester.


Harp. In good time, and what would thou have with my lord Cobham?


Sum. I come by virtue of a process, to ascite him to appear before my lord,
in the court at Rochester.


Harp aside. Well, God grant me patience, I could eat this conger. My lord is
not at home, therefore it were good Sumner you carried your process back.


Sum. Why, if he will not be spoken withal, then will I leave it here, and see
you that he take knowledge of it.


Harp. Swounds you slave, do you set up your bills here, go to, take it down
again, do thou know what thou do, do thee know on whom thou seruest
process?


Sum. Yes marry do I, Sir John Old-castle Lord Cobham.


Harp. I am glad thou know him yet, and sir do not thou know, that the
lord Cobham is a brave lord, that keeps good beef and beer in his house, and
every day feeds a hundred poor people at's gate, and keeps a hundred tall
fellows?


Sum. What Is that to my process?


Harp. Mary this sir, is this process parchment*


Sum. Yes mary.


Harp. And this seal wax?


Sum. It is so.


Harp. If this be parchment, and this wax, eat you this parchment, and this
wax, or I will make parchment of your skin, and beat your brains into
wax: Sir Sumner dispatch, devour, sir devour.


Sum. I am my lord of Rochesters Sumner, I came to do my office, and thou shall
answer it.


Harp. Sir, no railing, but betake you to your teeth, thou shall eat no
worse then thou bringst with thee, thou bringst it for my lord, and will thou
bring my lord worse then thou will eat thy self?


Sum. Sir, I brought it not my lord to eat.


Harp. O do you sir me now, all is one for that, but i will make you eat it, for
bringing it.


Sum. I cannot eat it.


Harp. Can you not? sbould i will beat you until you have a stomach. he beats
him.


Sum. O hold, hold, good master seruing-man, I will eat it.


Harp. Be champping, be chawing sir, or I Will chaw you, you rogue, the purest of
the honey.


Sum. Tough wax, is the purest of the honey.


Harp. O Lord sir, oh oh, he eats.
Feed, feed, wholesome rogue, wholesome.
Cannot you like an honest Sumner walk with the devil your brother, to fetch
in your Bailiffes rents, but you must come to a noble man's house with process?
God's Blood if thy seal were as broad as the lead that couers Rochester church,
thou should eat it.


Sum. O I am almost choked, I am almost choked.


Harp. Who Is within there? will you shame my Lord, is there no beer in the
house? Butler I say.


But. Here, here. Enter Butler.


Harp. Give him Beer. he drinks.
There, tough old sheepskins, bare dry meat.

Sum. O sir, let me go no further, I Will eat my word.


Harp. Yea mary sir, so I mean you shall eat more then your own word, for i will
make you eat all the words in the process. Why you drab monger, cannot the
secrets of all the wenches in a sheire serve your turn, but you must come
hither with a citation with a pox? I Will cite you. he has then d^ne. A cup of
sack for the Sumner.


But. Here sir here.


Harp. Here slave I drink to thee.


Sum. I thank you sir.


Harp. Now if thou findst thy stomach well, because thou shall see my Lord
keep's meat in's house, if thou will go in thou shall have a piece of beef to
thy break fast.


Sum. No I am very well good M. seruing-man, I thank you, very well sir.


Harp. I am glad on it, th^n be walking toward Rochester to keep your stomach
warm: and Sumner, if I may know you disturb a good wench within this Diocese,
if I do not make thee eat her peticote, if there were four yards of Kentish
cloth in it, I am a villain.


Sum. God be with you M. seruingmaan.


Harp. Farewell Sumner. Enter Const^ble.


Con. God save you M. Harpoole.


Harp. Welcome Constable, welcome Constable, what news with thee?


Con. And't please you M. Harpoole, I am to make hue to cry, for a fellow with
one eye that has robbed two Clothiers, and am to crave your hindrance, for to
search all suspected places, and they say there was a woman in the company.


Harp. Have thou bin at the Alchouse, have thou sought there?


Con. I durst not search sir, in my Lord Cobhams liberty, except I had some of
his servants, which are for my warrant.


Harp. An honest Constable, an honest Constable, call forth him that keeps the
Alchouse there.


Con. Ho, who is within there?


Ale man Who calls there, come near a Gods name, oh is it you M. Constable and
M. Harpoole, you are welcome with all my heart, what make you here so early
this morning?


Harp. Sir, what strangers do you lodge, there is a robbery done this
morning, and we are to search for all suspected persons.


Aleman. Gods bores, I am sorry for it, in faith sir I lodge no body but a good
honest merry priest, they call him sir John a Wrootham, and a handsome woman
that is his niece, that he says he has some suit in law for, and as they go up
and down to London, sometimes they lie at my house.


Harp. What, is he here in thy house now?


Con. She is sir, I promise you sir he is a quiet man, and because he will not
trouble too many rooms, he makes the woman lie every night at his beds feet.


Harp. Bring her forth Constable, bring her forth, let us see her, let us see her.


Con. Dorothy, you must come down to M. Constable.


Dol. A non forsooth. she enters.


Harp. Welcome sweet less, welcome.


Dol. I thank you good M. seruing-man, and master Constable also.


Harp. A plump girl by the mas, a plump girl, ha Dol ha, will thou forsake
the priest, and go with me.


Con. A well said M. Harpoole, you are a merry old man in faith, in faith you will
never be old: now by the macke, a pretty wench indeed.


Harp. Ye old mad merry Constable, art thou aduis'de of that ha, well said Dol,
fill some ale here.


Dol aside Oh if I wist this old priest would not stick to me, by Jove I would
ingle this old seruing-man.


Harp. Oh you o^d mad colt, in faith I Will feak you: fill all the pots in the house
there.


Con. Oh well said M. Harpoole, you are heart of oak when all is done.


Harp. Ha Dol, thou have a sweet pair of lips by the mass.


Doll Truly you are a most sweet old man, as ever I saw, by my troth, you
have a face, able to make any woman in love with you.


Harp. Fill sweet Doll, I Will drink to thee.


Doll I pledge you sir, and thank you therefore, and I pray you let it come.


Harp. embracing her Doll, can thou love me? a mad merry less, would to God
I had never seen thee.


Doll I warrant you you will not out of my thoughts this tweluemonth, truly
you are as full of favor, as a man may be. Ah these sweet gray locks, by my
troth, they are most lovely.


Constable Gods boores master Harpoole, I will have one busse too.


Harp. No licking for you Constable, hand off, hand off.


Constable Bur lady I love kissing as well as you.


Doll Oh you are an od boie, you have a wanton eye of your own: ah you sweet
sugar lipt wanton, you will win as many women's hearts as come in your
company. Enter Priest.


Wroth. Doll, come hither.


Harp. Priest, she shall not.


Doll I Will come anon, sweet love.


Wroth. Hand off, old fornicator.


Harp. Vicar, I Will sit here in spite of thee, is this fit stuff for a priest
to carry up and down with him?


Wrotham Ah sir, do thou not know, that a good fellow parson may have a
chapel of ease, where his parish Church is far off?


Harp. You whooreson stoned Vicar.


Wroth. You old stale ruffin, you lion of Cotswold.


Harp. Swounds Vicar, I Will geld you. flies upon him.


Constable Keep the Kings peace.


Doll Murder, murder, murder.


Ale man Hold, as you are men, hold, for Gods sake be quiet: put up your
weapons, you draw not in my house.


Harp. You whooreson bawdy priest.


Wroth. You old mutton monger.


Constable Hold sir John, hold.


Doll to the Priest I pray thee sweet heart be quiet, I was but sitting to
drink a pot of ale with him, even as kind a man as ever I met with.


Harp. Thou art a thief I warrant thee.


Wroth. Then I am but as thou have been in thy days, lets not be ashamed of
our trade, the King has been a thief himself.


Doll Come, be quiet, have thou sped?


Wroth. I have wench, here be crowns in faith.


Doll Come, lets be all friends then.


Constable Well said mistress Dorothy in faith.


Harp. Thou art the madst priest that ever I met with.


Wroth. Give me thy hand, thou art as good a fellow, I am a singer, a drinker,
a bencher, a wencher, I can say a mass, and kiss a less: faith I have a
parsonage, and because I would not be at too much charges, this wench serves me
for a sexton.


Harp. Well said mad priest, we will in and be friends, exeunt.


Enter sir Roger Acton, master Bourne, master Beuerley, and William Murley the
brewer of Dunstable. Acton Now master Murley, I am well assurde
You know our arrant, and do like the cause,
Being a man affected as we are?

Mu. Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, no master, good ^r Roger Acton Knight,
master Bourne, and master Beuerley esquires, gentlemen, and justices of the
peace, no master I, but plain William Murly the brewer of Dunstable your
honest neighbor, and your friend, if ye be men of my profession.


Beuerley Professed friends to Wickliffe, foes to Rome.


Murl. Hold by me lad, lean upon that staff good master Beuerley, all of a
house, say your mind, say your mind.


Acton You know our faction now is grown so great,
Throughout the realm; that it begins to smoke
Into the Cleargies eyes, and the Kings ears,
High time it is that we were drawn to head,
Our general and officers appointed.
And wars ye wot will ask great store of coin.
Able to strength our action with your purse,
You are elected for a colonel
Over a regiment of fifteen bands.

Murley Fue paltrie paltrie, in and out, to and fro, be it more or less, upon
occasion, Lord have mercy upon us, what a world is this? Sir Roger Acton, I
am but a Dunstable man, a plain brewer, ye know: will lusty Caualiering
captains gentlemen come at my calling, go at my bidding? Dainty my dear,
they will do a dog of wax, a horse of cheese, a prick and a pudding, no, no,
ye must appoint some lord or knight at least to that place.


Bourne Why master Murley, you shall be a Knight:
Were you not in election to be shrieue?
Have ye not past all offices but that?
Have ye not wealth to make your wife a lady?
I warrant you, my lord, our General
Bestows that honor on you at first sight.

Murley Mary God dild ye dainty my dear:
But tell me, who shall be our General?
Where Is the lord Cobham, sir John Old-castle,
That noble almes-giuer, housekeeper, virtuous,
Religious gentleman? Come to me there boys,
Come to me there.

Acton Why who but he shall be our General?


Murley And shall he knight me, and make me colonel?


Acton My word for that, sir William Murley knight.


Murley Fellow sir Roger Acton knight, all fellows, I mean in arms, how
strong are we? how many partners? our e^emies beside the King are mighty, be
it more or less upon occasion, reckon our force.


Acton There are of us, our friends, and followers,
Three thousand and three hundred at the least,
Of northern lads four thousand, beside horse,
From Kent there comes with sir John Old-castle
Seven thousand, then from London issue out,
Of masters, servants, strangers, prentices
Forty odd thousands into Ficket field,
Where we appoint our special randeuous.

(...) (...) paltry, in and out to and fro, Lord have (...) a world is this,
where is that Ficket field, sir Roger?


Acton Behind saint Giles in the field near Holbo^ne.


Murley Newgate, up Holborne, S. Giles in the field, and to Tiborne, an old
saw: for the day, for the day?


Acton On friday next the foureteenth day of January.


Murley Tyllie vallie, trust me never if I have any liking of that day: fue
paltry paltry, friday quoth a, dismal day, Childermasse day this year was
friday.


Beuerley Nay master Murley, if you observe such days,
We make some question of your constancy,
All days are like to men resolu'de in right.

Murley Say Amen, and say no more, but say, and hold master Beuerley, friday
next, and Ficket field, and William Murley, and his merry men shall be al one, I
have half a score iades that draw my beer carts, and every jade shall bear
a knave, and every knave shall wear a jack, and every jack shall have a
scull, and every scull shall show a spear, and every spear shall kill a foe at
Ficket field, at Ficket field, John and Tom, and Dicke and Hodge, and Rafe and
Robin, William and George, and all my knaves shall fight like men, at Ficket
field on friday next.


Bourne What sum of money mean you to disburse?


Murley It may be modestly, decently, soberly, and handsomely I may bring five
hundredth pound.


Acton Five hundredth man? five thousand's not enough,
A hundredth thousand will not pay our men
Two months together, either come preparde
Like a brave Knight, and martial Colonel,
In glittering gold, and gallant furniture,
Bringing in coin, a cart load at the least,
And all your followers mounted on good horse,
Or never come disgraceful to us all.

Beuerley Perchance you may be chosen Treasurer,
Ten thousand pounds the least that you can bring.

Murley Paltry paltry, in and (...) and fro, (...) I have ten thousand pound to
(...), and (...) rather than the Bishop shall have (...) will of me for my
conscience, it shall out all. Flame and flax, flame and flax, it was got
with water and malt, and it shall fly with fire and gunne powder. Sir Roger, a
cart load of money til the axetree crack, my self and my men in Ficket field
on friday next: remember my Knighthoode, and my place: there is my hand I Will be
there. Exit.


Acton See what Ambition may persuade men to,
In hope of honor he will spend himself.

Bourne I never thought a Brewer half so ^ich.


Beuerley Was never bankerout Brewer yet but one,
With using too much malt, too little water.

Acton That's no fault in Brewers now-adayes:
Come, away about our business. exeunt.

Enter K. Harry, Suffolk, Butler, and Old-castle kneeling to the King. Harry
It Is not enough Lord Cobham to submit.
You must forsake your gross opinion,
The Bishops find themselves much injured,
And though for some good service you have done,
We for our part are pleased to pardon you,
Yet they will not so soon be satisfied,

Cobham My gracious Lord unto your Majesty,
Next unto my God, I owe my life,
And what is mine, either by natures gift,
Or fortunes bounty, al is at your service,
But for obedience to the Pope of Rome,
I owe him none, nor shall his shaueling priests
That are in England, alter my belief.
If out of holy Scripture they can prove,
That I am in an error, I will yield,
And gladly take instruction at their hands,
But otherwise, I do beseech your grace,
My conscience may not be incroacht upon.

Har. We would be loath to press our subjects bodies,
Much less their souls, the dear redeemed part,
Of him that is the ruler of us all,
Yet let me counsel ye, that might command,
Do not presume to tempt them with ill words,
Nor suffer any meetings to be had
Within your house, but to the uttermost,
Disperse the flocks of this new gathering sect.

Cobham My liege, if any breathe, that dares come forth,
And say, my life in any of these points
Deserves th'attaindor of ignoble thoughts
Here stand I, craving no remorce at all,
But even the utmost rigor may be shown.

Har. Let it suffice we know your loyalty,
What have you there?

Cob. A deed of clemency,
Your Highness pardon for Lord Powesse life,
Which I did beg, and you my noble Lord,
Of gracious favor did vouchsafe to grant.

Har. But yet it is not signed with our hand.


Cob. Not yet my Liege. one ready with pen and incke.


Har. The fact, you say, was done,
Not of prepensed malice, but by chance.

Cob. Upon mine honor so, no otherwise.


Har. There is his pardon, bid him make amends, writes.
And cleanse his soul to God for his offense,
What we remit, is but the bodies scourge, Enter Bishop.
How now Lord Bishop?

Bishop Justice dread Sovereign.
As thou art King, so grant I may have justice.

Har. What means this exclamation, let us know?


Bish. Ah my good Lord, the state's abusde,
And our decrees most shamefully prophande.

Har. How, or by whom?


Bish. Even by this heretic,
This Jew, this Traitor to your majesty.

Cob. Prelate, thou lie, even in thy greasy maw,
Or whosoever twits me with the name,
Of either traitor, or of heretic.

Har. Forbear I say, and Bishop, show the cause
From whence this late abuse has bin deriu'de,

Bish. Thus mighty King, by general consent,
A messenger was sent to cite this Lord,
To make appearance in the consis^orie,
And coming to his house, a ruffian slave,
One of his daily followers, met the man,
Who knowing him to be a parator,
Assaults him first, and after in contempt
Of us, and our proceedings, makes him eat
The written process, parchment, seal and all:
Whereby his master neither was brought forth,
Nor we but scornd, for our authority.

Har. When was this done?


Bish. At six a clock this morning.


Har. And when came you to court?


Cob. Last night my Lord.


Har. By this it seems, he is not guilty of it,
And you have done him wrong t'accuse him so.

Bish. But it was done my lord by his appointment,
Or else his man durst never have bin so bold.

Har. Or else you durst be bold, to interrupt,
And fill our ears with frivolous complaints,
Is this the duty you do bear to us?
Was It not sufficient we did pass our word
To send for him, but you misdoubting it,
Or which is worse, intending to forestall
Our regal power, must likewise summon him?
This savors of Ambition, not of zeal,
And rather proves, you malice his estate,
Than any way that he offends the law.
Go to, we like it not, and he your officer,
That was imployde so much amiss herein,
Had his desert for being insolent: Enter Huntington
So Cobham when you please you may depart.

Cob. I humbly bid farewell unto my liege. Exit


Har. Farewell, what is the news by Huntington?


Hunt. Sir Roger Acton, and a crew, my Lord,
Of bold seditious rebels, are in Arms,
Intending reformation of Religion.
And with their Army they intend to pitch,
In Ficket field, unless they be repulst.

Har. So nere our presence? dare they be so bold?
And will proud war, and eager thirst of blood,
Whom we had thought to entertain far off,
Press forth upon us in our native bounds?
Must we be forced to hansell our sharp blades
In England here, which we prepared for France?
Well, a Gods name be it, what is their number? say,
Or who is the chief commander of this rowt?

Hunt. Their number is not known, as yet (my Lord)
But it is reported Sir John Old-castle
Is the chief man, on whom they do depend.

Har. How, the Lord Cobham?


Hunt. Yes my gracious Lord.


Bish. I could have told your majesty as much
Before he went, but that I saw your Grace
Was too much blinded by his flaterie.

Suf. Send poast my Lord to fetch him back again.


But. Traitor unto his country, how he smooth'de,
And seemde as innocent as Truth it self?

Har. I cannot think it yet, he would be false,
But if he be, no matter let him go,
We Will meet both him and them unto their woe.

Bish. This falls out well, and at the last I hope Exeunt
To see this heretic die in a rope.

Enter Earl of Cambridge, Lord Scroope, Gray, and Chartres the French factor.
Scroop. Once more my Lord of Cambridge make rehearsal,
How you do stand intiteled to the Crown,
The deeper shall we print it in our minds,
And every man the better be resolu'de,
When he perceiues his quarrel to be just.

Came. Then thus Lord Scroope, sir Thomas Gray, and you
Mounsieur de Cha^tres, agent for the French,
This Lionell Duke of Clarence, as I said,
Third son of Edward (Englands King) the third
H^d issue Phillip his sole daughter and heir,
Which Phillip afterward was given in marriage,
To Edmund Mortimer the Earl of March,
And by him had a son called Roger Mortimer,
Which Roger likewise had of his descent,
Edmund, Roger, Anne, and Elianor,
Two daughters and two sons, but those three
Did without issue, Anne that did survive,
And now was left her fathers only heir,
My fortune was to marry, being too
By my grandfather of King Edwardes line,
So of his surname, I am calde you know,
Richard Plantagenet, my father was,
Edward the Duke of York, and son and heir
To Edmund Langley, Edward the third's first son.

Scroop So that it seems your claim comes by your wife,
As lawful heir to Roger Mortimer,
The son of Edmund, which did marry Phillip
Daughter and heir to Lyonell Duke of Clarence.

Came. True, for this Harry, and his father both
Harry the first, as plainly does appear,
Are false intruders, and vsurp the Crown.
For when young Richard was at Pomfret slain,
In him the title of prince Edward did,
That was the eldest of king Edwards sons:
William of Hatfield, and their second brother,
Death in his nonage had before bereft:
So that my wife derived from Lionell,
Third son unto king Edward, ought proceed,
And take possession of the Diadem
Before this Harry, or his father king,
Who fetched their title but from Lancaster,
Forth of that royal line. And being thus,
What reason is it but she should have her right?

Scroope I am resolu'de our enterprise is just.


Gray Harry shall die, or else resign his crown.


Chart. Perform but that, and Charles the king of France
Shall aid you lords, not only with his men,
But send you money to maintain your wars,
Five hundred thousand crowns he bade me proffer,
If you can stop but Harries voyage for France.

Scrope We never had a fitter time than now
The realm in such division as it is.

Camb. Besides, you must persuade ye there is due,
Vengeance for Richards murder, which although
It be defend, yet will it fall at last,
And now as likely as another time.
Sin has had many years to ripen in,
And now the harvest cannot be far off,
Wherein the weeds of usurpation,
Are to be cropped, and cast into the fire.

Scroope No more earl Cambridge, here I plight my faith,
To set up thee, and thy renowned wife.

G^i^ Gray will perform the same, as he is knight.


Chart. And to assist ye, as I said before,
Charters does gage the honor of his king.

S^roope We lack but now Lord Cobhams fellowship,
And then our plot were absolute indeed.

Camb. Doubt not of him, my lord, his life's pursu'de
By the incensed Clergy, and of late,
^rought in displeasure with the king, assures
He may be quickly won unto our faction.
Who has the articles were drawn at large
Of our whole purpose?

Gray That have I my Lord.


Camb. We should not now be far off from his house,
Our serious conference has beguild the way,
See where his castle stands, give me the writing.
When we are come unto the speech of him,
Because we will not stand to make recount,
Of that which has been said, here he shall read enter Co^.
Our minds at large, and what we crave of him.

Scroope A ready way: here comes the man himself
Booted and spurrd, it seems he has been riding.

Camb. Well met lord Cobham.


Cobh. My lord of Cambridge?
Your honor is most welcome into Kent,
And all the rest of this fair company.
I am new come from London, gentle ^ordes:
But will ye not take Cowling for your host,
And see what entertainment it affordes?

Camb. We were intended to have been your guests:
But now this lucky mee^ing shall suffice
To end our business, and defer that kindness.

Cobh. Business my lord? what business should you have
But to be merry? we have no delicates,
But this I Will promise you, a piece of venison,
A cup of wine, and so forth: hunters fare:
And if you please, we will strike the stagge our selves
Shall fill our dishes with his wel-fed flesh.

Scroope That is indeed the thing we all desire.


Cobh. My lords, and you shall have your choice with me.


Camb. Nay but the stagge which we desire to strike,
Lives not in Cowling: if you will consent,
And go with us, we will bring you to a forest,
Where runs a lusty hierd: amongst the which
There is a stagge superior to the rest,
A stately beast, that when his fellows run,
He leads the race, and beats the sullen earth,
As though he sco^nd it with his trampling hoofes,
Aloft he bears his head, and with his breast,
Like a huge bulwark counter-checkes the wind:
And when he stands still, he stretches forth
His proud ambitious neck, as if he meant
To wound the firmament with forked horns.

Cobh. It Is pity such a goodly beast should die.


Camb. Not so, sir John, for he is tyrannous,
And gores the other dear, and will not keep
Within the limits are appointed him.
Of late he is broke into a several,
Which does belong to me, and there he spoils
Both corn and pasture, two of his wild race
Alike sor stealth, and covetous incroatching,
Already are removed, if he were dead,
I should not only be secure from hurt,
But with his body make a royal feast.

Scroope How say you then, will you first hunt with us?


Cobh. Faith Lords, I like the pastime, where is the place?


Camb. Peruse this writing, it will show you all,
And what occasion we have for the sport. he reads

Cobh. Call ye this hunting, my lords? Is this the stag
You feign would chase, Harry our dread king?
So we may make a banquet for the devil,
And in the fleede of wholesome meat, prepare
A dish of poison to confound our selves.

Camb. Why so lord Cobham? see you not our claim?
And how imperiously he holds the crown?

Scroope ^esides, you know your self is in disgrace,
Held as a recreant, and pursude to death.
This will defend you from your enemies,
And stablish your religion through the land.

Cobh. Notorious treason! yet I will conceal aside
My secret thought^, to sound the depth of it.
My lord of Cambridge, I do see your claim,
And what good may redound unto the land,
By prosecuting of this enterprise.
^ut where are men? where is power and furniture
To order such an action? we are weak,
Harry, you know's a mighty potentate.

Camb. Tut, we are strong enough, you are belou'de,
And many will be glad to follow you,
We are the light, and some will follow us:
Besides, there is hope from France: here is an ambassador
That promises both men and money too.
The commons likewise (as we hear) pretend
A sudden tumult, we will join with them.

Cobh. Some likelihoode, I must confess, to speed:
^ut how shall I believe this is plain truth?
You are (my lords) such men as live in Court,
And highly have been favored of the king,
Especially lord Scroope, whom oftentimes
He m^keth choice of for his bedfellow.
And you lord Gray are of his privy council:
Is not this a train to intrappe my life?

Camb. Then perish may my soul: wh^t think you so?


Scroope We Will swear to you.


Gray Or take the sacrament.


Cobh. Nay you are noble men, and I imagine,
As you a^e honorable by birth and blood,
So you will be in heart, in thought, in word.
I crave no other testimony but this.
That you wou^d all subscribe, and set your hands
Unto this writing which you gave to me.

Camb. With all our hearts: who has any pen and ink?


Scroope My pocket should have one: yea, here it is.


Camb. Give it me lord Scroope: there is my name.


Scroope And there is my name.


Gray And mine.


Cobh. Sir, let me crave,
That you would likewise write your name with theirs,
For confirmation of your masters word,
The king of France.

Char. That will I noble Lord.


Cobh. So now this action is well knit together,
And I am for you: where`s our meeting, lords?

Camb. Here if you please, the tenth of July next.


Cobh. In Kent? agreed: now let us in to supper,
I hope your honors will not away to night.

Camb. Yes present^y, for I have far to ride,
About soliciting of other friends.

Scroope And we would not be absent from the court,
Lest thereby grow suspicion in the king.

Cobh. Yet taste a cup of wine before ye go.


Camb. Not now my lord, we thank you: so farewell.


Cob. Farewell my noble lords: my noble lords?
My noble villains, base conspirators,
How can they look his Highness in the face,
Whom they so closly study to betray?
But i will not sleep until I make it known.
This head shall not be burdned with such thoughts,
Nor in this heart will I conceal a deed
Of such impiety against my king.
Madam, how now? Enter Harpoole and the rest.

Lady cobh. You are welcome home, my Lord,
Why seem ye so disquiet in your looks?
What has befalne you that disquiets your mind?

L^dy Po. Bad news I am afraid touching my husband.


Cobh. Madam, not so: there is your husbands pardon,
Long may ye live, each joy unto the other.

Powesse So great a ki^dnesse as I know not how to make reply, my sense is
quite confounded.


Cobh. ^et that alone: and madam stay me not,
For I must back unto the court again
With all the speed I can: Harpoole, my horse.

Lady Cob. So soon my Lord? what will you ride all night?


Cobham All night or day it must be so, sweet wife,
Urge me not why or what my business is,
But get you in: Lord Powesse, bear with me,
And madam, think your welcome nere the worse:
My house is at your use. Harpoo^e, away.

Harp. Shall I attend your lordship to the court?


Cobh. Yea sir, your gelding, mount you presently exe.


Lady Cobh. I prithee Harpoole, look unto thy Lord,
I do not like this sudden posting back.

Power Some earnest business is a foot belike,
What e're it be, pray God be his good guide.

Lady Po. Amen that has so highly us bested.


Lady Co. Come madam, and my lord, we will hope the best,
You shall not into Wales till he return.

Powesse Though great occasion be we should depart, yet madam will we stay to
be resolude, of this unlooked for doubtful accident. Exeunt.


Enter Murley and his men, prepared in some filthy order for war. Murly. Come
my hearts of flint, modestly, decently, soberly, and handsomely, no man before
his L^ader, follow your master, your Captain, your Knight that shall be, for
the honor of Meale-men, Millers, and Mault-men dunne is the mowse, Dicke and
Tom for the credit of Dunstable, ding down the enemy to morrow, ye shall not
come into the field like beggars, wh^re be Leonard and Laurence my two loaders,
Lord have mercy upon us, what a world is this? I would give a couple of
shillings for a dozen of good feathers for ye, and forty pence for as many
skarffes to set ye out withal, frost and snow, a man has no heart to fight
till he be brave.


Dicke Master I hope we be no babes, for our manhood, our bucklers, and our
town foote-balls can bear witness: and this lite parrell we have shall off,
and we will fight naked before we run away.


Tom. Nay, I am of Laurence mind for that, for he means to leave his life
behind him, he and Leonard your two loaders are making their wills because they
have wives, now we Bachellers bid our friends scramble for our goods if we die:
but master, pray ye let me ride upon Cut.


Murly Meal and salt, wheat and malt, fire and tow, frost and snow, why Tom
thou shall: let me see, here are you, William and George are with my cart, and
Robin and Hodge holding my own two horses, proper men, handsome men, tall men,
true men.


Dicke But master, master, me thinks you are a mad man, to hazard your own
person and a cart load of money too.


Tom. Yea, and master there is a worse matter in it, if it be as I heard say, we
go to fight against all the learned Bishops, that should give us their
blessing, and if they curse us, we shall speed nere the better.


Dicke Nay bir lady, some say the King takes their part, and master, dare you
fight against the King?


Murly Fie paltry, paltry in and out, to and fro upon occasion, if the King be
so unwise to come there, we will fight with him too.


Tom. What if we should kill the King?


Mur. Then we will make another.


Dicke Is that all, do ye not speak treason?


Mur. If we do, who dare trippe us? we come to fight for our conscience, and
for honor, little know you what is in my bosom, look here mad knaves, a
pair of guilt spurs.


Tom. A pair of golden spurs? why do you not put them on your heels? your
bosome's no place for spurs.


Mur. Be It more or less upon occasion, Lord have mercy us, Tom thou art a
fool, and thou speak treason to knighthood, dare any wear golden or silver
spurs til he be a knight? no, I shall be knighted to morrow, and then they
shall on: sirs, was it ever read in the church book of Dunstable, that ever
malt man was made knight?


Tom. No but you are more, you are meal-man, maultman, miller, corne-master and
all.


Dicke Yea, and half a brewer too, and the devil and all for wealth, you
b^ing more money with you, than all the rest.


Mur. The more's my honor, I shall be a knight to morrow, let me spose my men,
Tom upon cut, Dicke upon hobbe, Hodge upon Ball, Raph upon Sorell, and Robin
upon the forehorse.


Enter Acton, Bourne, and Beuerley. Tom. Stand, who comes there?


Act. Al friends, good fellow.


Murl. Friends and fellows indeed sir Roger.


Act. Why thus you show your self a Gentleman,
To keep your day, and come so well preparde,
Your cart stands yonder, guarded by your men,
Who tell me it is laden well with come,
What sum is there?

Mur. Ten thousand pound sir Roger, and modestly, decently, soberly, and
handsomely, see what I have here against I be knighted.


Act. Gilt spurs? it is well.


Mur. But where is our army sir?


Act. Dispersed in sundry villages about,
Some here with us in Hygate, some at Finchley,
Totnam, Enfield, Edmunton, Newington,
Islington, Hogsdon, Pancredge, Kenzington,
Some nearer Thames, Ratcliffe, Blackwall and Bow,
But our chief strength must be the Londoners,
Which ere the Sun to morrow shin^,
Will be nere fifty thousand in the field.

Mur. Mary God dild ye dainty my dear, but upon occasion sir Roger Acton,
does not the King know of it, and gather his power against us.


Act. No, he is secure at Eltham.


Mur. What do the Clergy?


Act. Fear extremely, yet prepare no force.


Mur. In and out, to and fro, Bullie my boikin, we shall ^arry the world before
us, I vow by my worship, when I am knighted, we will take the King napping, if
he stand on their part.


Act. This night we few in Higate will repose,
With the first cock we will rise and arm our selves,
To be in Ficket field by break of day,
And there expect our General.

Mur. Sir John Old-cast^e, what if he come not?


Bourne Yet our action stands,
Sir Roger Acton may supply his place.

Mur. True M. Bourne but who shall make me knight?


Beuer. He that has power to be our General.


Act. Talk not of trifles, come lets away,
Our friends of London long till it be day. exeunt.

Enter sir John of Wro^tham and Doll. Doll. By my troth, thou art as ielous a
man as lives.


Priest Can thou blame me Doll, thou art my lands, my goods, my jewels, my
wealth, my purse, none walks within xl. miles of London, but a plies thee as
truly, as the parish does the poor man's box.


Doll I am as true to thee, as the stone is in the wall, and thou know well
enough sir John, I was in as good doing, when I came to thee, as any wench
need to be: and therefore thou have tried me, that thou have: by Gods body, I
will not be kept as I have bin, that I will not.


Priest Doll, if this blade hold, there is not a peddler walks with a pack, but
thou shall as boldly choose of his wares, as with thy ready money in a Merchants
shop, we will have as good silver as the King coins any.


Doll What is all the gold spent you took the last day from the Courtier?


Priest It Is gone Doll, it is flown, merely come, merely gone, he comes a horse
back that must pay for all, we will have as good meat, as money can get, and as
good gowns, as can be bought for gold, be merry wench, the mault-man comes on
monday.


Doll You might have left me at Cobham, until you had bin better provided for.


Priest. No sweet Dol, no, I do not like that, yond old ruffian is not for the
priest, I do not like a new cleark should come in the old bel-frie.


Doll Ah thou art a mad priest in faith.


Priest Come Doll, I Will see thee safe at some alehouse here at Cray, and the
next sheep that comes shall leave his fleece. exeunt.


Enter the King, Suffolk and Butler. King in great have. My lord of Suffolk,
post away for life,
And let our forces of such horse and foot,
As can be gathered up by any means,
Make speedy randeuow in Tuttle fields,
It must be done this evening my Lord,
This night the rebels mean to draw to head
Near Islington, which if your speed prevent not,
If once they should unite their several forces,
Their power is almost thought invincible,
Away my Lord I will be with you soon.

Suf. I go my Sovereign with all happy speed. exit


King Make haste my lord of Suffolk as you love us,
Butler, post you to London with all speed.
Command the Mayor, and shrieues, on their alegiance,
The city gates be presently shut up,
And guarded with a strong sufficient watch,
And not a man be suffered to pass,
Without a special warrant from our self.
Command the Posterne by the Tower be kept,
And procl^mation on the pain of death,
That not a citizen stir from his doors,
Except such as the Mayor and Shrieues shall choose,
For their own guarde, and safety of their persons,
Butler away, have care unto my charge.

But. I go my Sovereign.


King Butler.


But. My Lord.


King Go down by Greenewich, and command a boat,
At the Friars bridge attend my coming down.

But. I will my Lord. exit


King It Is time I think to look unto rebellion,
When Acton does expect unto his aid,
No less then fifty thousand Londoners,
Well, I Will to Westminster in this disguise,
To hear what news is stirring in these brawles.

Enter sir John. Sir John Stand true-man says a thief?


King Stand thief, says a true man, how if a thief?


Sir John Stand thief too.


King Then thief or true-man I see I must stand, I see how soever the world
wagges, the trade of theeuing yet will never down, what art thou?


sir John A good fellow.


King So am I too, I see thou do know me.


sir John. If thou be a good fellow, play the good fellows part, deliver thy
purse without more ado.


King I have no money.


sir John I must make you find some before we part, if you have no money you
shall have ware, as many sound dry blows as your skin can carry.


King Is that the plain truth?


sir John Sir no more ado, come, come, give me the money you have, dispatch,
I cannot stand all day.


King Well, if thou will needs have it, there it is: just the proverb, one thief
robs another, where the devil are all my old thieves, that were wont to keep
this walk? Falstaff the villain is so fat, he cannot get on's horse, but me
thinks Poines and Peto should be stirring here abouts.


sir John How much is there on it of thy word?


King A hundred pound in Angels, on my word,
The time has been I would have done as much
For thee, if thou had past this way, as I have now.

sir. John Sir, what art thou, thou seem a gentleman?


King I am no less, yet a poor one now, for thou have al^ my money.


sir John From whence came thou?


King From the court at Eltham.


sir John Art thou one of the Kings servants?


King Yes that I am and one of his chamber.


sir John I am glad thou art no worse, thou may the better spare thy money,
and think thou thou might get a poor thief his pardon if he should have
need.


King. Yes that I can.


sir John Will thou do so much for me, when I shall have occasion?


King Yes faith will I, so it be for no murder.


sir John Nay, I am a pitiful thief, all the hurt I do a man, I take but his
purse, I Will kill no man.


King Then of my word I Will do it.


sir John Give me thy hand of the same.


King There it is.


sir John Me thinks the King should be good to thieves because he has bin a
thief himself, though I think now he be turned true-man.


King Faith I have heard indeed he has had an il name that way in his youth,
but how can thou tell he has been a thief?


sir John How? because he once robde me before I fell to the trade my self,
when that foul villainous guts, that led him to all that rogery, was in's
company there, that Falstaff.


King aside. Well if he did rob thee then, thou art but even with him now I Will
be sworn: thou know not the king now, I think, if thou saw him?


sir John Not I in faith.


King aside. So it should seem.


sir John Well, if old King Henry had liu'de, this King that is now, had made
theeuing the best trade in England.


King Why so?


sir John Because he was the chief warden of our company, it is pity that ere
he should have bin a King, he was so brave a thief, but sir, wilt remember
my pardon if need be?


King Yes faith will I.


sir John Will thou? well then because thou shall go safe, for thou may hap
(being so early) be met with again, before thou come to Southwarke, if any
man when he should bid thee good morrow, bid thee stand, say thou but sir John,
and he will let thee pass.


King Is that the word? well then let me alone.


sir John Nay sir, because I think indeed I shall have some occasion to use
thee, and as thou comst often this way, I may light on thee another time not
knowing thee, here, i will break this Angel, take thou half of it, this is a
token betwixt thee and me.


King. God have mercy, farewell. exit


sir John O my fine golden slaves, here is for thee wench in faith, now Dol, we will
revel in our beuer, this is a tyth pigge of my vicaridge, God have mercy
neigbour Shooters hill, you paid your tyth honestly. Well I hear there is a
company of rebels up against the King, got together in Ficket field near
Holborne, and as it is thought here in Kent, the King will be there to night
in's own person, well i will to the Kings camp, and it shall go hard, but if
there be any doings, I Will make some good boot amongst them. exit.


Enter King Henry, Suffolk, Huntington, and two with lights. K. Hen. My Lords
of Suffolk and of Huntington,
Who skouts it now? or who stands Sentinells?
What men of worth? what Lords do walk the round?

Suff. May it please your Highness.


K. Hen. Peace, no more of that,
The King's asleep, wake not his majesty,
With terms nor titles, he is at rest in bed,
Kings do not use to watch themselves, they sleep,
And let rebellion and conspiracy,
Revel and havoc in the common wealth,
Is London looked unto?

Hunt. It is my Lord,
Your noble Uncle Exceter is there,
Your brother Gloucester and my Lord of Warwick,
Who with the mayor and the Aldermen,
Do guard the gates, and keep good rule within,
The Earl of Cambridge, and sir Thomas Gray,
Do walk the Round, Lord Scroope and Butler skout,
So though it please your majesty to jest,
Were you in bed, well might you take your rest,

K. Hen. I thank ye Lords, but you do know of old,
That I have bin a perfect night-walker,
London you say is safely looked unto,
Alas poor rebels, there your aid must fail,
And the Lord Cobham sir John Old-castle,
He Is quiet in Kent, Acton ye are deceived,
Reckon again, you count without your host,
To morrow you shall give account to us,
Til when my friends, this long cold winters night,
How can we spend? King Harry is a sleep,
And al his Lords, these garments tell us so,
Al friends at footebal, fellows all in field,
Harry, and Dicke, and George, bring us a drum,
Give us square dice, we will keep this court of guard,
For all good fellows companies that come.
Where Is that mad priest ye told me was in Arms,
To fight, as well as pray, if need required?

Suff. He Is in the Camp, and if he knew of this,
I undertake he would not be long hence.

Har. Trippe Dicke, Trippe George. they trippe.


Hunt. I must have the dice,
What do we play at? the play at dice.

Suff. Passage if ye please.


Hunt. Set round then, so, at all.


Har. George, you are out.
Give me the dice, I pass for twenty pound,
Here Is to our luckie passage into France.

Hunt. Harry you pass indeed for you sweep all.


Suff. A sign king Harry shall sweep al in France. ent. sir John


sir John Edge ye good fellows, take a fresh gamster in.


Har. Master Parson? we play nothing but gold?


sir John. And fellow, I tell thee that the priest has gold, gold? god's blood ye
are but beggarly soldiers to me, I think I have more gold than all you three.


Hunt. It may be so, but we believe it not.


Har. Set priest set, I pass for all that gold.


sir John Ye pass indeed.


Harry Priest, have thou any more?


sir John Zounds what a question's that?
I tell thee I have more then all you three,
At these ten Angels.

Harry. I wonder how thou comst by all this gold,
How many benefices have thou priest?

sir John In Faith but one, do wonder how I come by gold? I wonder rather how
poor soldiers should have gold, for I Will tell thee good fellow, we have every
day tithes, offerings, christnings, weddings, burialls: and you poor snakes
come seldom to a booty. I Will speak a proud word, I have but one parsonage,
Wrootham, it is better than the Bishopprick of Rochester, there is nere a hill,
heath, nor down in all Kent, but it is in my parish, Barrham down, Chobham
down, Gads hill, Wrootham hill, Black heath, Cocks heath, Birchen wood, all
pay me tithe, gold quoth a? ye pass not for that.


Suff. Harry ye are out, now parson shake the dice.


sir John. Set, set I Will cover ye at al: A plague on it I am out, the devil, and
dice, and a wench, who will trust them?


Suff. Say thou so priest? set fair, at all for once.


Har. Out sir, pay all.


sir John God's Blood pay me angel gold,
I Will none of your cracked French crowns nor pistolets,
Pay me fair angel gold, as I pay you.

Har. No cracked french crowns? I hope to see more cracked french crowns ere
long.


sir John Thou meanest of French men's crowns, when the King is in France.


Hunt. Set round, at all.


sir Ihon Pay all: this is some luck.


Har. Give me the dice, it is I must shread the priest:
At all sir John.

sir John The devil and all is yours: at that: sdeath, what ^asting is this?


Suff. Well thrown Harry in faith.


Har. I Will cast better yet.


sir John Then I Will be hanged. Sir, have thou not given thy soul to the devil
for casting?


Har. I pass for all.


sir John Thou passest all that ere I playde withal:
Sir, do thou not cogge, nor foist, nor slurre?

Har. Set parson, set, the dice die in my hand:
When parson, when? what can ye find no more?
Already dry? wast you bragd of your store?

sir John Alls gone but that.


Hunt. What, half a broken angel?


sir John Why sir, it is gold.


Har. Yea, and I Will cover it.


sir John The devil do ye good on it, I am blind, ye have blown me up.


Har. Nay tarry priest, ye shall not leave us yet,
Do not these pieces fit each other well?

sir Ihon What if they do?


Har. Thereby begins a tale:
There was a thief, in face much like sir John,
But it was not he, that thief was all in green,
Met me last day on Black Heath, near the park,
With him a woman, I was al alone,
And weaponlesse, my boy had al my ^oo^^s,
And was before providing me a boat:
Short tale to make, sir John, the thief I mean,
Took a just hundredth pound in gold from me.
I stormed at it, and (...) be reueng'de
If ere we met, he like a (...),
Brake with his teeth this (...) ^ust in two,
To be a token at our meeting next,
Provided, I should charge no Officer
To apprehend him, but at weapons point
Recover that, and what he had beside.
Well met sir John, betake ye to your tools
By torch light, for master parson you are he
That had my gold.

sir John Zounds I will not in play, in fair square play of the keeper of Eltham
park, and that I will maintain with this poor whinyard, be you two honest
men to stand and look vpon's, and let us alone, and take neither part.


Har. A greede, I charge ye do not boudge a foot, Sir John have at ye.


sir John Soldier ware your skonce.


Here as they are ready to strike, enter Bu^ler and draws his weapon and steps
betwixt them. But. Hold villains hold, my Lords, what do ye mean,
To see a traitor draw against the King?

sir John The King! Gods will, I am in a proper pickle.


Har. Butler what news? why do thou trouble us?


But. Please it your Highness, it is break of day,
And as I skouted near to Islington,
The gray eyed morning gave me glimmering,
Of armed men coming down Hygate hill,
Who by their course are coasting hitherward.

Har. Let us withdraw, my Lords, prepare our troops,
To charge the rebels, if there be such cause,
For this lawd priest this devilish hypocrite,
That is a thief, a gamster, and what not,
Let him be hanged up for example sake.

sir John Not so my gracious sovereign, I confess I am a frail man, flesh
and blood as other are: but set my imperfections aside, by this light ye have
not a taller man* nor a truer subject to the Crown and State, than sit (...)
of VVrootham.


Har. Will a true subject robb^ his King?


sir John Alas it was ignoran^e and want, my gracious liege.


Har. It Was want of grace: why, you should be as salt
To season others with good document,
Your lives as lamps to give the people light,
As shepherds, not as wolves to spoil the flock,
Go hang hm Butler.

But. Did thou not rob me?


sir John I must confess I saw some of your gold, but my dread Lord, I am in
no humor for death, therefore save my life, God will that sinners live; do not
you cause me die, once in their lives the best may go astray, and if the world
say true, your self (my liege) have bin a thief.


Har. I confess I have,
But I repent and have reclaimd my self.

sir John So will I do if you will give me time.


Har. Will thou? my lords, will you be his suerties?


Hunt. That when he robs again, he shall be hanged.


s^r John I ask no more.


Har. And we will grant thee that,
Live and repent, and prove an honest man,
Which when I hear, and safe return from France,
I Will give thee living, till when take thy gold,
But spend it better then at cards or wine,
For better virtues fit that coat of thine.

sir John Viuat Rex and currat lex, my liege, if ye have cause of battle, ye
shall see sir John of Wrootham bestirre himself in your quarrel. exeunt.


After an alarm enter Harry, Suffolk, Huntington, sir John, bringing forth
Acton, Beuerly, and Murley prisoners. Har. Bring in those traitors, whose
aspiring minds,
Thought to have triumphed in our overthrow,
But now ye see, base villains, what success
Attends ill actions wrongfully attempted.
Sir Roger Acton, thou retainst the name
Of knight, and should be more discreetly temperd,
Than join with peasants, gentry is divine,
But thou have made it more then popular.

Act. Pardon my Lord, my conscience urged me to it,


Har. Thy conscience? then thy conscience is corrupt,
For in thy conscience thou art bound to us,
And in thy conscience thou should love thy country,
Else what s the difference twixt a Christian,
And the uncivil manners of the Turk?

Beuer. We meant no hurt unto your majesty,
But reformation of Religion.

Har. Reform Religion? was it that ye sought?
I pray who gave you that authority?
Belike then we do hold the scepter up,
And sit within the throne but for a cipher,
Time was, good subjects would make known their grief,
And pray amendment, not enforce the same,
Unless their King were tyrant, which I hope
You cannot justly say that Harry is,
What is that other?

Suff. A mault-man my Lord,
And dwelling in Dunstable as he says.

Har. Sir what made you leave your barley broth,
To come in armor thus against your King?

Mur. Fie paltry, paltry to and fro, in and out upon occasion, what a worlde's
this? knighthood (my liege) it was knighthood brought me hithe^, they told me I
had wealth enough to make my wife a lady.


Har. And so you brought those horses which we saw,
Trapt all in costly furniture, and meant
To wear these spurs when you were knighted once.

Mur. In and out upon occasion I did.


Har. In and out upon occasion, therefore you shall be hanged, and in the sted
of wearing these spurs upon your heels, about your neck they shall bewray
your folly to the world.


sir John In and out upon ocasion, that goes hard.


Mur Fic paltry paltry, to and fro, good my liege a pardon, I am sorry for my
fault.


Har. That comes too late: but tell me, went there none
Beside sir Roger Acton, upon whom
You did depend to be your governor?

Mar. None none my Lord, but sir John Old-castle.


Har. Bears he part in this conspiracy. enter Bishop


Act. We looked my Lord that he would meet us here.


Har. But did he promise you that he would come.


Act. Such letters we received forth of Kent.


Bish. Where is my Lord the King? health to your grace,
Examining my Lord some of these caitiue rebels,
It is a general voice amongst them all,
That they had never come unto this place,
But to have met their valiant general,
The good Lord Cobham as they title him,
Whereby, my Lord, your grace may now perceive,
His treason is apparent, which before
He sought to color by his flattery.

Har. Now by my ro^altie I would have sworn,
But for his conscience, which I bear withal,
There had not liude a more true hearted subject.

Bish. It is but counterfeit, my gracious lords,
And therefore may it please your majesty,
To set your hand unto this precept here,
By which weel cause him forthwith to appear,
And answer this by order of the law.

Har. Bishop, not only that, but take commission,
To search, attach, imprison, and condemn,
This most notorious traitor as you please.

Bish. It shall be done, my Lord, without delay:
So now I hold Lord Cobham in my hand,
That which shall finish thy disdained life.

Har. I think the iron age begins but now,
(Which learned poets have so often taught)
Wherein there is no credit to be given,
To either words, or looks, or solemn oaths,
For if there were, how often has he sworn,
How gently tun'de the music of his tongue,
And with what amiable face beheld he me,
When all, God knows, was but hypocrisy. enter Cobham.

Cob. Long life and prosperous reign unto my Lord.

Har. Ah villain, can thou wish prosperity,
Whose heart includes naught but treachery?
I do arrest thee here my self, false knight,
Of treason capital against the state.

Cob. Of treason mighty prince, your grace mistakes,
I hope it is but in the way of mirth.

Har. Thy neck shall feel it is in earnest shortly,
Dare thou intrude into our presence, knowing
How haynously thou have offended us?
But this is thy accustomed deceit,
Now thou perceiust thy purpose is in vain,
With some excuse or other thou will come,
To clear thy self of this rebellion.

Cob. Rebellion good my Lord, I know of none.


Har. If you deny it, here is evidence,
See you these men, you never councelled,
Nor offered them assistance in their wars

Cob. Speak sirs, not one but all, I crave no favor,
Have ever I been conversant with you,
Or written letters to encourage you,
Or kindled but the least or smallest part,
Of this your late unnatural rebellion?
Speak for I dare the uttermost you can.

Mur, In and out upon occasion I know you not.


Har. No, did not say that sir John Old-castle,
Was one with whom you purposde to have met?

Mur. True, I did say so, but in what respect?
Because I heard it was reported so.

Har. Was there no other argument but that?


Act. To clear my conscience ere I die my lord,
I must confess, we have no other ground
But only Rumor, to accuse this lord,
Which now I see was merely fabulous.

Har. The more pernicious you to taint him then,
Whom you knew not was faulty yea or no.

Cobh. Let this my Lord, which I present your grace
Speak for my loyalty, read these articles,
And then give sentence of my life or death.

Har. Earl Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray corrupted
With bribes from Charles of France, either to win
My Crown from me, or secretly contriue
My death by treason? Is this possible?

Cobh. There is the platform, and their hands, my lord,
Each severally subscribed to the same.

Har. Oh never heard of base ingratitude!
Even those I hug within my bosom most,
Are readiest evermore to sting my heart.
Pardon me Cobham, I have done thee wrong,
Hereafter I will live to make amends.
Is then their time of meeting so near hand?
We Will meet with them, but little for their ease,
If God permit: go take these rebels hence,
Let them have martial law: but as for thee,
Friend to thy king and country, still be free. Exeunt.

Murl. Be it more or less, what a world is this?
Would I had continued still of the order of knaves,
And never sought knighthood, since it costs
So dear: sir Roger, I may thank you for all.

Acton Now it is too late to have it remedied,
I prithee Murley do not urge me with it.

Hunt. Will you away, and make no more to do?


Murl. Fie paltry paltry, to and fro, as occasion serves,
If you be so hasty take my place.

Hunt. No good sir knight, you shall begin in your hand.

Murl. I could be glad to give my betters place. Exeunt.


Enter Bishop, lord Warden, Croamer the Shrieue, Lady Cob and attendants.
Bishop I tell ye Lady, its not possible
But you should know where he conueies himself,
And you have hid him in some secret place.

Lady My Lord, believe me, as I have a soul,
I know not where my lord my husband is.

Bishop Go to, go to ye are an heretic,
And will be forc'de by torture to confess,
If fair means will not serve to make ye tell.

Lady My husband is a noble gentleman,
And need not hide himself for any fact
That ere I heard of, therefore wrong him not.

Bishop Your husband is a dangerous schismaticke,
Traitor to God, the King, and common wealth,
And therefore master Croamer shrieue of Kent,
I charge you take her to your custody,
And ceaze the goods of Sir John Old-castle
To the Kings use, let her go in no more,
To fetch so much as her apparel out,
There is your warrant from his majesty.

L. War. Good my Lord Bishop pacify your wrath
Against the Lady.

Bish. Then let her confess
Where Old-castle her husband is conceald.

L. War. I dare engage mine honor and my life,
Poor gentlewoman, she is ignorant,
And innocent of all his practices,
If any evil by him be practiced.

Bish. If my Lord Warden? nay then I charge you,
That all the cinque Ports whereof you are chief^
Be laid forthwith, that he escape us not,
Show him his highness warrant M. Shrieue.

L. War. I am sorry for the noble gentleman, Enter Old-castle and Harp.


Bish. Peace, he comes here, now do your office.


Old-castle Harpoole what business have we here in hand?
What makes the Bishop and the Sheriff here,
I fear my coming home is dangerous,
I would I had not made such haste to Cobham.

Harp. Be of good cheer my Lord, if they be foes we will scramble shrewdly with
them, if they be friends they are welcome: one of them (my Lord, Warden) is
your friend, but me thinks my lady weeps, I like not that.


Croo. Sir John Old-castle Lord Cobham, in the Kings majesty's name, I arrest
ye of high treason.


Oldca. Treason M. Croomes?


Harp. Treason M. Shrieue, god's blood what treason?


Oldca. Harpoole I charge thee stir not, but be quiet still,
Do ye arrest me M. Shrieue for treason?

Bish. Yea of high treason, traitor, heretic.


Oldca. Defiance in his face that calls me so,
I am as true a loyal gentleman
Unto his highness, as my prowdest enemy,
The King shall witness my late faithful service,
For safety of his sacred majesty.

Bish. What thou art, the kings hand shall testify,
Shewt him Lord Warden.

Old. Jesus defend me,
Is It possible your cunning could so temper
The princely disposition of his mind,
To sign the damage of a royal subject?
Well, the best is, it bears an ancedate,
Procured by my absence, and your malice,
But I, since that, have showed my self as true,
As any churchman that dare challenge me,
Let me be brought before his majesty,
If he acquit me not, then do your worst.

Bish. We are not bound to do kind office^
For any traitor, schismatike, nor heretic,
The kings hand is our warrant for our work,
Who is departed on his way for France,
And at Southhampton does repose this night.

Harp O that it were the blessed will of God, that thou and I were within
twenty mile of it, on Salisbury plain! I would lose my head if ever thou
broughtst thy head hither again. aside.


Old^a. My Lord Warden o'th cinque Ports, and my Lord of Rochester, ye are
joint Commissioners, favor me so much, On my expense to bring me to the king.


Bish. What, to Southhampton?


Oldca. Thither my god Lord,
And if he do not clear me of al guilt,
And all suspicion of conspiracy,
Pawning his princely warrant for my truth:
I ask no favor, but extremest torture.
Bring me, or send me to him, good my Lord,
Good my Lord Warden, M Shrieue, entreat.
Here the Lord Warden, and Cromer uncover to the Bishop, and secretly whispers
with him. Come hither lady, nay, sweet wife forbear,
To heap one sorrow on another neck,
It Is grief enough falsely to be accusde,
And not permitted to acquit my self,
Do not thou with thy kind respective tears,
Torment thy husbands heart that bleedes for thee,
But be of comfort, God has help in store,
For those that put assured trust in him.
Dear wife, if they commit me to the Tower,
Come up to London to your sisters house:
That being near me, you may comfort me.
One solace find I settled in my soul,
That I am free from treasons very thought,
Only my conscience for the Gospels sake,
Is cause of all the troubles I sustain.

Lady. O my dear Lord, what shall betide of us?
You to the Tower, and I turned out of doors,
Our substance ceaz'd unto his highness use,
Even to the garments longing to our backs.

Harp. Patience good madame, things at worst will mend,
And if they do not, yet our lives may end.

Bish. Urge it no more, for if an Angel spoke,
I swear by sweet saint Peter's blessed keys,
First goes he to the Tower, then to the stake.

Crom. But by your leave, this warrant does not stretch
To imprison her.

Bishop No, turn her out of doors, L. Warden and Oldcastle whisper.
Even as she is, and lead him to the Tower,
With guard enough for fear of rescuing.

Lady O God requite thee thou bloodthirsty man.


Oldca. May it not be my Lord of Rochester?
Wherein have I incurd your hate so far,
That my appeal unto the King's denide?

Bish. No hate of mine, but power of holy church,
Fo^bids all favor to false heretics.

Oldca. Your private malice more than public power,
Strikes most at me, but with my life it ends.

Harp. O that I had the Bishop in that fear, aside
That once I had his Sumner by our selves.

Crom. My Lord yet grant one suit unto us all,
That this same ancient serving man may wait
Upon my lord his master in the Tower.

Bish. This old iniquity, this heretic?
That in contempt of our church discipline,
Compeld my Sumner to devour his processet
Old Ruffian past-grace, up start schismatike,
Had not the King prayed us to pardon ye,
Ye had fried for it, ye grizild heretic.

Harp. God's Blood my lord Bishop, ye do me wrong, I am neither heretic nor
puritan, but of the old church, i will swear, drink ale, kiss a wench, go to
mass, eat fish all Lent, and fast fridaies with cakes and wine, fruit and
spicerie, shriue me of my old sins before Easter, and begin new before
whitsontide.


Crom. A merry mad conceited knave my lord.


Harp. That knave was simply put upon the Bishop.


Bish. Well, God forgive him and I pardon him.
Let him attend his master in the Tower,
For I in charity wish his soul no hurt.

Old^a God bless my soul from such cold charity,


Bish. Tooth Tower with him, and when my leisure serves,
I will examine him of Articles,
Look my lord Warden as you have in charge,
The Shriue perform his office.

L. Ward. Yes my lord. Enter the Sumner with books.


Bish. What bringst thou there? what? books of heresy.


Some. Yea my lord, here is not a latin book,
No not so much as our ladies Psalter,
Here Is the Bible, the testament the Psalms in meter,
The sickemans salve, the treasure of gladness,
And al in English, not so much but the Almanack's English.

Bish. Away with them, to the fire with them Clun,
Now fie upon these vpstart heretics,
Al English, burn them, burn them quickly Clun.

Harp. But do not Sumner as voule answer it, for I have there English books
my lord, that i will not part with for your Bishoppricke, Beuis of Hampton,
Owleglasse, the Friar and the Boy, Ellen of Rumming, Robin hood, and other such
godly stories which if ye burn, by this flesh i will make ye drink their ashes in
S. Margets ale. exeunt.


Enter the Bishop of Rochester with his men, in liuerie coats. 1. Ser. Is it
your honors pleasure we shall stay,
Or come back in the afternoon to fetch you.

Bish. Now you have brought me here into the Tower,
You may go back unto the Porters Lodge,
And send for drink or such things as you want,
Where if I have occasion to employ you,
I Will send some officer to call you to me.
Into the city go not, I command you,
Perhaps I may have present need to use you.

2 We will attend your worship here without.


Bish. Do so I pray you.


3 Come, we may have a quart of wine at the Rose at Barking, I warrant you, and
come back an hour before he be ready to go.


1 We must hie us then.


3 Let Us away. exeunt.


Bish. Ho, M. Lieftenant.


Lieften. Who calls there?


Bish. A friend of yours.


Lieften. My lord of Rochester, your honor's welcome.


Bish. Sir here is my warrant from the Counsel,
For conference with sir John Old-castle,
Upon some matter of great consequence.

Lieften. Ho, sir John.


Harp. Who calls there?


Lieften. Harpoole, tell Sir John, that my lord of Rochester comes from the
counsel to confer with him.


Harp. I will sir.


Lief. I think you may as safe without suspicion,
As any man in England as I hear,
For it was you most labored his commitment.

Bish. I did sir, and nothing repent it I assure you.
Enter sir John Old-castle. M. Lieftenant I pray you give us leave,
I must confer here with sir John a little.

Lief. With all my heart my lord.


Harp aside. My lord be ruled by me, take this occasion while it is offered, and
on my life your lordship shall escape.


Old-ca. No more I say, peace lest he should suspect it.


Bish. Sir John I am come unto you from the lords of his highness most
honorable counsel, to know if yet you do recant your errors, conforming you
unto the holy church.


Old-ca. My lord of Rochester on good advise,
I see my error, but yet understand me,
I mean not error in the faith I hold,
But error in submitting to your pleasure,
Therefore your lordship without more to do.
Must be a means to help me to escape.

Bish. What means? thou heretic?
Dare thou but lift thy hand against my calling?

sir John No not to hurt yon for a thousand pound,


Harp. Nothing but to borrow your upper garments a little; not a word more, for
if you do, you die: peace, for waking the children, there, put them on,
dispatch, my lord, the window that goes out into the leads, is sure enough, I
told you that before, there, make you ready, i will convey him after, and bind him
surely in the inner room.


Old-ca. This is well begun, God send us happy speed,
Hard shift you see men make in time of need: Harpoole.

Harp. Here my Lord, come come away.


Enter serving men again. 1 I marvel that my lord should stay so long.


2 He has sent to seek us, I dare lay my life.


3 We come in good time, see where he is coming.


Harp. I beseech you good my lord of Rochester, be favorable to my lord and
master.


Old-ca. The inner rooms be very hot and close,
I do not like this air here in the Tower.

Harp His case is hard my lord, you shall safely get out of the Tower, but I
will down upon them, in which time get you away.


Old-ca. Fellow thou troublest me.


Harp. Hear me my Lord, hard under Islington wait you my coming, I will bring
my Lady ready, with horses to convey you hence.


Old-ca. Fellow, go back again unto thy Lord and counsel him.


Harp. Nay my good lord of Rochester, i will bring you to S. Albons through the
woods, I warrant you.


Old-ca. Villain away.


Harp. Nay since I am past the Towers liberty, thou part'st not so. be draws.


Bish. Clubbes clubs, clubs.


1 Murder, murder murder.


2 Down with him. they fight.


3 A villain traitor.


Harp. You cowardly rogues. sir John escapes.


Enter Lieftenant and his men. Lieft. Who is so bold as dare to draw a sword,
So near unto the entrance of the Tower?

1 This ruffian servant to sir John Old-castle was like to have slain my Lord.


Lieft. Lay hold on him.


Harp. Stand off if you love your puddings.


Rochester calls within. Rock within. Help help, help, M. Lieftenant help.


Lief. Who Is that within? some treason in the Tower upon my life, look in,
who is that which calls? enter Roch. bound.


Lief. Without your cloak my lord of Rochester?


Harp. There, now it works, then let me speed, for now is the fittest time for
me to escape away. exit


Lief. Why do you look so ghastly and affrighted?


Roch. Old-castle that traitor and his man,
When you had left me to confer with him,
Took, bound, and stripped me, as you see,
And left me lying in his inner chamber,
And so departed, and I

Lief. And you! never say that the Lord Cobhams man
Did h^re set upon you like to murder you.

1 And so he did.


Roch. It was upon his master then he did,
That in the brawle the traitor might escape.

Lief. Where is this Harpoole?


2 Here he was even now.


Lief. Where can you tell? they are both escaped,
Since it so happens that he is escap'de,
I am glad you are a witness of the same,
It might have else been laid unto my charge,
That I had been consenting to the fact.

Roch. Come, search shall be made for him with expedition, the havens laid that
he shall not escape, and hue and cry continue thorough England, to find this
damned dangerous heretic. exeunt.


Enter Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray, as in a chamber, and set down at a table,
consulting about their treason: King Harry and Suffolk listening at the door.
Camb. In mine opinion, Scroope has well aduisde,
Poison will be the only aptest mean,
And fittest for our purpose to dispatch him.

Gray But yet there may be doubt in their delivery,
Harry is wise, therefore Earl of Cambridge,
I Judge that way not so convenient.

Scroop What think ye then of this? I am his bedfellow,
And unsuspected nightly sleep with him.
What if I venture in those silent hours,
When sleep has sealed up all mortal eyes,
To murder him in bed? how like ye that?

Camb. Herein consistes no safety for your self,
And you disclosde, what shall become of us?
But this day (as ye know) he will aboard,
The wind so fair, and set away for France,
If as he goes, or entering in the ship,
It might be done, then it were excellent,

Gray Why any of these, or if you will,
I Will cause a present sitting of the Council,
Wherein I will pretend some matter of such weight,
As needs must have his royal company,
And to dispatch him in the Council chamber.

Camb. Tush, yet I hear not any thing to purpose,
I wonder that lord Cobham stays so long,
His counsel in this case would much avail us.

They rise from the table, and the King step^ in to them with his Lords.
Scroop What shall we rise thus, and determine nothing?


Har. That were a shame indeed, no, sit again,
And you shall have my counsel in this case,
If you can find no way to kill this King,
Then you shall see how I can further ye,
Scroopes way by poison was indifferent,
But yet being bedfellow unto the King,
And unsuspected sleeping in his bosom,
In mine opinion, that is the likelier way,
For such f^lse friends are able to do much,
And silent night is Treason's fittest friend,
Now, Cambridge in his setting hence for France,
Or by the way, or as he goes aboard,
To do the deed, that was indifferent too,
Yet somewhat doubtful; might I speak my mind,
For many reasons needelesse now to urge.
Mary Lord Gray came something near the point,
To have the King at council, and there murder him,
As Caesar was amongst his dearest friends:
None like to that, if all were of his mind.
Tell me oh tell me you ^right honors stains,
For which of all my kindnesses to you,
Are ye become thus traitors to your king?
And France must have the spoil of Harries life?

All. Oh pardon us dread lord. all kneeling.


Har. How pardon ye^ that were a sin indeed,
Drag them to death, which justly they deserve, they lead them away.
And France shall dearly buy this villainy,
So soon as we set footing on her breast,
God have the praise for our deliverance,
And next, our thanks (Lord Cobham) is to thee,
True perfect mirror of nobility. exeunt.

Enter the host, sir John Old-castle, and Harpoole. Host Sir, you are welcome
to this house, to such as here is with all my heart, but by the mass I fear
your lodging will be the woorst, l have but two beds, and they are both in a
chamber, and the carier and his daughter lies in the one, and you and your wife
must lie in the other.


L. Cobh. In faith sir, for my self I do not greatly pass,
My wife is weary, and would be at rest,
For we have traueld very far to day,
We must be content with such as you have.

Host But I cannot tell how to do with your man.


Harpoole What, have thou never an empty room in thy house for me?


Host Not a bed by my troth: there came a poor Irish man, and I lodgde him
in the barn, where he has fair straw, though he have nothing else.


Harp. Well mine host, I pray thee help me to a pair of fair sheets, and
I Will go lodge with him.


Host By the mass that thou shall, a good pair of hempen sheets, were never
lain in: Come. exeunt.


Enter Constable, Mayor, and Watch. Mayor What have you searched the town?


Constable. All the town sir, we have not left a house unsearched that uses to
lodge.


Mayor Surely my lord of Rochester was then deceiude,
Or ill informde of sir John Old-castle,
Or if he came this way, he is past the town,
He could not else have escaped you in the search.

Constable. The privy watch has been abroad all night,
And not a stranger lodges in the town
But he is known, only a lusty priest
We found in bed with a pretty wench,
That says she is his wife, yonder at the sheeres:
But we have chargde the host with his forth coming
To morrow morning.

Mayor What think you best to do?


Constable. Faith master mayor, heeres a few straggling houses beyond the bridge,
and a little Inn where cariers use to lodge, though I think surely he would
nere lodge there: but we will go search, and the rather, because there came
notice to the town the last night of an Irish man, that had done a murder,
whom we are to make search for.


Mayor Come I pray you, and be circumspect. exeunt


Constable. First beset the house, before you begin the search.


Officer Content, every man take a several place.
here is heard a great noise within. Keep, keep, strike him down there,
down with him.

Enter Constable with the Irish man in Harpooles apparel. Con. Come you
villainous heretic, confess where you^ master is.


Irish man Vat mester?


Mayor Vat mester, you counterfeit rebel, this shall no^ serve your turn.


Irish man Be sent Patrike I ha no mester.


Con. VVheres the lord Cobham sir John Old-castle tha^ lately is escaped out of
the Tower.


Irish man Vat lort Cobham?


Mayor You counterfeit, this shall not serve you, we will torture you, we will make
you to confess where that arch-heretique Lord Cobham is: come bind him fast.


Irish man Ahone, ahone, ahone, a C^ee.


Con. Ahone, you crafty rascal? exeunt.


Lord Cobham comes out in his gown stealing. Cobh. Harpoole, Harpoole, I hear
a marvelous noise about the house, God warant us, I fear we are pursued: what
Harpoole.


Harp. within. Who calls there?


Cobh. It Is I, do thou not hear a noise about the house?


Harp. Yes mary do I, zwounds, I can not find my hose, this Irish rascal
that was lodgde with me all night, has stolen my apparel, and has left me
nothing but a lousy mantle, and a pair of broags. Get up, get up, and if the
carier and his wench be asleep, change you with them as he has done with me,
and see if we can escape.


A noise again heard about the house, a pretty while, then enter the Constable
meeting Harpoole in the Irish man's apparel. Con. Stand close, here comes the
Irish man that did the murder, by all tokens, this is he.


Mayor And perceiving the house beset, would get away: stand sir.


Harp. What art thou that bidst me stand?


Con. I am the Officer, and am come to search for an Irish man, such a villain
as thy self, that have murdered a man this last night by the hie way.


Harp. God's Blood Constable, art thou mad? am I an Irish man?


Mayor Sir, we will find you an Irish man before we part: lay hold upon him.


Con. Make him fast: O thou bloody rogue!


Enter Lord Cobham and his lady in the carrier and wenches apparel. Cobham
What will these Ostlers sleep all day?
Good morrow, good morrow, Come wench, come,
Saddle, saddle, now before God too foord-dayes, ha?

Con. Who comes there?


Mayor Oh it is Lankashire carier, let him pass.


Cobham What, will no body open the gates here?
Come, lets int stable to look to our capons.

The carrier calling. Club calling Host, why ostler, zwookes, here is such
abomination company of boys: a pox of this pigstie at the house end, it filles
all the house full of fleas, ostler, ostler.


Ostler Who calls there, what would you have?


Club Zwookes, do you rob your ghests? do you lodge rogues and slaves, and
scoundrels, ha? they ha stolen our doths here: why ostler?


Ostler A murrein choke you, what a bawling you keep.


Host How now, what would the carrier have? look up there.


Ostler They say that the man and woman that lay by them have stolen their
clothes.


Host What, are the strange folks up yet that came in yester night?


Constable. What mine host, up so early?


Host What, master Mayor, and master Constable!


Mayor We are come to seek for some suspected persons, and such as here we
found, have apprehended.


Enter the Carrier and Kate in lord Cobham and ladies apparel. Con. Who comes
here?


Club Who comes here? a plague found ome, you bawle quoth a, ods hat, I Will
forzweare your house, you lodgde a fellow and his wife by us that ha run away
with our parrel, and lef^ us such gew-gawes here, come Kate, come to me,
thowse dizeard in faith.


Mayor Mine host, know you this man?


Host Yes master Mayor, I Will give my word for him, why neibor Club, how comes
this gear about?


Kate Now a foul ont, I can not make this gew-gaw stand on my head, now the
lads and the lasses won flowt me too too


Constable. How came this man and woman thus attired?


Host Here came a man and woman hither this last night, which I did take for
substantial people, and lodgde all in one chamber by these folks: me
thinks, have been so bold to change apparel, and gone away this morning ere
they rose.


Mayor That was that villain traitor Old-castle, that thus escaped us: make
out ^uy and cry yet after him, keep fast that traitorous rebel his servant
there: farewell mine host.


Carier Come Kate Owdham, thou and Ise trimly dizard.


Kate I faith neame Club, Ise wot nere what to do, Ise be so flowted and so
showted at: but by th mess Ise cry. exeunt.


Enter Priest and Doll. sir John Come Dol, come, be merry wench,
Farewell Kent, we are not for thee,
Be lusty my less, come for Lancashi^e,
We must nip the Boung for these crowns.

Doll Why is all the gold spent already that you had the other day?


sir John Gone Doll, gone, flowne, spent, vanished, the devil, drink and the
dice, has devoured all.


Doll You might have left me in Kent, that you might, until you had bin better
provided, I could have sta^ed at Cobham.


sir John No Dol, no, i will none of that, Kent^s too hot Doll, Kent's too hot:
the weathercocke of Wrotham will crow no longer, we have plucked him, he has
lost his feathers, I have prunde him bare, left him thrice, is moulted, is
moulted, we^ch.


Doll Faith sir John, I might have gone to service again, old master Harpoole
told me he would provide me a mistress.


sir John Peace Doll, peace, come mad wench, I Will make thee an honest woman,
we will into Lancashire to our friends, the troth is, I Will marry thee, we want but
a little money to buy us a horse, and to spend by the way, the next sheep that
comes shall loose his fleece, we will have these crowns wench I warrant thee:
stay, who comes here? some Irish villain me thinks that enter the Irish man
with his master slain. has slain a man, and draws him out of the way to
rifle him: stand close Doll, we will see the end. The Irish man falls to rifle
his master. Alas poe mester, S. Rishard Lee, be saint Patricke is rob and cut
thy trote, for dee shaine, and die money, and dee gold ring, be me truly is love
thee well, but now dow be kill thee, be shitten kanaue.


sir John. Stand sir, what art thou?


Irishman. Be saint Patricke mester is pore Irisman, is a leufter.


sir John Sir, sir, you are a damned rogue, you have killed a man here, and
rifled him of all that he has, god's blood you rogue deliver, or i will not leave you
so much as an Irish hair above your shoulders, you whoreson Irish dog, sir
untruss presently, come off and dispatch, or by this cross i will fetch your
head off as clean as a bark.


Irishman. Wees me saint Patricke, Ise kill me mester for chain and his ring,
and nows be rob of all, mees undo.


Priest robs him. sir John Auant you rascal, go sir, be walking, come Doll
the devil laughes, when one thief robs another, come mad wench, we will to
saint Albons, and revel in our bower, hey my brave girl.


Doll O thou art old sir John, when all is done in faith.


Enter the host of the Bell with the Irish man. Irishman Be me tro mester is
pore Irisman, is want ludging, is have no money, is starve and cold, good mester
give her some meat, is famise and tie.


Host In Faith my fellow I have no lodging, but what I keep for my guess, that I
may not disapoint, as for meat thou shall have such as there is, and if thou will lie in the barn, there is fair straw, and room enough.


Irishman Is thank my mester heartily, de straw is good bed for me.


Host Ho Robin?


Robin Who calls?


Host Show this poor Irishman into the barn, go sir. exeunt.


Enter carrier and Kate. Club. Ho, who is within here, who looks to the horses?
Gods hatte here is fine work, the hens in the manger, and the hogs in the
litter, a bots found you all, here is a house well looked too yvaith.


Kate Mas goffe Club, Ise very cawd.


Club. Get in Kate, get in to fire and warm thee.


Club Ho John Hostler.


Hostler What gaffer Club, welcome to saint Albons,
How does all our friends in Lancashire?

Club Well God have mercy John, how does Tom, where is he?


Hostler O Tom is gone from hence, he is at the three horse-loues at
Stony-stratford, how does old Dick Dunne?


Club Gods hatte old Dunne has bin moyerd in a slough in Brickhil-lane, a
plague found it, yonder is such abomination weather as never was seen.


Hostler. Gods hat thief, have one half pecke of pease and oats more for
that, as I am John Ostler, he has been ever as good a jade as ever traueld.


Club Faith well said old Jack, thou art the old lad still.


Hostler Come Gaffer Club, unload, unload, and get to supper, and I Will rub dunne
the while. Come. exeunt.


Enter sir John Old-castle, and his Lady disguisde. Oldca. Come Madam, happily
escapt, here let us sit,
This place is far remote from any path,
And here awhile our weary limbs may rest,
To take refreshing, free from the pursuit
Of envious Winchester.

Lady But where (my Lord,)
Shall we find rest for our disquiet minds?
There dwell untamed thoughts that hardly stoop,
To such abasemen^ of disdained rags,
We were not wont to travel thus by night,
Especially on foot.

Oldca. No matter love,
Extremities admit no better choice,
And were it not for thee, say froward time,
Imposde a greater task, I would esteem it
As lightly as the wind that blows upon us,
But in thy sufferance I am doubly taskt,
Thou wast not wont to have the earth thy stool,
Nor the moist dewy grass thy pillow, nor
Thy chamber to be the wide horrison,

Lady How can it seem a trouble, having you
A partner with me, in the worst I feel?
No gentle Lord, your presence would give ease
To death it self, should he now seize upon me,
Behold what my foresight has vndertane here is bread and cheese and a bottle.
For fear we faint, they are but homely cates.
Yet sau^de with hunger, they may seem as sweet,
As greater dainties we were wont to taste.

Old^a. Praise be to him whose plenty sends both this,
And all things else our mortal bodies need,
Nor scorn we this poor feeding, nor the state
We now are in, for what is it on earth,
Nay under heaven, continues at a stay?
Ebbes not the sea, when it has overflowed?
Flows not darkness when the day is gone?
And see we not sometime the eye of heaven,
Dimmd with ouerflying clouds: the^es not that work
Of careful nature, or of cunning art,
(How strong, how beauteous, or how rich it be)
But falls in time to ruin: here gentle Madame,
In this one draught I wash my sorrow down. drinks.

Lady And I incoragde with your cheerful speech,
Will do the like.

Oldca. Pray God poor Harpoole come,
If he should fall into the Bishops hands,
Or not remember where we bade him meet us,
It were the thing of all things else, that now
Could breed revolt in this new peace of mind.

Lady Fear not my Lord, he is witty to devise,
And strong to execute a present shift.

Oldca. That power be still his guide has guided us,
My drowsy eyes wax heavy, early rising,
Together with the travel we have had,
Make me that I could gladly take a nap,
Were I persuaded we might be secure.

Lady Let that depend on me, whilst you do sleep,
I Will watch that no misfortune happen us,
Lay then your head upon my lap sweet Lord,
And boldly take your rest.

Oldca. I shall dear wife,
Be too much trouble to thee.

Lady Urge not that,
My duty binds me, and your love commands.
I would I had the skill with tuned voice,
To draw on sleep with some sweet melody,
But imperfectoin and unaptness too,
Are both repugnant, fear inserts the one,
The other nature has denied me use.
But what talk I of means to purchase that,
Is freely happened? sleep with gentle hand,
Has shut his eie-liddes, oh victorious labor,
How soon thy power can charm the bodies sense?
And now thou likewise climbst unto my brain,
Making my heavy temples stoop to thee,
Great God of heaven from danger keep us free. both sleeps.

Enter sir Richard Lee, and his men Lee. A murder closely done and in my ground?
Search carefully, if any where it were,
This obscure thicket is the likeliest place.

servant. Sir I have found the body stiff with cold,
And mangled cruelly with many wounds.

Lee Look if thou know him, turn his body up,
A lack it is my son, my son and heir,
Whom two years since, I sent to Ireland,
To practice there the discipline of war,
And coming home (for so he wrote to me)
Some savage heart, some bloody devilish hand,
Either in hate, or thirsting for his coin,
Has here slucde out his blood, unhappy hour,
Accursed place, but most inconstant fate,
That had reserude him from the bullets fire,
And suffered him to escape the wood-karnes fury,
Did here ordain the treasure of his life,
(Even here within the arms of tender peace,
And where security gate greatest hope)
To be consumde by treasons wastefull hand?
And what is most afflicting to my soul,
That this his death and murder should be wrought,
Without the ^nowledge by whose means it was done,

2 seru. Not so sir, I have found the authors of it,
See where they sit, and in their bloody fistes,
The fatal instruments of death and sin.

Lee Just judgment of that power, whose gracious eye,
Loathing the sight of such a heinous fact,
Dazeled their senses with benumming-sleepe,
Till their unhallowed treachery were known:
Awake ye monsters, murderers awake,
Tremble for horror, blush you cannot choose,
Beholding this inhumane deed of yours.

Old. What mean you sir to trouble weary souls,
And interrupt us of our quiet sleep?

Lee Oh devilish! can you boast unto your selves
Of quiet sleep, having within your hearts
The guilt of murder waking, that with cries
Deafes the loud thunder, and sollicites heaven,
With mo^e than Mandrakes shreekes for your offense?

Lady Old. What murder? you vpbraid us wrongfully.


Lee Can you deny the fact? see you not here,
The body of my son by you mis-done?
Look on his wounds, look on his purple hew:
Do we not find you where the deed was done?
Were not your knives fast closed in your hands?
Is not this cloth an argument beside,
Thus staind and spotted with his innocent blood?
These speaking characters, were nothing else
To plead against ye, would convict you both.
Bring them away, bereauers of my joy,
At Hartford where the Sises now are kept,
Their lives shall answer for my sons lost life.

Old castle As we are innocent, so may we speed.


Lee As I am wronged, so may the law proceed. exeunt.


Enter bishop of Rochester, constable of S. Albons, with sir John of Wrotham,
Doll his wench, and the Irishman i^ Harpooles apparel. Bishop What intricate
confusion have we here?
Not two hours since we apprehended one,
In habit Irish, but in speech, not so:
And now you bring another, that in speech
Is altogether Irish, but in habit
Seems to be English: yea and more than so,
The servant of that heretic Lord Cobham.

Irishman Fait me be no servant of the lord Cobhams,
Me be Mack Chane of Vlster.

Bishop Otherwise called Harpoole of Kent, go to sit,
You cannot blind us with your broken Irish.

sir John Trust me, my Lord Bishop, whether Irish,
Or English, Harpoole or not Harpoole, that
I leave to be decided by the trial:
But sure I am this man by face and speech
Is he that murdered young sir Richard Lee:
I met him presently upon the fact,
And that he slew his master for that gold,
Those jewels, and that chain I took from him.

Bishop Well, our affairs do call us back to London,
So that we cannot prosecute the cause
As we desire to do, therefore we leave
The charge with you, to see they be conuaide
To Hartford Sise: both this counterfaite
And you sir John of Wrotham, and your wench,
For you are culpable as well as they,
Though not for murder, yet for felony.
But since you are the means to bring to light
This graceless murder, you shall bear with you,
Our letters to the Judges of the bench,
To be your friends in what they lawful may.

sir John I thank your Lordship.


Bish. So, away with them. exeunt.


Enter Jailer and his man, bringing forth Old castle. Jailer Bring forth the
prisoners, see the court preparde,
The Justices are coming to the bench.
So, let him stand, away, and fetch the rest. exeunt.

Old. Oh give me patience to endure this scourge,
Thou that art fountain of that virtuous stream,
And though contempt, false witness, and reproach
Hang on these iron gyues, to press my life
As low as earth, yet strengthen me with faith,
That I may mount in spirit above the clouds.
Enter Jailer bringing in Lady Old-castle, and Harpoole. Here comes my lady,
sorrow it is for her,
Thy wound is grievous, else I scoff at thee.
What and poor Harpoole! art thou ith briars too?

Harp. I faith my Lord, I am in, get out how I can.


Lady Say (gentle Lord) for now we are alone,
And may confer, shall we confess in brief,
Of whence, and what we are, and so prevent
The accusation is commenede against us?

Old. What will that help us? being known, sweet love,
We shall for heresy be put to death,
For so they term the religion we profess.
No, if it be ordained we must die,
And at this instant, this our comfort be,
That of the guilt imposde, our souls are free.

Harp. Yea, yea my lord, Harpoole is so resolude,
I wreake of death the less, in that I die
Not by the sentence of that envious priest
The Bishop of Rochester, oh were it he,
Or by his means that I should suffer here,
It would be double torment to my soul.

Lady Well, be it then according as heaven please.


Enter lord Judge, two Justices, Mayor of Saint Albons, lord Powesse and his
lady, and old sir Richard Lee: the Judge and Justices take their places. Judge
Now M. Mayor, what gentleman is that,
You bring with you, before us and the bench?

Mayor The Lord Powes if it like your honor,
And this his Lady, traveling toward Wales,
Who for they lodgde last night within my house,
And my Lord Bishop did lay search for such,
Were very willing to come on with me,
Lest for their sakes, suspicion we might wrong.

Judge We cry your honor mercy good my Lord,
Wilt please ye take your place, madame your ladyship,
May here or where you will repose your self,
Until this business now in hand be past.

Lady Po. I will withdraw into some other room,
So that your Lordship, and the rest be pleased.

Judge With all our hearts: attend the Lady there.


Lord Po. Wife, I have eyde yond prisoners all this while,
And my conceit does tell me, it is our friend,
The noble Cobham, and his virtuous Lady.

Lady Po. I think no less, are they suspected trow ye
For doing of this murder?

Lord Po. What it means,
I cannot tell, but we shall know anon,
Mean space as you pass by them, ask the question,
But do it secretly, you be not seen,
And make some sign that I may know your mind.

Lady Po. My Lord Cobham, madam? as she passes over the stage by the^.


Old. No Cobha^ now, nor madam as you love us,
But John of Lancashire, and Ione his wife.

Lady Po. Oh tell, what is it that our love can do,
To pleasure you, for we are bound to you.

Oldca. Nothing but this, that you conceal our names,
So gentle lady pass for being spied.

Lady Po. My heart I leave, to bear part of your grief. exit,


Judge Call the prisoners to the bar: sir Richard Lee,
What evidence can you bring against these people,
To prove them guilty of the murder done?

Lee. This bloody towell, and these naked knives,
Beside we found them sitting by the place,
Where the dead body lay within a bush.

Judge What answer you why law should not proceed,
According to this evidence given in,
To tax ye with the penalty of death?

Old. That we are free from murders very thought,
And know not how the gentleman was slain.

1 Just. How came this linen cloth so boudy then?


Lady Cob. My husband hot with traveling my lord,
His nose gusht out a bleeding, that was it.

2 Just. But wherefore were your sharp edgde knives vnsheathde?


Lady Cob. To cut such simple victual as we had.


Judge Say we admit this answer to those articles,
What made ye in so private a dark nooke,
So far remote from any common path,
As was the thick where the dead corpse was thrown?

Old. Iournying my lord from London from the term,
Down into Lancashire where we do dwell,
And what with age and travel being faint,
We gladly sought a place where we might rest,
Free from resort of other passengers,
And so we strayed into that secret corner.

Judge These are but ambages to drive of time,
And linger Justice from her purposde end.
But who are these?

Enter the Constable, bringing in the Irishman, sir John of Wrotham, and Doll
Constable. Stay Judgment, and release those innocents,
For here is he, whose hand has done the deed,
For which they stand indicted at the bar,
This savage villain, this rude Irish slave,
His tongue already has confessed the fact,
And here is witness to confirm as much.

sir John Yes my good Lords, no sooner had he slain
His loving master for dthe wealth he had,
But I upon the instant met with him,
And what he purchacde with the loss of blood,
With strokes I presently bereau'de him of,
Some of the which is spent, the rest remaining,
I willingly surrender to the hands
Of old sir Richard Lee, as being his,
Beside my Lord Judge, I greet your honor,
With letters from my Lord of Winchester. delivers a letter.

Lee Is this the wolf whose thirsty throat did drink
My dear sons blood? art thou the snake
He cherisht, yet with envious piercing sting,
Assaildst him mortally? foul stigmatike,
Thou venom of the country where thou liuedst,
And pestilence of this: were it not that law
Stands ready to revenge thy cruelty,
Traitor to God, thy master, and to me,
These hands should be thy executioner.

Judge Patience sir Richard Lee, you shall have justice,
And he the guerdon of his base desert,
The fact is odious, therefore take him hence,
And being hangde until the wretch be dead,
His body after shall be hanged in chains,
Near to the place, where he did act the murder.

Irish. Prithee Lord shudge let me have mine own clothes, my strouces there,
and let me be hanged in a with after my cuntry, the Irish fashion. exit.


Judge Go to, away with him, and now sir John,
Although by you, this murder came to light,
And therein you have well deserved, yet upright law,
So will not have you be excusde and quit,
For you did rob the Irishman, by which
You stand attained here of felony,
Beside, you have bin lewd, and many years
Led a lascivious unbeseeming life.

sir John Oh but my Lord, he repents, sir John repents he will mend.


Judge In hope thereof, together with the favor,
My Lord of Winchester intreates for you,
We are content you shall be proved.

sir John I thank your good Lordship.


Judge These other falsely here, accusde, and brought
In peril wrongfully, we in like sort
Do set at liberty, paying their fees.

Lord Po. That office if it please ye I will do,
For countries sake, because I know them well,
They are my neighbors, therefore of my cost,
Their charges shall be paid.

Lee. And for amends,
Touching the wrong unwittingly I have done,
There are a few crowns more for them to drink. gives them a purse.

Judge. Your kindness merits praise sir Richard Lee,
So let us hence. exeunt all but Lord Powesse and Oldcastle.

Lord Po. But Powesse still must stay,
There yet remains a part of that true love,
He owes his noble friend vnsatisfide,
And vnperformd which first of all does bind me,
To gratulate your lordships s^fe delivery,
And then entreat, that since unlooked for thus,
We here are met, your honor would vouchsafe,
To ride with me to Wales, where though my power,
(Though not to quittance those great benefits,
I have receiud of you) yet both my house,
My purse my servants, and what else I have,
Are all at your command, deny me not,
I know the Bishops hate pursues ye so,
As there is no safety in abiding here.

Old. It Is true my Lord, and God forgive him for it.


Lord Po. Then let us hence, you shall be straight provided
Of lusty geldings, and once entered Wales,
Well may the Bishop hunt, but spite his face,
He never more shall have the game in chase. exeunt.

FINIS.

