A true report of the Disputation or rather private Conference had in the Tower
of London, with Ed. Campion Jesuit, the last of August. 1581.

Set down by the Reverend learned men them selves that dealt therein.

Whereunto is joined also a true report of the other three days conferences
had there with the same Jesuit. Which now are thought meet to be published
in print by authority.



IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty, Ianuarij. 1. 1583.

ERRATA.
A. signifies the first page. B. the second. The numbers show the line

Fault Correction. C. ii. a. line last. commoda for commoda. D. ii. a. 25. in
the margent. Normam Limam. D. ii. b. 36. both loath. D. iiii. a. 27. lewd loud.
D. iiii. b. 19 Proof process. H. iiii. line last. by in. D d. iiii. b. 9.
justified infected.

To the Reader.
MAster Campions Book being at large answered shortly after our conference
with him, which was concerning certain points in the beginning of the fayd
book only: and our said conference also, being partly remembered in the said
answer of his book, (though we had immediately upon the said conference, set
down in writing certain notes of the same, out of our fresh memory to all
events:) Yet we thought there was no cause, the whole book being confuted, why
we should publish our dealing with him, concerning a few points in the
beginning thereof only, specially Master Campion being now dead, and not to
reply thereunto himself: so that we laid aside our notes, and without all
thought of any publishing of them at all. But there having been sithen by
others the favorers of him and his cause partly in print, but in written
Pamphlets much more dispersed, wherein Master Campions surmised glorious
conquest against us, is exceedingly set forth, and some of them so confidently,
that in the conclusion thereof the Author says: The Catholics by the
judgment of those that were not wedded wholly to will, did get the Goal. And
again: In my soul I protest, that in any indifferent judgment, the adverse
protestaunts were quite confounded: and if I were not a Catholic already, the
only hearing of that conference, would have made me one.

Upon such untruths and impudency of such writers, we were partly of our
selves inclined, and by the often and earnest exhortations of others
importuned, and by some of great authority almost enforced to set down the
true report of the said conference: whereby we trust that all those
Catholics, as they would be called, that have any spark of shamefastness
left, may blush for Master Campions sake, being so manifestly deprehended in so
many lies so braggingly aduouched, and in print in the Lattin tongue published
to the world.

Surely we do think our selves, and may say in truth, that if we had been so
openly convicted, so many ways and in such sort, as Master Campion then was:
we should while we lived, be ashamed to show our faces. And we have indeed
heretofore, out of our fresh memories then, made report of diverse parts of
this our conference unto diverse persons as occasion has served, and not
dissembled, that we found not Campion such a man, as by his challenge and
book, and other men's reports of him we looked for: and that upon this our
conference with him, we verily thought the book published in his name, to have
been none of his. But by such Pamphlets as these be, and like reports by word,
his surmised victories against us were so speedily suread abroad, that diverse
Gentlemen and others, neither unlearned, nor of them selves evil affected,
gave not much credit to our sayings: of that value is the first report in some
ears and heads, which has among other things moved us not a little, to set
down at the last this our true report of our said conference, upon hope, that
truth in time may take place. We do know they will cavil at this, as our
biting of a dead man, whom being alive, they will say, we could not all match
But the truth is, we do defend our selves against the backebitings of many
slanderous reporters, who do yet live and lurk in every corner, by false
reports and writings continually indeuouring to suppress, or at the least to
blemish the truth, upon every least occasion offered or sought. As first they
began, so they continue. For whereas diverse of us at diverse times had
conference with Campion and his fellows, the time being such, that so many of
us as could get leave, when we had once conferred with him and his fellows,
departed into the country from whence we were called: and others remaining in
the city, assaying whether it might please God, that they could do any good
with them to their reformation: this was forthwith by reports and pamphlets
every where so framed and dispersed, as though Campion like some great bear or
Lion rather (as they would have him seem) had shaken us all off like cowardly
curres one after another. But that religion can not long stand, that is
underpropped and stayed by such impudent lies, as amongst many other things may
well appear to all, that with indifferency, without foreiudgement, will read
and consider our true report of the said conference. Which why we have not
published it before, and why we do publish it now, we have showed the true
causes, howsoever they shall cavil, that upon misliking of our parts, we have
not published it hitherto, and find fault also that we have published it now.
Surely we with good conscience may affirm this our report, in the substance of
matter to be most true, though our memory could not always retain the order,
or the very words wherein every sentence was uttered.

A. Nowell.
W. Daije.

A true report of the conference had with Campion and others, by the Deane of
Paul's and the Deane of Windsor, in the Tower of London the last of August, the
23. year of the Queens Majesty, and of the Lord 1581.
WE the Deane of Paul's and the Deane of Windsor (being sent to the Tower to
have conference with Master Campion and his fellows in matters of Religion,
and by order of Master Lieutenant, admitted into the Chapel of the Tower,
whither the said Campion and others were brought) shortly after our meeting,
said to Master Campion, that we came thither to the end to do him good, if it
might please God to give such good success, howsoever he or any other should
think otherwise of us. And because it should not seem to him, that our
meaning was to take any advantage against him by our sudden coming to him, we
our selves being prepared for the Conference: we said we intended to deal with
him in no other matters, then such as were contained in his own book, by him
so much studied, written, and so lately published in print: wherein he having
made so large a Challenge as he had, we said, we thought he could not think
himself to be suddenly taken as unprouided. Of which speech he seemed not much
to mislike, only he said, that he understood not of our coming.

Then we beginning with the first part of his said book, did demand of him
with what reason he could charge the Queens Majesty's most merciful
government, and us that at this time profess the Gospel (as he did in y^
Preface of his said book) with unused and strange cruelty and torments,
practiced upon his fellows in religion: seeing that the Authors and professors
of their Religion, had most cruelly burnt alive, so many thousands of us, for
the maintenance of our Religion only, besides diverse other ways of most
horrible torments: whereas none of them was ever executed for Religion, but
either for treason, or some other notorious crime punishable with death by ye
Laws of ye Realm.

Whereunto he answered, that he was punished for Religion himself, and had
been twice on the Rack, and that racking was more grievous then hanging, and
that he had rather choose to be hanged then racked.

Whereunto one of us said, that belike Master Campion being the Popes tender
Pernell, accounts a little racking of him self, to be more cruelty, then the
roasting quick of many thousands of us.

You must (quoth Master Campion) consider the cause: the cause why, and not the
punishment only.

It has been ever your manner said we, not only to use petitione principij,
but totius also: not only to require a principal point in controversy, but
even ye whole it self to be granted unto you: as that your cause is good, and
that you be the true Church of Christ, as you continually presume and take unto
you. But thanks be to God, the contrary has been so proved, that a great
part of Christendom does evidently see it. And many thousands, who were
before of your Church, have fled to us from it, as from the synagogue of
Antichrist. And concerning his racking, Master Lieutenant being present, said,
that he had no cause to complain of racking, who had rather seen then felt
the rack: and admonished him to use good speech, that he gave not cause to
be used with more severity. For although (said he) you were put to the rack,
yet notwithstanding you were so favorably used therein, as being taken off,
you could, and did presently go thence to your lodging without help, and use
your hands in writing, and all other parts of your body: which you could not
have done, if you had been put to that punishment, with any such extremity as
you speak of. Besides this, Master Beale one of the Clarks of her Majesty's
privy Counsel, being by chance present, demanded of him before all the
company there assembled, whether that being on the rack, he were examined
upon any point of Religion or no:

Whereunto he answered, that he was not in deed directly examined of Religion,
but moved to confess in what places he had been conversant, since his repair
into the Realm.

Master Beale said, that this was required of him, because many of his
fellows, and by likelihood he him self also, had reconciled diverse of her
Highness subjects to the Romish Church, and had attempted to withdraw them
from their obedience due to their natural Prince and Sovereign.

Whereunto he answered, that forasmuch as the Christians in old time being
commanded to deliver up the books of their Religion to such as persecuted
them, refused so to do, and misliked with them that did so, calling them
Traditores: he might not betray his Catholic brethren, which were (as he said)
the temples of the holy Ghost.

But it was replied by Master Beale, that it was convenient in policy for the
Prince to understand, what such as were sent from the Bishop of Rome (her
Majesty's and the Realms mortal enemy) did within her dominions: and to
know her foes from her faithful subjects, specially in such a time as this,
wherein we live: and that this inquiry did not touch the cause of Religion.
After this we came to the matter of his book.

And first, where he charge us that we have now of a sudden, cut off many
goodly and principal parts of the holy Scriptures from the whole body
thereof, of mere desperation and distrust in our cause (as he writes:) and
for example and proof thereof, he names first the Epistle of Saint James,
which Luther, that flagitious Apostata says he) in the Preface of the same
Flagitiosus Apostata. Contentiosam, tumidam, aridam, stramineam.
Epistle, and in his book, De captiuitate Babilonica, names contentious,
puffed up, dry or barren, and as a thing stuffed with straw, and judges it
unworthy the Apostolic spirit: we answered, that if Luther had so written,
yet Master Campion did us wrong, to charge us with violating of the Majesty of
the holy Bible, for rejecting of the said Epistle of S. James, who do, and
always have received the same Epistle. Yet we prayed him that he would show
these words, in the places by Lutherus in praefat. in epist, Iacobi. Hanc
epistolam S. Iacobi laudo and pro vtili ae commodo habeo.
him noted: which he said he would, if he had the books. The book, wherein
was Luthers Preface to that Epistle being delivered him, when he had read some
part of the said Preface, and found that Luther did allow and commend that
Epistle, as in deed he does, testifying, that though it were rejected of some
old writers, yet he commended it and took it to be good and profitable: which
words of Luther when Master Campion had read, he shut the book and said,
that it was not of the true edition.

We answered that the print was not lately published, being almost forty
years sithence, and that we had searched all other printes that we could come
by, and found them to agree with this: and that we thought there was no other,
and therefore we prayed him, that he would show some edition wherein it was so
set down, as he alleged it in his book.

He said, he thought it was so as he had alleged in the same book of Luther
in the Dutch tongue.

Then we offered to bring him the Dutch book for the trial of the truth of
the Latin translation: but he refused to see the same. But it was aduouched
unto him (as the truth is in deed) that it was likewise in the Dutch book,
as he had read it in the Latin, for that we had made conference thereof.

Then he desired to see Luthers book, De captiuitate Babilonica. This book
also we delivered to him, and desired that he would show those words there.
He read the words in Latin, which are these in effect: I pass over (says
Luther) that many do very probably affirm, that this Epistle is not Saint
James the Apostles, nor worthy the Apostolic spirit. Here Master Campion
thought that he had found at the least, that Luther had said, that the said
Epistle, was not worthy the Apostolic spirit.

But we prayed him to consider, that Luther spoke of other men's judgment, and
not of his own, as in the same place is most evident to see: and also before
in his Preface to that Epistle he expressly deuideth his judgment from theirs.

But Master Campion much urged the words (very probably) whereby says he,
Luther showed his allowance of their judgment.

We answered, that he so said, for that they brought very probable reasons for
that their judgment. But he still charged Luther with blasphemy for saying
that some do very probably affirm, that the Epistle of James, was not written
by the Apostle Saint James, nor worthy the spirit of an Apostle, and urged us
to answer what opinion we had of that Epistle, meaning to entangle us with
that Dilemma either to condemn Luther, or else to doubt of the Epistle, as
Luther says that some probably do.

We answered that our Church doubts not of that Epistle, but receives it as
Canonical, reads it in our Churches, expounds it in our schools, and
alleges it for confirmation of doctrine. Notwithstanding for Luther or any
other to say, that some have very probably affirmed that Epistle not to be
written by Saint James nor to be worthy the spirit of an Apostle, is no
blasphemy.

It is blasphemy, blasphemy (quoth he) pronou^cing those words with
disdainefull countenance and voice.

It is soon said (quoth we) but not so easily proved.

I will prove it (quoth he) to be blasphemy by two reasons, and thus he framed
a syllogism.

The Gospel of Saint John, and the Epistle of Saint James, were written by the
same spirit:

But to say that some do probably affirm the Gospel of Saint John not to be
written by Saint John, nor to be worthy the spirit of an Apostle is
blasphemy:

Therefore to say yt like of Saint James Epistle is blasphemy.

Answer was made that the Mayor was Petitio Principij the challenging of the
grant of that which chiefly is in controversy. For those that so say of Saint
James Epistle, doubt whether it was written by the same Spirit, that the
Gospel of Saint John was or no: and that still rests for you to prove said
we.

And here Master Campion when he could not deny, that he required that to be
granted to him which he should have proved, was put to silence, and had no
more to reply.

Then was his second reason called for, but none could be found.

Then said one of them, Why, is not Saint James Epistle called the Catholic
Epistle of Saint James? How do you then deny it to be Canonical?

It was said, that that was a simple reason. For whereas other Epistles of the
Apostles, were written unto special Cities, people or persons: this of Saint
James, for that it was written commonly to all the tribes of the Jews
dispersed, was called Catholic or general.

Then said we to the auditorie: You have heard that Luther does much commend
this Epistle of Saint James, as good and profitable: and Master Campion
alleges, that he calls it contentious, puffed up, dry or barren, stuffed
with straw, and unworthy the Apostolic spirit. Whereby (said we) ye may see
the diversity or rather contrariety of Luthers words, and Master Campions
report, and so may ye judge of his synceritie and truth, which he uses
likewise continually.

Then said Master Campion, that Luther himself and others had purged these
works, and taken away all such places as that was, and the like that ministered
such occasions of offense as that did: and he said he would procure from the
Emperors Majesty, and the Duke of Bauaria, and from another Prince (whose
name we remember not) the true copyes of those books to be sent to the Queens
Majesty. Which words he (rising up from the form whereon he sat) pronounced
with so great contention of voice, and with such gesture, casting up his arms,
and beating upon his book, that one of us challenged him therefore, demanding
why he used such outrageous speech and behavior?

He answered, for that so many young Catholics were present there, he would
not by any faint defending of the cause, give them occasion of offense.

Whereby we understand, how he would have behaved him self, might he have
obtained a disputation among the youth of the Uniuersities, trusting they
would be carried away many of them by such his bold and confident dealings and
actions.

And we said further to Master Campion, that if Luther had purged his books,
and where he first rejected Saint James Epistle (as Master Campion says) he
has sithen received and much commended it: with whatreason has Master Campion
charged us upon his surmise of Luthers first writing, which does no where
appear as rejecting Saint James Epistle? He should rather have commended us,
who do and always have allowed of that Epistle, and should have praised
Luther, who after the example of Saint Augustine (and other ancient and godly
writers) had amended S. Aug. in his book of retractations.
in his writing that which upon better advise he misliked.

Then we turning to the auditorie, said, that seeing all the printed Books of
Luther extant, that we could find, do contain such commendations of Saint
James Epistle as they had heard, and that Master Campion has charged Luther so
contrarily to all his printed books, wherein he commends that Epistle, and
thereby also charge us as rejecting it, who ever have received it: they might,
we said, take Master Campions truth and synceritie to be as it is, until he
have brought out his copies from the Emperor and the Duke of Bauaria, which he
nor any living we believe can ever do.

But Master Campion said, that might he have his own books from Oxeforde, he
would show that in Luther, which he had written of him.

Whereunto it was answered, that if he would let us know where they were, we
would become humble suitors to their honors, that he might both enjoy his
books, and that the party who had them in keeping might be without danger.
But this would he not consent unto.

Then Heart one of his fellows said, that he being at Rome, heard Bellarminus
the reader of controversies there affirm, that the words reported by Campion
in his book were in that preface of Luther, and that therefore upon his word
it was so.

Whereunto we answered, that neither his words, nor the testimony of
Bellarminus were of sufficient credit to carry away such a matter as that was
without better proof, specially so many and most manifest proofs in Luthers
printed books being to the contrary, who agrees with us in allowing the said
Epistle, and that therefore Master Campion has most impudently alleged this
place of Luther, as a proof that we should reject S. James Epistle.

Then Master Beale said, It is not material to us, if Luther had once so
written: but he asked Master Campion whether ever he did read him self any
such words in Luther, as he in his book does charge him with, or not?

Whereto he answered, that in a treatise made by Doctor Lee, sometime
Archbishop of York, against that book of Luther entitled De captiuitate
Babilonica, he had read these words alleged, as he had set them down in his
book.

Being again asked, whether either upon his oath, or upon his credit, he would
say to the presence there assembled, that he had ever seen the places alleged
by him in his book: and whether he knew them to be true?

He answered, that he wrote his book as he traueiled, and that he could not,
we knew, carry a library about with him, and therefore he was forced to give
credit to his notes.

We said it was more credible, that he brought the said book over with him,
ready framed by the common and long conference of him self, and his fellow
Jesuits at convenient opportunity suddenly to be published, rather then yt he
did write it in his travels, having so much besides to do, and being destitute
of his library as he said, which is the usual manner (as we said) of you all,
hu^ting thereby for popular praise of speedy writing. But when and howsoever
you did write your book said we, you have used overmuch boldness, so
co^fidently to publish in print these slau^derous reports of such men as you
have named, being not able to make any proof of yt, whereof you accuse them.
And upon these such good grounds of yours, you do most unreasonably and
untruly charge us all, as those that have rased, mangled and spoiled the body
of the holy Bible.

The third testimony or proof alleged against us by Master Campion in his
book, is taken out of the Centuries, written by Illiricus, and others: which
book being given into his hands, and the like demand made as before, he
would neither read, nor once open the book, neither yet made he any answer
thereto, knowing that he could make no exception to the print, as he did before
to Luthers books, seeing that book was never printed but once.

And besides, where they as Historiographers, had only set down the judgments
of S. Hierome, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and of other ancient fathers concerning
this Epistle of Saint James, of Tobias, the books of Macchabees, etc: he knew
that he could not thereby prove his assertion, that they suddenly cut away so
many goodly parts of the holy Bible, much less that we had so done, as he
does in his book charge us. For which causes chiefly, he would not as much as
once open those books, and for the same cause, he would not look upon
Kemnisius, whom, and us by him, he had likewise falsely charged.

When Master Campion could not show these words, out of any of those books by
him alleged, nor any good matter to prove the^, nor us suddenly to have rased,
mangled and spoiled the holy Scriptures, as he charge us of desperation in
our cause, to have done: then did we show him, that we had not now suddenly
(as he untruly reported) cut off any part or line of the body of the holy
Scriptures, but made only a difference between those books of the
Scriptures, that be commonly called Canonical, and of all men be taken for
undoubtedly true, from those that have been long ago suspected of many, and are
called Apocrypha, according as was before set down by the ancient Doctors of
the Church, above a thousand years since and more. And for the proof hereof,
we alleged the testimony of Saint Hierome, In Catalogo Scriptorum
ecclesiasticorum, where he thus writes of the Epistle S. Hieromes words.
of Saint James named by Master Campion: The Epistle of Saint James, is said to
be published, by some other man under his name. And of the second Epistle of
Saint Peter he says in the same book, that it is denied of many to be his, by
reason of the difference of the style.

To this Master Campion answered, that Hierome spoke not of his own judgment,
but reported what others said of them.

We answered, if Saint Hierome so reported of other men's sayings of those
Epistles, and did not him self gainesay it, that it was a manifest token, that
he did not greatly mislike their sayings. And seeing in S. Hieromes time and
before, those Epistles were doubted of, you do us great wrong said we, to
charge us that we have suddenly cut them off from the body of the Bible, who in
deed notwithstanding the former doubts of them, gladly receive and allow
them. We alleged again S. Hierome, In Prologo Galeato, et Epistola ad
Paulinum, where he shows his own judgment, what books of the Scriptures
of the old Testament are to be taken for Canonical, and which have been
doubted of: which Epistles (quoth we) have been written and printed in all
Bibles, by the space of these thousand years and more, to warn al readers of
that difference of the said Apocrypha, from the true Canonical: and to arm
them as it were against the error of confounding the Canonical Scriptures with
these Apocrypha: for the which cause as it seems, he also names that
Prologue Galeatum, as an helmet for defense against that error. But now
sitchence the Tridentine Council, some Popish printers have left out the said
Prologue and Epistle of S. Hierome, who yet declares this his judgment
likewise, in his Preface to the first book of Esdras also.

Sherwin one of Master Campions fellows, answered to these allegations, that
Hierome did Iudaizare, and more was not ^ayd to these places.

We also alleged Eusebius, who having made rehearsal of those books of the
new Testament, which be undoubtedly true, names also such as were gainesayd,
and writes thus: Quibus vero Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 25.
contradicitur, etc. those books that are gainesayde, though they be known to
many, be these: The Epistle which is attributed to S. James, the Epistle of
Jude, the latter of Peter, and the second Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
and third of John. And the same Eusebius in another place affirms plainly,
the said Epistle of S. James, to be a counterfaite or bastard Epistle.
Adulterinam.


To this authority they said that it was true that he so said, and as we
alleged them, and that when he wrote, it was lawful for any man to doubt of
those books, that he called Apocrypha: but seeing by the Church (that was by
the Council of Carthage, and now also by the Council of Trident) they were
received for Canonical, it was blasphemy, they said, to doubt of the
authority of those books.

To that was replied, that the Synod of Laodicea, held them for Apocrypha.

Yea said they, but that Synod was not general.

No more was that of Carthage said we.

No said they, but that of Carthage was after confirmed by a general Council
in Trullo.

So was (quoth we) the Synod of Laodicea, which held them for Apocrypha,
confirmed also by the same general Council in Trullo, as there is to be
seen. But how does this agree, that not long before you did say absolutely,
that S. James epistle was written by the same spirit that S. John's Gospel was
written with, and now you ground the credit of S. James Epistle and the other
upon these Councils:

But said we, these Councils had no authority to make any manner writings
Canonical, that was not before Canonical. For, by the judgment of S.
Augustine in many places of his books, there August. contra Faustum. li. 28.
cap. 2. and lib. 33 cap. 6.
are two things requisite to prove any writing Canonical: one is the
testimony of the Church, in which the author lived when he wrote: The other
is the continual contestation of the Churches succeeding. To this effect
writes S. Augustine: and so be all latter Churches barred from authority to
make any writings canonical scripture, specially those that have of old been
doubted of. They may testify what the old Churches before them have done, as
we now do.

Hereunto they said again, that it was blasphemy after those Councils to
call those books Apocrypha, or to doubt of the authority of them.

It is rather most horrible blasphemy said we, to make humane writings equal
with the Canonical scriptures, (as of late your Tridentine Council has done,
and as your Pope being but one Distinct. 19. cap. In Canonicis.
man has made his Decretal epistles) then with S. Hierome, Eusebius, and other
ancient godly fathers, to call those books Apocrypha, which they do so call.

And we said, that notwithstanding those Councils, Caietanus their Popes
Cardinal thought it no blasphemy, who in the end of his expositions upon the
old testament, in very plain words, makes the same difference of the books
of the scriptures, and does not only allow the judgment of Hierome, but
adds further, that all writitings, yea of bishops of Rome them selves, of
whom he names some, must be brought to S. Hieroms rule. Ad norm^ Hieronimi.


They utterly rejected Cardinal Caietanus, because (as they said) he was but
one man against all the Church.

We said, you of your side will not be charged with the words of others,
though they be the Popes Cardinals, and yet you do think it reason, that we
should be charged with every word, that has slipped from Luther. Nay you
charge him, and us by him, with that which you can never prove, that he did
write or speak.

Heart said further, that Caietanus was a good scholema^ and traueled in that
course with commendation: but when he began to become an expositor of the
scriptures, said he, then he lost his grace and credit.

We answered, if they thought it reason to charge us with all the sayings of
Luther, or of any other: we might by good and great reason, charge them with
the sayings of so great and learned a Cardinal of Rome, as Caietanus was. Last
of all we came to the place of S. Augustine in his second book De doctrina
Christiana. August. De Doctrina Christian. lib. 2. ca. 8.
Which Campion and his fellows gladly received, because they said, it made for
them and not for us. For, said they, S. Augustine rehearses those books for
Canonical scriptures, which you call Apocrypha.

To this we answered, that they should rather charge Saint Hierome and
Eusebius, and other ancient fathers, who do call them Apocrypha. And S.
Augustine in that place rehearsing the order of the books of scriptures,
though, said we, he differ somewhat from Eusebius and S. Hierome in show of
words: yet he does in deed agree with them. For where they divide the
books of the scriptures into three sorts, that is, Canonical, Apocrypha and
feigned or untrue: Augustine deuideth them, into Canonical and Apocrypha
only: and then he deuideth the Canonical books into two sorts, that is,
those that be certainly true (which we with S. Hierome and Eusebius, do call
properly Canonical) and those that have been doubted of, which Eusebius and S.
Hierome do call Apocrypha. And S. Augustine names those that be utterly
untrue, Apocrypha, which Eusebius calls doubtful, feigned and forged. Eusebius.
lib. 3. cap. 25. dubia, ficta, adulterina. August. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap.
23. and contra 2. Gaudent. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 23. Testes Domini.
And this may be gathered out of Augustine him self in diverse places, whereof
we have noted some. And albeit Augustine calls those books Canonical, yet
he gives not the like authority to them, as namely to the Maccabees, and to
the other of that sort, as he does to those that be Christ's the Lords
witnesses, as he names them, which be these that are named properly
Canonical. Here would they not admit in any wise, that the word Canonical
was aequiuocum, or of diverse significations in diverse places: but that
wheresoever that word was found, it brought all books so called under one
kind. Much time was spent here about, and the matter was much argued on Master
Campion and his fellows part. At the last Master Campion was desired by us, to
read the chapter in yt Canon law, beginning In Canonicis, which Gratian takes
out of this place of Augustine: and first that he Distinct. 19. cap. In
Canonicis.
would read the rubric, which he seemed both to do. And Pound one of his
companions sitting by (who with his importunity and impertinent speeches, had
often interrupted the course of the conference) said, Father Campion, let them
read their places them selves. Yet at the length Master Campion read it, and
it is thus. Inter Canonicas scripturas, Decretales Epistolae connumerantur:
which after much desiring he englished also. The decretall Epistles are numbered
together among the Canonical Scriptures.

Whereupon one of us said, you charge us with blasphemy, for naming those
books Apocrypha, which Saint Hierome, Eusebius, and other ancient holy fathers
do so name: but here may you see most horrible blasphemy in deed, in the
Canonical law of your Pope, which matcheth his Decretall Epistles (that is
mere fables) with the Majesty of the Canonical Scriptures, as he does in
this distinction, and sundry other places, whereby you may see to what point
this boldness of making men's writings Canonical Scriptures is come.

Then said we to M. Campion, do you hold yt Popes decrees for Canonical
scriptures? as you do the books of Moses and the Prophets?

He answered no: and granted then that the word Canonical, was aequinocum or
of diverse significations, which before they all did so constantly deny.

Whereupon we said that we had some good hope of Master Campion, for that he
blushed. And we said further that Cardinal Caietanus in the place before
alleged, says expressly that S. Augustine placed those books in the Canon
of manners, but not in the Canon of doctrine, whereby he plainly declares that
the word Canonical is aequiuocum.

After this he was desired to read the text of that Chapter, and there he
found and could not deny, but that the place of Augustine was untruly
reported by Gratian, and by manifest corruption drawn altogether from the
meaning of Augustine. For where S. S. Augustines words.
Augustine says, that those Scriptures are to be taken for Canonical, which
the most or greatest part of Christian Churches so take, among the which those
Churches be, which deserved to have Apostolic Seas, and to receive Epistles
from the Apostles: these words of S. Augustine are changed, and in the The
report of them. Distinct. 19. Cap. de Canonicis.
place of the Apostolic Seas, is put the Apostolic Sea, (meaning the Church
of Rome) and those Churches which deserved to receive Epistles from the said
Church of Rome: which is clean contrary to S. Augustines words and meaning.

Both often before, and here specially, Master Campion and his fellows seemed
to be desirous to dispute upon some points of religion, rather then to
continue in this examination of his book, which we said we would not at
afternoon refuse, but the forenoone (quoth we) is so far spent, that we must at
this time make an end. And then turning us to the auditorie, we said: You have
heard how Master Campion in his printed book, has charged us as rasers,
manglers and spoylers of the holy Scriptures, of mere desperation and distrust
in our cause, as he says. You have heard how he would prove us so to be, by
certain places by him in his said printed book noted, as being the words of
Luther and others in their books. You have heard and seen proved by the
books them selves, that there is no such thing to be found in those places of
their books as he has set down: but only that S. Hierome, and Eusebius
above a thousand year sithen, doubted of the authority of those Epistles and
books. And you have heard, and it is universally known, that S. Hieroms
Prologue and Epistle, wherein he notes those books to Hierom. Prolog. Galeat.
and epistola ad Paulinum.
be Apocrypha, have been joined with all Bibles that have been written and
printed ever since S. Hieromes time, by the space of a xi. hundred years and
more, until now of late sithen the Tride^tine Council, some Popish Printers
have left them out. And you have heard, that not only now of late, the
Council Tridentine has made the Apocrypha of equal authority with the
undoubted Canonical scriptures: but also that it is set down in the B. of Romes
Canon law, yt his Decretal epistles are to be numbered together among ye
Canonical scriptures: and so finally you see what injury these men do
themselves to the holy scriptures, and what blasphemy they have committed, in
matching their fables with the Canonical scriptures, who do most unjustly charge
us with those crimes.

Sherwin said, but you should have told withal, what we have answered to all
those points.

We said, your answer is to be looked for, when you can bring forth your
copies which you speak of, and promised: for in any books by you named, and
extant and to be had, there is nothing of that which M. Campion has set down
to be found. And here the time being spent we made an end for yt forenoones
conference.

The after noones conference.
IN the fore noones conference both Master Campion himself, and others of his
companions, had oftentimes required us that we would deal with them in some
matter of doctrine, and leave that course that we began with, in the examining
of his book.

Whereunto we answered, that we were minded (if the time would suffer us) to
examine other parts of his book, and lay it open to the audience there, how
that as he had most untruly charged Luther and others, with the mangling and
spoiling of the body of the holy Scriptures in the beginning of his book: so
had he likewise most untruly and impudently in other places slaundered other
worthy men: and upon the same his good grounds, he had charged us all, as
rasers and manglers of the holy Scriptures. And surely our opinion was, that if
any thing at all, (that laying open before his face of his continual
untruths, which he has so braggingly aduouched in his book) might have
reclaimed him. For undoubtedly he could never have endured the manifestation of
those his lies, as they were in the confutation of his book shortly after set
out, had they been laid open before his eyes: which might manifestly appear
to all that did mark his gentle and mild behavior and speech in the After
noones conference, in comparison of his bragging and lewd words used in the
forenoone.

Notwithstanding at our meeting at after noone, we said unto Master Campion,
seeing your desire is so much to dispute in some matter of doctrine, we will
not refuse. But first we pray you, let us (quoth we) peruse the Canon that
follows, that which we last dealt with in the fore noone concerning the Popes
Canons, and the Canonical Scriptures, for that the time would not then suffer
us to read it. The words of Pope Leo the fourth, there Distinct. 20. Cap. De
libellis. The Pamphleter here says, that M. Day (meaning the Deane of Windsor)
having belike of old store an other Canon to read etc. But the truth is
their affirming the word Canonical, to make all writings so named to be of
equal authority, occasioned us to read that Canon before. Distinct. 19. Cap.
In Canonicis. The Decretall Epistles are together numbered with the Canonical
Scriptures. To the which if you join the saying of Pope Agatho, Distinct. 19.
Cap. Sic O^es, which is near to it. All the Sanctions of the Apostolic Sea,
are to be taken as established by the divine voice of Peter him self says
Pope Agatho. To the which if you join this, which Pope Leo magna voce, with a
great voice says here, would you not think that Satan or Beelzebub bellowed
out most horrible blasphemies? for even as Lucifer by pride would have made
him self equal with God: so this Lucifers vicar in earth would by a
Luciferian pride make his word, Canons and writings, equal with the Majesty
of Gods word, and the Canonical Scriptures.
translated word for word, are these: For this cause I fear not to pronounce
more plainly and with a loud voice, that he that is convinced not to receive
indifferently the statutes of the holy fathers (which we have spoken of before)
which with us are entitled by the name of Canons, whether he be a Bishop, a
Clarke or a lay man, that he is proved neither to believe, nor to hold
profitably and effectually to his effect, the Catholic and Apostolic faith,
nor the four holy Gospels. This says Pope Leo. You may see, (quoth we)
whereunto this boldness of matching men's writings with the holy Canonical
Scriptures, is come. Fore here Pope Leo with a loud voice pronounces, that
whosoever does not indifferently receive the Canons, is convicted, neither to
retain effectually, nor believe the Catholic and Apostolic faith, nor the
four holy Gospels: whereby he matcheth the believing, receiving, or refusing
of his Canons, with the believing or refusing of the four holy Gospels: for so
we said that the proof of that Canon, and the word indifferently did importe.

Master Campion endeavored very much to quallifie this word indifferenter,
indifferently, and so to mollify the Popes blasphemy if he could: and he
confessed that there was difference between the Evangelists and other
writers, for that the Evangelists and writers of the Scriptures could not
err in memory or any other circumstance, but Councils might be deceived in
some such small matters of circumstance. As for example, says he, I am bound
under pain of damnation to believe that Tobias dog had a tail, because it
is written he wagged his tail.

It was said by us that it became him not to deal so triflingly in matters of
such weight.

Why then, says he, if this example like you not, take another. I must believe
that Saint Paul had a cloak, because he wills Timothy to bring his cloak.

We said these things were nothing to purpose, unless he could prove, that
such a promise was made to the bishop of Rome and his Cou^cils, that whatsoever
they should determine, was sure to be true and certain.

They alleged Christ's saying: He that hears not the Matt. 18.
Church, let him be reputed as a publicane and heathen.

We answered that text served them for all purposes. But first they must prove
them selves to be the true Church before that text would belong unto them. And
where they alleged out of the 15. of the Acts, So it seems to the holy
Ghost and us. We answered, Act. 15.
we knew well enough that that Council was governed by the holy Ghost,
wherein the Apostles were president. But what makes that to the wicked
Councils of Popes? And after much reasoning about the word indifferenter, we
said, were that word put out, yet were it blasphemy to say, that he that
believes not the Popes Canons (which are with other there mentioned) believes
not the four holy Gospels. After this we began our disputation concerning
justification, both for that it is first of all other mentioned in your book
(quoth we to Master Campion:) and both Luther and we all, are most grievously
charged by you, with error therein: and also for that it is in deed a matter
of the chiefest controversy between us. And first, for that you do in your
book, untruly charge Luther, and us by him, with the cutting away of Saint
James epistle, for that the wretch (as you say of Luther) Miser. Confossus
and diruptus.
was by this epistle vanquished and overthrown, and for that, that epistle
does so manifestly convince his and our error in this matter of justification
(as you do write) we do protest that we will neither refuse, nor make any
exception to that epistle of Saint James, nor to any other part of the new
Testament, which you untruly have charged us to have cut off from the body of
the holy scriptures.

It is well, said they, that you do receive this Epistle of Saint James.

We have ever received it said we, How much the more untruly, have you
charged us with the contrary? And so entering into the matter, we said,
Whereas you do charge Luther, and with him us all, for teaching a new and
false doctrine, yea heresy also, in that we say and write, that we are
justified by faith only: we say for our defense against this your slander,
that the same doctrine is taught, both in many places of the holy scriptures
most effectually, and is also expressly affirmed and pronounced by the ancient
holy fathers and doctors of Christ's Church, both Greeks and Latins, in the
very same words that we do use.

Let us hear your scriptures and doctors said they. The^, for that we came
purposed to examine y^ untruths of Campions book, rather then to dispute: we
did very briefly, as our memory did then serve us, note rather then thoroughly
allege many places out of the holy scriptures, for the proof of our
justification by faith, and consequently by faith only, to this effect.

Our savior Christ said we, as it is in sundry places of the Evangelists
recorded, says often: Thy faith has saved thee. Matthew. 9. Mark. 5. and 10.
Luke 7. 8. and 12. and 18. Act. 26. 18. John 1. 12. John 3. 16.
Only believe, believe only. They shall receive remission of their sins,
and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in me. As many as
believe in me, to them has God given power, to become the sons of God.
Whosoever believes in me, shall not be condemned, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. Thus says our savior Christ, etc. And Saint Paul says,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. God does justify
through faith. We are saved by grace Act. 16. 31. Galat. 3. 8. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Romans 4. Romans 3. 22.
through faith. We are blessed by faith. We are the children of Abraham: yea we
are the children of God by faith. The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon us all that believe. If thou confess with the mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God raised him up from
the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses unto salvation. We are freely
justified by his grace through Romans 3. 24.
faith.

Then said they, we know right well that the scriptures do contain great
commendations of faith, but in all these there is not this word faith only,
which is your doctrine.

But the ancient holy fathers said we, upon these grounds of the scriptures
by us alleged, do gather and plainly pronounce, that only faith justifies,
as you shall hear anon. And how many things said we, do you your self
teach us as necessary articles of religion, not having for you one plain
word therefore, but do affirm, that in effect they are contained in the holy
scriptures. And you have heard that justification and righteousness, yea,
salvation and the kingdom of heaven, are attributed to faith, and that without
any addition of any other thing. And you have heard the words of our Savior:
believe only, only believe. And of Saint Paul, you are freely justified by
faith, which are in effect as much as faith only, and to more effect
exceedingly, then are your proofs of a great many of the principal points of
your Popish religion. And where as we mean none other by faith only, but
faith without the works of the Law, and without our good works: if the
former place can not satisfy you, hear what Saint Paul says further. Know
ye that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
Galat. 2. 16.
of Jesus Christ. The righteousness of God is made manifest without the Law, by
the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe. We hold that a
man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. It is one God that
justifies circumcision Romans 3. 21. 22* 28. 30.
by faith, and uncircumcision through faith. Every one that believes is
absolved from all, from the which they Act. 13.
could not be absolved by the Law of Moses. Thus says Saint Paul, and to the
like effect in exceeding many places, declaring that we are justified by faith,
and not by the Law, by faith and not by works, which is all one as to say, by
faith only.

No it is not all one, said they.

But the ancient doctors of the Church said we, do upon these very places of
the holy scriptures by us alleged, gather and in express words set down, as
we do, that we are justified by faith only, as ye shall see. Saint Hillary
(quoth we) says thus, reading his words out of the book it self, Mouit
scribas remissum D. Hilarious in Matthew. cap. 8.
ab homine peccatum: hominem enim tantum in Jesus Christo contuebantur, and
remissum ab eo quod lex laxare non poterat: fides en^m sola iustificat. That is
to say, It moved the scribes that sin was remitted by man: for they beheld
man only in Jesus Christ, and that was remitted by him, the which the Law can
not release: for faith only does justify. Thus far Saint Hilary: Faith
only does justify.
who as you do see of this doctrine of Saint Paul by us alleged for
justification by faith without the Law, gathers and sets down the same
doctrine in the same words that we do teach, that faith only does justify.

But he says not so in the same sense that you do, says Master Campion.

We shall see of the sense anon said we: but we pray you hear the other
doctors also, who do agree with us in the same words. Saint Ambrose also upon
the place by us alleged out of the third to the Romans, among many other
sentences has this, Non iustificari hominem apud Deum nisi per fidem. That a
man is not justified before God but by faith. And shortly after Saint Ambrose
says, Tam Gentiles quam Iudeos, non aliter quam credentes iustificauit. Quia
enim vnus Deus est, vna ratione omnes iustificauit. That is, both the Gentiles
and the Jews God has justified none other ways, but believing. For because
there is one God, he has justified all by one means. And most plainly upon
the words by us before alleged, he says, Iustificati gratis per gratiam
ipsius: Iustificati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes neque vicem reddentes,
sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei: Romans 3.
That is, they were justified freely by his grace: They were justified freely
for working nothing, neither making any recompense: they were justified through
only faith by the gift of God. Thus far Saint Ambrose, who does very often
in his expositions D. Ambros^in cap. 4. and 9. ad Romans
upon that Epistle to the Romans repeat, That we are justified by faith
alone. And Saint Basil most worthily named the great says, (...) Basil. (...).
(...), etc. That is, perfect and sound rejoicing in God is this, when a man
does not boast of his own righteousness, but knows that he wants him self
true righteousness, and that he is justified by only faith in Christ. And Saint
Paul does glory in the contempt of his own righteousness. Thus far Saint
Basil. Gregor. Nazianzen. (...).
And Gregory Nazianzen says, (...). Confess Jesus Christ, and believe that
he is risen from death, and thou shall be saved: For to believe only is
righteousness. Thus says Nazianzen surnamed Theologus the divine for his
excellent learning in the scriptures. And the same doctrine of justification by
faith alone, do many other ancient, godly and learned fathers and doctors set
down most plainly in their works. After that these sayings of these ancient
doctors were read, we said, A^an. in Galat. 3. Chris^st. in Hom. 2. in Romans
Origin. in Romans cap. 3.
You see that this doctrine and the very words themselves, which we do use, we
are justified by faith only, or faith only does justify, are not any new
invention of ours, but are set down and pronounced by many ancient and holy
fathers of the Church above a thousand year sithen and more, and that, being
grounded even upon the same places of the holy scriptures, that we do allege
for our justification by faith only.

Master Campion said, but those Doctors and you do not agree in sense, as I
said before.

It is well said we, that you cannot deny but that they do agree with us in
words, and that they do gather these words even of the same scriptures,
which we alleged for only faith to justify: and that therefore these words,
we are justified freely through grace by faith: faith without the law, without
the works of the law does justify, (which are the words of Saint Paul) are
all one with these words, faith only does justify, which was before by you
denied.

Master Campion said, but the truth of the matter rests in the sense and
meaning of the Doctors.

What sense is it that you do speak of, said we.

Master Campion answered, We do grant that it is true that only Faith does
justify in this sense, that is, that when we be first brought into the state
of grace, no good works do go before primam gratiam the first grace or
justification, but that our first justification is by faith only, without any
works going before: but the works that follow the first grace and
justification (said Master Campion) do both justify and merit also.

We alleged Saint Augustines saying, Opera non praecedunt August. de fide and
operibus.
iustificandum, sed sequuntur iustificatum: Works do not preceede a man to be
justified, but do follow him being justified.

That is true, said Master Campion, as I said before of the first grace and
justification: but good works do go before the second justification.

It is but a small matter (said we) to grant y^ no good works do go before
the first grace or justification, when before the same grace there can be no
good works at all. And concerning the second justification, we replied to
that, that Saint Paul speaking Romans 4.
of that justification, and alleging the example and saying of king David
therefore, says expressly, that to a man that does believe in him that
does justify the wicked, his faith is reputed to righteousness, according to
the purpose of the grace of God. Even as David sets down the blessedness
of a man, unto whom God reputeth righteousness without works. Blessed are
they whose wickedness is pardoned, and whose sins are covered, etc. Thus
says Saint Paul, thus says the King and Prophet David, teaching plainly
that our justification is by Gods pardoning of our evil works, and not by the
merits of Psalm. 32.
our good works: for he says expressly that justice is without our works.
And S. Paul and King David were in the state of grace when they did thus write,
and yet do show that their justification then, as well as before, was without
works.

Master Campion said, a man being in the state of grace, may write of the first
grace and justification, why not? and so did they in that place.

Yea (quoth we) but if he be set down for an example himself, after that he
has obtained the first grace and continued therein, and yet says that God
reputeth his justification without any his works, though he have done many
good, as Abraham first, and then David are here set out for example, and as
Saint Basil, as was before alleged, sets out Saint Paul himself for an
example, D. Basil. de Humilitate.
who does glory in the contempt of his own righteousness: it is cuident,
that that justification or righteousness which is before God, is without any
works of ours at all, and that all justification of all persons, and in all
times, is by the grace of God through faith only, without any merit of our
works.

Then they alleged Saint James words, Faith without charity is dead, making
thereby charity the soul and life of faith.

Hereunto we made answer, that faith without charity was in deed dead, and
altogether vain and unprofitable. But Saint James meaning herein, was not to
make charity the principal part, or the form of faith: but only to show,
that by charity faith is approved and declared to be a true and a lively
faith, which we do most willingly grant. And therewith we alleged the saying
of Thomas de Aquin. being a scholeman of their own side, who says, Deus
iustificat effectiue: fides iustificat apprehensiue: opera iustificant
declaratiue. That is, God does justify effectually, faith does justify
apprehendingly, works do justify declaringly.

Master Sherwin said it was Fides iustificat instrumentaliter, Faith justifies
instrumentally.

That word (quoth we) does make no alteration in sense at all. And here you
may see how Saint Paul teaching that we are justified by faith without works
before God: and Saint James teaching that we are justified by works, that is,
do declare our selves by our works unto men to be justified, do agree.

Master Campion said that he could yield and subscribe unto that saying of
Saint Thomas.

And we said, that we would do the like, for that it is the very true
doctrine that we teach: howbeit he held his pen from subscribing.

Then Master Sherwin alleged these words of Saint Paul, If 1. Cor. 13.
I had all faith, and have not charity, I am nothing. And he did very
vehemently urge the words, all faith, all faith without charity is nothing
worth.

Here says one of the Pamphleters, silence was the answer: but how truly,
let him self see: for it was straight answered, Master Sherwin you may see,
that the Apostle speaks there of faith in working of miracles, even by the
words of the Apostle him self, who says, If I should have all faith, so that
I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And when he
cried still omnem fidem, all faith, and that therefore it must contain our
faith also, else we had none at all.

It was answered by us: If you will not believe us, yet let Saint Chrisostomes
exposition be of some authority with you, who calls it (...), faith not of
doctrine, but of miracles, says Saint Chrysostom, even as we also do say:
which faith the wicked may have as our Savior Christ teaches, and therefore
all faith to work miracles, does not contain that true Mat. 7. 22. 23.
faith, which does justify him that has it.

Further they objected Saint Paul's words in his Epistle to the Galathians,
Faith works by charity. Galat. 5.


We answered, that unless faith do work by charity, it is no faith at all:
but that made nothing against our justification by faith only. But here they
reasoned against us thus.

If faith only justify, then it justifies without charity: But that was
contrary to the text of the Apostles: Therefore only faith does not justify.

We answered, this Syllogism consists of four terms. For it is one thing
to say that faith only does justify, and another, that faith is not without
charity. For when we say that only faith justifies, we mean not to deny
that charity is joined with that faith which justifies, being inseparably
united unto it: but that only faith and not charity is the means, by which
we embrace Jesus Christ our justification and righteousness. And this we
endeavored to make manifest by an example. The fire (quoth we) has heat and
light, which qualities can not be severed in that subject, yet the fire
burns by heat only, and not by light. Now if any will reason thus: If the
heat of the fire only burn, then it burns without the light of the fire:
but that it can not do: Therefore it burns not by heat only. They should
show them selves to be absurd that so would reason, said we. And such is your
reason against the justification of faith only, because it can not be separated
from charity. Likewise though the parts of man's body be joined together, and
one is not without another in a perfect body, yet does the eye only see, and
the ear hear only, and every part has his distinct office.

Then Master Sherwin alleged out of the Epistle to the Ephesians: Ipsius sumus
factura, creati in Christo Jesus in bonis operibus. Ephe,;
That is, We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus in good works.

We looked in the Greek Testament and found (...) ad opera bona: unto good
works, and so answered, that Saint Paul says not, we are the creatures of God
in Christ through good works, but that we are created of God in Christ to do
good works: which Master Sherwin (looking upon the greek Testament) could
not deny. Further we told Master Sherwin, that if he took that place in that
sense, that we were created in good works, he was contrary to Master Campion,
who granted that good works do come after the first grace, and not to be
joined with our first creation in Christ Jesus, as Master Sherwin would have
it. And besides that we did admonish him, that the place by him alleged, did
of all others most effectually make against the^, and for us. For immediately
before the words by him alleged, Saint Paul says thus: Gratia enim estis
saluati per fidem, and hoc Ephe. 2. 8, 9.
non ex vobis, (Dei enim donum est) non ex operibus, ne quis glorietur. That
is, You are saved by grace through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast himself. In this
sentence of Saint Paul, every parcel (quoth we) makes for us, and against
you. The cause of our salvation is the grace of God, the instrument whereby we
receive it, is faith, the false cause alleged by you is here excluded, that
is, our works.

Master Campion alleged, Qui instus est, iustificetur adhuc. Apoc. 22.
He that is righteous, let him be more and more righteous. And thereupon he
said, he would not refuse to subscribe, that we be justified by faith only,
so that we would subscribe, that being so justified, we ought afterward to
walk forward more and more in the works of righteousness.

We granted that we would so subscribe.

But M. Sherwine said unto M. Ca^pion, Take heed what you do.

Then said Master Campion, If you will so subscribe and grant withal, that
those good works are meritorious, or do merit, I will subscribe to faith
only.

Do you now come in with your merit, (said we?) we will none of it, neither
will acknowledge any merit (quoth we) in respect of our justification, or of
the kingdom of heaven, but only the merits of Christ's passion. And so our
subscribing was dashed by master Campions addition of merit to that, which
before he The pamphleters do say, that we refused to subscribe, not showing M.
Campions addition of merits.
promised without any mention thereof.

But you do know well (said master Campion) that often mention is made in
the scripture of this word merces, that is of reward for our good works. And
that at the last judgment it shall be said, Come into the kingdom ye
blessed: For I was bungrie, and ye fed me, etc. So that these good works are
mentioned as a cause or a mean at the least, of entering into the kingdom of
heaven.

We deny not (said we) but the word merces is often mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, and that God will reward our good works, far above our
deserving: but that merces, is ex mis^ricordia Domini dantis, and non ex merito
hominis accipientis. That reward is of the mercy of God giving it, and not of
the merit of man receiving it. For when it is said, He that gives a cup
Matthew. 10.
of cold water, shall not loose his reward: if you take that reward to be the
kingdom of heaven, and the land of the living to be given for the merit
thereof, surely you make it to be of more easy purchase, than any land in this
world can be, be it never so little. And concerning the last judgment, the
words of our Savior, Come possess the kingdom prepared for you before the
beginning of the world, may give you to understand, that it is not given for
the merit of any their good works, which they could not do, before they
were any thing. And the word (...) Take ye the inheritance of the kingdom,
shows that it is given to us in Christ, as inheritance, which the Father
gives to his children freely, and is not purchased by our good works. Besides
that, though our Savior Christ will of his special grace and favor, remember
those alms done to the poor in his name, and take them as done unto himself:
yet were it an intolerable arrogancy for us to say, We fed thee when thou
wast hungry etc. Or to say, Give us the reward of our cup of cold water,
which thou promisedst we should not loose. Wherefore as we said, that merces
and reward or hire, is of the grace and mercy of God giving it, and not of
the merit of man receiving it, which is according to y^ true doctrine of y^
holy scriptures, that not flesh or man 1. Corinthians. 1. 29, 30, 31. Ephe. 2. 8, 9.
do glory or rejoice, but that he who does glory or rejoice in his
justification and salvation, may glory and rejoice in the Lord only: For
Saint Paul says, Where is then thy rejoicing? Romans 3. 27.
It is excluded, By what law? of works? Nay but by the law of faith.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, with out the works of
the law. And again: If Abraham Romans 4. 2.
were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. For to
him that works, the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt. But to him
that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his says
is counted for righteousness. And again: Now if by grace, then not of works,
for so grace is not now grace, etc. Thus far Saint Paul. Whereby you may
see, that if justification and salvation should be attributed to the merits
of man's good works, it would occasion boasting and glorying in the flesh, and
chalenging of our justification and salvation as due unto the merit of our
works, and so much abate and abase the glory of Gods grace, that grace should
then no more deserve the name of grace. But if justification and salvation, be
as it ought to be, given wholly unto Gods grace and mercy, promised unto us in
Christ Jesus, which we do apprehend and lay hold of by faith only, as the
only isntrumental cause under Gods grace: then is all the glory and honor
of our justification given unto God only, without any merit of man. And so we
conclude as we said before, that we mean not by faith only, to exclude the
doing, but the meriting of good works.

One of them alleged the words of our Savior, He that Mark. 16.
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. And hereupon he said, We grant that
n^ merit does preceede this faith.

Whereunto one of us said, when he was baptized, and obtained that first grace
and justification which Master Campion speaks of, he may safely grant, that
no good works do preceede or go before that justification which he had in
his infancy, the which no work at all do or can preceede: but for his part
(said he) when he does consider, how after that first grace, he has most
vngratiously broken the vow made to God in Baptism, and how few and small
good works he had done toward the atteyning of any second justification which
Master Campion speaks of: how many and great evil works he has done: how
much of his life, his time and goods he had misspent: how little he had spent
in the service and to the honor of God: how late he came to the Lords
vineyarde, and how loytering a labourer he had been in that short time: Surely
(quoth he) for my part, when I do look upon my righteous works so few and
so imperfect, and on the other side upon my unrighteous deeds so many and so
sinful, I can not but think it to be a most damnable arrogancy, to
challenge any part of that second righteousness, or of the kingdom of heaven,
by so few and small good works: and do see how great occasion I should give
thereby, that God should condemn me for my so many and great evil works, in
respect of which I cannot but despair of any desert or merit toward that
second justification that you do speak of. Here Master Campion, to show
belike that he was no Pharisee: I must confess also (said he) that I have been
most defective in all good works, and in deed a loytering labourer (as you
term it) in the Lords vineyarde.

What remedy then quoth the other?

The remedy (quoth Master Campion) is, the mercy of God in Christ Jesus.

That is (quoth the other) that I believe, and this my belief only in his
mercies through Christ, and not in any late and loytering work, is that faith,
that shall save me and you too, I trust: and therefore (quoth he) here (as in
some good hope of our agreement, in this point of justification by faith only,
without any merit of works, which we trust we have by the holy Scriptures,
and by the ancient Doctors both Greeks and Latins, by examples, yea and by
our consciences sufficiently proved) if it shall so please Master Lieutenant,
let us make an end: and so we ended our conference.

A brief recital of certain untruths scattered in the Pamphlets, and libels
of the Papists, concerning the former conferences: with a short answer unto
the same.
WE thought it not amiss, here in the end, to note some of the principal
points untruly set down by the authors of such Pamphlets, as have hitherto
come to our hands concerning this conference. First, they leave no
circumstances of Master Campions imprisonment, his racking, sickness, lack of
his note books, of his library, our sudden coming upon him etc. untouched.
But they that will consider his bragging challenge made in his book, and prompt
readiness to dispute with all protestants: how lately his book was before by
him set out, and how fresh in his memory, and how we dealt with him only in
his own book, and in a few points in the very beginning thereof: and did
bring with us all those books which he himself had noted and alleged, and
gave them into his hands: and our selves also having made ready the places in
the said books by him noted to ease his travel in seeking of them: who will
(I say) consider these things, may hereby easily understand, their allegations
of sudden taking of him, and his lack of books, to be most vain. And he
himself by his loud speeches, and bold and busy gestures, showed no token
of any either sickness or weakness: neither did him self then complain upon
those difficulties, which the Pamphleters has so diligently and largely noted
sithe^.

They do charge some of us and specially one with discourteous words, and
uncomely for professors of the Gospel (as they say) spoken to Master Campion
and others. But they show not upon what occasion by Master Campion and others
of his companions offered, these words were spoken. For when Master Campion did
rise up from the form whereon he fate: did cast up and fling with his hands
and arms: did knock and beat upon his book at every other word, with an
exceeding loud voice and sharp countenance, affirming that all our printed
books were false, and that he would procure true copies to be sent from the
Emperors Majesty, and from the Duke of Bauaria, and from another prince (whom
we remember not) unto the Queens Majesty: was it I pray you so outrageous in
the Latin tongue, as severally to admonish Master Campion him self, without
the understanding of the common auditorie, for one of us to say, Qui hic mos
est mi homo? Quis hic gestus? Et loqueris and pultas fores? Gloriosus miles.
Proijcis ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba? We may be bold to say, that
considering Master Campions bragging in English, and the admonition of the
other in Latin, there was no such outrage as they do note. But this they much
disdain, that he said once, Os impudens. Truth it is, but upon his often and
fierce affirmation that all the printed books of Luther in England were
false: and upon Pounds odious interpellations (as, we know you to be a good
Terence man) and his most scornful looks through his fingers, staring upon
him continually whiles he was reasoning with Master Campion, to put him out of
his memory: he being offended both with Pounds mockings, words and looks,
and with Campions shameless sayings, brake out with Os impudens, as he thinks,
most deservedly on their parts.

Yea, but he used the word obgannire, or oggannire. He denies not, but
coming by commandment to confer with Campion only, when two or three of
them spoke together, and many other of them muttered, and sometime brake out
into scornful laughter, he said, Siccine tam multos oggannire and obstrepere?
This is the rage and railing wherewith the Pamphleters do charge him.

They say that he by a Commissioners check, put the priests that would have
spoken, and Master Sherwin to silence. The truth is, that though we were sent
only to Master Campion at that time, yet others did speak sometime, and
Master Sherwin specially very much, and almost as much as did Master Campion.
Whereupon not we, but Master Lieutenant told him, that he should be dealt with
another time, and willed him then to quiet himself. Hereupon it is, that the
Pamphleters say, we should have used them as the Queens prisoners. We say,
they should have remembered, and behaved them selves as becommed prisoners, and
not as Ruffians in all liberty, or licentiousnes rather, as they in deed, and
specially Master Campion in the forenoone behaved himself. And yet the
Pamphleters are not ashamed to write, The Catholics used no such words as did
the Protestants, (and one of them specially) but being passing modest, went
directly and soberly toche cause. And again, God gave Master Campion (speaking
very mildely as he ever used) such modesty in answering. Thus write they,
etc. Then surely his speaking did much differ from his writing, as is to be
seen by that his challenge and book, the most bragging and vain glorious,
that ever was written. Now Sherwin has his contrary commendation, of whom
they write thus. But Master Sherwin like him self, with excellent courage
spoke. Master Sherwin here notably took the advantage. Cross blows were
continually given to the Protestants, by Master Campion and Master Sherwin.
Master Campion and Master Sherwin framed their reasons exceedingly well, with
many such like commendations. But of us they write, The Protestants shufled up
the matter. They answered to an argument of the Catholics, there be four
terms in this syllogism, and no further answer. Silence here was their
answer. M. Day having belike of old collection an other place in store,
spent much time in that impertinent question. The Deane of Paul's when he could
do naught else, grinded with his teeth for despite and rage. And so the
Catholics by the judgment of those that were not wholly wedded to will, did
get the goal. Scilicet.

But the Pamphleters labor about nothing more, then to deliver Master Campion
from the note and blemish of ignorance in the Greek tongue: whereof one of
them writes thus, The Deane of Paul's and Master Beale showed great
ostentation toward Campion, in offering him a Greek Testament to read a text
of Paul. To whom Master Beale said, Graecum est non potest legi, calling upon
him to read if he could, etc, to the others utter defacing, if he could have
procured it. But our good Lord gave the other such modesty in answering him,
as al indifferent persons were edified by it. And refusing there to read
(whereby Beale and the rest, were flatly then persuaded it was for lack of
skill) in the end it fell out that Saint Basil was offered him in Greek, and
the book holden him by a minister, wherein he read skilfully, and by the
hearing of all the auditorie confessed the text to be as they alleged it,
answering it as before. And withal (quoth he) let this man witness, whether I
can read Greek or no? who in open hearing answered, Uery well. Whereupon
being confounded, We confess (quoth the Deane of Paul's) you can read Greek,
whereat some might have blushed, if they had had any such good humor in them.
Thus writes one of them.

Another of them reports the matter thus. It happened in process of their
disputations, by occasion incident there was talk of a text of Scripture
(which forsooth must be viewed by Master Campion) and to make the matter most
plausible (as the Protestants imagined) they caused a Greek testament to be
brought unto him, which he refused to take, saying merrily to his contrary, it
shall be yours. At which doing many laughed, condemning him for ignorance of the
tongue, and therefore gestingly by the Protestants it was said, Graecum est non
potest legi. It is Greek, perhaps it cannot be read. Whereunto Master Campion
gave no answer but rested at the matter, as a man unable to read Greek, or
to understand the same. But it chanced not long after, that the Protestants
as they had prepared before, were to allege a place out of Saint Basil the
Greek doctor: and again thinking to give the Catholics another bob, they
commanded again the book of that ancient father to be given to Master Campion
that he might read, whom before they derided as not able to do the same. But
he took the book, and having one of their ministers at his elbowe, both read
and gave the sense of the writer, and bad him bear witness that he was able to
read and understand Greek: whereat there was some admiration made among the
Protestants. and he was demanded why he did not so before? who mildely
answered, that the print was over small. Why said they, had you not declared
so much before? that had been sufficient. The like trial they made of an other
Catholic, to wit Master Sherwin, who by report of his fellows and
companions, is very well seen in the Greek and Hebrewe tongues: yet he took
the book and viewed it, but openly did not read, which was imagined that he
did to be accounted ignorant in the tongue, or rather for that he was willed to
hold his peace, for that there should be other times to talk. Thus they
write of this matter, far more largely and earnestly, then of any other. But
the truth is, that when we had read the sentences out of the Greek Testament
and Doctors once or twice our selves, we offered the Greek Testament first,
and afterward Nazianzene in Greek to Both Basil and Nazianzen were offered,
but it was Nazianzen and not Basil as they report.
Campion to read, that he might credit his own eyes, and that we alleged
their words truly. But he refused to read in the Greek testament
altogether, as them selves do here confess. And when Saint Basil and
Nazianzen in Greek were offered to him to read, he said once or twice, I
know, I know, it is as ye have alleged: which we took to be a shift, to
avoid the reading of it him self. But when he was urged, and Master Stollard
who stood by, took the book and held it to him, he read, but so softly as it
were to him self, that we may with good conscience protest before God, that
we heard not one word: so far off was it that he read skilfully, and in the
hearing of all the auditorie, as they do write. But surely, whosoever did
know Campions vain, may think that he would have read in the hearing of all the auditorie in deed, had he had any knowledge in that tongue: and not so
have whispered to him self, or in Master Stollardes ear. Truth it is, that
he said, Let this man witness whether I can read Greek or no. But why did he
not read so, that not he alone, but that all we might have been witnesses
thereof?

But say they, Master Stollard said, he read very well. They only heard him
so say belike: for of truth he said to us, If he did read at all, he read the
worst that ever I heard, which some of us thought that Master Stollard spoke,
for that we having read those few words of Nazianzen, (...) once or twice
before the book was given Campion, he might seem out of his memory to have
repeated them, rather then to have read them out of the book. Now, that we
should be in any admiration hereat as they write, what cause was there? For
that we should ask him why he did not so much before, who heard him then not
read one word: or that the Deane of Paul's confounded should say, We confess
you can read Greek: or that there was any cause given why we should blush or
be confounded, are most impudent lies, and most meet for such reporters. Nay,
rather may all Papists blush for Campions sake, who making such a challenge, as
though he had had all knowledge, in all learning and languages, when it came to
the trial, upon conscience of his ignorance, durst not read openly one short
sentence in Saint Basil or Nazianzen, the books being of a large and fair
print. Surely we before our coming thither, upon Campions own bragging
challenge and book, and other men's reports of him, thought we should have
been sore encumbered by his learning, and ouermatched by his knowledge in the
tongues: so far off was it, that we meant to make any ostentation therein
toward him (as they write:) but upon experience and trial with him, we found
him not to be that man that we looked for, and went away with that opinion,
that the book which was so suddenly after his bragging challenge, put in
print, was none of his writing, much less penned by him as he was in his
journey, as he reported him self: but that it was elaborate before, by the
common and long study of all the best learned Jesuits, to serve at all
oportunities. To the same effect is the report of Sherwin, who looking upon the
Greek Testament, and reading never a word, goes yet away thereby, not only
with the commendation of a man very well seen in the Greek and Hebrew
tongues: but also of singular modesty and contempt of all praises, as seeking
to be accounted ignorant in that, wherein he had great skill. For that they
would have the cause of his not reading to be, for that he was willed to hold
his peace, is very ridiculous: for he did often speak, after he was so willed to
hold him self contented: and then he was specially desired to read, and not
to hold his peace. But we thought the truth to be, that when Sherwin had
alleged out of the second to the Ephesians after the old translation, Creati
in bonis operibus, we were created in good works: and the original Greek
being showed unto him, when he found it to be (...) ad bona opera, created to
do good works: he looked in the beginning and in the end of the Greek
Testament, trusting as we thought, that if he might have found, that it had
been printed in any place, where the Gospel is preached, he might after
Campions example, have made a challenge to the print as false, (which is now
become a special shift of the Papists, and the last refuge when all other do
fail) but when he did see that it was Plantines print, he held his peace.
Notwithstanding we do not think, but that Sherwin could read Greek, the
ignorance whereof we neither objected to any, nor did make any ostentation (as
they write) of any our knowledge therein. Only we offered the books them
selves unto Campion, that his own eyes might be witnesses, that the ancient
fathers both Greeks and Latins did teach justification by faith alone, even
as we do. By which occasion, God as we think by the opening of his ignorance,
meant to control his vain glorious bragging of all knowledge and ability to
deal with all men. Thus much, and to much of this matter, were it not that the
reader may hereby understand, what vantages these writers and reporters do
take unto them selves: yea and by speedy and continual spreading and beating
of the same into the ears and heads of many, do much prevail also, until
time the mother of truth, shall discover their untruths.

But we may by no means dissemble another matter, by these Pamphleters sore
laid to our charge. Saint Augustine in the fourtenth chapter of his book De
fide and operibus, was by some of them in our conference (as we think)
alleged, as against our doctrine of justification by faith alone: but in that
confusion of many speaking at once, it was not greatly by any of us marked or
said unto, that we remember. But the authors of the Pamphlets do report this
place of Saint Augustine, as by them of al other most effectually alleged
against us. Their words be these. Unto this was added by the Catholics the
authority of Saint Augustine out of his book De fide and operibus and the
fourtenth August. De fide and operibus.
chapter, where he has registered that this doctrine of Justification by faith
only, was an heresy taught in the Apostles time: for reformation whereof he
declares that Saint John, Saint Peter, S. Jude, and Saint James, did write
their Epistles, wherein they so much inculcate the doctrine of good works.
Thus they write, thus they whisper in every ear open unto them, to the slander
of us and our doctrine of justification by faith only, as not only an error,
but an heresy also. But we do pray all indifferent readers, to consider of
these manner of dealings. For Saint Augustine in that place writes against the
wicked opinion of those, who mistaking Saint Paul's words of Justification by
says without works, do by an evil security neglect to live well, not
seeking by true faith the help of God, to the ouercomming of their own evil
concupiscences, but do despise the works of righteousness, and by a dead faith
do promise to them selves everlasting life. These be Saint Augustines express
words in that place truly translated, which they have most untruly and
maliciously alleged against us, and against the heresy (as they term it) of
justification by faith only: which they would have the simple people to
mistake, as though we would exclude all things universally saving faith
only: and did utterly cast away all care of good works, and godly life, yea,
and all desire of Gods grace to assiste us, as did they against whom S.
Augustine in that place did write. But we protest before God and all good men,
that we never meant to make faith the chief and only cause of our
justification, but that the grace and mercy of God by our savior Jesus Christ
promised to the faithful in his holy word, is the principal and original
cause, and very fountain of our justification: and that faith, not a dead
faith (as they thought against whom S. Augustine does write) but a lively
faith (being wrought in our hearts by the said word of God, and by the
operation of the holy ghost) believing Gods promise of his mercy in Christ, is
the isntrumental cause in us, whereby only we receive our justification,
without the merit of our works: and yet being justified, we are most bounde^
to walk in all good works, as much as it shall please God to give us grace
thereunto, for the which we ought to sue by continual and most hearty prayer.
Which our doctrine, you may see to be most contrary to the wicked opinion of
those, against whom S. Augustine writes in that place, and that therefore it
is most falsely and maliciously alleged as against us, who by faith only
justifying us, mean not to exclude the doing, but the merits of our good
works, which is no heresy, wherewith these men would charge us, but the very
truth it self taught in the holy Scriptures, and by the ancient godly
fathers and learned doctors set down in the very same words which we do use,
as has been before at large declared.

Of the conclusion of our conference the Pamphleters write thus. At the last,
the Protestants did make a do, as though some thing had been won, when in
my soul I protest there was not, but in any indifferent audience the adverse
Protestants had been quite confounded. For Master Campion and Sherwin too,
would have said much more in defense of their cause, but one of them by his
Commissioners authority suddenly made an end, cutting them off from all
further speech. Thus they do write. In deed when we had continued very long,
and the sun shining upon our faces in at the South windows, and the throng
being very great, and by occasion of both, the heat so intolerable, that
some of us were feign to go out of the chauncel to take breath, and to return
again: and Master Campion and we being now come to a very near point of
agreement in the question of justification, (as is before noted in the end of
our conference) we turning to Master Lieutenaunt, said, If it shall so please
you, let us here make an end. With a good will said he: and so we brake off.
And here is all the Commissioners authority, which they speak of, that we or
any of us did take upon us. And thus ended our conference with Campion: the
judgment of the truth of their or our reports whereof, we do leave unto
God, and to those who were present thereat. Surely we by our notes set down,
whiles our conference was yet fresh in memory, and by sundry conferences
amongst our selves sithen, and with other also, who were there present, yea and
by diligent perusing of the pamphlets written against us, have endeavored to
set down all points that were dealt with, in our said conference, with as
much truth concerning the substance of the matter, as our diligence and
memory, and the remembrance of other also, could possibly attain unto.

Alexander Nowell.
William Daiie.

The three last days conferences had in the Tower with Edmund Campion Jesuit,
the 18: 23: and 27. of September. 1581. collected and faithfully set down by
M. John Feilde student in Divinity.

Now perused by the learned men themselves, and thought meet to be published.



Ianuarij. 1. 1583.

To the Christian Reader, grace and peace.
THou have here, gentle Reader, a true report of the whole substance of the
conferences had in the Tower the last three days, faithfully gathered out of
the notes of diverse that wrote there, and afterward perused by the learned men
them selves, and now lastly published by authority. If any man be inquisitiue
why they were set forth no sooner, he may understand, that being private
conferences, it was thought not much requisite to make the^ publicly known,
neither had they bin now set forth, if the importunity of the adversaries, by
their sundry untrue and contrary reports made and scattered amongst their
favorites, had not even perforce drawn the^ forth. If Campions answers be
thought shorter the^ they were, thou must know that he had much wast speech,
which being impertinent, is now omitted: although I protest, nothing is cut
off from the weight and substance of the matter: for of that, I made
conscience, and had special regard. Again, if the repliers speeches seem to
be more ample: it is, because their authorities then alleged only in Greek
or Latin, are now at large put down, both in Greek, Latin, and English.
But for the arguments and answers, I was even religious faithfully to report
them, as they were. Wherein, I appeal to all the hearers in Gods sight, to
whose grace I commit thee.

John Feilde.

A remembrance of the conference, had in the Tower with Edmunde Campion
Jesuit, by William Fulke, and Roger Goade Doctors in Divinity, the 18. of
September, 1581. as follows.
AFter that Master D. Fulke had made a godly prayer for direction in that
action, that it would please God to confirm the faithful, and to confound
the obstinate and wilful, and that Campion denying to pray with them, had
superstitiously all to be crossed himself, Master D. Fulke began with this
preface in effect.

D. Fulke. Where as there has been some proceeding with you before, and we are
come by order to the third chapter of your book, where you slander our
Church of England and the whole Church of God, for the definition of the
Catholic Church, for that we define it so, as it should be invisible: we come
to prove both by the Scriptures and Fathers, that it is invisible. But this I
would have known unto you, that our purpose is not to deal by discourse, but
briefly by Logical arguments, according to the order of schools, etc.

After he had inquired D. Fulkes name, Campion also spoke after this manner.


Campion. The disputation that I desire, is yet behind: for I desire it might
be in the Uniuersities. This may be called a conference, but it is not the
disputation which I require. Besides, these conferences are unequal, both in
respect of the suddenness of them, as also for want of such necessary helps
as were fit and convenient. I see that you have some appointed to note, as if
it were made a solemn matter. I should have the like, so should I have come
better furnished, and all these might have been better profited. Besides, I
have been ill dealt withal already, and things heretofore spoken by me, have
been mistaken, and published in print otherwise then I ever meant.


D. Fulke. For the suddenness, it is all alike with us. Master Lieutenant sent
you word by my request, to choose the question your self on Saturday last at
noone: so that you had knowledge of the question as soon as we, and also the
choice and appointing thereof. As for the noting, it is not made so solemn a
matter that Here was speech, that nothing was meant by the noting, but a
private matter, and to prevent false reports.
it can prejudice you, but to prevent false reports that may be spread of the
conference, injurious as well to you as to us. As for the disputation you
require, it is not at our appointment: It must be ordered by them that are to
appoint both you and us. We come by commandment, etc. but let us go to the
matter. You slander us, and Master Calvin likewise, in the third chapter of
your book, for defining of the Catholic Church as we do. You say we make it a
Platonicall Idaea, an ayrie thing, that is no where etc. But I will prove that
it is against the nature of the Catholic Church, at any time to be visible.


Campion. Where do I slander you or Calvin? Read my book, I will maintain
my book and every part of it. And as for the Catholic Church, I will
mayntaine, that from the time of Adam to Christ, and from Christ unto us, the
Church has been visible. But because you say I slander you and Calvin, show
my words.


D. Fulke. These are your words. Non est ausus contrauenire sonitu, videri
noluit Ecclesiae quam toties Scripturae commemorant, refragari, nomen callide
retinuit, rem ipsam funditus definiendo sustulit etc. And ye quote Call.
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 1. Sect. 2. and 3. Here you plainly slander Calvin
and us, for defining the Catholic Church (comprehending all the elect of God
that have been, are, or shall be) to be invisible.


Camp. The Catholic Church is considered according to her parts, triumphant in
heaven, and militant on earth: generally, and particularly: and I am ready to
maintain, that always the militant Church in earth is visible: every (...) in
his mayer knows this, who in their prayers pray for the Church militant:
therefore this is the point, whether this be always visible?


Fulke. Well then it appears in the very beginning that you swerve from the
title of your own book, sclaundering us without cause, for the definition of
the whole Catholic Church, and Sophistically you go from the whole to a
part, from the Catholic Church to the Church militant, which is but a part of
it, when as the whole Catholic Church comprehends all the elect, and is the
full body of Christ, that fills all in all things, as the Apostle says, and
as we confess in the articles of our faith, We believe the Catholic church.
We deny not that the church militant sometime is visible: but we affirm that
the whole Catholic Church, whereof our definition is given, is not visible.
And what cause have you then to exclaim upon Calvin and us, for defining the
Catholic Church to be invisible: This we are here ready to prove.


Camp. I have said, that upon earth the Church is always visible. But I pray
you let us speak of ye Church militant. I am sure these gentlemen would hear,
not of a Church of Saints in And this he spoke with great iolitie and
scoffingly.
heaven, but of a Church in earth, w^etd they may join themselves, what
should we talk of the Church in heaven? They would rather know I am sure, of
what Church they are here: Ask them.


Fulke. Well then you are found recreant in this paynt, openly to sclaunder our
definition to be such as should take away the nature of the Church, in that we
make it invisible, and now when it comes to the trial, you will not deal
with the Catholic Church, whereof our definition is given: but with a part of
it, to wit, that which is upon earth, which we never denied in some sense to
be always visible, because it consists of men upon earth, although it be not
always seen, because it is oftentimes hidden from the world, and sometimes
also from the true members thereof. But this Church upon earth you will have to
be always visible. Seeing therefore you give over y^ defense of your slander
of our definition of the Catholic Church, which we came prepared to maintain:
we are ready also to reason of ye church milita^t.


Campion. The state of the question is, that the Church militant upon earth,
can not be hidden, but it is always known, so that a man may understand of
what Church he is. etc.


Fulke. The case may be such as a member can know no more but himself: what
mean you by visible?


Campion. I mean to be visible, is to know one another, to meet at
Sacraments, when I can tell that I am of this church, and you of that, I a
Catholic, and you a Protestant, as I certainly know there is a Church in
France, a church in Spain, and in Flaunders, though I be far from it, and
we may know Here was much a do about writing, and yet I never knew any thing
imprinted that might prejudice him
one another: a member can say, This is my pastor, these are my prelates and
governors. This is plain. I would to God I had one also to write for me. I
pray you let me not be mistaken, for I have had great wrong that ways, and
things have been put in print, that I never spoke or meant.


Fulke. If we have this discoursing, we shall never have done: I would you would
be brief. I will prove from a place of scripture, that the church militant
(understanding visible as you say) is not always visible in earth. Elias
complains, that he was left 1. Argument.
alone etc. Ergo the Church was not then visible.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent, and further declare the meaning of the place,
which makes altogether for me. For Elias sets out the schismatical church
of the Samaritanes. In this schismatic church, a member being driven out,
(as sometime it falls out to be) the world turning and changing, he might
not know the rest: but yet knew there were 7000. that never bowed their knees
to Baal. Again, you must not bring a particular to overthrow a general.
There were none there: therefore there were none in other places. But this
place is an excellent place against you. For as the Prophet complained there,
so we may justly complain now, O Lord they have forsaken thy covenant, they
have destroyed thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword, and I am
left alone etc. Yet no doubt, there were many: as for example, I might have
complained of Geneua, when I was there, that I had been alone, not knowing of
any other Catholic there. Were all the Protestants in England in Queen Mary's
time gone? were there none? and are all Catholics now gone? Whatsoever they
be, I know certainly there is a Church in France etc. And so then there was
a flourishing church in Judea, under Asa, and Iehosaphat, whither Elias was
flying for succor and relief etc.


Fulke. I thought we should have discoursing. You declare your self utterly
ignorant in all this matter. For where were these words spoken?


Ca^p. They were spoken as he was flying into Judea, to y^ church whither he
knew to repair, teaching us what to do in y^ like case.


Fulke. That is not true, they were spoken in mount Horeb, as he was in the
wilderness, after he was fled from the persecution of Iezebel, when she had
determined his death.


Campion. The text is plain, Venitque Beersebae Iudeae etc. He came to
Beerseba of Judea etc.


Fulke. His flight was into the wilderness, and Beersheba was in his way, where
he left his servant, and so went forward into the wilderness. For Beersheba was
the utmost town in Judea toward Horeb, and both Beersheba and the wilderness
of Arabia, were from Judea toward Horeb. And therefore the text says, Ipse
vero perexit He went forward etc. continuing his journey to the wilderness,
and therefore it is not true you said, he went into Judea, to join himself
with the Church, or to seek relief there.


Campion. But his complaynt was of a particular place, for the Church flourished
in Judea under two notable kings, Asa and Iehosaphat. And when he says, Ego
solus, he means that he was the only prophet that was left etc.


Fulke. This answer cannot stand with the oracle, which pronounces that God
had left 7000. true worshippers. Wherefore it is manifest, that Elias thought
himself the only true worshipper that was left in Israel, except you will say
there were 7000. prophets, whereof he was ignorant. But ye answer y^ the
church was then so visible, yt he knew whither to resort. But I will prove y^
the church of Judea, (unto which y^ congregation of Israel, if they be a true
church must be joined) was so invisible at some time, that it had not so much
as the face of a church, whither any man in Elias case might resort. It is
written 2. king. 16. that under y^ reign of Achas, there was taken a pattern
of the Altar of the idolaters of Damascus, and that Vrias the high Priest
removed the Altar of the Lord. Whereby it appears, that the priesthood was
corrupted, Here the words of the text were read*
the altar was removed, and the sacrifices utterly ceased, etc.


Campion. That might well be. For there might be such a time, and the case
might so fall out, that there could be no exercise of the priestly function,
and yet it might remain visible enough, etc.


Fulke. Uery well, what visibilitie could there be in those days of Achas,
Manasses, and such like, when there was no face at all of an outward Church,
neither in the head nor in the members, when the high Priest was become an
idolater? How could they know whither to resort, the Temple being defiled, and
the priesthood it self so defiled with idolatry? etc.


Camp. What mean you by the face of a Church? It might for all this be known,
though they could not exercise their function.


Fulke. How could that be? when there was no outward form of a Church, it
failed in the head, in the chief, and in the members. There was no place for
their public sacrifices, seeing that only place, to which they were bound to
resort, was defiled with heathenish idolatry. For it must be there and no
where else. And I doubt not but there were particular members, that were known
to God, or might know one another: yet was there not a visible Church, as you
determine of the word visible, to be, when men know their pastors and
prelates, and the place whither to resort, etc.


Campion. I say, the days were as these days are now to Catholics, or as
they were to you in the days of Queen Mary, to them that are in prison: and
yet we know there were protestants left, and those that were in prison knew
well enough to resort unto them, that were abroad: and so of the Catholics,
though now Mass be forbidden, and the execution of their priesthood, yet
Catholics know Catholics, and whither to resort for the exercise of Catholic
religion.


Fulke. But in Iudaea they knew not whither to resort, when the temple it
self was defiled, where only by the law of God the sacrifice was appointed to
be offered. Therefore although there were a Church then, yet it could not be
visible.


Camp. Read the words: The kings of Judah were as our kings, and as I said,
before the times turned, there was many changes. But does this follow: there
is no church in England where Mass is said (which I dare say many catholics
love, and would go Bold asse^ ^rations.
a great way to hear with all their hearts:) Ergo there are no Catholics in
England. They had no open Co^munions in Queen Mary's time: ergo there were
none, etc.


Fulke. You make bold co^parisons, you cloye us with words and go from the
matter. We say not that the Church could ever perish out of the earth for one
moment of time, or that they were not, because they were not seen, but we
say against your assertion, the Church in Iudaea was not visible, because
there was neither place nor sacrifice, nor high Priest, etc. The Priest was
wicked, the Temple was defiled, etc. Now all kingdoms may profess religion,
and have their exercises thereof in all places, though they could not do so in
Iudaea.


Campion. You have made a good argument for me, Master Doctor. I will knit it
up with this: though they might only exercise in the Temple, yet we may every
where: and though Elias saw them not, yet there were thousands: so though it
be not permitted now to say Mass publicly, and to exercise our functions, yet
there are thousands.


Fulke. Here is nothing but repetitions. All this is not denied, but where is
the visibilitie of this Church upon earth known to men, (as for God he always
knows them that are his) when the head Pastor, and the only place of exercise
of Jewish religion was corrupt.


Campion. And yet there was Tobias in Israel, and other. Tobias was of another
time, for it was from the days of Achab unto Salmanazar 140. years at the
least.



Fulke. That is not the matter: it was not visible, because they had no other
place to exercise in but the Temple at Jerusalem, which at these times was
polluted, the very Altar of God being removed, and an idolatrous altar set in
the place.


Campion. That is not alike, for we have our functions free, we may sacrifice
every where, and say Mass upon every mountain.


Fulke. Like enough for that matter. But there was not so much as an outward
face of the Church, the high Priest being an Idolater, and the true Altar taken
away, and therefore there could be no visibilitie. You answer nothing to the
matter, but abuse the presence with multitude of words, and therefore
committing the judgment to them that be wise and learned, I will give place
unto my brother.


Mast. D. Goade. Concerning the short warning, the case is al one with us, as
it was with you, we had no longer deliberation the^ you had, little above one
days space, concerning the question, and therefore you have no cause to
complain, etc.


Campion. What shall I call your worships name?


Goade. My name is Goade.


Campion. Yes that may appear by this preparation, as it were to a set and
solemn thing, these books also declare, besides the bringing of a writer with
you, etc.


Goade. Well, all these concern not the matter, you had word as soon as we, and
were so made acquainted with the question, as it was of your own choice, etc.
but in deed you are gone from ye state of the question, against which we came
prepared, being of ye whole Catholic Church, as your own book does importe,
and it is apparent that you have wrongfully challenged our definition, being
(as has been truly said) of the Church in general: well we must I see now,
follow whether you lead us. We must leave the Catholic Church, and talk of
the militant Church, the general, and go to a particular. One thing before I
join with you I would wish you to forbear, namely your dealing with the
present state and personal speeches, it will better beseem modesty, and
pertain more to the matter we have in hand, etc. which may be performed with
less waste of words and more humility. You answer not to the report I have
heard of you, for modest behauing your self in conference.


Campion. Concerning my self, I will lay my hands under your feet, but I
must not humble God to you, you know who says, Ne sis humilis in sapientia
tua, be not humble in thy wisdom. I must with courage maintain religion.
Haec est sapientia vestra coram populo, this is your wisdom before the people,
etc. I must not be prayed in religion.


Goade. How fitly those places of Scripture are applied, I will not now stand
to discuss: but concerning the state of the question as your self set it
down, you are fallen from it. And the Church even as it is upon earth, being
but a part of the Catholic Church, I will prove sometime to be hidden. But
what mean you when you write that it must be of the nature of the Church, to
be visible?


Campion. I mean that it must be an essential mark of the Church, and such a
quality as is inseparable. It must be as visible, as fire is hot, water
moist, etc.


Goade. Uery good: but as you understand this quality of Campion ^greeth not
with others of his own side.
visibilitie, you declare your self to dissente from others of your side, who
by visible, understand a notable glorious Church, who has her beauty and
pomp and as your Bristow writes her continual succession of Bishops, etc.


Campion. That same outward pomp and glory, may be wanting, and yet the
Church be visible enough. I would be loath to meddle with that question of
succession. You know why I would not willingly deal in it.


Goade. Well, as has been proved out of the old testament that there was a
time when the Church militant was hidden, so will I prove it out of the new.
There was a time when our 2. Argument.
Savior Christ being smitten, and all the rest of the Apostles scattered and
hidden, that visibilitie was not an inseparable quality, ergo this quality is
not always inseparable.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Goade. I think any here might prove the Antecedent: the story of that time
shows it plain. The face of the visible Church was then not in Christ and
his Apostles, but in the Jews amongst the Scribes and Pharisees: they had the
succession of the Priesthood and held the chaires. Christ was crucified, put
to death and buried, the Apostles scattered and fled into holes and corners, so
that if visibilitie be such a certain mark of the true Church, then the high
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, were the true Church, and not our Savior
Christ and his Apostles.


Campion. It was a Church in choate, beginning, not perfect.


Goade. Therefore it was at sometime hidden, etc. namely in the beginning of
the Church: where was then this visibilitie?


Campion. In the virgin Marie, Zachary, John Baptiste, Peter, etc.


Goade. What show you me these to prove the Church visible? who was Pastor,
when the Pastor was smitten and killed? who occupied the chaires? where was the
outward face of the Church, which you will have to be so glorious? and where
was the Pastor and outward exercise of Religion?


Campion. I have said before, that it is not necessary, it should have always
that outward pomp and glory. In the beginning, it is not apparent, as
afterward.


Goade. Ergo there is a time, when it may be hidden.


Campion. Not hidden, for they were gathered together. It was in deed pusillus
grex, a little flock, but prove that it was not visible.


Goade. Because you make light account of these times, as being but the
beginnings of the Church, let us go on to the proceedings and increase. In
those great persecutions under the cruel Emperors, the Church became hid
and invisible, ergo visibilitie is not an inseparable mark: specially in thee
time of Dioclesian, Christians were so wasted as to the judgment of me^, there
were none remaining: their books were burnt, their churches destroyed, and
them selves put to death with sondrie torments.


Camp. You answer your self. For against whom was this ^secutio^ so hot,
against whom fought they, were they shadows: I am sure there were Christians,
or else they could not have stood forth to have endured those torments: but I
could show you Rome in that time. Some escaped till Constantines time, much
about three and twenty years. All were not eaten up: for then every man would
be a Christian, and well was he that could show him self so. I could name you
the Bishop of Rome that then was.


Goade. But in the end after that great havoc was made, and cruelty had
wasted all that could be found, where was then Pillars were erected in every
place with this blasphemous inscription; superstitione Christi vbiq* deleta,
etc.
the visible Church: In the end it was enforced to be hidden. It had lost that
which you say must needs be of the nature of it, the glory of it was so
eclipsed that it shined no where.


Campion. It was most visible then and most glorious, and not long after, when
Constantine came, al were Christians: Whereby it appears that diverse remained.


Goade. That is not to the point: though some remained, yet they were hid.
All being persecuted and put to death that could be known or found.


Campion. The time of these persecutions, was even like to our times. For then
the Christians were exiled, put to death, driven into corners, as the
Catholics are now, and yet there remained enough, etc. and they were known.


Goade. Surely you make evil and untrue conparisons, you have no such cause to
complain of bloody persecutions in the time The Papists call justice for
treason, persecution for religion.
of our gracious Queen, and do not well to compare her highness peaceable and
mild government with those tyrannical persecutions: ye might better liken
your cruelty showed in Queen Mary's time to those examples. I had thought to
have found more modesty in you.


Campion. Well, let the comparison be of Q. Mary's time: then Protestants were
put to death, and yet there remained many.


Goade. The question is not whether they remained, but whether they were seen.
But you said of those Emperors times, that there remained many, and they were
not unknown. They were unknown both to the faithles and faithful: ergo they
were altogether unknown.


Campion. I deny both parts of the antecedent.


Goade. Then I must prove both distinctly, and first touching the faithles. The
faithles could not know the Church: therefore they did not know it.


Camp. They knew it not by faith, but by sense they knew it.


Goade. John 3. The world knows not us, because it knows not him.


Campion. I told you they did not know him as they ought to know him, to
salvation. They knew, but not fruitfully and effectually. As I know you are a
Protestant, but yet believe not your religion. And a man that says Mass is
known, and yet you do not believe in it.


Goade. But though the persons were known, yet they knew them not to be of
the Church. I will come to the other part of the antecedent.

As is the whole so are the parts:

But God only knows the whole:

Ergo he only knows the parts. For the members of Christ are known to
Christ alone. By reason of many hypocrites, men are not able to judge who are
truly faithful. There are many wolves within, and many sheep without: Deus
nouit qui sunt sui, 2. Tim. 2. God knows who are his, therefore the true
members of Christ can not be known but to God alone.


Campion. I know not who is elect, but I know who is a Catholic: I know not
whether the Bishop of Rome be elect or no, etc.


Goade. Only the elect are of the Church, whereof Christ is the head.


Camp. I say that both good and evil are of the visible Church.


Goade. Christ has no dead members of his body: therefore the reprobate can
not be of the Church. I will help you with a distinction. They may be in the
Church, but not of the Church.


Campion. The distinction is Caluins, and therefore I refuse it. But you
answer your self, for evil men may be viua membra Christi, the lively
members of Christ in respect of faith, but not in respect of charity. A man
may be a member of the body of Christ, as it is here in earth, being a wicked
man: but only the godly are Strange Divinity.
members of his body as it is in heaven. Your own argument does confound you.
It is impossible to know the elect: therefore it is impossible the Church
should be invisible.


Goade. It is your part to answer, not to oppose: you use many words and
grant absurdities. Your argument does not follow.


Campion. You cannot know any particular man to be elect, you cannot pronounce
it of your self: therefore you cannot measure the Church by election. then it
remains the Church must be visible, because it must be known.


Goade. To be elect or true members of Christ is one thing, and to be in the
visible Church is another.


Campion. This was Wickliefes error that only the elect were true members of
the Church: but as I have said, no man can know who is elect, and therefore
you teach that no man can know a member of the Church, nor no man can know
that he shall be saved.


Goade. Particular election is not so unknown as you would make it: for a man
may have knowledge of his own election by undoubted testimonies, and see the
signs of election in others.


Fulke. You said before that visibilitie was an inseparable quality of the
Church, whereupon I reason thus.

If it be an inseparable quality, it is an inseparable note: The third
argument.


But it is not an inseparable note:

Ergo not an inseparable quality.


Campion. I deny both the Mayor and the Minor: both may be doubted of.


Fulke. I will prove both.


Campion. Give me leave: A note is more then a quality. The quality is to go
right, to go the nearest and gainest way, the safest way. A note is a mark
that may be removed, that teaches to turn on the right hand, or on the left,
by this cross, or by that windmill or mark, etc.


Fulke. I grant there is a difference between a note and a quality, and you
needed not so many words to have showed that, but I speak of an inseparable
note, and an inseparable quality. That quality which is inseparable, being
also a note, must needs be an inseparable note. Also of that your self have
said, that it is an essential quality. I will prove the Mayor.

Whatsoever mark is of the essence or nature, is inseparable:

The visiblenes is a mark which is of the essence and nature of the Church:

Therefore it is an inseparable mark.


Campion. It is an inseparable quality, but not an inseparable note, but after
a sort: for a quality must evermore stand, but a mark may be taken away.


Fulke. The question is, whether it be an inseparable note of the Church that
cannot be taken away.


Campion. I say it may be, in a sense.


Fulke. I know not what sense you speak of, but this is evident by your own
confession, the visiblenes of the Church is a mark, and it is of the nature.
Ergo it is inseparable. so my Mayor is plain.


Campion. Prove your Minor.


Fulke. There was a time when visiblenes was no note of the Church: ergo it is
not an inseparable note.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Fulke. There was a time, when the Church was only known by the Scriptures:
therefore there was a time when visiblenes was no note of the Church.


Campion. I deny both the Antecedent and the consequent.


Fulke. I will prove both, and first the Antecedent.


Came. Nay prove the consequent first, and then the antecede^t.


Fulke. Why, the other is first, both in order and nature.


Campion. Nay. Whenever the consequent is denied, you must straight prove the
argument.


Fulke. That is, if the consequent only be denied, but seeing you deny both, I
will first prove that which in nature and order is first, and afterward I will
prove the other, (if it need.) It is but a sorry shift of you, to decline from
the point of the question. Chrysostom says, that Christianity which is the
Church, is to be known only by the Scriptures. He has these words,
Tantummodoper scripturas: nullo modo: nulla probatio, etc. Homil. in Math. 24.
There is no other proof, there is none other way to know the Church or true
Christianity, but only by the Scripture.


Wherefore thus I frame my argument out of Chrysostoms place.

The Church is to be known only by the Scriptures:

But visibilitie is not the Scriptures:

Ergo the Church is not to be known by visibilitie. Or thus.

The only note to know the Church by, is y^ holy Scriptures:

Uisibilitie is not the holy Scripturs:

Ergo visibilitie is not a note to know the Church by.


Campion. Yea, out of the Scriptures the Church may be known, for the
Scriptures appoint visiblenes to be a mark of the Church. But I deny the
Minor.


Fulke. Do you say then, that visibilitie is the Scripture?


Campion. I say, visibilitie is contained in the Scriptures.


Fulke. My Minor is, that visiblenes is not the Scripture, and so upon my
Mayor, which is Chrysostomes authority, I conclude that visiblenes is no mark
of the Church.


Campion. I know Chrysostomes place, he denies not visiblenes to be a note.
You may go to an other argument.


Fulke. You would not hear Chrysostom by your will, but he shall be read by
your leave.

Tunc cum videritis abominationem desolationis stantem in loco sancto, id est,
cum videritis haeresim impiam, quae est exercitus Antichristi stantem in locis
sanctis Ecclesiae: in illo tempore qui in Judea sunt, fugiant ad montes, id
est, qui sunt in Christianitate, conferant se ad scripturas. Sicut enim verus
Iudeus est Christianus dicente Apostolo, non qui in manifesto, sed qui in
occulto: sic vera Judea, Christianitas est, cuius nomen intelligitur confessio.
Montes autem sunt scripturae Apostolorum aut Prophetarum, de quibus dictum est:
Illuminas tu mirabiliter a montibus aeternis. Et iterum de ecclesia dicit:
fundamenta eius in montibus sanctis. Et quare iubet in hoc tempore omnes
Christianos confer se ad Scripturas? Quia in tempore hoc, ex quo obtinuit
haeresis illas Ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse verae Christianitatis,
neque effugium potest esse Christianorum aliud volentium cognoscere fidei
veritatem, nisi Scripturae diuinae. Antea enim multis modis ostendebatur, quae
esset Ecclesia Christi, and quae gentilitas: nunc autem nullo modo cognoscitur
volentibus cognoscere quae sit vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi tantummodo per
scripturas, etc. Then when you shall see the abomination of desolation standing
in that holy place, that is, when you shall see an ungodly heresy, which is
the army of Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the Church: in that
time, they which are in Jury, let them fly to the mountains, that is, they
that are in Christianity, let them get them to the Scriptures. For as the true
Jew is a Christian (as the Apostle says) not which is in open sight, but
which is in secret: so true Jury (whose name is understood to be confession)
is Christianity. And the mountains are the Scripture of the Apostles and
Prophets: of whom it is said, Thou do give light marueilously from the
everlasting mountains. And again he says of the Church, Her foundations are
in the holy hills. And wherefore does he command all Christians in this
time, to get them to the Scriptures? Because in this time, since heresy has
obtained those Churches, there can be no trial of true Christianity, neither
can there be any other escape of Christians, which would know the truth of
the faith, but the Divine Scriptures. For before times, it was showed by many
ways which was the Church of Christ, and which was gentilitie: but now to
them that would know which is the true Church of Christ, it is known by none
other means, but only by the Scriptures. This is plain for the Antecedent.
And these particles are plain, Nullo modo cognoscitur, It is known by no
means, there is no other proof, but tantummodo per Scripturas, only by the
Scriptures.


Campion. Master Doctor you know the order, I deny the consequent, you prove
the Antecedent.


Fulke. You denied the Antecedent, and therefore it was necessary for me to
prove it. But this place also does prove the Consequence of mine argument,
which you denied. Let me see how you can answer to the place.

All other marks in time of heresy or schism, by Chrysostomes judgment are
excluded, but only the Scriptures:

Therefore visibilitie also is excluded from being a mark of the Church.


Campion. When the Church was first planted, there was miracles, by which it
might be known: but now they ceasing, it is to be known (says Chrysostom)
only by the Scriptures: meaning that it is not to be known by miracles, etc.


Fulke. This answer is a senseles cauil, which is easily avoided. For there is
an Antithesis or opposition in Chrysostomes words: how it was known before,
that is, multis modis by many ways, and how it may be known now, by one
only way, tantummodo per Scripturas, only by the Scriptures. For now that
Antichrist is revealed, he excludes all ways, except one, and says it must
be known only by the Scriptures. Therefore he excludes visiblenesse as well
as miracles, from being an inseparable note of the Church.


Campion. It excludes miracles, etc.


Fulke. Well then your answer is, that nullo modo: nulla probatio: and
tantummodo: excludes nothing but miracles.


Campion. Yea, and that appears by the words, Ante tempus Antichristi. For
whereunto else should nunc and ante be referred, except it had meant by ante,
before the primative Church, and nunc now by the present and instant time.


Fulke. You do but talk. you cannot so put away, Nulla probatio, No proof.
Nullo modo, by no mean it is known, but tantummodo per Scripturas, only by
the Scriptures, etc. He speaks of all times since heresies have occupied the
Churches. If you will answer no otherwise, I will rest upon judgment.


Campion. I have answered, but I would to God I had a notarie: well, I commit
all to God. But I pray you note that I say, that visibilitie is included in the
Scriptures.


Goade. I will examine this cause by a manifest place, one of the strongest
that is alleged by those of your side, to prove the visibilitie of the
Church: namely, that out of the 5. of Matthewe, A city that is builded on a
hill, can not be hid, whereupon they infer, therefore the Church must needs
be always visible.


Campion. If it please you, though it be commonly alleged, yet it is
allegorical. There are many stronger places, and you were best take a more
pregnant place, etc.


Goade. It is alleged by Hosius, and others on your side, to this purpose,
and therefore I chose it: notwithstanding, if you shun it and would have me
to omit it, I will.


Campion. No, I say there are apter and stronger places: nevertheless I shun
it not, but because of these hearers, we should seek most for edification,
and it is the special cause of our meeting.


Goade. Thus then I reason:

This special place alleged by those of your side, can not be 4. Argument.
understood of the Church: Ergo it proves not this visibilitie


Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Goade. I would be glad, for the better waying of this place, that you would
remember what your self has written, concerning the finding out of the sense
of any place of Scripture, in the second chapter of your book. I would you had
been as reasonable in other things of your book, and then we should have
agreed better: for the rule is very good to help to the true sense, that the
circumstances of the place be considered, the words that go before, Camp.
ratione secunda. Hanc peruestigemus ex verbis adiacentibus. voces, clausul^,
tota connexio.
that follow after, the scope, the clauses, and whole context. Now both out
of that which goes before, and of that which follows, out of the whole scope
and drift of the place, it is evident to be spoken only of the Apostles, and
their successors in the ministry: Ergo it is only to be understood of them,
and not of the whole Church.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Goade. Whatsoever is spoken properly of the Apostles doctrine and life, can
not be understood of the whole Church:

But this is properly spoken of their doctrine and life:

Therefore it can not be understood of the whole Church.


Campion. You must not petere principium. It was not only spoken in respect of
the Apostles function, but of y^ whole church, no otherwise then as the
Apostles were Christians, including the whole Church.


Goade. Then that commandment, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink ye all of this,
spoken to the Apostles, much more must include the whole Church, being spoken
of the sacrament which appertains to all, and yet ye exclude the people from
the cup.


Campion. This was not spoken to them as they were Christians, but in respect
of their function, as they were priests: the other was spoken as they were
Christians.


Goade. Neither of these is true: but briefly deny one part of my argument.


Campion. I deny the minor.


Goade. Out of the circumstances of the place and conclusion, it is manifest,
that it is properly spoken of the Apostles doctrine and life, and not of the
whole Church. Consider the words. Vos estis sal terrae, You are the salt of
the earth. Vos estis lux mundi, etc. You are the light of the world. Non
potest ciuitas abscondi, etc. A city can not be hid. Then the conclusion: Sic
luceat lux vestra, So let your light shine, etc. You are the salt of the earth,
notes ye Apostles doctrine, wherewith they should season others. You are the
light of the world, notes their life, whereupon all men's eyes are cast, and
so can no more be hid then a city upon an hill. Both these points are proper
to the ministry, and hereupon the conclusion inferred, So let your light
shine, etc.


Campion. You have very well answered your self: For the text contains both.
There is the salt and the earth: the light and the world: who must season, and
who must be seasoned: who must shine, and to whom they must shine. Do you not
see plainly, that he includes both the teachers, and them that are taught?
etc.


Goade. Now you fall to discoursing clean besides the purpose. It is true
that the one can not be without the other, but yet it is plain, that to
season, to lighten, and to be set as upon an hill, is proper alone to the
Apostles and their ministry. For the drift and scope of the place, is only
to set forth the Apostles doctrine and conversation, and you violently wrest it
to the whole Church. The life of the ministry, is as it were set upon an high
stage, the light of their conversation is looked unto of all: what is this to
the Absurdity: ergo precepts given to the M. his calling are given to the
family.
visibilitie of the whole Church?


Campion. Uery well, does a candle shine to it self? and is not a master of a
family, a Master? and that which is spoken to him, may it not be said also to
them?


Goade. I pray you how holds this argument? The life and doctrine of the
ministry is as it were set upon a stage for all men to look unto, and
therefore they are called the salt of the earth, the light of the world: Ergo
the whole Church is visible. This is the force of your argument from this place.


Camp. I have said the text makes not for you. It is not understood of their
ministry and life only, as they were Apostles, but as they were Christians.


Goade. As I have proved this out of the text, so now I will show this to be
the sense out of the Fathers, both Chrysostom and Jerome upon the place.


Campion. You may spare your labor, you shall never find Here M. D. Goade was
turning for Chrysostom. upon this place, and he willed that it might be showed at
the next meeting.
Doctor that understands it only of the ministry: I tell you that
aforehand.


Goade. Yes I will show out of Chrysostom, that it is only understood of the
ministry, and of their life: in the afternoon according to your request, the
place shall be showed.


Campion. It is a common and an usual kind of speech, to utter that to the
master, which is meant to the servants.


Goade. Will you believe none but your self? hearken what Saint Hierome says
upon this place.


Campion. Yes, if you would believe Hierome, as well as I, we should be soon
agreed. What think you, is Hierome of your religion? would you be of his?


Goade. I would not be of any man's religion, to build upon man. I hold
neither of one nor other, but of Christ, and ground my religion only upon his
word. But remember your strong place you spoke of, to prove the perpetual
visibilitie of the church. Let us hear what it is.


Campion. Shall I then have one argument?


Goade. Yea let us hear it: you shall be answered, though it be not your part to
oppose.


Campion. It is out of Matthew chap. 18. Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Church. I will
prove out of this place, that the Church of necessity must continually be
visible. I prove it thus.

This is a commandment that is perpetual, and must be always executed in
the Church:

But that can not be, unless the Church be visible:

Ergo the visibilitie of the Church is continual.


Goade. I distinguish of the mayor. When the Church is gathered and may retain
a face, when it doeth-execute government, and has a consistory to hear
matters, then it ought to be done: but this cannot be always had, being often
hindered by persecution.


Camp. Offenses between brother and brother happen always, and this is the
medicine and remedy. There is no age, wherein there are not offenses, and where
shall I seek the perpetual remedy that is appointed, unless the Church be
perpetually visible?


Goade. I have said before. When there is a state, and an established Church,
this remedy is to be sought for. But this cannot always be had, because the
militant afflicted church oftentimes can not be suffered to exercise this
medicine of wholesome discipline.


Camp. The disease is continual, ergo the remedy is continual. I must tell my
Prelates: where shall I tell the^, if they be not.


Goade. The remedy is continually necessary and wholesome, but can not
continually be used. Diverse most necessary things are not always in use. It is
most necessary the Gospel should be continually preached, it is Christ's
commandment, and yet this oftentime fails: as in persecution, when the
church is driven into streights, and the public exercise of the word
restrained. I deny your argument: It is always necessary, therefore it is
always in use and practice. Many other necessary things are wanting many
times that ought to be, and yet this takes them not away, neither makes them
vain or unnecessary, etc.


Campion. The disease is common: it is perpetual. To whom should I have gone
before Luthers time? What Prelates should Ad nauseam ^sque.
I have made my complaint unto in those days? I must tell my Pastor, etc.


Goade. You are answered, that in times of persecution this could not be, and
specially in those times of general Apostacy foretold by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. this could not be practiced, no more then the true preaching of the
word. You deal straungely with us. When you had shut us in prison, embrewed
your hands with our blood, driven the true Church as it were into the
wilderness, through your grievous persecutions and tyrannies, so as there
could be no meetings for public exercise of religion: then you ask where was
our Church, and to whom we should have gone before Luthers times.


Campion. Where was your Church for 900. years ago? Here Camp. after his bold
manner did insolently insult by these vain questions.
Whose were John Husse? Hierome of Prage? the Waldenses? etc. Were they yours?
Help him Master Doctor.


Fulke. It needs not: this is beside the matter, your place is answered. The
remedy is not idle or vain, though sometimes men are restrained from the use
of it. Cyprian complayneth above 1200. years ago, that for the great
persecution that was against the Church, they could not meet so often as they
desired, to execute discipline, and yet who will deny but the discipline of The
discipline of the Church perpetual and necessary, though it be not always had
and put in practice.
the Church is perpetual? It must be used when it may be had. A medicine is
not an idle medicine in the Apothecaries shop, nor Galens prescription
thereof is vain, because sometimes it can not be had.


Campion. Though of some at sometimes it cannot be had in one place, yet it may
be had in another. There may be some cases wherein I can not tell where the
Church is, to tell it: but if I will seek it, I may find it. Therefore it is
not always visible.



Fulke. The words are spoken generally to every man, Si peccauerit aduersus^te
frater, If thy brother offend against thee, etc: and yet every man can not
obtain it. You that are in prison, what Church can you tell, if you be
offended? will you say the remedy is vain, because you can not use it? Again,
there are mean remedies before a man come to this, that he should tell the
Church: he must first give private admonition, and before witnesses, which
every man can not do that is offended. As to whom should Elias have
complained, when he knew none but himself? Therefore it is no more
necessary, that there should be a visible Church always to complain unto:
then it is necessary that every man should always be able to admonish
privately, or to have two or three witnesses to call unto him. Again, you
answer your self, that there may be some cases wherein I can not tell where
the Church is, to tell it. Therefore it was very ill concluded of you, that if
a man can not always have a visible Church to make his complaynt unto, the
remedy prescribed by our Savior Christ is vain or idle. And concerning the
name Ecclesia in that text, when it is said we should tell the Church, ye
abuse the audience: for it means not the whole Church, but the consistory
and eldershippe, that have the government of every particular congregation.
For how can a man tell the whole Church on earth, or yet the whole parish
where he dwells: but he may tell the company of Elders and governors, when
such are established to have the execution of discipline, and this also may be
interrupted by persecution.


Campion. Master Doctor you have said well for me: the word Ecclesia is
taken for the governors of the Church, and they are always in sight. In what
place of the Scripture is the word Ecclesia taken for an invisible Church, you
can show me no place. Show me one place: show me one place if you can.


Fulke. I can show you a great many. But because you call so earnestly for one,
I will show you one.

It is taken for the whole body of the Church: therefore for an invisible
church, in the first chapter to the Ephesians, in the latter end, where the
Apostle says, (...): And he appointed Ephesians. 1.
him head over all things unto his Church, which is his body, and the fulness
of him which fills all in all. So that it is taken for the whole Catholic
Church, as it contains all the elect of God, those that have been, are, and
shall be, etc. which universal Church is invisible.


Campion. I grant it is there taken for the Church triumphant and militant.


Fulke. Ergo it is there taken for an invisible Church. For we speak of it as
it conteyneth every member, and is the whole body of Christ, whereof some are
yet unborn.


Campion. I grant it of the whole: but the Church militant is visible, the
other invisible.


Fulke. But the Catholic Church of Christ being the body of Christ, is
mystical: ergo insensible.


Campion. Prove it according to all parts to be invisible.


Fulke. It is sufficient for me to prove, that the Catholic Church, which is
the whole body of Christ, is mystical: and therefore it is invisible. I speak
of the Catholic Church, as it is an article of faith. For, we believe the
Catholic Church according to the articles of faith: Now faith is of things
which are not seen: ergo the Catholic Church is invisible.


Campion. I know that the whole Catholic Church and every part of the same,
as it is of faith, is invisible: but what is this to the Church militant:


Fulke. You urged me to show a place where the word Ecclesia is taken for an
invisible Church: and I have showed you, that it is taken for an invisible
Church, wheresoever it is taken for the Catholic Church, which you confess to
be invisible, both in the whole and every part.


Campion. So far as it is of faith.


Fulke. And we speak of it, as it is of faith. For the whole Catholic Church,
being an article of faith, is considered no otherwise then as it is of faith,
neither any part thereof by your own confession: whereof it follows that the
visible Church, for which you strive so much, is no article of our faith,
because it is seen, faith being of things that are not seen. You have granted
many absurdities this day, while you labor to defend that the Church on
earth is always visible. And now the conclusion is worst of al, that the
visible Church (for which you are so earnest) is proved to be no article of
faith.


Campion. Why may not a man see and yet believe. Peter saw him whom he
believed, saying, thou art Christ the son of the living God, etc.


Fulke. That which he saw of Christ, was experimental knowledge: but that
which he confessed, Christ to be the son of God, was of faith, and not of
sense. For flesh and blood revealed it not unto him, but God from heaven. That
which Peter saw of Christ with his bodily eyes, was seen of many unbelieving
Jews, and of Judas the traitor: but his confession (which came of faith) he
had not by bodily sight, but by divine revelation. It is not of faith, to see
men which are the members of the Church, but to see them as they are members of
the Church, that is of faith: therefore that which is seen of the Church is not
of faith.


Camp. Why, you said the Church might be seen by experimental faith, as Peter
saw Christ and believed.


Fulke. When said I so?


Campion. Even now when you spoke of Peter.


Fulk. I never thought it, much less did I speak it. It is needful there
should be writing, else I see you would outface the matter: I said the clean
contrary. That which Peter saw of Christ, was experimental knowledge, and
not faith: that which he believed and confessed, he saw not. Even so I say,
that which we believe and confess in our Creed of the Catholic Church, we
neither do see, neither can we see.


Campion. I can see the whole world, though I cannot see it all at once: so I
can see the Catholic Church in her parts, although I cannot see it all at
once, or in one place.


Fulke. Whatsoever you can see at several times, and in several places of the
Catholic Church, is no article of faith, For that which we believe of the
Catholic Church, is not seen at any time, or in any place.


Campion. That is true.


Fulke. Ergo the whole Catholic Church, and every part thereof, as it is of
faith, is not visible.

Here Campion of himself brake up.


Campion. Shall we meet again. It were to be considered of what question we
shall talk.

Here question being made, what point they should deal upon, and being asked
whether he would defend the Church of Rome to be the true Church of Christ, he
denied to meddle therein, as being dangerous, unless leave might be obtained of
her Majesty's most honorable Counsel. Then being demanded whether he would
deal with that question in the after noone, Whether the Church might err, he
consented, the company present agreeing thereunto. And so the hour was
appointed at two of the clock after dinner: the Replyers having no longer time
to provide their arguments.


In the after noone. The Question. whether the visible Church may err.
FIrst, because promise was made in the forenoone, that those places which were
omitted, should be showed, D. Goade brought forth his place out of Chrysostom
upon Math. 5. Rursus eos per ista ad been viuendum ac diligetiam cohortatur,
ostendens vt studeant esse soliciti, quasiante omniu^ oculos constituti, and in
medio orbis terrarum theatro. Nolite inquit aspicere, quia in isto nunc
residemus loco, in exigua sumus part certaminis. Sic enim eritis manifesti
cunctis quemadmodum ciuitas in montis vertice collocata, vel sicut lucerna in
domo super candelabru^ relucens. Again by these things he exhorts them by
diligence of well living, that they might stand to be careful as they that
are set before all men's eyes, and in the midst of the Theater of the whole
world. Do not you regard (says he) that we remain now in this place, and
are but in a small part of our battle: for you shall be so manifest to all men,
as a city placed upon the top of a hill, or as a candle shining in a house
upon a candlestick, etc. Here you see by the judgment of Chrysostom,
expounding the place, that it only respects the Apostles which you denied to
day. For he exhorts them to live well, as those that are set in the sight and
eyes of all, and therefore must be careful how they bear them selves upon
that open stage of the whole world, being as a city upon an hill.

Campion. The place is nothing against me, for it pertains to the whole
Church. Does Chrysostom contrary any thing spoken by me? does not their
function, their faith and religion, their place show that this is not spoken
only to them?


Goade. These are but words. It is plain, he notes their doctrine by the
salt, and their conversation by the light.


Campion. He speaks not any thing contrary to that which I have said.


Goade. Yes, you say the place means the whole Church to prove the
visibilitie thereof, as a city set upon an hill, can not be hid. Whereas
Chrysostom interprets it of the Ministry only, as is manifest by ye word
Salt, and the whole drift of the place.


Campion. Of all other, first it belongs to the Prelates, then to their
flocks, as I have showed you by the example of a Master of a family.


Goade. It belongs in deed to the flock also to live well, but this place
is not directed unto them. It is absurd, against the whole scope of the place,
to make a general conclusion from a particular, from the Apostles to the whole
Church.


Campion. The Apostles were faithful, they include the whole Church, as they
were Christians, and not Apostles.


Goade. Why then, that which was spoken to the Apostles, was likewise spoken to
ye Church. But it was said to the Apostles Drink you all of this: ergo to the
whole Church.


Campion. That was personal, and in respect of their function, he spoke only
in respect of those that were present, but there was none present but the
Apostles: like that which was said to the Apostles, Go ye and preach to all
nations, baptizing, etc. does he therefore command the people also to preach
and minister the Sacraments?


Goade. The raze is far unlike. The receiving of the Sacraments belong to
all Christians: they must all receive. And though preaching the word, and
ministering, in respect of the funetion, be only appropriate to the Apostles
and Ministers: yet the word and Sacraments, are common to al Christians. So by
manifest difference it appears, that the commandment, Go and preach, is
personal, belonging to one calling: and the commandment Absurd. The
commandment in the institution binds Christians to receive the cup. And Paul
says 1. Cor. 11. That which I received of the Lord: whereby he teaches that he
had a commandment.
Drink ye all of this, is general to all the faithful.


Campion. There is no place in the institution that co^mandes the common people
to drink, or not to drink.


Goade. The Apostle (the best interpreter of Christ's institution) applies it
to the whole Church, 1. Cor. 11. verse 23. That which I received of the Lord,
etc. And by the same reason you may say as was said before, there is no
commandment to receive the Communion.


Campion. There is no commandment in that institution, that the lay people
should receive the Communion.


Fulke. That is a shameful absurdity. But now seeing the place is showed,
let us come to the question agreed upon. Whether the Church militant (...)
err? That it may (...), I prove thus.

Whatsoever error is incident to every member, is incident to the whole:

But it is incident to every member to err:

Ergo to the whole.


Campion. I deny both the Maiorand Minor. Absurd. Who can dispute with him
that denies the grounds of disputation?



Fulke. Why, the Mayor is from a place in Logique: that which is incident to
every part, must needs be incident to the whole: as every part of a man's body,
is subject to corruption, therefore the whole body is subject to corruption.


Campion. There is no such place in Logique. Every man may err, but not the
whole gathered together. Your example is not like: for the whole has a
promise, and so has not every particular man.


Fulke. The whole has no promise that it shall not err, more theu every
particular member: for every member of Christ has the spirit of Christ, which
is the spirit of truth, and therefore the same promise that the whole has.


Campion. Why, then there should be no heretics.


Fulke. Yes, heretics may be within the Church, but not of the Church: Si ex
nobis essent permansissent nobiscum says Saint John, If they had been of us,
they had abidden with us.


Camp. They were of us in appearance, and in outward show.


Fulke. I deny that they were of us, though in outward profession they seemed
to be of us: for in deed they were never of us. John. 3. They went out from
us, but they were never of us. And he adds the reason: For, if they had been
of us, they had remained with us. They were within the Church, but they were
never of the Church.


Campion. Christ says of them that fall away in persecution, that they
believed ye Gospel: therefore before persecution they were of us, but they
departed from us, etc. they were of us according to faith, though they were not
according to election.


Fulke. Christ speaks not there of true justifying faith, nor of the elect,
but of those that believed for a time. For if they had been of us, they would
have remained still with us: but they were not of us, neither according to
justifying faith, nor according to election.


Camp. The meaning of John is, they were not of us according to the election of
God, yet they were of the militant Church, which contains both good and evil.


Fulke. It is true, that in the visible Church be contained both good and
evil: but the elect only are of the Church.


Campion. Why, what say you by David when he committed adultery, was he elect
and the child of God?


Fulke. I say he did wickedly, but yet he was and remained elect, and the
child of God.


Campion. This is strange. But I say, when he committed adultery, he was the
child of the devil: for it is plain,

He that commits sin is the servant of sin:

But David committed sin:

Ergo he was the servant of sin and the child of the devil.


Goade. The meaning of the place is, that he that gives him self over to
sin is the servant of sin, to be led wholly by it, in whom sin reigns.
But no particular sin in the elect, does make the children of God to become
the children of the Devil, neither does separate them from the hope of
salvation.


Fulke. He that is once a true member of Christ, can never become a member of
the Devil.


Campion. Then once good, and never evil.


Fulke. That follows not. He may fall into evil, but never finally.


Goade. The place is to be vnderstodde of him that falls of malice, and not
of him that falls by infirmity.


Campion. He that falls into adultery, falls maliciously: for he may
resist if he will. For every member of the Church has power to withstand sin
if he will.


Fulke. Now, we shall have free will. This discontented others also that stood
by.



Campion. I mean not of him self, but by grace. For when God has given him
grace, he may if he will resist. Answer me this place, He is the servant of
sin that commits sin.


Fulke. You were answered before.


Campion. Why then you hold, that a Catholic falling into adultery is still
the child of God. I grant that for every offense God does not cast out his
sons. For in a great house, In magna domo, there be many sons, which though
they be disobedient, they cease not to be sons till they be cast out, etc.
but when they are cast out, they are no more the sons of God.


Fulk. God casts out none of his si^es. For, if they be sons, they are also
heirs. They are the Apostles words.


Camp. I say they are sons for the tune, which are cast out. Eijcit in
exteriores tenebras. He casts them out into utter darkness. He that had not
the nuptial garment, makes this claim to be the son of God, and sits
down amongst Gods children, but he is cast out into utter darkness.


Fulk. But he was never any son, but an hypocrite, and therefore no marvel
if he were cast out: S. Paul says, yt a son is an heir.


Camp. Why, are not all that are bapti^ the sons of God?


Fulk. No, for they have not all the spirit of adoption.


Camp. Why then, what judge you of infants that die without Baptism, or
immediately after they are baptized: are they not the children of God:


Fulke. I take not upon me to judge. But if they be not Gods They may be
reconed borne within the covenant, but they are not his children, if they be
not elected, though we judge the^ not: because their not being elected, does not
appear unto us*
elect, baptism cannot make them his children.


Camp. Then Christ commanded baptism in vain, if it save not those that are
baptized.


Fulke. That is not so: for there is a necessary use of baptizing, though the
holy Ghost be not given to every one that receives baptism. I baptize with
water (says John Baptist^) but Christ baptizeth with the holy Ghost.


Camp. I will prove that infants are without si^, and therefore must needs be
saved. For if they have sin, they must either have original sin, or actual
sin: but being baptized, they have neither of both: (for original sin is
taken away by baptism, and as for actual sin, they never committed any) ergo
they are without sin.


Fulke. Original sin is not taken away from any in this life, but it is not
imputed to the elect.


M. Lieutenant. M. Doctors, the question that was appointed before dinner,
was, Whether the visible Church may err.


Goade. M. Lieutenant, he continually draws us into new questions to avoid
the matter in controversy. Shall I enter that question? I will recite some
Churches in ye Apostles times, and ask your judgment of the^, and then go to
mine argument. The Churches of Corinth and of Galatia, what say you to the^*
The Church of Corinth (though they had a promise, as you said) did err about
ye matter of resurrection: ye church of Galatia, about ye matter of
justification


Camp. The Apostle though he wrote to all, yet he means but some few of
them. And what are these to the whole Church, being but particular churches?
the militant Church of Christ co^prehendeth y^ whole number of churches on
earth. As for y^ error of y^ church of Galatia, it was no otherwise reproved
then as preachers are wo^t to reprove, who are wo^t to rebuke al for some y^
are faulty.


Goade. In deed you say some thing concerning that of Corinth. I grant yt the
error was not so general. For he said, Quida^ inter vos, etc. Certain amongst
you, etc. But for the Galathians it was otherwise. For the whole Church was
justly reproved, according to that, O you foolish Galathians, who has be
witched you, that you should not believe the truth? These wholly fell and were
not particular members, but whole Churches, planted by the Apostles them
selves, replenished with special gifts of the holy Ghost. And if these faded
in the Apostles time, and in so great a matter, what privilege have any other
churches since, y^ they should not likewise err and so co^seque^tly what
privilege has y^ milita^t church:


Camp. Make your argument, and then we shall see what ye will conclude.


Goade. So then I make mine argument.

Whatsoever congregation does err in matters of faith, is not the true Church:
The second argument.


But the Church of Rome erreth in matters of faith:

Ergo the Church of Rome is not the true Church.


Campion. This is from the question. M. Lieutenant might do well to put us in
mind of the question.


Goad. I remember the question well. I bring an instance according to your
meaning, because you in saying that the Church cannot err, mean y^ the church
of Rome cannot err: this privilege agrees not to y^ church of Rome, which you
say is y^ true Church.


Campion. I deny your Minor. The Church of Rome has not erred. You suppose the
Church of Rome to be y^ true Church, and I believe it.


Goad. In deed I only suppose it for disputatio^s sake, and believe it not: but
y^ errors are infinite, and I should weary my self and al y^ company, to
rehearse many. I omit inferior errors of less weight and moment, and come to
those that shake the foundation of faith.


Campion. We shall then run into all controversies: bring some, proper error
that I my self shall coufesse to be an error, that the church of Rome
holds.


Goade. Why a general must be taken away by particulars.


Campion. That is true.


Goade. Then I reason thus. It has erred, and does err in the foundation,
touching salvation by Christ: Ergo it is subject to error.


Campion. It does not, God forbid it should. But if you will properly prove it
has erred, show me that some general Council has erred.


Goade. Well, I will follow you in this point. The Council of Trent has
erred in many points of doctrine, and namely in the matter of justification:
ergo a general Council has erred.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent. etc.


Goade. It ascribech whole or part of righteousness to be inherent in our
selves:

But this is an error:

Ergo it errcth in justification, etc. The very words I do not remember, but
this is the effect of the doctrine, that Inhaerens iustitia est pars
iustificationis, That inherent righteousness is a part of justification.


Campion. The Council has no such words, or if it have, it Here was promise
that the place should be showed.
does not ascribe any thing to righteousness cleaving in our selves as of our
selves, but as given of God. In deed it is in us, but as y^ gift of God. As
there are virtues, faith, hope and charity, which must be in us serving to this
righteousness, which yet are not of us.


Goade. Whatsoever is in us that must justify us before the just judgment of
God, must be perfect:

But our righteousness is not perfect:

Ergo our righteousness cannot either in whole or part justify us.


Campion. I answer your Mayor: it must be perfect, according to that
perfection that God requires of us in this life.


Goade. This is most corrupt. For God will have a perfect and undefiled
righteousness, such as he has set down in his own law. Qui fecerit etc. He
that shall do them, shall live in them. Gal. 3. Again, Maledictus est omnis,
qui non permanserit in omnibus quae scripta sunt in libro Legis, vt faciat ea,
etc. Cursed is every one that abides not in all things that are written in
that book, to do them, etc.


Campion. I say, God does not exact such a perfect righteousness according to
the law, for we are delivered from that by Christ, etc.


Goade. Then we must rest on Christ alone: but if we will be justified by any
part of righteousness in our selves, it must be perfect. For Gods justice
allows no imperfect righteousness. Do you think you can fulfill this law:
etc.


Campion. Yea that I can.


Goade. Can you love God above all things, and your neighbor as your self?
Can you love him with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your
strength?


Campion. I can. For when I prefer God before all things, and love him
chiefly, I love him above all.


Fulke. Note that Blasphemous absurdity.


Goade. If a man may fulfill the law to justification, then Christ dyed in
vain.


Campion. What now, shall we have hissing? etc.


Goade. Sure it is worthy of hissing, and of blusshing too, if Here there was a
little whispering among the company, as if it had been a soft hissing.
you had any fear of God before your eyes, or conscience. I pray God make you
to understand the absurdities that you hold, that you may be ashamed of them,
and renounce them.


Campion. Why, is every motion to sin deadly sin: etc.


Goade. You are like ye Pharisee, that thought the keeping of the law to
consist in the outward letter. What say you, is not concupiscence, and the
motions of the flesh against y^ law of God, sin?


Campion. No that they are not: for if I being tempted, refrain my self, and
when I have a motion to evil, bridle my self from it: as, if I see my
neighbors goods, and have a motion to steal, and do not, do I not herein love
my neighbor as my self: If a man be in the Queens Jewel house, where he
may take some precious thing, and bridle himself of it and abstain, shall
this man be condemned? What will you condemn a man for every little tentation?
It is a good thing to be tempted. etc. Iam. 1. Blessed is he that endures
temptation.


Goade. Ye abuse the place. For it is understood of afflictions. Scripture most
absurdly applied.
And as for concupiscence, it is the transgression of the law: Thou shall not
lust, ergo it is sin. But I will leave this as impertinent to the purpose.
Consider that notable place in the end of the fifth chapter to the Corinth.
Epist. 2. Him that knew no sin he made sin for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him, not in our selves, to show that it is no
righteousness cleaving in us but in Christ, and is made ours by imputation, even
as our sins were imputed to Christ: consider the place hereafter with your
self.


Fulke. Mark here his absurdities. First he holds, that he can keep the
law in such perfection as God requires: and he Campions absurdities.
can love God with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his
strength, and his neighbor as himself. Secondly, he affirms that though he
have a lust to steal, yet if he bridle that lust, he loves his neighbor as
himself. Thirdly, he holds that we are justified by inherent righteousness,
which he thinks to color by the grace and gift of God. But nevertheless, ye
are in the case of the Pharisee, Luke 18. which trusts in his own
righteousness, and yet ascribes all to the grace of God, saying, I thank thee,
etc. He boasted not before men, but humbly gave thanks unto God, acknowledging
his righteousness to be Gods gift, and yet Christ told this parable against him
and such as he is, which trust in themselves that they are righteous, that is,
by justice inherent, although they confess they have it by the grace and gift
of God.


Campion. But this was of pride that he gloryed in his righteousness, and
therefore the parable is told against himself.


Fulke. I grant that he was proud, and so are all iusticiaries that trust in
themselves that they are righteous, howsoever they would cloak their pride, by
ascribing it to the gift of God: but he is condemned for trusting in himself
that he was righteous, that is, for inherent righteousness, which nevertheless
he ascribed not to his own strength, but to the grace of God, saying, I thank
thee God, etc. But I will go to another argument.


Campion. I pray you let me answer this argument first, for it shall be reported
that I said this and that, and my words shall be depraved. I say therefore,
there are two ways of justification: one in us, another without us. Christ is
a cause of justification by his grace and merit without us, and so we are
justified by baptism: and we are justified by the gifts of God in us, faith,
hope, and charity. how say you, were not these my words: And why then do you
challenge me for saying we are justified by Gods righteousness, says, hope,
and charity, which is within us. For how say you, are we not justified by
faith? and is not faith within us?


Fulke. I challenged you for blasphemous absurdity, in saying you could love
God with all your heart, with all your soul, and strength. And albeit hope and
charity follow that same faith, (by which we are justified) in the regenerate
that are the children of God: yet we are not justified by them, no nor by
faith, otherwise then instrumentally, as by apprehending the righteousness of
Christ, which is without us, and is no otherwise ours then by imputation. And
how can you love God with all your heart etc. when you can not give him an
entire love, according to his law?


Campion. I said a man may love God with all his heart in this life, according
to his law, when he does prefer God before all the things in the world:
as when a man does chiefly prefer him, etc.


Fulke. But can you love God only?


Campion. A man loves God only, when he loves him chiefly, etc.


Fulke. Chiefly and only is all one: write that.


Campion. Why, think you the law was given to no purpose? I am sure it was
given to be fulfilled, and we are notbidden to keep it, if it were impossible.


Fulke. The law was given for another cause, then that we should be justified
by fulfilling it: namely, to show us our infirmity, that we may be convicted
of sin.


Campion. That is a wise cause in deed. Belike a father commands his
children, not that they should do his will, but because he would have them to
see that they can not do it.


Fulke. As though almighty God can have none other end of giving
commandments, then mortal men use to have. But this is not to the question.
I would go forward with another argument, if you would suffer me.


Campion. You will give me leave to declare my meaning.


Fulke. Belike you have an ill opinion of the auditorie, that they can
understand nothing, except you tell it them twenty tunes over. If you will not
suffer me to proceed, I must desire Matter Lieutenaunt to command you.

If a general Council may err, then the Church may err: 3. Argument.


But a general Council may err:

Therefore the Church may err.


Campion. I deny the Minor.


Fulke. A general Council may be corrected, as Augustine says: therefore it
may err.


Campion. It may be declared or explaned, but not corrected by a contrary
decree.


Fulke. Will you hear the place? it is Tom. 6. lib. 2. contra Donatistas cap.
3. Quis autem nesciat sanctam Scripturam canonicam tam veteris quam noui
Testamenti, certis suis terminis contineri, eamque omnibus posterioribus
Episcoporum literis ita praeponi, vt de illa omnino dubitari and disceptari non
possit, vtrum verum vel vtrum rectum sit, quicquid in ea scriptum esse
constiterit. Episcoporu^ autem literas, quae post confirmatum Canonem vel
scriptae sunt, vel scribantur, and per sermonem forte sapientiorem cuiuslibet
in ea re peritioris, and per aliorum Episcoporum grauiorem auctoritatem
doctiorumque prudentiam, and per Concilia licere reprehendi, siquidem eis forte
a veritate deuiatum est. Et ipsa Concilia quae per singulas regiones vel
prouincias fiunt, plenariorum Conciliorum auctoritati quae fiunt ex vniuerso
orb Christiano, sine vllis ambagibus cedere: ipsaque plenariasaepe priora
posterioribus emendari, cum aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum
erat, and cognoscitur quod latebat, sine vllo typho sacrilegae superbiae, sine
vlla inflata ceruice arrogantiae, sine vlla contentione liuidae inuidiae, cum
sancta humilitate, cum pace catholica, cum charitate Christiana. That is to
say, Who knows not, that the holy canonical Scripture, both of ye old and new
Testament is contained within her certain bounds, and that the same is so
preferred before all latter writings of Bishops, that of it there cannot be any
doubt or question at all, whether it be true or whether it be right, whatsoever
is certaynely known to be written therein. But that the letters of Bishops,
which since ye cano^ confirmed, either have bin written, or be now in writing,
may be reprehe^ded both by the saying which is perhaps more wise of any man
that is more skilful in that matter, and also by the more grave authority and
wisdom of other bishops, that be better learned, if any thing in them perhaps
be declined out of the way of truth. And that even those Councils which are
held in every region or province without al doubt must give place to general
Councils, which are gathered of all the Christian world: and that even the
general Councils themselves are often corrected, the former by the latter, when
by any trial of things, that is opened which was shut up, and that is known
which was hidden, without any swelling of sacrilegious pride, without any
stiff neck of arrogancy, without any contention of malicious envy, with
holy humility, with Catholic peace, with Christian charity. Here you have a
plain place, that only the Scripture cannot err, that all other writers may
err, that all prouincial Councils may err, and last of all, general Councils
themselves may be corrected, the former by the latter: therefore without
question they may err.


Campion. I answered before you read, that a general Council may be declared
and better explaned, but not corrected.


Fulke. It may be amended, and therefore corrected. There is no difference
between amending and correcting.


Campion. So far forth it may be corrected, as it may be And yet who knows
not that general Cou^cils have been contrary one directly against another Here
the Papists in a libell brought out of La^cashire, do report this far
otherwise, as they do all the rest: but none truly, they that were present can
tell.
better explaned, but not to set out things that are contrary. For general
Councils are not one contrary to the other.


Fulke. Saint Augustine says, The general Council may be ignorant of some
thing at the beginning, that afterward by experience may be amended:
something may be close, which afterward may be opened: it may be hid to one
Council, that may be known of another. And the Antithesis in these words
must needs stand, that only the Scriptures cannot err, and therefore are not
to be corrected. As for Councils general and provincial, and Bishops writings
of all sorts, may be corrected, and therefore they may err.


Campion. A general Council may err in matter of fact, as in condemning and
absoluing some Bishops, etc. but it can not err in matters of doctrine.


Fulke. Do you know whereof Augustine speaks in this place? etc.


Campion. Yea, as well as you.


Fulke. Why then declare it before this company.


Campion. He speaks of a matter of fact.


Fulke. Now you show your self altogether ignorant of the matter: for he
speaks of the Council of Carthage, that was held in Cyprians time, wherein
was concluded an error of faith. For they had decreed, that such were to be
rebaptized, as had been baptized of heretics, With which decree, and Cyprians
authority (who was President of the Council) when Saint Augustine was
pressed, he answers, that only the Scripture could not err, but all other
both Bishops writings, and Councils might err, and therefore might be
reformed, etc.


Campion. He speaks not of a matter of faith, as appears by the word
experiment. For there can be no experiment in a matter of faith: heresy
cannot be amended.


Fulke. These are vain shifts. Men may find by experience they have erred.


Campion. The word amending, shows that it was in manners.


Fulke. To be corrected and amended is all one, and may be as well in faith as
in manners, and the argument whereof he entreats, and the Antithesis he makes
between the Scriptures, and all other authorities, shows plainly, that he
means of error of faith. But seeing you have nothing else to answer, I will
leave it to the consideration of them that be wise and learned, and so long as
you bring no matter, I will not answer your words.


Goade. Seeing you stand upon Councils, I will proceed that way.

General Councils have erred, ergo etc. 4. Argument.



Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Goade. They are contrary one to another, etc.


Campion. I deny it.


Goade. The Council of Constantinople, and the Council of Nice are contrary.


Campion. They are not.


Goade. They are contrary in the matter of Images, namely the Council of
Constantinople condemning the setting up of Images in the Church: and the
Council of Nice afterward allowing Here for lack of the book present it was
referred to the showing of the place afterward.
Images.


Campion. You can not show, that they were contrary one to an other.


Goade. It shall be showed afterward. I will come to another general Council.
The Council of Constance has erred in matter of faith, ergo a general Council
has erred.


Campion. I deny the Antecedent.


Goade. The Council of Constance erred in taking away the cup from the
common people: this was a matter of faith: ergo that Council erred in matter of
faith.


Campion. Thus we shall run into all questions, and then we shall have done
this time twelve months. This was no error in the Council, for I say there is
no commandment that the people should be partakers of the cup.


Goade. By the same reason you may as well exclude the people from the bread
also, but though you have in this point denied the force of Christ's
institution: yet the commandment in the same is plain, Bibite ex hoc omnes,
Drink ye all of this. And Paul interprets it so, 1. Cor. 11. delivering
as well the cup as the bread to the whole Church, even as he had received of
the Lord. The Council of Constance decrees against it: ergo a manifest and
foul error in that Council.


Campion. Does Saint Paul make it a precept, that the lay people should
receive the cup?


Goade. Paul iudued with the spirit of God, gives a flat precept in the same
chapter, verse 28. Probet seipsum homo, Let a man try himself, and so let him
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. These are plain precepts, Let
him eat, Let him drink: and here is as great a commandment to the whole
church for the one, as for the other.


Campion. The place is to be understood, when he does receive, and under the
obedience of the Church, it may be done. And this that you make so much a do
about, I have seen it done to many Catholics my self: but it is not so
necessary, that you should make such adoo about it.


Goade. It is not left free, but an express commandment, and therefore
necessary. It is the Imperative mode, and therefore a commandment. I maruayle
how you can stand in this being so plain?


Fulke. Here are two things, Probet, and Edat and bibat, Let him examine
himself, and let him eat and drink, and both be commandments. First, he
must be prepared, and then he must eat, and not only eat, but he must drink
also. For as the institution is of eating and drinking, so is the commandment
of the Apostle drawn from the institution. And if there be no commandment,
then is no man bound to receive the Lords supper.


Camp. No, it is a thing indifferent by the institution touching Absurd. For
there is as great necessity of the one Sacrament as the other.
the common people, saving that only the authority of the Church has laid it
upon us: here you may see the authority of ye church, in things not commanded.


Goade. It is a commandment, both in the institution and by the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 11. saying, That which I received I delivered, grounding his
commandment upon the institution, and therefore commanded in the institution.


Camp. Yea, he says when he will, or when he does receive, then let him
examine him self.


Fulke. These are your own words, there is no such word here. When he will,
and when he does, he must prove him self, and so he must eat. The words
which the Apostle uses here, are both the imperative mode in the Greek text:
Let him examine him self, and let him eat and drink. The Greek testament
being reached unto him, he refused to read it in the Greek. All this is but a
vain brag: for his sight in Greek was very little or none at all as may appear
in the first days conference, here al* so, and afterward.



Campion. I grant there are two precepts, but this is the sum and end, Vt
digne edat, That he may eat worthily.


Fulke. Here is the book, see it and read it: this is the original, give him
the book, it is a reasonable great printe.


Campion. You are still urging me to read Greek, what childish dealing is
this, can I not see the imperative mode as well in the Latin as in the Greek,
shall this disadvantage the cause? I have (I thank God) and you shall know it,
as much Greek as will serve my turn, and when there is occasion to use it, I
will show it. But is not the Latin tongue as good a tongue as the Greek? etc.


Fulke. You were best confess your ignorance. We make not tongues the measure
of the truth, but we bring the original to prevent your cauillations, and
your finding fault with translations. But I will deal with you with an other
argument.

The whole Church did think it necessary for infantes to receive: Argument. 5.


Ergo the whole Church has erred, etc.


Campion. Now we shall have a question whether infantes may receive, so we
shall run into all questions.


Fulke. Not so. But I will prove that Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the
Church with him, as S. Augustine confesses, held this error, that it is
necessary for infantes to receive the communion, which you your self hold to
be an error, seeing you affirm it is not of necessity by Christ's
commandment, that any lay men should receive it. You shall hear the words of
Augustine and of Innocentius both, as Augustine cites them. Why are you
afraid of the place before you come at it, let me read it. Saint Here Campio^
interrupted him, saying, there was no such place and made much a do.
Augustine cites the words of Innocentius, out of his Epistle to the Bishops
of Numidia, Lib. 2. ad Bonifacium contra duas epist. Pelag. cap. 4. Haec enim
eius verba sunt. Illud vero quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit praedicare,
paruulos aeternae vitae praemijs etiam sine baptismatis gratia posse donari,
perfatuum est. Nisi enim manducauerint carnem filij hominis, and biberint
sanguinem eius, non habebunt vitam in semetipsis: qui autem hanc eis sine
regeneratione defendunt, videntur mihi ipsum baptismum velle cassare. For these
are his words. But where as your brotherhoode affirms them to preach, that
little children may be rewarded with the gift of eternal life, even without the
grace of Baptism, it is a very foolish thing. For except they shall eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, they shall have no life in
them selves. But they which defend this unto them without regeneration, seem
to me that they will make frustrate baptism it self. Upon which words of
Innocentius, Saint Augustine infers, Ecce, beatae memori^ Innocentius papa,
sine baptismo Christi, and sine participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi,
vitam non habere paruulos dicit. Behold, the Pope Innocent of blessed memory
says, that little children cannot have life without the participation of the
body and blood of Christ. In these words Saint Augustine shows the general
practice of the Church was, that infantes should receive, because it was
thought necessary unto salvation.


Campion. It was only a practice, it was no opinion of necessity of salvation.


Fulke. Saint Augustine writes against the Pelagians, that held that Baptism
was not necessary for infantes, and that infantes might be saved without
Baptism, against whom he reasons Augustins argument.
thus. Infantes cannot be saved without they receive the communion: but they
cannot receive the communion unless they be first baptized: ergo infantes cannot
be saved unless they be baptized. And to prove that they cannot be saved
except they receive the communion, he alleged the decree or diffinitiue
sentence of Innocentius.


Campion. Saint Augustine says not, that the whole churth thought it
necessary to salvation. But when Innocetius commanded that infantes should
communicate, it was but a necessity of the commandment, the necessity was
not in the thing, but to keep the unity of the Church, and so no error of
faith, but a lawful practice of the Church: but show the decree.


Fulke. You have heard the words of Innocentius, out of his synodicall
Epistle, and thus Saint Augustine cites his decree: Ecce, beatae memoriae
Innocentius papa, sine baptismo Christi, etc. Lo, Innocentius the Pope of
blessed memory, etc.


Campion. There is no such decree: I will believe none of your notes. He says
they be damned unless they be baptized, but he says not, they be damned except
they receive the communion.


Fulke. He says both: you shall see the book, seeing you will not credit my
notes. Here the book was promised to be brought and the place to be showed. 6.
Argument.



Goade. Upon supposition as before, I will suppose as you believe concerning
the Church of Rome. The head (as you hold him) of that Church, has erred in
matter of faith: ergo the Church being the members, are subject to error.


Campion. I deny your Antecedent.


Goade. Saint Peter did err in faith, and that, after the sending down of the
holy Ghost upon him and the rest* therefore the principal head of the Church,
as you account of Peter.


Campion. He did not err in faith. I know the place, Gal. 2. It was a matter
of manners not of doctrine. For it was but a little dissimulation.


Goade. It was matter of doctrine, for it was somewhat concerning that, where
about the Cou^cill was gathered at Jerusalem touching Circumcision.


Campion. Ye utterly mistake it, for it was about the observation of the Law
by the Gentiles, and not concerning Circumcision.


Goade. I now well remember it was not directly about the question of
Circumcision. But it is certain, Peter was in that error, that the Gospel
pertained not at all to the Gentiles, until he was reformed by vision, Act.
10: For then at length he said, Nunc tandem comperio, etc. Now at length I
find, etc: so he was for a time in error. But for the place, Gal. 2. it is
said, Non ambulauit recto pede ad veritatem euangelij. He walked not with a
right foot according to the truth of the Gospel, etc.


Camp. It was but a small matter of dissimulation in manners.


Goade. The text says, Paul withstoode him to the face, because he was blame
worthy, and justly to be reproved: therefore it was no small matter. And
Augustine against Hierome, De Petro iure reprehenso, Epist. 19. does justify
this open reproof by S. Paul, though Hierome labored to lessen this fault,
etc.


Campion. And so do I. But this proves not that it was any matter of faith.


Fulke. It was against the truth of the Gospel:

Truth is contrary to error:

Ergo it was an error of faith.


Camp. I have said the fault was in manners, for dissimulation. When I saw
that he did not walk well, or right, etc. as at this day any poor Priest may
tell the Pope, seeing the Pope to err in manners, and may say unto him, Sir,
why do you so?


Fulke. But that is against your own Canon Law. For what so ever the Pope
does, no man may say: Sir, why did you so?


Campion. I think there can be showed no such words in Here it was promised
that it should be showed.
the Law.


Fulke. I pray you answer me, Did Peter dissemble against his conscience, or
with it? Surely he did it not for any worldly respect, but because he thought
it was his duty in so doing to bear with the weakness of ye Jews, and to
think that aman may dissemble in such a case, is a matter of faith, therefore
his error was a matter of faith, and not of fact only.


Camp. Why, in some case the Catholics think they may communicate with you,
come to your Churches, and you again communicate with us, and go to our
churches, dispute and confer with us, etc.


Fulke. I would wish you to contain your self, I know where you are. It is a
matter that does not belong unto you. You draw to a thing you ought to be
silent in. It is a matter of state, it were best for you to leave such things.


Camp. I mean to dispute, what do you threaten?


Fulk. No, but I give you good cou^sail, I am more your friend then you are
aware of. I think you are already found deep enough in such matters. But to
an other argument.

The general Council confesses that it may err: The seventh argument.


Ergo the Church may err.


Camp. In deed this is to the point, if you can prove it.


Fulke. Answer directly, and you shall see I will prove it so, as you shall
not be able to avoid it. The whole council prays This D. Fulke read out of
his note book.
in the end of every general Council, in a set form of prayer, that God will
pardon their error: ergo they confess they may err, etc. for thus they say,
Te in nostris principijs occursorem poposcimus, te quoque in hoc fine
iudicioru^ nostroru^, pro excessibus indultorem adesse Concilior. Tom. primo de
ord. celeb. concilii.
precamur, scilicet vt ignorantiae parcas, vt errori indulgeas, etc. This is
the very form of their prayer. We prayed that thou would be an ayder in
our beginnings, thee also in this end of our judgments we pray to be present
as a pardoner of our excess, that is to say, that thou would spare our
ignorance, and pardon our error. Here you see plainly, they confess they may
err, when they desire pardon of their errors.


Campion. Master Doctor they pray against your errors, do they not? that God
would pardon your errors.


Fulke. They pray that if they themselves have erred, they may be pardoned,
they speak of their own errors committed in their own Council, and the
words that follow do plainly express the same.


Campion. I would see the printed book, and first I would know whether they
speak of any error of faith: then secondly I would know if it can be showed
wherein the Council erred.


Fulke. Seeing the Council by this prayer confesses that it may err, what
need it be showed wherein it erred.


Campion. Was this prayer said in the Council of Trent?


Fulke. I know not, but it is the prayer that is appointed to be said after
every Council.


Campion. I answer, the Council of Trent will not acknowledge any error: it
was some matter of fact.


Fulke. Their words are plain that they may err, not only in fact, but
also in faith: and therefore they pray to be pardoned in both. Et quia
conscientia remordente tabescimus, ne aut ignorantia nos traxerit in errorem,
aut praeceps forsitan voluntas impulerit iustitiam declinare, ob hoc te
poscimus, te rogamus, vt si quid offensionis in hac Concilij celebritate
contraximus, co^donare ac remissibile facere digneris. And because our own
conscience accusing us we do faint, lest either ignorance has drawn us into
error, or hasty will perhaps has driven us to decline from justice, we pray
thee, we beseech thee, that if we have committed any offense in the
celebration of this Council, thou would vouchsafe to forgive it, and to make
it pardonable.


Campion. That very word declares, that they mean of some error in fact,
and not of doctrine. They pray that if they have ignorantly erred from justice,
they might be pardoned.


Fulke. Those things which the Council does wisely distinguishe, you do
unwisely confound. They acknowledge, that ignorance might draw them into
error, and heady will draw them from justice, they distinguish error from
injustice, and desire to be pardoned of both. As for ye book, it shall be
brought. We could not have books here, for we agreed upon the question but
immediately before dinner, and could not go out of the place since for books,
but it shall be showed.


M. Lieutenant. Here M. Lieutenant told them the time was past, but M. D. Fulke
desired to have one agument more.


Fulke. The Council of Nice 2. decreed an error, therefore the Argument 8.
Church may err.


Camp. Now we shall have the matter of Images.


Fulke. You are Nimis acutus, you will leap over the style or ever you come at
it: I mean not to speak of Images.


Campion. Well then, I deny the Antecedent.


Fulke. The Synod decreed, yt Angels, Archangels, souls of men, etc. have
bodies, are visible and circumscriptible, and this is an error: ergo they
decreed an error, etc.


Camp. They decreed no such thing.


Fulke. You shall hear the words of the Council, Action 1. First, yt saying
of one Ioha^nes, Bishop of Thessalonica, was read in these words. De angelis
and archangelis and eoru^ potestatibus quibus and nostras animas adiungo, ipsa
Catholica ecclesia fic sentit, esse quidem intelligibiles, sed non omnino
corporis expertes and inuisibiles. Concerning Angels and Archangels, and the
powers of them, to which also I adioyne our souls, the Catholic Church her
self does so think, that they are in deed intelligible, but not altogether
without bodies, and invisible. Which words of Ioha^nes Thessalonice^sis, the
Archbishop of Constantinople Tharasius, who was prolocutor of the Council
abridgeth, and concludes upon them saying, Ostendit autem pater quod and
angelos pingere oporteat, quando circumscribi possunt and vt homines
apparuerunt. This father has showed that we must paint the Angels also, seeing
they may be circumscribed, and have appeared as men. Sacra Synodus dixit, Etiam
domine. The holy synod said, Yea my lord. Here you see the decree of the whole
Synod approving the saying of Johannes Thessalonicensis, and the conclusion of
Tharasius thereupon.


Campion. Show me the decree, and let me see the Canon. many things are spoken
in Councils that are not the Canons.


Fulke. I have read the decree.


Campion. Show me the Canon, read their Canon.


Fulke. As though every Council has set forth Canons: many Councils have no
Canons, neither has this any yt I know. You show your self a man well read in
the Councils, yt will exact Canons of every Council, but this was yt consent
and the agreement of the whole Council, the whole Council answered Etiam domine.


Campion. Show me the book.


Fulke. If I do not show it, then let me bear the blame.


Camp. Well, admit it be so: first, they might mean that Angels and spirits
had a certain definite substance of their being, which they called their
bodies.


Fulke. Then belike they knew not how to speak: but I am sure, they knew
what difference there was betwixt (...) and (...) substance and body: if they
had so meant, they wa^ted not words to have expressed their meaning.


Camp. They might think they had certain subtle bodies, according to the
forms that they did take, as Augustine and some other have held. besides,
this was not an error of faith.


Fulke. Ergo it was of manners belike.


Camp. It was a small error, neither of faith nor manners.


Fulke. I prove it was an error of faith. We believe that God is the creator of
all things visible and invisible: but if Angels and spirits be visible, then
are there no invisible things whereof we believe God to be the creator.
Besides, they do not only make the^ visible, but circumscriptible also: and
therefore they do mean bodies, and not substances generally, for only bodies
are circumscriptible.


Camp. They mean not such bodies as we have, but such as they took, how could
they else be painted.


Fulke. But they (say they) were visible and circumscriptible.


Campion. Because they do Assumere corpora, not because they had bodies in
deed, but seemed to have.


Fulke. But the Council says, they have proper bodies of their own, and are
circu^scriptible, and have been seen in their proper bodies.


Campion. It was no decree.


Fulke. Sacra Synodus dixit, Etiam domine: All the holy Synod confirmed it,
saying, Even so my Lord.


Campion. Many a saint in heaven have thought as hard matters as this, and they
are saved.


Fulke. I deny not that, but yet this was an error of faith, neither does every
error in faith shut out a man from salvation.


Camp. In deed so you say in your book against Bristow, that the Church may
err in matters of faith, for you say that Invocation of Saints, and prayer for
the dead, were errors in faith, and yet that they which used them, are saved. I
wonder therefore why you cry out so loud in your pulpits against Invocation
of saints, and have nothing more in your mouths the^ Blasphemy, Blasphemy,
when the Catholics maintain it.


Fulke. I say in deed, that Invocation of saints, as it was held of some of
the later sort of ancient fathers, was an error in faith: but yet not such as
could exclude them from being members of the true Church, and yet the same
error as it is used of Papists, is blasphemous. These fathers held the
foundation Faith, and therefore that error was not damnable in them.


Campion. In deed you say, that if a man have faith, what errors soever he
have besides, it is well enough so long as he hold your faith: it makes no
matter what errors soever ^e hold with it, he cannot perish.


Fulke. You slander my book, I never writ so.


Camp. Let me see your book, and I will show it you.


Fulk. In what book will you show it?


Campion. In your book against Bristowe.


Fulke. You shall see the book at our next meeting, and if you be able to show
any such words, or matter either, I will lose my head. I may say, and have
said, that the Fathers had their errors, among which some allowed invocation of
Saints, and yet holding the foundation, they may be saved.


Camp. Uery well, that is all one, why should you then make so much a do
against invocation of Saints? Why do you not say in your pulpits, that it is
an indifferent matter?


Fulke. Because as you hold it, it is in deed a blasphemous error: but as
the Fathers held it, it was no blasphemous error, but yet an error, and no
indifferent thing.


Goade. Are you ignorant that they which hold the foundation, though they err
in some particular points of doctrine, they may be saved? Shall every
particular point of error in doctrine deprive a man of salvation, holding
soundly ye foundation Christ?


Campion. Well he says it in his book, etc. If a man have only faith, it
makes no matter what errors he hold beside.


Fulke. You shamefully slander my book, and I know you can show no such
thing out of my book. Now you have granted so many absurdities, ye know not
how to make up the matter, but by slaundering my book.


Campion. I have granted no absurdities, but I will defend them, bring me the
book, and I will show it you. And thereupon I challenge you, you and I at
Cambridge M. Doctor, to try it.


Fulke. Uery well Sir, you show your self according to your public challenge,
more bold then wise, you that have challenged all the Realm, no marvel if
you challenge me.


Campion. I will stand to my challenge, and here I challenge you to dispute with
you at Cambridge, if you dare.


Fulke. It lies not in me to remove you to Cambridge. I came hither upon
commandment at this time, otherwise you are not the man whom I would choose and
take for to be mine adversary, if you were at liberty. There are twenty of
your side, whom I would rather take if I should choose mine equal, which make no
such challenge. Non tibiplus cordis, sed minus oris inest.


Goade. Your Church denies an article of faith: ergo it erreth, 9. Argument.
etc.


Campion. God forbid, it does not.


Goade. You deny the bodily ascension of Christ into heaven: ergo an article of
faith.


Campion. We do not deny it.


Goade. You deny that he is bodily in heaven, for you say that he is bodily in
earth: but he can not be both in heaven and earth at once, if he have a true
body.


Campion. I deny your argument. For he is, and may be in many places at once;
touching his body.


Goade. It is contrary (...) the nature of a true body, to be in many places
at once. For a true natural body, must have the properties of a very natural
and true body, and so you make Christ to have a fantastical and not a true
body. You say, at the same time he is in earth and in heaven. Saint Augustine
confuting the lik^ error of those that denied that Christ had a true body,
says: Cauendum: no ita diuinitatem astruamus hominis, vt veritatem Ad Dard.
Epist. 57.
corporis auferamus. We must beware that we do not so maintain the divinity
of Christ, that we take away the true nature of a body. Jesus Christus vbique
est per id quod Deus est, in coelo autem per id quod homo, etc. Jesus Christ is
present every where, according to his Godhead, but he is in heaven according to
his manhood. And in Ioh. tractatu 3. Corpus Domini in quo resurrexit, vno
tantum loco esse potest: veritas autem eius vbique diffusa est, etc. The body
of Christ wherein he rose again from the dead, can be only in one place: but
the truth of Christ is spread every where.


Campion. All this is true according to nature, but in the sacrament it is a
miracle.


Goade. Augustine denies any miracle to be in the Sacraments: therefore you
can not flee to miracle. The very words I now remember not, but I am sure I
have read it to that effect.


Fulke. His words are as I think, Sacramenta honorem vt religio sa habere
possunt, stuporem vt mira habere non possunt. Our Sacraments may have reverence
as things religious and holy, but they can not be wondered at, as things
strange and miraculous.


Goade. Peter says Act 3. Whom the heavens must hold till the restoration
of all things.


Campion. What will you make him a prisoner now in heaven? must he be bound to
those properties of a natural body? Heaven is his palace, and you would make
it his prison.


Goade. They are the words of the holy Ghost, Whom the heavens must contain
until etc. It becomes not you so to jest at them, and specially considering
your state, being a prisoner, ye should not so play with the word of God. I
see now, the modesty I heard reported to be in you, is clean contrary. I
would to God you would make more conscience in speaking more reuere^ly of such
Divine matters.


Campion. I am a prisoner for religion, but touching Christ his body, why I
pray you, might not tha^ same natural body, which by nature being heavy, and
yet ascended upward step by step, and pierced those thick Crystal
heavens which are harder A fancy in philosophy.
then any crystal, walked upon the waters, and ^orow the door being shut,
why may not the same ^y like (...) many places at once?


Fulke. It were a hard matter for you to prove, that the heavens are harder
then crystal.


Campion. I can prove it.


Goade. The text does not say, that he came through the doors being shut,
but he came when the doors were shut, the doors by his divine power giving
place to his body, as the brazen gates in the Acts did unto Peter of their
own accord. Besides, these other things you speak of, they were
extraordinary works. etc.


Ca^p. The text is plain, that he came in by a great miracle.


Fulke. First there is no words in the ^xt to enforce a miracle,
notwithstanding I am content to grant that he came in miraculously, which
might be, either the doors opening of their own accord unto him, as was
said they did unto Peter, or by giving place unto his divine power.


Camp. If he neither came through the doors, nor wrought a miracle, how came
he in? Belike he played some iugling trick.


Fulke. That is a vile blasphemy. It appears you have great Here it appeared
that many were offended with the indignity thereof.
reverence of Christ, that speak so blasphemously of him, and bear no more
reverence to his holy word.


Campion. Why what would you call it? if it were not a miracle, it must be some
such thing.


Fulke. It might be a miracle, though he came not through the door, for he came
after the doors were shut. Is it a necessary consequence, to say such a one
came in after the doors were shut: ergo he came through the doors? What tempus
is the verb?


Campion. I think it be the Aoriste.


Fulke. The word is, (...). I pray you what tempus is it?


Campion. The perfect tempus, even as clausis the Latin word is.


Fulke. But you did English it before, the doors being shut, which is the
present tempus.


Campion. You know it is the phrase of our English speech.


Fulke. Our English phrase will bear as well, after the doors were shut.

Here Master Lieutenaunt showed them the time was past, and so they left off.


William Fulke.
Roger Goade.

A remembrance of the conference had in the tower with Edmund Campion Jesuit,
by William Fulke and Roger Goade Doctors in Divinity, the 23. of September,
1581. as follows.
The assertions of Campion were these. 1. Christ is in The questions
the blessed Sacrament substantially, very God and very man, in his natural
body. The 2. After the words of consecration, the bread and wine are
transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ.
FIrst Master Lieutenaunt in a short and pithie speech, exhorted Campion to
consider what great favor her Majesty showed him, that he might have
conference with the learned to reform his errors, when they should be
plainly convinced out of the word of God. etc.

Campion. I do acknowledge, that I am beholding to her Majesty. If she have
appointed this conference to instruct me, thinking me to be out of the way, I
can not but be thankful to her Majesty for the same. Yet I protest (being
resolute in my conscience) that I come not with my mind so suspended as to
doubt of my cause, but my intent is to do you good: as you would instruct me,
so would I instruct you: as you would draw me, so would I draw you. Therefore
take my intent in good part, as I would do yours. I come to give an account of
my faith, I am not vnresolute. This said, he crossed himself after his
superstitious manner.


Fulke. Let us begin with prayer. O eternal and most merciful God, we humbly
thank thy Majesty that thou have lightened our minds with the knowledge of
thy truth: we heartily beseech thee, to confirm and increase our faith
always in the same, and at this time grant, that we may so defend thy
truth, that thou may have the glory, the obstinate heretic may be
confounded, the weak may be strengthened, and we all may be edisied in Jesus
Christ, through whom we make our prayers, and to whom with thee and the holy
Ghost the Spirit of truth, be all honor and glory, Amen.

We are earnestly moved, because of the confusion the other day, that it might
be avoided now, to desire that we might have some Moderator, if we might
entreat any of these learned men that Here M. Lieutenaunt was content, that
any learned man present might moderate, but none would take it upon them.
are present to take the pains: otherwise that it might please Master
Lieutenaunt when one argument is done, to command us to go to another. And
also when we have accepted an answer, not to suffer the adversary to carry
the matter with multitude of words: so that we be neither forced to leave our
argument, as though we could follow it no longer, nor the adversary permitted
with large discourses to spend the time unprofitably, contrary to the right
meaning of this conference.

But before we enter into the matters appointed, we have to discharge our
credit for the authority of the Fathers, whom we alleged the last day in
the afternoon when we had not the books ready to show, because the question
was then upon the sudden both chosen and disputed upon, all within two
hours: whereupon we promised to bring the books as this day, because the
adversary would not credit our allegations written in our note books, some
of them more then twenty years a go, not to deceive the Papists, but to
help our own memory.

The first place that I have to show, is out of Saint Augustine, de Baptismo
contra Donatistas. lib. 2. cap. 2. Quis autem nesciat, etc. as before in the
first days conference.


Camp. You might have spared this labor, for of this place I did not doubt, my
answer was etc. vt supra.


Fulke. We have your answer: let us have no repetition.


Campion. The greatest matter that was doubted of, was the decree of
Innocentius concerning the communicating of infants, the second Council of
Nice, and the prayer at the latter end of every Council. You must prove these
three to be erroneous.


Fulke. I have proved them already: I am now only to show that the books
themselves agree with my written notes. I would have showed you them all in
order, though you had not put me in mind. The decree of Innocentius cited by
Saint Augustine con^ta 2. epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium lib. 2. cap. 4. Haec enim
eius verba sunt, etc. vt supra. These are the words of Innocentius, concerning
the communicating of in^ts. S. Augustines words upon the fame are these. Ecce
beatae memoriae Innocentius, etc. Behold Innocentius of blessed memory, etc.


Campion. This is plain, I will answer you.


Fulke. We have your answer.


Campion. You read not so much before.


Fulke. I have read no more now then I did before out of my note book.


Campion. Mine answer is, to deny that Innocentius makes it necessary for
infants to communicate.


Fulke. We have your answer before, I come only to discharge my credit for
alleging the book truly.


Campion. Mine answer was, that it was never simply necessary, but necessary
according to the praetize of the Church.


Fulke. What need these repetitions?


Campion. I must declare mine answer.


Fulke. We have it already.


Campion. You come to appose me, as if I were a scholar in the Grammar school.


Fulke. You think by multitude of words to carry away the matter: but you
shall have no such scope, as you had the last day.


Campion. You are very imperious. I trust, I answered you sufficiently the last
day.


Fulke. The other day when we had some hope of your conversion, we forbear you
much, and suffered you to discourse, contrary to the order of any good
conference, whereupon it has been given out by some of your sect, that you had
the best part, because you had the most words. And therefore now that we see
you are an obstinate heretic, and seek to cover the light of the truth with
multitude of words, we mean not to allow you such large discourses, nor to
forbear you, as we did.


Campion. You are very imperious to day, whatsoever the matter is. My answer I
am sure was sufficient, to any thing you could bring, you need not to be so
imperious: I am the Queens prisoner, and none of yours.


Fulke. Not a whit imperious, though I will exact of you to keep the right
order of disputation. What your answers were the last day, it is well known
to so many lawefull witnesses as were present: beside, they are registered out
of your mouth: they were even such as are like to proceed from a Friar, full
of impudency and garrulitie.


Campion. Well, I must bear this at your hands, and much more. You charge me
with multitude of words: may I not add unto my answer?


Fulke. We have heard your answer before: we are not now to dispute the matter
again, but to deliver our credit for the allegations.


Campion. Do forward then.


Fulke. This was the second. Of the form of prayer after the Council, which
is this: Te in nostris principijs etc. vt errori indulgeas, etc. We beseech
thee in these our beginnings etc. that thou will pardon our error. And again,
Et quia conscientia remordente tabescimus, ne aut ignorantia nos traxerit in
errorem, etc. And because our own consciences accusing us, we do faint, least
either ignorance has drawn us into error, etc. As was alleged in the first
days conference.


Camp. Where you infer, that the Council asked forgiveness of their
erroneous decree: they meant not any error of doctrine, but of words
whatsoever had been spoken against the decree, before the determination of the
Council: as, many words might be before used, which after the Councils
determination it was not lawful to use.


Fulke. They fear least ignorance might have drawn them into error, or
headlong Will driven them to decline from Justice: and therefore they desired
pardon, even for their erroneous and unjust determinatio^s if any were: which
were needeles, if none could be.


Camp. I say, they prayed for those that before the determination of the decree
were in error, or for those that spoke against the decree before it was
concluded: as, when things are disputed of doubtfully, many things are spoken
amiss: as, if any words be spoken here to convert an other. etc.


Goade. You are full of similitudes, and as evil you apply them. It is well
that you make no more account of general Cou^cils: for by your similitude, you
make a general Council no better then this meeting.


Campion. I do not make this and a general Council a like.


Fulke. The next place was cited out of the second Council of Nice, which
decrees that Angels and souls of me^, have bodies, are visible, are
circumscriptible. Action 5. Sanctus dixit de Angelis. etc.


Campion. Let me have the book.


Fulke. You shall have it when I have read the place. De Angelis and
Archangelis and eorum potestatibus, quibus and nostras animas adiungo, ipsa
Cathol. Ecclesia sentit esse quidem intelligibiles sed non omnino corporis
expertes and inuisibiles, vt vos Gentiles dicitis: verum tenui corpore preditos
and aerio sieve igneo, vt scriptum est, Qui facit Angelos suos spiritus and
ministros eius ignem vrentem: sic autem multos sanctorum patrum sensisse
cognouimus. Quoru^ est Basilius cognomento Magnus, and beatus Athanasius, and
Methodius, and qui stant ab illis. Solummodo autem Deus incorporeus, and
informabilis. Intelligibiles autem creaturae nequaquam ex toto sunt incorporeae
and inimitabiles. Pictura existunt, quare etia^ in loco existunt, and
circumferentiam habent. Quanquam autem non sunt vt nos corporeae, vtpote ex
quatuor elementis, and crassa illa materia: nemo tamen vel Angelos vel daemones
vel animas dixerit incorporeas. Multoties eni^ in proprio corpore visi sunt,
sed ab illis, quibus dominus oculos aperuit. Nos igitur eos no^ vt Deu^, sed vt
creatur as intelligibiles and ministros Dei, non tame^ vt vere incorporeos,
pingimus and colimus. Quod aute^ hominis formae pinganturin causa est, quod in
ea visi sunt, si qua^do ministeriu^ Dei apud homines obierint. Tharasius
sanctiss. Patriarcha dixit, Animaduertamus dictum patris, quod illic, Samaritae
imagines Domini and seruatoris nostri, item intemeratae eius matris
subuerterunt: hic vero, Gentiles. Ostendit autem pater, quod and Angelos
pingere oportet quando circumscribi possint, and vt homines apparuerint. Sacra
Synodus dixit, Etiam domine. Concerning Angels and Archangels, and the powers
of them, unto whom also I adioyne our souls, the Catholic Church her self
does so think, that they are in deed intelligible, but not altogether void
of bodies and invisible, as you Gentiles do say: but that they have a thin
body, either of air or of fire, as it is written, Which makes his Angels
spirits, and his ministers a burning fire. And so we have known that many of
the holy fathers have thought, among whom is Basil, surnamed the great, and
blessed Athanasius and Methodius, and them that stand with them. Only God is
without body and shape: but the intelligible creatures are not altogether
bodiles, and they are such as may be portraicted in picture. Wherefore they are
in place also, and have a circumscription although they be not bodily as we
are, as of the four elements, and that gross matter. Yet no man may say that
Angels, or devils, or souls are without bodies, for they have been often seen
in their proper bodies: but of them, to whom the Lord has opened their eyes.
Therefore we do paint and worship them, not as God, but as intelligible
creatures and the ministers of God, but yet not as truly being without body.
But that they are painted in the shape of man, the cause is, that they have
been seen in that shape, if at any time they did execute the ministry of God
amongst me^. Tharasius the most holy Patriarch said, Let us mark the saying
of the father: that there, the Samaritans did overthrow the images of our Lord
and savior, and also of his undefiled mother: but here, the Gentiles. The
father also shows, that we ought to paint the Angels, seeing they may be
circumscribed, and have appeared as men. The holy Synod said, Yea my Lord.


Campion. You have answered your self.


Fulke. That is your common answer, when you can coin no better.


Camp. I answered then, and so do now: Assumunt corpora, They take bodies upon
them, they have none of their own.


Fulke. He says, they may be circumscribed.


Camp. That is, they may be painted.


Fulke. Nay, he says plainly, they are not Expertes corporis, void of body,
and defines of what bodily matter they consist, namely of air or fire, and
for that he alleges the scripture: also he says, they are not invisible.


Campion. Look in what bodies they have appeared, in such they may be painted:
they did appear as men, they be not men, neither have they bodies of their
own.


Fulke. He says expressly, they have been seen in their own proper body.


Campion. The judgment of the Council is, that the Angels may be painted:
that is all.


Fulke. That is not all: for it affirms that they are circumscriptible and
visible, as I said before.


Campion. You have proved no error of the Council.


Fulke. We might have brought the Epitome of the Councils, gathered by one
Bartholemew Garanza a Spanish Friar, which notes it for an error in that
Council, contrary to the Lateran Council under Innocentius the third, who
thought him self as well learned as you.


Campion. It is no matter.


Fulke. Yes, it is a matter when Papists agree not amongst them selves.


Campion. You should have brought it, I would have answered him also.


Fulke. Well, let them that be wise and learned, peruse the Council at their
leisure. Further, in reasoning of Peter's reprehension, you said his error was a
matter of fact, and not of faith: for the Pope you say may so err, and be
reprehended of a poor Priest, who may say unto him: Sir, why do you so: To
this I replied that so to reprehend the Pope, was against your own Canon law,
which now I prove out of the decrees. Part 1. Distinct. 40. cap. Si Papa suae
and fraternae salutis neglige^s deprehenditur, inutilis and remissus in suis
operibus, and insuper a bono taciturnus, quod magis officit sibi and omnibus:
nihilominus innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit primo mancipio
gehennae, cum ipso plagis multis in aeternu^ vapulaturos. Huius culpas istic
redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus, qui cunctos ipse iudicaturus a nemine
est iudicandus, nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius. Pro cuius perpetuo statu,
vniuersit as fidelium tanto instantius or at, quanto suam salutem post Deum ex
illius incolumitate animaduertit propensius pendere. If the Pope be found
negligent of his own and his brethrens salvation, unprofitable and remiss in
his works, and also holding his peace of goodness, which does more hurt him
and all men: nevertheless, he leads with him innumerable people by heaps, to
the chief slave of hell, with whom he shall be beaten with many stripes for
ever. No mortal man does here presume to reprove his faults, because he him
self being to judge all men, is to be judged of no man, except he be found
erring from the faith: for whose perpetual state, the university of faithful
does pray so much the more earnestly, by how much it perceaueth their
salvation after God to hang more readily of his health. Again, by the
Extrauagant, De concessione prebendae: titulo 4. cap. 2. ad Apostolatus, in the
Gloss, where he shows that the Pope may do that which to all others is
forbidden: Nec est qui audeat dicere, Domine cur ita facis? And in the
marginall note: Papae nullus audeat dicere, Domine cur ita facis? No man may be
bold to say to the Pope, Sir, why do you so?


Camp. Read the decree again.


Fulke. Si Papa. etc.


Campion. The meaning of the decree is, that no man may iudicially reprehende
him: I say so.


Fulke. Both the decree and the Extrauagant, speak generally, that the Pope
must not be reprehended of any man, except he be an heretic, whereof it
follows that Gratians Decree and the Gloss thought not, but that he might
err in faith.


Camp. Mine answer is, he may do it soberly, as a man may with humility
reprehende his prince, but not judge him.


Fulke. Let other men judge, I have showed as much as I promised out of the
Canon Law. You charged me to affirm in mine answer to Bristow, that so a man
hold the foundation of faith, it is no matter what errors he hold beside.
Here is my book, show these words, or any words to that sense, as you
promised.


Camp. You say that the true Church may err in matters of great weight, so
they retain the foundation.


Fulke. I say, yt so long as a man holds the foundation, though he err in
small matters, he may be saved.


Came. You say ye fathers erred in invocation of Saints, which is a great matter
with Gods Church, though you call it a small matter, and yet you will not teach
the people yt it is a small matter.


Fulk. I said, that invocation of Saints as it was held by some of the latter
sort of ancient fathers, was but a small error in comparison of such gross
heresies which the Popish Church does now hold, and in comparison of such
invocation of Saints as is now maintained and practiced by the Papists: but
your accusation of my book was written, therefore you can not alter it.


Camp. Lend me your book that I may charge you. The book being delivered,
after a little turning, he said, This is not the book that I meant.


Fulke. This is the book that you named.


Camp. I meant your answer unto Doctor Allens articles, because Bristow has
confuted it.


Fulk. This is a poor shift, when you have slandered my book, and named one,
to fly to another: so would you do with that book you name now. For I am
sure, that neither in that, nor any other that ever I wrote, your slander can
be found.


Goad. There is an other thing ye were desirous to see, touching the Council
of Constantinople, and the Council of Nice, one of them being alleged to be
contrary to the other about setting up of Images in the Church: the Council of
Constantinople disalowing Images, and the second Council of Nice allowing
the^, and condemning the other Council as erroneous.


Camp. That of Constantinople, was not a general nor lawful Council, but a
certain Iconomachy, and may rather be called a conuenticle then a general
Council, and therefore no contrariety hereby proved between general
Councils.


Goade. It appears it was general, and solemnly gathered in the chief
city: hear the words in the title of the Council. Sancta, magna and
uniuersalis Synodus quae iuxtagratia^ Dei, and per pium deuotorum and
orthodoxorum nostrorum Imperatorum Consta^tini Council. To. 3. fol. 139.
and Leonis decretum, in hac diuinorm^ studiosa and regia ciuitate congregata
est, etc. The holy great and universal Synod which by the grace of God and
the godly decree of our godly Emperors Constantine and Leo, is gathered in
this holy and royal city. This Council did confute by the Scriptures, the
setting up of Images in ye Church, out of Deuteronomy. 20. Thou shall not make to thy
self any Image nor likeness of any thing. etc. and Deuteronomy. 4. For which cause
(says this Counsel) you heard the voice of words in the midst of the
fire, but you saw no image. Contrary to this, the Council of Nice does
accurse those that will not worship images in these words: Qui venerandas
imagines, non venera^tur Anathema. Accursed be they yt worship not holy images.

So it appears that these two Councils were contrary, and therefore one of
them did err. But I will proceed to the next place. You doubted also, whether
it were to be found in Saint Augustine, that there is no Miracle in the
Sacrament. Now you may hear his own words. To. 3. De Trinitate lib. 3. cap.
10. Sicut panis ad hoc factus in accipiendo Sacramento consumitur. Sed quia
haec hominibus nota sunt quia per homines fiunt, honorem tanquam religiosa
possunt habere, stuporem tanquam mira non possunt. As the bread ordained for
this purpose, is consumed in receiving the Sacrament. But because these things
are known unto men, and are done by men, they may have honor or reverence as
holy things, but they can not be wondered at as things strange and miraculous.
Here you have Augustines words against miracle in the Sacrament.


Camp. In deed there is no such evident miracle visibly appearing, as when
Christ cured y^ lame, the blind, etc. but yet there is a great miracle which
our faith does acknowledge.


Goade. Augustine speaks simply against miracle: so that whether it be
visible or invisible, both is excluded. Beside, it is perpetual in all
miracles, that there must be some outward sensible sign. Further, you doubted
of Inhaerens iustitia, righteousness inherent in our selves, which I avouched to
be erroneous doctrine set forth in the late Council of Trent. The words are
these, Council. Trident. cap. 7. Vere iusti nominamur, and sumus iustitiam in
nobis recipientes vnusquisque suam, secundum mensuram quam spiritus sanctus
partitur singulis prout vult, secundum propriam cuiusque dispositionem and
cooperationem. Et cap. 16. Quae quum iustitia nostra dicitur, quia per eam
nobis inhaerente^ iustificamur, illa eadem Dei est, quia a Deo nobis infunditur
per Christi meritum. We are called and in deed are truly righteous, receiving
in our selves every man his own righteousness, according to the measure which
the holy Ghost does divide to every one even as he will, according to every
man's own proper disposition and cooperation. For that righteousness which is
called ours, because we are justified by it inherent in our selves, the self
same is the righteousness of God, because it is powered into us from God by the
merit of Christ.


Camp. I did not doubt of inherent righteousness in our selves, whether it were
in the Council of Trent, for I defend and maintain it as the Council teaches
it: you say it is by imputation of Christ's righteousness being without us,
whereby we are justified: and I say, we are justified by that righteousness
which is within us, though it be not of us.


Goade. The place which I urged against you the other day, beside many other in
ye scripture, is direcly against this doctrine. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He has made him
to be fin for us which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness
of God in him.


Fulke. Well, now we are to come to the question. You hold that the natural
body and blood of Christ is contained in the Sacrament of the Lords supper.
Your words are, Christ is present in the Sacrament substa^tially, very God and
man in his natural body.


Camp. I say there is really present in the Sacrament, the natural body and
blood of Christ under that bread and cup.


Fulke. What mean you by these words under the bread and cup, that we may
agree of terms?


Campion. You know in the bread is whitenes, etc. that is not in his body:
make your argument.


Fulke. So I will.

The cup is not the natural blood of Christ:

Ergo the other part is not his natural body. Argument 1.



Campion. There is present in the cup, the natural blood of Christ. Go to my
words.


Fulke. Well.

The natural blood of Christ is not present in the cup:

Ergo the natural body is not present in the other part.


Campion. The natural blood of Christ is present in the cup.


Fulke. Thus I disprove it.

The words of Christ's institution be these:

This cup is the new testament in my blood:

But the natural blood of Christ is not the new testament in his blood:

Ergo the natural blood of Christ is not in the cup.


Camp. The ward, Is, is neither in ye Hebrew, nor in ye Greek.


Fulke. Uery well, you shall see me find it. (...).


Campion. You must add this word (...).


Fulke. Nay, the word (...) is in Saint Paul, This cup is the new testament in
my blood.


Campion. The word (...), which is understood, is referred to the beginning
of the sentence. Hic est calix nouum testamentum in sanguine meo: This is the
cup, the new testament in my blood: he says not this cup is the new testament.


Fulke. You pervert the words, you cannot shift it off so.


Campion. My text has it so.


Fulke. It cannot be so, you have heard the Greek, and your vulgar translation
is according to the Greek: Hic calix nouum testamentum est in meo sanguine. 1.
Cor. cap. 11.


Camp. No Sir, I was in hand with the 22. of Luke.


Fulke. Shall you appoint me my text? I say, my text is taken out of Saint
Paul. I have showed (...) in the Greek and Latin both.


Campion. It is referred to the beginning, Hic est calix nouum testamentum.


Fulke. The composition cannot admit that peruersion, you would obscure the
sense by disordering the words: but Saint Paul is a better interpreter of
Saint Luke, in whom the verb (...) lacks, then your vulgar translation.


Campion. What do you infer of these words?


Fulke. The cup is the new testament:

But the natural blood of Christ is not the new testament:

Ergo the natural blood of Christ is not the cup.


Camp. M. Doctor this is your argument. The cup is the new testament, etc. I
deny your argument.


Fulke. It is a syllogism.


Campion. It is neither in mode nor figure.


Fulke. It is in Baroco.


Camp. You take the cup otherwise in ye Mayor then in ye conclusion. For when
it is said, the cup is the new Testament, the meaning is, that in the cup,
which is the blood of Christ, is the covenant of the new Testament. In the
conclusion you take the cup for the chalice, wherein the blood of Christ is.


Fulke. I take the cup for the same in both: I speak and mean as the Apostle
does. I take the cup for that which is in the cup. Therefore mark my
argument again.

The cup, or that which is in the cup, is the new Testament:

The natural blood of Christ is not the new Testament:

Ergo the natural blood of Christ is not the cup, or that which is in the
cup. Answer to this Syllogism.


Campion. It is no Syllogism, there be quatuor termini.


Fulke. Well I perceive then, you can answer no otherwise.


Campion. It is plain taking the cup, for that in the cup.


Fulke. Master Lieutenaunt, you hear his answer: I will rest in the judgment
of those which know what a Syllogism is.


Goade. I will propounde an other argument. You say that Christ is present in
the Sacrament substantially, very God and man in his natural body, which I
improve thus.

Look how Christ was present to the Fathers in the wilderness 2. Argument.
in Manna, and in the rock, even so he is present to us in our Sacrament:

But he was not present to them in their Sacrament in his natural body:

Therefore he is not in his natural body present in our Sacrament.


Campion. I deny your Mayor or first proposition.


Goade. I prove it thus. They received in their Sacrament the same substance
that we do: Therefore they had the same presence.


Campion. I deny your Antecedent.


Goade. I prove it out of the plain words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 3. Et
omnes eandem escam, etc. speaking of our fathers the Israelites, he says, And
did al eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and the
rock was Christ.


Campion. They did eat eandem escam spiritualem, the same spiritual grace,
but not the same substance.


Goade. They received the same that we do touching the substance: you can not
so anoyde the force of this place. Spiritual is added in respect of the
corporal signs, which differ between them and us, as shall after appear, but
the same spiritual substance in both, as the circumstance of that place
enforces.


Camp. Why, Christ had yet received no substance of flesh, and therefore could
not then be present to them substantially in his natural body.


Goade. You reason well for me. Therefore he was present unto them
spiritually, as the words are, eandem escam spiritualem: And so he is to us
present, and not carnally, because Christ had not then taken flesh, and the
Fathers did then eat Christ in substance as well as we, therefore the presence
and eating in both must needs be spiritual.


Camp. I answer they had the same in a mystery and figure.


Goade. This is no answer. I will easily take it away both by the words
following in the text, and also by the manifest circumstance of the place, both
which proves to be clearly the same in substance. They had the same Christ,
who is the substance of our Sacraments: ergo the same substance that we have.


Camp. They had not the same Christ in substance, in their Sacrament.


Goade. The words following are plain to expound the Apostles meaning: Et omnes
eundem potum biberunt, etc. Petra autem erat Christus. They did all drink the
same spiritual drink, for they drunk of the spiritual rock that followed
them, which rock was Christ: Therefore they eating and drinking the same
Christ, did eat and drink the same substance.


Campion. There is a fallacion in the word, eandem, the same. In a mystery and
in signification the same, but in substance, great difference.


Goade. The difference was only in the outward signs, the measure of
revelation, and in time, they believing on Christ to come, and we in Christ
that is come: but in matter and substance the very same. And that the Apostles
meaning must needs be so, I will now manifestly prove out of the circumstance
of this text, and out of the Apostles own argument. His purpose is to prove
that the Israelites were nothing inferior to the Corinthians, touching the
seals or Sacraments of Gods favor: and therefore the Corinthians had no more
to boaste in, touching their Sacraments then the Israelites had. Whereupon he
says they did eat the same meat etc. ergo they were equal. Now if they
eat not the same in substance, which the Corinthians did eat, but only in
shadow and figure (as you say) then the Israelites were much inferior to the
Corinthians in their sacraments, and so ye would make the Apostles argument of
no force.


Campion. The Apostles meaning is, that the old Israelites believed in the same
Christ, and did eat him after a sort, as we do: they were not altogether
equal, for he speaks a little before of Baptism, saying, that they were
baptized in the cloud, this was not the same with our baptism.


Goade. In deed the outward sign differed, as I said before, namely the
watery cloud from our water in Baptism, but in matter and substance it was a
sign of the same invisible grace. And so the Apostle proves the Israelites
equal to the Corinthians, and consequently to us in both the Sacraments.


Campion. Abraham believed in the same Christ, yet Christ was not then
incarnate to Abraham, as he is now to us, etc.


Goade. To what purpose is this? What does it help you? does it not rather
confirm that I said to be true, the same in substance, the same Christ before
and now, the difference to be in time? These are your old excursions, when ye
can not answer the argument. But now, after I have proved the same substance
(which you denied) first by the plain words, and then by the evident
circumstance and drift of the text, I will yet further urge this argument by
the judgment of Saint Augustine. tom. 9. in Ioh. tract. 26. Sacramenta illa
fuerunt in signis diuersa, sed in re quae significatur, pariasunt. Apostolum
audi. Omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt, spiritualem vtique eandem:
Nam corporalem alteram, quia illi Manna, nos aliud: spiritualem vero quam nos.
Those Sacraments were in signs diverse, but in the thing signified are equal.
Hear what the Apostle says. All did eat the same spiritual meat: in deed
the same meat spiritual. For touching the corporal meat they did eat one,
and we another, but they did eat the same spiritual meat that we do.


Campion. You must prove out of Augustine, that they did eat the same Christ.


Goade. That has been already plainly proved out of the text, They drank of
the rock, etc. the rock was Christ. But you shall have it proved also out of
Augustine, who expounding the Apostles words, says, they did eat the same
spiritual meat that we do eat.


Campion. He means the same in effect.


Goade. Augustines words are plain, not the same in effect, but in substance
and matter. In signis diuersa, sed in re paria. Those Sacraments in matter or
thing signified are equal: He makes difference in the signs, but none at all
in the thing. Re paria: the same thing or substance in both, therefore the same
Christ.


Campion. The same Christ was to them incarnate in hope and effect, as the
Lamb is said to be slain from the beginning of the world: but Christ in
deed was not yet incarnate.


Goade. True it is, that touching the purpose and counsel of God, and the
efficacy of Christ's death in all ages, the Lamb Christ was slain from the
beginning. But what is this to mine argument out of Augustine? The difference
of time is no matter, they eat the same thing, they did eat Sacramenta re
paria, says Augustine. And in his treatise de vtilitate poenitentiae Tom. 9.
he proves very plainly, the same Christ and the same substance to be in the
Israelites sacrament, and in ours.


Campion. Read the place.


Goade. Eundem inquit cibum spiritualem manducanerunt: quid est eunde^, nisi
quia eum quem etiam nos? Suffecerat vt diceret, cibum spiritualem
manducauerunt: eundem inquit: eundem non inuenio quomodo intelligam, nisi eum
quem manducamus and nos. Quid ergo ait aliquis, Hoc erat Manna illud, quod ego
nunc accipio: Ergo nihil modo venit, si ante iam fuit, ergo euacuatum est
scandalum crucis. Quomodo ergo eundem, nisi quia addidit spiritualem? Nam qui
Manna illud sic acceperunt, vt tantummodo indigentiae suae corporali satisfieri
putarent, and ventrem suum pasci, no^ mentem: Some of these words were then
omitted, and not read for brevity sake.
nihil magnum manducauerunt. Quicunque in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem
quem nos cibum spiritualem manducauerunt. Sic etiam eundem potum quem nos, sed
spiritualem, id est, qui fide capiebatur, non qui corpore hauriebatur. Audisti
eundem potum, petra erat Christus. Non enim alter Christus tunc, alter nunc.
Tunc enim Christus venturus, modo Christus venit. Venturus and venit, diuersa
verba sunt, sed idem Christus. He says they did eat the same spiritual meat.
What is the same, but the same that we also eat? It might have sufficed to
say, they did eat spiritual meat, but he says, the same. I do not find
how to understand this word, the same, but the same which we also do eat.
Then may some say, What, was Manna the same which I now receive? then does
nothing come now but that which was before? then the offense of the cross is
become void: how then can it be true that he says, the same, but that he
adds spiritual? For they that did receive Manna in such sort, that they
thought thereby to satisfy only their corporal necessity, and to feed
their belly and not their mind, did eat no great thing. Whosoever in Manna
did understand Christ, did eat the same spiritual meat that we do, and also
received the same drink that we do, but spiritual, that is, which was
received by faith, and not by the body. Thou have heard that it is the same
drink, the rock was Christ. For there was not one Christ then, and another
now: for then Christ was to come, now he is come. To come, and is come, be
diverse words, but the same Christ. You hear how Augustine, as it were of
purpose, often urges the word, eundem, the same meat. And afterward
explaneth it to be the same Christ in their Sacraments and ours, and
notwithstanding the difference in time, yet the same in substance.


Campion. I grant to be the same Christ, as I said before, touching the effect
and deed, slain to them in hope, but to us in deed: they had the same
touching the fruit and effect, and so S. Augustine is to be understood.


Goade. Your answer is more absurd then some other writers of your side. For
they distinguish, though very corruptly, Sacramenta veterum sub lege tantum
figurabant, nostra autem conferunt gratiam. The Sacraments ofthe fathers under
the law did only figure, but ours do confer and give grace.


Campion. This is mine answer: the same in effect and end, touching salvation.
If you can say no more, ye may go to another argument.


Goade. Your answer is taken away, and can stand neither with the text of the
Apostle, nor yet with Saint Augustines judgment. Beside, it is manifest you
would confound those things, which of their own nature must needs be
distinguished, namely the thing it self, and the effect, end, or fruit that
comes thereof. For the effect being salvation, is the fruit that follows
the spiritual eating of Christ being the thing it self or substance: whom
whosoever first eats not, can not be partaker of the fruit that follows.


Camp. You have not, neither can take away mine answer. The same I say still,
in effect and end, but not equal in the thing signified. As, a man may be
sick to day, and to morrow whole: the same man, but not the same in substance
of his body and blood.


Goade. Well, seeing you have none other answer, I will leave this argument,
and commit it to the judgment of the learned to judge of your answer.


Fulke. Thus I will prove, that Christ is not present in his natural body in
the Sacrament.

Whatsoever is in the sacrament is void of sense, or insensible: 3. Argument.


But Christ is not insensible:

Ergo Christ is not in the Sacrament.


Camp. Your mayor and your minor are both untrue in some sense.


Fulke. This is your old shift, to trouble the hearers understanding, with
proof of both parts, that you might not be espied in the point of
controversy.


Campion. That you say insensible, it is true, if you mean the spiritual
grace, which is not subject to sense.


Fulke. I mean by insensible, void of life or sense.


Campion. Then I deny your mayor.


Fulke. I prove it out of Epiphanius. lib. Anchorato.


Campion. Read the place.


Fulke. The words be these. (...), etc.


Campion. What word build you upon:


Fulke. I have read the words, where he says it is insensible, if you
understand it.


Campion. You might have brought the Latin book.


Fulke. Then you would have cauiled, that it was not rightly translated: but
you were best confess your ignorance.


Campion. I pray you help me.


Fulke. If you understand it your self, I need not.


Campion. I understand Latin better then Greek. Yet I trust I have Greek
enough to answer you withal. Read it in Latin.


Fulke. Nay, I will read it in English, that other men may understand it as
well as you. For we see what our father took in his hands, as it is contained
in the Gospel, that he arose at supper, and took these things. And after he
had given thanks, he said, This of me is that. And we see that it is not
equal, nor like, neither to the incarnate image, nor to the invisible deity,
nor to the lineame^ts of his members: For this thing is of long shape, or roll
fashion, and void of sense, as concerning power. And yet he would say through
grace, This of mine is that, and no man does discredit the saying.


Camp. You lose time: we should not credit our eyes, but faith. What have you
gotten by this place: Epiphanius says none must discredit the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, because it is a long white thing.


Fulke. You understand not the place.


Campion. The meaning is, we must not credit sense, but faith: you have
gained nothing by this place.


Fulke. Yes, more then you would willingly afford. First, that the sacrame^tal
bread in that time, was not such a round thin cake, as you use in your Mass,
but a roll of bread: Secondly, that the sacrament was not equal with Christ:
and thirdly that it was an insensible thing, void of life, having not so much
as yt power of sense.


Campion. He says that we should not credit our sight, but faith: we must
believe Christ to be present.


Fulke. As Christ has said and means.


Campion. That which I see is void of sense, it is against your self, it
teaches us to believe faith.


Fulke. You know not the argument of ye book, nor of ye place.


Campion. Yes as well as you.


Fulke. Then show it before this company, you that will challenge the whole
Church of England, and make profession of universal knowledge.


Camp. I will answer any challenge I have made.


Fulke. Yea, even as you do this. Show us the argument which the Doctor
handles in this place, if you can.


Campion. I have said, you are not able to reply.


Fulke. Yes if you will show the argument, I will reply. Campion. You do not.


Fulke. I do not, therefore I cannot: I will first show the argument of the
place: he speaks of images, and namely he shows how man is made after Gods
image, and yet is not equal with God, although Christ being the image of the
Father, is equal with him. This he shows by example of the sacrament, which
is the image of Christ, in such sort as man is the image of God. For it is not
equal with Christ, nor like unto him, either concerning his humanity or
deity: but a mere insensible thing, as that which has no power of life:
whereas Christ is all sensible, all of power, all incomprehensible, concerning
his Godhead.


Campion. Reply against mine answer, if you can. The exterior form or color
which we see, is that which he says to be insensible.


Fulke. He speaks not of color, he speaks of that which Christ calls
his body. Is the exterior form called the body of Christ: Is the color of
bread the image of Christ: Epiphanius says, that of which Christ said, This
is my body, is void of sense: Therefore he says the whole Sacrament, or
whatsoever is contained in it, is insensible.


Campion. That is, Christ is not seen, but under the exterior form or color,
For no substance ca^ be seen. Are not you Doctor Fulke? and yet I see nothing
but your color and exterior form. I will abide by this, that the substance of
any thing can not be seen.


Fulke. I will not vouchesafe to reply upon this answer, too childish for a
Sophister.


Camp. You are very imperious. You come I trow, to pose me as a Grammar
scholar, and to take me up with check at your pleasure. I know no cause why I
should take it at your hands: I am the Queens prisoner, and not yours.


Fulke. I would you were the Queens true subject.


Goade. Whatsoever is naturally present in the Sacrament, is beneath upon
earth: 4. Argument.


But Christ touching his body is not beneath upon earth:

Ergo Christ touching his body, is not naturally present in the Sacrament.


Campion. I deny your minor.


Goade. Christ touching his bodily presence is in heaven, and only in heaven:
therefore not upon earth.


Campion. I deny your Antecedent, it is partly true, and partly false,
ordinarily he is in heaven, but miraculously his body also is in earth.


Goade. I will ease you of your distinction.

Christ is no way present on earth, touching his body:

Therefore neither ordinarily, nor yet miraculously. Answer to the argument
briefly.


Campion. As brief as you will. He is some way present upon earth touching his
body. Prove your antecedent.


Goade. I prove it thus.

If Christ touching his bodily presence, be any way present upon earth, then he
is to be sought upon earth:

But he is not to be sought upon earth:

Ergo no way present upon earth.


Campion. I deny your Minor. He is some way to be sought upon earth in the
Sacrament, but not by his ordinary presence.


Goade. Mine argument is against all distinction.


Campion. Will you not give me leave to distinguish:


Goade. I say, he is no way bodily present on earth, which utterly takes away
your distinction. And I prove it by the Apostles reason. Colos. 3. 1. Si
consurrexistis cum Christo. etc. If ye be risen together with Christ, seek
those things that are above where Christ sits at the right hand of God, set
your affection on heavenly things, and not upon earthly things. The Apostle
exhorts us to seek things above, because Christ is in heaven touching his
body, sitting at the right hand of God. If he be beneath on earth bodily any
way, then the Apostles reason is nothing.


Campion. The Apostles meaning is, that Christ is not to be sought for now, in
that sort as when he walked upon earth.


Goade. This answer is taken away before. The Apostles true meaning is, to
draw them from men's traditions, and earthly ceremonies, by this reason,
Because Christ is not beneath on earth touching his body.


Campion. He means of all earthly things, and not of ceremonies.


Goade. That is but your conjecture, of ignorance or forgetfulness of the
Apostles argument in the former chapter next going before.


Camp. Is not Christ to be sought upon earth? when I look into my Bible, do I
not seek Christ?


Goade. I think you do not truly seek him.


Camp. Do you?


Goade. I will not answer your words. Answer you mine argument, ye would go
from the matter.


Camp. Your argument is nothing. If Christ be in heaven, I must not seek him
in earth.


Goade. It is the argument of the Apostle, and may thus be framed.

Our affection must there be set where Christ is, touching his body:

But Christ is in heaven alone touching his body, where he sits at the right
hand of God:

Therefore our affection must be in heaven.


Camp. What is it to seek Christ above? must I fly up into heaven? it is our
affection and cogitation that must be lift up.


Goade. What is this to the argument, you answer not the Apostles reason,
being framed into a Syllogism.

Our affection must be where Christ is, touching his body:

But he is in heaven in his body, at the right hand of God:

Ergo there to be sought, and not upon earth.

If Christ be any way upon earth, the Apostles argument holds not: but
contrariwise by the Apostles reason, earthly things were to be sought, if
Christ be any way upon earth touching his body.


Camp. I must not now seek Christ in conversation in Jerusalem: to seek him
in the Sacrament, is not to seek him in earth.


Goad. But if he be on earth in the Sacrament (as you say) bodily, then he may
be sought upon earth, yea and earthly things also, which the Apostle denies.
There is a manifest opposition in the Apostles words between above and
beneath, in heaven and in earth: ye may not confound these.

We must ascend thither where Christ is:

But he is above in heaven:

Therefore in mind we must ascend into heaven.


Campion. The drift of the Apostle is, we must ascend with Christ, we must die
with Christ, in affection, and spiritually.


Goade. You never answer directly to the argument. It (...) contrary to the
Apostles plain words, and against the scope of his exhortation, that we
should seek Christ beneath, as any way bodily present on earth.


Camp. Mine answer is, that according to his ordinary presence he is above,
but according to miracle, he is bodily upon earth beneath.


Goade. Now ye fly again to miracle: but this shift is taken away before. For
if Christ be any way bodily present on earth, though it be by miracle, then he
is to be sought on earth, which the Apostle denies. You hear his answer,
this stone has been rolled enough.


Fulke. If Christ be present in his natural body, he is present in his true
body: 5. Argument.


But he is not present in his true body:

Ergo he is not present in his natural.


Campion. I deny your Minor: he is present in his true body.


Fulke. If he be present in his true body, then wheresoever the Sacrament is,
there is his true body:

But wheresoever the Sacrament is, there is not his true body:

Ergo he is not present in his true body.


Campion. Prove your Minor: Wheresoever the Sacrament is, there is his true
body.


Fulke. Chrysostom denies it in cap. 5. Math. Homilia 12. operis imperfecti:
Sin vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transfer peccatum est and periculum,
sicut docet nos Balthazar, qui bibens in calicibus sacratis, de regno depositus
and de vita. Si ergo haec vasa sanctificata in priuatos vsus transfer
periculosum est, in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed misterium corporis
Christi continetur, quanto magis vasa corporis nostri, quae sibi Deus ad
habitaculum preparauit, non debemus locum dare diabolo agendi in eis quae vult.
Here you see Chrysostom does plainly deny the true body of Christ to be
present in the holy vessels, in the which the mystery or sacrament thereof is
contained.


Campion. Of all other Doctors he makes most against you.


Fulke. He makes nothing against us for this question, in any place of his
works: but how answer you unto this place?


Camp. I say, where the natural body of Christ is present, there is his true
body present.


Fulke. But this Doctor says clean contrary, that in the holy vessels is
contained the mystery of the body of Christ, but not the true body of Christ.


Camp. He speaks of Balthasars vessels.


Fulke. Although he brings Balthasars example of abusing the holy vessels of
the Jews, to show how dangerous it is to convert holy things to private
uses: yet he speaks expressly of the holy vessels of the Christians, wherein
was the mystery of the body of Christ.


Camp. The chalice may be abused, after the true body of Christ is taken out
of it, and that is a great fault to abuse it, when the body of Christ is not in
it.


Fulke. Then he should say, In quibus non erat: but he says, In quibus non
est, In which the true body of Christ is not.


Campion. He talks of all holy vessels, not only of the chalice.


Fulke. I grant he reasons from the less to the more: if it be dangerous
to abuse al holy vessels, namely those, in which the true body of Christ is
not, but the mystery thereof: how much more perilous is it, to abuse the
vessels of our body, wherein God dwells?


Campion. Does he say, that the body of Christ is not in the chalice?


Fulke. He says it is in none of the vessels:

But the chalice is a vessel:

Ergo it is not in the chalice.


Campion. May not the holy vessels be abused after mass is done? and so he
means that though the body of Christ be not in them when they are abused, yet
it is an heinous fault to abuse the^ when the Sacrament is taken out.


Fulke. His words are plain, that the true body of Christ is not in them, but
the mystery or sacrament thereof. Here D. Fulke was admonished to rehearse the
place in English, that the people might understand.


For if it be a sin and danger to transfer the sanctified vessels unto
private uses, as Balthazar does teach us, which drinking in the hallowed
cups, was deposed from his kingdom, and from his life. Therefore if it be so
dangerous to transfer unto private uses these sanctified vessels, in which
is not the true body of Christ, but a mystery of the body of Christ is
contained: how much more the vessels of our body, which God has prepared for
a dwelling place to him self, ought we not to yield unto the devil, to do in
them what he will. The place is so plain, that no man can deny it: he says
the mystery of Christ is contained in the vessels, therefore he speaks not
of the vessels when they are empty, but when the sacrament is in them, which
he denies to be the true body of Christ.


Campion. The thing may be abused after the true body of Christ be taken out,
and yet there is a mystery there, because of the spiritual use, the meaning
is, you must not abuse the thing referred to holy uses, by the example of
Balthazar, and therefore the mystery is always there, when the vessels are
empty.


Fulke. A very secret mystery in deed; that is in the empty chalice. Well,
well, I think that there is none so simple here, but he may see in what case
you stand.


Campion. A mystery is not always taken in one sense. Why may there not be a
mystery of Christ in the empty chalice? there is a mystery of Christ in
every thing. I would you might answer me a while to that I could bring out of
Chrysostom.


Fulke. You are not allowed to oppose at this time, but I will answer you in
writing whatsoever you can bring. As for this matter, all men see how unable
you are to answer. I could help you with a better answer my self.


Goade. If Christ be present in the sacrament in his natural 6. Argument.
body, then his bodily presence must continue so long as the use of the
sacrament continues, to the worlds end:

But Christ touching his bodily presence does not so continue:

Therefore Christ is not present in the sacrament in his natural body.


Camp. Christ does, and so shall continue his bodily presence to the end of
the world.


Goade. Christ him self has denied his bodily presence or continuance:

Therefore he shall not so continue.


Campion. I deny your antecedent.


Goade. Io. 16. verse. 28. I leave the world and go to the father. And Math.
26. 11. The poor ye shall have always with you, but me ye shall not have
always.


Camp. He means, he will not be conversant in the world as then he was,
touching his outward conversation, and poor estate: you shall not says he,
have me always with you as you have the poor. Here he was entering into a long
tale.


Goade. I looked for this shift before. I will take away your distinction, ye
are too full of words, ye will not suffer me to go on with mine argument:
you are belike afraid.

It is spoken in respect of his bodily presence simply:

Therefore not in respect of his poor estate.


Campion. Prove what you can: I deny your antecedent.


Goade. I prove it by Saint Augustine, expounding the same words of our
Savior Christ. Tractat. in 10. 50. Pauperes semper habebitis vobiscum, me
autem non semper: loquebatur enim de presentia corporis sui. Nam secundum
maiestatem suam, secundum prouidentiam, secundum ineffabilem and inuisibilem
gratiam, impletur quod ab eo dictum est, Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad
consummationem seculi: secundum carnem quam verbum assumpsit, secundum id quod
de virgin natus est etc. non semper habebitis vobiscu^. Asce^dit in coelum,
and non est hic, ibi est enim: sedet ad dextra^ patris, and hic est, non enim
recessit praesentia maiestatis. Secundu^ praesentia^ maiestatis semper habemus
Christum, secundum praesentiam carnis, recte dictum est discipulis, Me autem
non semper habebitis. The poor ye shall have always with you, but me ye shall
not have always: he spoke this of the presence of his body. For according to
his Majesty, according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and
invisible grace, that is fulfilled which Christ said, Lo I am with you to the^d
of the world: according to the flesh which the word took, according to that he
was borne of the virgin, etc. you shall not (says he) have me with you
always. He is ascended into heaven and is not here: for he is there sitting at
the right hand of the father. And he is here, for he is not departed according
to the presence of his majesty. According to ye presence of his majesty, we
have Christ always with us: according to the presence of his flesh, it was
well said to his disciples, But me you shall not have always. Augustine in his
first words expounds this, to be spoken of the bodily presence of Christ,
simply.


Campion. It is spoken according to his visible conversation: Prove any thing
against this.


Goad. Augustine excludes all kind of bodily presence:

Therefore it is not spoken according to his visible conversation.


Camp. I deny your Antecedent.


Goad. Augustine acknowledges only two kinds of presence of Christ: the one,
ye bodily presence of his flesh: the other, according to his majesty,
providence and invisible grace. According to this latter kind he says, Christ
is present with us: which he directly opposes to his bodily presence. Therefore
all kind of bodily presence is excluded.


Campion. There is no contrariety to that I said before. S. Augustine
excludes not by maiestical presence al bodily presence. Make your Syllogism,
and I will answer you.


Goad. It is more then the usual order of disputation, to require a
Syllogism, when I am come to ye issue of mine argument, namely to authority,
as now we are come to Augustine: but I will follow your request: Do you
answer directly. Thus I make mine argument out of Augustines words.

Christ is now present with his Church touching his majesty, and unspeakable
grace:

Therefore by no means touching his body.


Campion. I deny your argument.


Goad. Augustines words proves it, making but two kinds of presence of
Christ: namely, presence of majesty, and presence of flesh: and opposes the
one against the other.


Camp. He speaks not of Christ present in ye sacrament, but of his presence
which every Christian man may have: he speaks according to Subiectam
materiam, he excludes not his natural presence in the sacrament.


Goad. You answer not the argument out of Augustine. But I will follow you,
and prove that he excludes the presence of Christ's natural body in the
sacrament.

He excludes all presence, save that by his majesty, providence, and grace:

Ergo he excludes the presence of Christ's natural body in the sacrament.


Camp. To your Antecedent I answer: he excludes all ordinary presence by
outward conversation, and shows how Christ is present with every Christian by
his spirit and grace: he speaks not of his presence in the sacrament.


Goad. He speaks generally, excluding all bodily presence.

Therefore as well in the sacrament, as without.


Camp. He speaks generally, quoad subiectam materiam, according to the
matter that he had in hand.


Goad. You answer not ye argument. Thus I urge it briefly.

Christ is now present with his Church, only touching his spirit and grace:

Ergo he is no way present touching his body.

Mine argument you see is grounded upon Augustines plain words, opposing the
one presence to the other, Secundum presentiam maiestatis, semper habemus
Christum. etc.


Campion. He compares these two together, how he was present to his Apostles,
and how to us: he talks generally of an usual presence; as every ma^may have
Christ present by prayer, etc.


Goad. And he makes Christ present to us, none other way but by his majesty,
and invisible grace: and touching all presence of his flesh, says it is true,
me ye shall not have always. I pray you, would or durst Augustine so have
written in so plain words absolutely to allow only of Christ's presence by
his grace, denying that touching his bodily presence we should not always have
him with us, if Christ any way were still bodily present upon earth:


Camp. Yea, I warrant you, being rightly understood. For he opposes his
presence then, and his presence now, not any more according to visible
conversation. And so your argument ye would make out of Augustine, is not good.


Goad. You use not to answer the point of the argument, but your manner is to
hold you still to one shifting distinction, though it be often taken away. Your
kind of answering is not only against learning, but against common sense.


Fulke. I will take an other argument.

If Christ be present in the sacrament in his natural body, he is Argument 7.
present in truth and in deed, not only in a signifying mystery:

But he is not present in the sacrament in truth and in deed, but only in a
signifying mystery:

Ergo he is not present in his natural body.


Came. I deny your Minor: he is present in ye truth of his body.


Fulke. I prove it out of the Canon Law. De Consecratione Distinct. 2. cap.
Hoc est. Sicut ergo caelestis panis qui Christi caro est, suo modo vocatur
corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentu^ corporis Christi illius videlicet
quod visibile, quodpalpabile mortale in cruce positu^ est, vocaturque ipsa
immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotismanibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio,
non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio: sic Sacramentum fidei, quod
Baptismus intelligitur, fides est^ Therefore even as the heavenly bread which
is the flesh of Christ, after a peculiar manner is called the body of Christ,
when in deed it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ, to wit, of that body,
which being visible, which being palpable, being mortal, was put on the cross,
and even that immolation of the flesh, which is done by the Priests hands, is
called the passion, death, crucifixion of Christ, not in truth of the thing,
but in a signifying mystery: so the Sacrament of faith, which is understood to
be baptism, is faith. And the Gloss. hereupon says: Coelestis etc. id est,
Coeleste Sacramentum, quod ver e repraesentat Christi carnem, dicitur corpus
Christi, sed improprie: vnde dicitur suo modo, sed non rei veritate, sed
significante mysterio. Vt sit sensus. Vocatur corpus Christi, idest,
significat. The heavenly bread, that is, the heavenly Sacrament, which truly
represents the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly:
whereupon it is said by a peculiar manner, but not in the truth of the thing,
but in a signifying mystery. So that the sense is, It is called the body of
Christ, that is, it signifies it.


Camp. All this makes for transubstantiation. That which we see, is called the
body of Christ, where in deed, it is but the color and the accidents.


Fulke. All makes for you: but let us see whether you can so run away with
the matter. He says, Coelestis panis, the heavenly bread: can the color or
accidents be called the heavenly bread:


Campion. The meaning is of the accidents and of the sign.


Fulke. This is a strange proposition, color or accidens, is coelestis panis.


Campion. It is called Coelestis panis, because it is heavenly bread by
consecration.


Fulke. That can not be. For he calls that heavenly bread, which is the
flesh of Christ, and after the manner of it the body of Christ:

But accidents are not the flesh of Christ, nor ye body of Christ:

Ergo they are not the heavenly bread.


Campion. If you respect the quality, it is the heavenly bread by consecration.


Fulke. It seems you know not the place: the Gloss says the heavenly bread
which is the heavenly Sacrament, is called improperly the body of Christ, not
in truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery.


Camp. Saint Augustine there speaks popularly. You bewray your slender
reading of Augustine, in citing this as Gratians authority.


Fulke. It is Gratian in the decrees of your own Canon law, and the Gloss
thereupon. In deed the decree is borrowed of Augustine: but it is more fully
against the carnal presence, as it is cited by Gratian.


Campion. I will answer both Gratian and the Gloss.


Fulke. Set it down then in few words.


Campion. It is called coelestis, in respect of consecration and
transubstantiation: bread, in respect that it is bread and wine in outward
show: and for the accidents it is called Sacramentum the Sacrament, in respect
that under those outward shows the natural body of Christ is present.


Fulke. So you understand the sacrament (which is denied to be the body of
Christ in truth of the thing) to be the accidents: but it is absurd, that
accidents should be called the heavenly bread.


Campion. It is not absurd, if it be heavenly understood: but accidents visibly
considered of themselves, import absurdity.


Fulke. The Sacrament is the outward show, which is not the body of Christ. I
will prove that he takes the word Sacrament, for the whole Sacrament, not for
the accidents as you do.


Campion. He speaks of the whole.


Fulke. He speaks of the whole, and not of the whole: this is manifest
contradiction.


Campion. The word Sacrament, is here taken for the exterior forms, and not
for the whole Sacrament.


Fulke. I prove it must be taken for the whole Sacrament, else it could not be
compared with Baptism:

But it is compared with Baptism:

Ergo he takes it for the whole Sacrament.


Camp. Your mayor I answer: He compares the element of the sacrament of the
altar, with the eleme^t of water in baptism.


Fulke. He speaks of the whole Sacrament of Baptism, which is called faith,
even as the heavenly bread is called the Sacrament of Christ:

But the water of Baptism is not called faith:

Ergo he speaks of the whole Sacrament.


Campion. He respects the external signs, and compares signs with signs.


Fulke. That which he spoke of, is called the body of Christ:

But the accidents are not called the body of Christ:

Ergo accidents are not that he spoke of.


Campion. This is a book, and yet I see not the substance of a book, but
whiteness, and other accidents.


Fulke. Who would say that whitenes is the book? none but a mad man: neither
will any say, that whiteness is the body of Christ, or called the body of
Christ. Therefore by the word of heavenly bread, and of the Sacrament, he
means the whole sacrament. I see you have nothing but shameless shifts,
against so clear authority of your own Canon law speaking against you.


Campion. If you dare, let me show Augustine and Chrysostom: if you dare.


Fulke. Whatsoever you can bring, I have answered already in writing against
other of your side: and yet if you think you can add any thing, put it in
writing, and I will answer it.


Campion. Provide me ynke and paper, and I will write.


Fulke. I am not to provide you ynke and paper.


Campion. I mean, procure me that I may have liberty to write.


Fulke. I know not for what cause you are restrained of that liberty, and
therefore I will not take upon me to procure it.


Campion. Sue to the Queen, that I may have liberty to oppose, I have been
now thrice opposed, it is reason I should oppose once.


Fulke. I will not become a suter for you.


Camp. Sue to the Queen for me, it is but an easy suite: you being in such
credit with your Prince, may (if you dare) procure this matter. Catholics of
their prince can obtain a greater matter: and are not you Protestants in such
credit with your Prince, that you can obtain so small a matter?


Fulke. We mean not to try our credit in this matter. But if you write any
thing, I will answer you in writing.


Campion. Procure it.


Fulke. It were to small purpose: I have answered already Heskins and Saunders,
which are like to bring as much as you.


Campion. I am not worthy to carry their books after them. And you your self
Sir, may be scholar to either of them.


Goade. If Christ be present in his natural body, he must be present in his
true body: 8. Argument.


But Christ is not present in his true body:

Ergo not in his natural body.


Camp. I deny your minor. He is present in his true body.


Goade. A true body must have the properties of a true body: But this has not
the properties of a true body:

Ergo it is not a true body.


Camp. I deny again your minor. It has the properties of a true body.


Goade. Amongst the properties of a true body, this is one special, to be
circu^scribed in place, and not to be in many places at once.

But in your transubstantiation, Christ's body is made to be in many, yea in
infinite places at once:

Ergo it has not the properties of a true body.


Campion. It is in respect of a miracle, not seen with eye, but with our faith.


Goade. Now you run again to miracle. It has been before showed you out of
Augustine, that there is no miracle in the Sacrament, and your self said that
miracles are now ceased.


Campion. It is a great miracle to convert a sinner, yea greater then to make
the world, and this kind of miracle is daily.


Goade. Now you would go from the matter, this is not properly a miracle. But
to the purpose, Answer the argument.

That which is in many places at once, is not a true body.

But as you teach, Christ in the Sacrament is bodily in many places at once:

Ergo not a true body.


Campion. The property of the fire is to burn, yet the three children in the
fire (...) ^ed. Wi^ you ther^e (...) that it was truly fire:


Goade. That was in deed and properly a miracle, whereof the Scripture
testifies, which visibly was seen.


Campion. So is this a miracle.


Goade. Beside, it is not sensible, which must be in a miracle: There is no
ground of the word for it. And faith must be grounded on the word of God.


Campion. The word teaches that God is omnipotent.


Goade. You that will reason from Gods omnipotency, must prove also his will.
Omnia quae voluit fecit, He has done all things whatsoever he would.


Camp. Nay, you must prove it is not his will.


Goade. I will prove it out of Theodoret. Dialo. 3. qui inscribitur impatibilis,
writing of the glorified body of Christ after his resurrection: Non est mutatum
in naturam diuinitatis, sed post resurrectionem est quidem and immortale, and u
corruptione and interitu alienum, and diuina gloria plenum: sed tamen corpus
est, quod habet propriam circumscriptionem. The body of Christ is not changed
into the nature of his divinity, but after his resurrection it is in deed a
body immortal, free from corruption, and full of divine glory: but yet it is a
body that has a proper circumscription.


Campion. When it pleases Christ to work a miracle, he is not bound to the
natural properties, he does not always practice all his properties. His body
ascending into heaven, had the true properties of a body, yet did not then
practice them. It is against the natural property of a body to ascend upward.


Goade. This ascension of Christ's body, being an article of our faith, is
grounded upon the word, that his body was taken up, and nevertheless remained
a true body circumscribed in place. Augustine says we must not take away the
truth of Christ's body. Epist. ad Dard. 57. Cauendum ne ita diuinitatem
astruamus hominis, vt veritatem corporis auferamus, cui profecto immortalitatem
dedit, naturam non abstulit. We must take heed, that we do not so maintain
the Godhead of Christ being man, that we take away the truth of his body,
whereunto he gave immortality, but took not away the nature.


Campion. You need not bring these places, I grant that Christ has a true
body. But you may as well deny the ascension of Christ, being against the
property of a true body to ascend upward.


Goade. I answered before, that this is an article of our faith, grounded upon
the express word of God. And because we do believe by the word, that Christ's
body is ascended, and sits at the right hand of God, and from thence shall
come to judge: therefore we cannot believe the contrary, that Christ is yet
present on earth. So Augustine reasons in the same Epistle. Christus Jesus
vbique est per id quod Deus, in coelo autem per id quod homo. Spacia locorum
toll corporibus, nusquam erunt: and quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Christ
jesus is every where as he is God, but as he is man, he is in heaven. Take away
space of places from bodies, and they shall be in no place: and because in no
place, they shall have no being at all.


Campion. I think I have answered sufficiently: he is present not naturally,
but miraculously.


Goade. Why, then ye destroy the property of a true body, and so consequently
take away the truth of a body.


Campion. I grant the properties, though the same be not always put in
practice.


Goade. Then sometime Christ may have many, or rather infinite bodies in many
places at one time, when the property of a true body cease.


Campion. Nay, it remains still one and the same body, though in many places
at one time.


Goade. When Christ delivered his body in his last supper, I pray you, were
there not by your opinion two sundry bodies? namely Christ himself the author
and actor in the supper, was it not the one: and the bread transubstantiate (as
ye will have it) into Christ's body, was it not the other?


Camp. Christ the actor in the Institution, yet was then present in the same
body in the Sacrament: if he will have it so, who can let him? I say he is
miraculously in many places at once.


Goade. Now we come again to his will. But I deny that he will have it so,
and you can not prove it. Saint Augustine is flat against you in the forenamed
Epistle, writing against the like heretics of his time, that would take from
Christ the properties of a true body, after his glorification, as to be
circumscribed in one place. etc.


Ca^p. Ye urge me much with Augustine. Let me show for my self Augustine,
Chrysostom, and others of y^ fathers, if you dare.


Goade. This is not to answer. Come you to dare? This is like your bold
challenge.


Campion. You may if ye list, procure leave that I may oppose. Catholics
could easily obtain a greater matter then this of their princes, and can not
you obtain this of your Prince?


Fulke. We see it is to no purpose. Whatsoever you ca^ bring is known and
answered already. Heskins, Allen, and others of your side, who are far your
betters, I have already answered. Well, I will go to another argument.

If Christ be present in his natural body, he is received not 9. Argument.
only of the godly, but also of the wicked:

But he is not received of the wicked:

Ergo he is not present in his natural body.


Campion. I deny your minor.


Fulke. I prove the minor out of S. Augustine de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap.
25. Nec isti ergo dicendi sunt ma^ducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in me^bris
computandi sunt Christi, (vt alia taceam) no^ possunt simul esse and membra
Christi, and me^bra meretricis. Denique ipse dicens, qui manducat carnem meam,
and bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo, ostendit quid sit, non
Sacramento tenus, sed reuera corpus Christi manducare, and eius sanguinem
bibere. Therefore neither is it to be said, that these ungodly men do eat the
body of Christ, because they are not to be accounted in the members of Christ,
(for to omit other things) they cannot be at one time, both the members of
Christ and the members of an harlot. Finally he himself, saying he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him, shows what it
is, not so far as a Sacrament may go, but in very deed to eat the body of
Christ, and to drink his blood.


Camp. His meaning is, they receive not the grace of Christ effectually to
salvation.


Fulke. His words are, they receive not the body of Christ, reuera in deed,
but sacramento tenus, in a sacrament, or sacramentally. Again he says, that
Christ dwells not in them: Ergo they eat not the body of Christ.


Campion. He dwells not in them unto salvation.


Fulke. True, and therefore they eat not his body: for whosoever eats the
flesh of Christ, has Christ dwelling in him to salvation.


Camp. Whosoever eats the flesh of Christ worthily: but the wicked also eat
the body of Christ, though unworthily.


Fulke. He says expressly they eat not the body of Christ reuera, that is in
deed, or verily, but sacramentally.


Campion. Wherefore then are they guilty?


Fulke. That is an other question. And yet one may be guilty of the Majesty
of the Prince, which refuses to obey the same, or dispiseth the same: so are
they guilty of the body of Christ, which refuse to receive it being offered.


Campion. They receive Christ, but not worthily. He that receives Baptism,
receives the holy Ghost, or else the Sacrament should not be true: so Saint
Paul says, He that eats the body of Christ unworthily, is guilty of the
body and blood of Christ.


Fulke. He that receives unworthily, receives the sacrament: and the
Sacrament may be true, though he receive it unworthily. Again, you falsify
the text, when you say, he that eats the body of Christ unworthily. Saint
Paul's words are: He that eats this bread and drinks this cup of the
Lord unworthily.


Campion. They must either receive Christ unworthily, or his grace:

They receive not the grace of Christ unworthily:

Ergo they receive Christ unworthily.


Fulke. Christ can never be separated from his grace. A man may receive the
grace of Christ, though he receive not his body. But he cannot receive the body
of Christ, but he must also receive his grace.


Campion. The wicked receive the body of Christ, but not his grace.


Fulke. So you say: but answer to Saint Augustine, which says, The wicked
eat not the body of Christ in very deed.


Campion. They eat Christ sacramentally.


Fulke. Yea, but not in deed, as Saint Augustine says.


Campion. They receive the same Christ, but not to the same comfort that the
godly do.


Fulke. They do not receive Christ, says Saint Augustine: because they are not
to be accounted in the members of Christ.


Campion. And I say the same.


Fulke. He says, they eat not the body of Christ in deed: you affirm that
they eat the body of Christ in deed. Again, Saint Augustine says. Hoc est
in Christo manner. etc. This it is to dwell in Christ, that Christ may dwell in
us. For so he said this, as though he had said, He that dwells not in me,
and in whom I dwell not, let him not say or think he eats my body, or
drinks my blood.


Camp. The wicked eat the same body, but not to the same effect.


Fulke. Augustine says, they eat not his body reuera, in deed: I see you
have no other shift of answer. Therefore I will leave it to judgment.

The Apostles received not the same body that afterward was Here M. Lieutenant
admonished them that the time was past.
crucified, therefore your solution of the same body, not after the same manner
and quality, cannot stand.


Campion. They received the same body, both before and after his passion.


Goade. I will follow the confutation of that absurd assertion, that the
wicked eat the body of Christ, which is easy to be improued many ways. I
frame mine argument thus.

Whosoever eats the body of Christ, does eat Rem sacrame^ti, The thing or
substance of the sacrament: 10. Argument.


But no wicked or unbelieving person, can eat Rem sacrame^ti:

Ergo no wicked person can eat the body of Christ.


Campion. I distinguish of your Mayor. Res sacramenti, is taken two ways: for
the body of Christ, or the invisible grace of Christ. The wicked are partakers
of the body of Christ, but not of his invisible grace.


Goade. You cannot thus distinguish that which in it self is all one, though
it differs in words: as the body of Christ, and the thing or substance of
the sacrament. Which I prove evidently out of Augustine in 10. Trac. 25. Huius
rei sacramentu^ sumitur quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium, res vero ipsa
cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque eius
particeps fuerit. The sacrament of this thing is received of some unto life,
and of some unto death. But the thing or substance it self, whereof the
outward sign is a sacrament, is received of all men to life, and of none to
death, whosoever is partaker thereof. Whereby it is manifest, that S. Augustine
does make but two parts of the sacrament, which he does distinguish: viz.
the outward sign which he calls the sacrament, and the inward thing or
substance of the sacrament, which is Christ him self. And out of the same
words of Augustine, I follow mine argument thus against your absurd
distinction.

Whosoever eats Christ the thing or substance of the sacrament, shall live
for ever,

But none of the wicked or unfaithful shall live for ever:

Ergo none of the wicked can eat Christ, being the substance of the sacrament.


Camp. If you will reply upon mine answer, take my words. The wicked eat not
Christ effectually and worthily, according to invisible grace.


Goade. You answer not mine argument out of Augustine, and as for your words
and distinction, it is too absurd to separate the eating of Christ him self
from effectual or worthy eating, seeing that whosoever eats Christ the
substance of the sacrament, does live for ever, and so consequently must
needs eat him effectually. Consider the words of Augustine, he affirms
the sacrament to consist of two things, the visible sign, which he calls
Huius rei sacramentum, and the invisible grace, or Christ him self, which he
calls Rem sacramenti. As also Irenaeus says, the sacrament consists of two
things: the one earthly, the outward element: and the other heavenly, which is
Christ him self.


Campion. That part of the sacrament, which is called heavenly, is taken two
manner of ways: either in respect of Christ him self, or in respect of the
wicked. Christ in him self is always heavenly, but to the wicked which
receive not the grace of Christ, he is not heavenly, though he be present, and
they receive him to their condemnation.


Goade. You answer not the reason nor authority of Augustine. This was taken
away before, none can receive Christ, but they must also receive his heavenly
grace to eternal life: but my purpose was not to have urged this argument.


Fulke. I will use but one brief argument.

That which Christ promised to give in the Sacrament, was not the same which
was crucified:

Ergo it was not the natural body of Christ which they received.


Camp. It was the same which was crucified.


Fulke. S. Augustine denies it, speaking in the person of Christ in these
words. In Psalm. 98. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis and bibituri
illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent: sacramentum aliquod vobis
commendaui, spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos. You shall not eat that
body which you see and drink, that blood which they shall shed that shall
crucify me: I have commended unto you a certain sacrament, which being
spiritually understood, shall give you life.


Campion. This is a fallacion: he denies modum, the manner and not the
substance. Your reason is like this Quicquid emisti etc. that which you have
bought you have eaten: you have bought raw flesh, therefore you have eaten
raw flesh.


Fulke. You cannot so avoid it, he denies the same body, and speaks not of
the manner.


Camp. The same body that was crucified we receive, but not eodem modo, after
the same manner.


Fulke. Was the manner of his blood shed, or his very blood in deed?


Camp. His very blood in deed was shed.


Fulke. Why then, that blood which was shed is denied to be given.


Camp. The same body which was crucified, is given, but not after the same
sort: for when he was crucified, he was mangled and wounded, so he is not now,
he is given after an other sort.


Fulke. So by your Gloss you make Corpus to be in the predicament of quality,
which is absurd: Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum. You have sodde these
coleworts long enough, the place is plain, denying the same body and the same
blood, and not the manner and sort thereof.


Camp. The learned know mine answer. He is not the same man which he was
before, which is altered in qualities.


Fulk. A fine answer in deed: As though Christ should mean that the
qualities of his body and blood, should be so altered that they might justly be
said not to be the same, although they were the same.


Campion. Augustine upon the same Psalm, affirms the body of Christ is so
present in the Sacrament, that it may be adored.


Fulke. Does he say, that the body of Christ may be adored in the sacrament?


Camp. He says, no man eats that body, except he adore it.


Fulke. That is an other matter. I say so likewise, that no man receaueth the
body of Christ, except he adore it. But Augustine says not, except he adore
it in the sacrament. But the time will not suffer us to proceed any further.


Goade. If Christ be present in the sacrament in his natural 12. Augument.
body, the^ he is present either in a mortal, or else in a glorified body:

But neither in a mortal, nor yet glorified body:

Ergo he is not present in his natural body.


Campion. I deny your Minor. He is present in his glorified body.


Goade. If he be present in body, it must be the same body that he delivered to
his Apostles in his last supper:

But that was not glorified, but mortal:

Ergo if he be present in any kind of body, it must be a mortal body.


Camp. The body of Christ was not yet glorified when the Sacrament was
instituted. What of that* it is no matter whether his body were glorified or
not glorified.


Goade. Yes, for you affirmed before, that Christ is present in his glorified
body, which I have improued, Christ having then a natural and mortal body,
wherein shortly after he was to be glorified, not the same it was after his
resurrection.


Camp. A fallation in the same. Glorification does not make it not the same
body: a man sick and a man whole at sundry times, yet remains the same man.


Goad. My meaning and words are plain, having made the comparison between
mortal and glorified. I made the difference to be not in substance but in
quality: but now it appears that you must seek an other place then Hoc est
corpus meum in the institution, whereon to build your real presence. We
talk what was then at the time of the institution.


Camp. Nay, we ground sufficiently upon that place: though Christ's body be now
glorified, yet we do not build upon glorification, but upon the words, This
is my body, which Christ has spoken, and therefore it is his body.


Goade. But you are not yet resolved what kind of body. It is an other now,
from that it was then.


Camp. Yet the same body, though differing in condition. Christ cannot be
wounded now as before, yet the same flesh.


Goade. I do not deny the same body in substance to be now that was then:
but you see that the presence of a glorified body which you affirmed, is not
grounded upon Hoc est corpus meum. But I leave this argument


Goade. Let us conclude with prayer. Almighty Lord and merciful father, we
yield thee humble thanks for thy manifold benefits bestowed upon us,
especially y^ thou have vouchsafed us the knowledge and love of thy heavenly
truth contained in thy holy word, which thou have denied unto many others,
leaving the^ in their own perverse blindness: we beseech thee to increase
daily in us more and more the true knowledge of thee, and of thy son Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent, and vouchsafe to make thy truth so much the more
dear and precious unto us, for that it has enemies that daily seek to
obscure and impugn the same, and as for those that go a^traie, so many of
them as pertain unto thy kingdom, we beseech thee in thy good time, to call,
to lighten their minds, and to mollify their hearts, that we may together
with one heart, and one mouth glorify thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.


The disputation in the afternoon the same day. The second question or
assertion of Campion.
The question. After the words of Consecration, the bread and wine are
transubstanciated into the body and blood of Christ.
Fulke. LEt us begin with prayer. O almighty God and most merciful father,
we humbly submit our selves before thy majesty, and do unfeignedly acknowledge
that our hearts are full of ignorance and blindness, so that we cannot
understand thy wonderful truth by our selves, nor see it when it is reueiled
by thee, except it please thy majesty by thy holy spirit to lighten our
darkness, and give sight to our blindness. Wherefore we humbly beseech thee, to
assiste us by thy grace, and to give us sight to see thy truth, and strength
to defend the same against all thine enemies, that the weak may be confirmed,
the obstinate confounded, and thy name glorified through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Because you took a time to find those words which you reported to be in my
book, and I see the book in your hand, I pray you read them if you have
found them.


Camp. The book is mistaken, it is not that book I meant.


Fulke. It is the book that you named.


Camp. I am sure you do not disclame the opinion.


Fulke. As I told you in the forenoone, I do disclame it in such sort as it
was uttered by you, which you are not able to prove to be affirmed by me.


Campion. You make invocation of Saints, a matter of great weight.


Fulke. The Church did err in that point, but not as you Papists do err in
it. There is great difference between their error and yours. But let us come
to the appointed question, which is against Transubstantiation.

I prove there remains the substance of bread and wine in the The question.
sacrament after consecration.

Our Savior drank the same that his Apostles did:

But our Savior drank wine:

Ergo his Apostles drank wine. 1. Argument.



Camp. I deny yt our Savior drank of the consecrated wine.


Fulke. The words of the Evangelist are plain, that our Savior Christ spoke,
I will drink no more from henceforth of the fruit of the vine. These words
are plain of wine: for the blood of Christ is not the fruit of the vine.


Camp. This signifies that our Savior did eat indefinitly, whether he did
eat of the same bread, or drink of the same cup of wine which he gave, I
doubt of it: he did eat and drink with the^.


Fulk. He protested that he would not drink any more of that which he gave:

But that which he gave unto them was wine:

Therefore he drank of the same wine.


Camp. This text conuinceth it not.


Fulke. Yes, plainly.


Camp. He speaks of that wine which was drunk at supper, for all was wine,
if there had been 20. gallons before consecration.


Fulke. He speaks of the wine in his hand: for whereto else has the pronowne
(this) relation: After he had taken the cup in his hand, immediately he faith, I
will not drink any more of this fruit of the vine.


Camp. He had supped with them, he had eaten the Pascall lamb with them, he
would not take any more repast with them in this life till his resurrection, as
before: therefore it is to be referred to the action that went before.


Fulke. It is plain that he speaks of the same wine which he had in his
hand, and which he gave unto them. And Chrysostomes words declare the same in
Math. Homil. 89. Sedcuius rei gratia non aquam sed vinu^ post resurrectionem
bibit? perniciosam quanda^ haeresin radicitus euellere voluit eorum, qui aqua
in mysterijs vtuntur, ita vt ostenderet quia and quando hoc mysterium traderet,
vinum tradidit: and iam post resurrectionem in nuda mysterij mensa vino vsus
est. Ex germine aute^ (ait) vitis, quae certe no^ aquam sed vinu^ producit. But
for what cause did he not drink water, but wine after his resurrection? His
purpose was to pull up by the roots a certain pernicious heresy of them
which use water in the mysteries: so that he showed, that both when he
delivered this mystery, he delivered wine, and now also after his
resurrection, in the only table of the mystery, he used wine. Of the fruit
of the vine says he, which verily brings forth wine and not water.


Campion. All this makes for me.


Fulke. You shall hear how it makes for you. Here you see, that he drank of
that which he delivered to his disciples:

And he drank wine:

Therefore he delivered wine to his disciples.


Campion. He delivered that which had the show of wine: does he say that he
gave wine:


Fulke. He says, Vinum tradidit, He delivered wine, or he gave wine.


Campion. Go to, he delivered consecrated wine: He did consecrate wine and did
give it unto them.


Fulke. He gave consecrated wine:

Ergo he gave wine.


Campion. I deny your argument: for consecrated wine is not wine.


Fulke. Then he gave wine that was not wine: For Chrysostom says, Vinum
tradidit, He gave wine.


Camp. He gave that, that was wine.


Fulke. Chrysostom says, That which he delivered was wine when he delivered
it, or else how did he take away the heresy of those that brought in water,
if he had not given wine.


Campion. The meaning of Chrysostom is, to bring in wine against those that
would have water. He says he delivered wine, but consecrated wine, to exclude
water.


Fulke. He excluded water to bring in wine, and not to shut out both water and
wine.


Camp. We use wine in the mysteries.


Fulke. But he says, Christ delivered wine: so do not you say when you give
the cup


Camp. He gave them that which had the name of wine, and had the show of it,
but now was not in deed wine. As for example, the rod of Moses was called a
rod, after it was turned into a serpent, because it was a rod a little before.


Fulke. The rod was miraculously turned into a serpent, and returned into a
rod again: both which miracles were to be judged by the sense, and yet you
prove not that it was called a rod, while it was a serpent.


Campion. Yes that I do. Et deuorauit virga Aaron, etc. And the rod of Aaron
devoured the rod of the enchaunters.


Fulke. Yea Sir, That which was a rod while Moses did write, and was a very
serpent before Pharao, devoured the rods of the Egyptians which were serpents
in show, but rods in deed. Moses called it a rod when it was a rod, and not
when it was a serpent. Again, it was a sensible miracle.


Campion. So there is great miracles in the Sacrament.


Fulke. So you say, but none appears to our sense.


Campion. They are understood by faith.


Fulke. It is an easy matter so to feign miracles in every matter: but God did
never show miracle in conversion of substances, or any sensible thing, but it
was to be judged by the senses to be a miracle. Bring me one instance of any
miracle in conversion, or in any other sensible thing, that could not be
discerned by sense.


Camp. It was a rod a little before, that after was called a serpent, and yet
retained the name it had before: as Clandi ambulant, Caeci vident, etc.


Fulke. That is not denied, although by you it can not be proved: but here the
place is plain. Chrysostom speaks of the substance of the Sacrament, he
delivered wine, and they received wine.


Campion. I have answered. Leave the rest to God, and their consciences which
are the hearers.


Goade. I will continue to urge you further with the words of the Institution.
Your answer can not be allowed for good, when you would shift off the plain
words of our savior Christ, calling it wine being the fruit of the vine, and
would have this referred to the wine used in eating the Pascall, before the
institution. You may not so leap back from the Institution to the Pascal,
there was some distance of time between the Pascall and the Supper: so you can
not refer this to the whole action.


Campion. You say well. The eating the pascal Lamb went before, and the
Institution followed: and yet I say the words of Christ concerning the fruit
of the vine, has relation to the whole.


Goade. Consider the order of the words in the Evangelist: As they were eating
the Passover, Jesus took bread, etc. And then after he had delivered the cup,
and bad them all drink thereof, calling it his blood, then follows, I say
unto you, I will not drink hereafter of this fruit of the vine. etc. But I
will make my argument from the Institution, thus.

The Apostles did eat the substance of bread and wine after 2. Argument.
consecration, as you term it:

Therefore there remains the substance of bread and wine after consecration.


Campion. I deny your Antecedent.


Goade. That which our Savior Christ gave, the Apostles did eat:

But he gave bread and wine:

Ergo they did eat bread and wine.


Camp. I deny your minor. He did not give bread and wine.


Goade. The same which Christ took into his hands, he also delivered:

But he took bread and wine:

Ergo he delivered bread and wine.


Camp. I answer out of Ambrose. Before consecration it was bread, and so he
took bread, but after the words of consecration, he says it is no bread.


Fulke. You falsify Ambrose, and would abuse the auditorie, for he does not
say it is no bread.


Camp. He says there is a change. I may you let me make one argument out of
Ambrose, and answer me if you can.


Goade. Well, make your argument, you shall be answered.


Campion. Let me borrow the book. Now hear Ambrose words lib. de
Sacramentis. 4. cap. 4. Tu forte dicis panis est vsitatus. Sed panis iste panis
est ante verba Sacramentorum: vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane fit caro
Christi. Vides ergo quam operatorius sit sermo Christi: iussit and facta sunt.
Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini, vt inciperent esse quae non erant,
quanto magis operatorius est, vt sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur.
Peradventure thou say that it is common bread. But this bread before the
sacramental words is bread: but after consecration, of bread is made the flesh
of Christ. Thou see then of what efficacy the word of Christ is, he
commanded and the creatures were made. If then there is so great force in the
word of the Lord, that the things that were not, begun to be: how much more is
it able to work, that the things which were, should have still their being,
and be changed into other things.


Goade. I know the place, and thus I answer. First ye have not any word in
Ambrose to exclude the substance of bread. We acknowledge a change with
Ambrose, not of one substance into an other, as you would have to be, but
touching the use whereto the sacrament serves, namely that which was common
bread before, ordained to a common use to feed the body, is now converted and
consecrated to an holy and spiritual use, to nourish the soul, by feeding
upon Christ by true and lively faith.


Campion. But Ambrose words are plain, that which before was bread, after
consecration ex pane fit caro Christi, of bread is made the flesh of Christ.


Goade. Ambrose words in deed are plain in the same chapter, whereby he does
expound his meaning, the change to be as I have said touching the use, and not
the substance. Dicis communem panem, etc. By these words it appears, that
Ambrose purpose was to confute their opinion, who thought over basely of the
Sacrament, making no difference between it and common bread. Thou say it is
common bread, but thou art deceived, it is consecrated and changed to an holy
and heavenly use, and is become sacramentally the flesh of Christ.


Campion. It is called bread, but it is not bread, for ex pane fit caro
Christi. And even as he made heaven and earth by his word, so by his word the
bread is made his flesh.


Goade. We deny not that it is Christ's flesh, as himself says of the
bread, This is my body: but it is to be understood as a sacramental speech,
when the name of the thing is given to the sign, as after shall be showed out of
Augustine.


Camp. The words are forcible, of bread is made flesh, and Sermo Christi est
operatorius, The word of Christ is of power and efficacy.


Goade. That is, of common bread is now made Christ's body, appointed to be a
sacrament of his body. And although this be a wonderful change by the force
of Christ's word and Institution, that common bread should be changed to a
spiritual use, yet Ambrose does not say that the substance of bread is
changed, but rather the contrary, that the substance does still remain, as
appears by diverse examples of miracles he alleges in the same chapter, and
also by his words, Vt sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur, That they
should remain and be as they were, and also be changed touching the use. Now
you have urged what you can out of Ambrose, I will return again to follow
mine argument drawn from the words of the Institution, as they are explaned
by S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. 16. Panis quem frangimus, etc. The bread which we
break, is it not the partaking of the body of Christ? Whereby appears, that
after sanctification remains bread: for he says, the bread which we break,
and breaking follows after blessing or sanctifying. It can not be understood
the body of Christ, for that can not be broken. So by this place, after
consecration remains bread still.


Campion. It reteineth still the name of bread in diverse respects: first,
because it was bread before, and secondly because it has the show of bread: as
Moses rod being turned into a serpent, keeps still the name it had before.


Goade. You are now wandering into discourses, I will not follow you. The
Apostles plain words takes away your answer. It follows in the text, We
are all partakers of the same bread, he says not the same that was bread
before: and it is consecrate before it comes to participation. And the same
Apostle in the next chapter, oftentimes repeateth and calls it bread, when
it comes to be received after sanctification.


Campion. I have given you two causes, why it is so called: I will add the
third, because of the analogy between the bread and that which feeds our
souls. Make a Syllogism.


Goade. I urge the words of the Apostle, there needs no Syllogism: answer
plainly and directly.


Campion. I have given three causes, why it is called bread.


Goade. Your causes can not stand. For touching your comparison of the rod
turned into a serpent, there appeared a sensible change as is usual in
miracles, but here is no such thing in the sacrament, and therefore the
comparison holds not. And for the analogy, it makes directly against you.
For even as the bread received feeds the body, so ^eth Christ the soul. But
if when it comes to be received into the body, there be no bread in deed as
you say, then where is your analogy:


Campion. It suffiseth that it was bread before, and so appears the analogy
by the feeding of our souls.


Goade. What does the bread feed our souls:


Camp. Yea, Christ that is the bread of life, feeds our souls. Make a
Syllogism, and then we shall see whether your argument has any face or force.


Goade. We are come to the words and authority of the Scripture. If the
words of Christ's Institution, and all these manifest places of the Apostle be
of no force, then I confess mine argument to be nothing. I leave you to
judgment.


Fulke. Your answer is taken away by the word breaking. The bread which we
break, etc. The body of Christ is not broken, but the bread, and not that
which appears to be bread.


Campion. The bread is broken by quality, and not by substance. Can substance
be broken:


Bulk. Bread is broken:

And bread is substance:

Therefore substance is broken.

When sticks are broken, shall we say that the subance of them is not broken,
but the accidents: this is foolish Sophistry. But I 3. Argument.
will reason thus with you. There is something in the Sacrament material,
which goes the way of all meats:

Ergo there is bread and wine.


Campion. Whatsoever becomes of all those qualities, the color, the taste,
the quantity, etc. it happens to them as to accidents: for it is certain
there remains neither bread nor wine.


Fulke. The taste goes not that way, nor in deed any of the accidents
unaltered: but hear what Origin says, in Matthew. cap. 15. Quod si quic quid
in os ingreditur, in ventrem abit, and in secessum eijcitur, and ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbum Dei, perque obsecrationem, iuxta id quod habet
materiale in ventrem abit, and in secessum eijcitur. Caeterum iuxta precationem
quae illi accessit, pro portione fidei fit vtilis, efficiens vt perspicax fiat
animus, spectans ad id quod vtile est. Nec materia panis, sed super illum
dictus sermo est qui prodest non indigne comedenti illum. Et haec quidem de
typico Symbolicoque corpore.


Camp. The quantity is avoided, and other accidents.


Fulke. It is monstrous that you speak. Origin says the material part of
the Sacrament, and the matter of bread. I will read his words in English. If
whatsoever enters into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught, even that meat also which is sanctified by the word of God, and
by prayer, according to that which it has material goes into the belly, and
is cast forth into the draught. But according to the prayer which is added unto
it, after the portion of faith, it is made profitable, causing that the mind
may be made clear of sight, looking to that which is profitable. Neither is it
the matter of bread, but the word spoken over it, which profits him that
eats it not unworthily. And these things are spoken of the typical and
symbolicall body.


Campion. I have answered. The accidents go, the quantity, quality, and such
like.


Fulke. The place is plain. Origin acknowledges a material part of the
Sacrament, which is substance. In what praedicament is Materia?


Campion. In none. Materia taken indefinitely, is in no praedicament, for it is
in all praedicaments. The matter of substance is in substance, of quantity in
quantity. etc


Fulke. Well, then the matter of substance is substance. The matter of bread is
the matter of substance: therefore the matter of bread is substance. Then it is
substance and not accidents, which is avoided by Origens judgment.


Campion. He says not, the matter of bread is avoided.


Fulke. He says that meat which is sanctified, according to that which it
has material, is avoided:

Meat is that which feeds, accidents feed not:

Therefore accidents are not called meat.


Campion. Accidents do feed, and that I will stand to prove.


Fulke. Philosophy, Physieke, and Divinity are much beholding to you. It was
never heard of before, that bare accidents without substance could feed or
nourish.


Campion. He means the matter of the sacrament, and not the material
substance of bread which is avoided. The sacrament consists of the sign, and
the thing signified. The sign is the outward shape, whitenes, quantity, etc.
this is the material part of the Sacrament, which is avoided.


Fulke. There is no one of these accidents, shape, quantity, color, taste,
that are avoided, because they are altered in the stomach, before they come to
the place of auoydance. Again, i^ is a shameful absurdity, to say that the
accidents are the meat which is sanctified by the word and prayer.


Campion. I answer, Id quod habet materiale, is the matter of the Sacrament,
not of the bread.


Fulke. This place is too plain against you: every one may see your answer
how vain it is.


Goade. That which overthrows both the nature and use of 4. Argum,
a Sacrament, is not to be admitted:

But transubstantiation does overthrow does the nature and use of a Sacrament:

Ergo it is not to be admitted, and consequently untrue that you affirm, the
bread and wine to be transubstantiate. etc.


Campion. I deny your minor, it does overthrow neither the nature, nor the use
of a Sacrament.


Goade. I must prove both the members severally, because you deny both: and
first, that it takes away the nature of a Sacrament. A Sacrament consists of
two things, the matter, and the form: the visible sign, and the invisible
grace: the one earthly, and the other heavenly, as Iraeneus says: the element,
and the word according to Augustine, Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fit
Sacramentum. Let the word come unto the element, and so it is made a
Sacrament. This being so, then thus I reason.

Whatsoever takes away the element, overthrows the Sacrament: for the word
must come unto the element, as Augustine faith, the element must not depart
away:

But transubstantiation takes away the element:

Ergo Transubstantiation overthrows ye nature of ye sacrament.


Campion. I deny your minor, it does not take away the element.


Goade. It takes away the material part, the substance of bread and wine:

Ergo it takes away the element.


Campion. I say it takes away neither the heavenly nor the earthly part.


Goade. You answer not directly to mine argument. But I will prove that it
takes away the earthly part.

It takes away the substance of bread:

Ergo the earthly part.


Campion. I deny your argument. For there remains res terrestris, an earthly
thing, though the substance be changed.


Goade. What is that earthly thing; if there remain no substance? Every
Sacrament must consist of the element and the word: the element is the earthly
creature or substance.


Camp. The element does not note a substance, there remains an earthly
creature, the whiteness of the bread.


Goade. What, can the whiteness remain without substance or subject: The
Sacrament must consist of the substance of Christ's body, and the substance of
bread and wine.


Campion. Resterrestris, the earthly thing remains, but not the substance: we
are come to a nyce point.


Goade. So it seems. I will here leave the first part I had to prove, and now
will come to the second, touching the use of the sacrament: which I will also
prove to be destroyed by your transubstantiation. You spoke before of the
analogy in the Sacrament, there must be a similitude and proportion between
the sign and the thing signified. As in Baptism, the element of water washing
the body, and the holy Ghost through the blood of Christ washing and
sanctifying the soul. So in the other Sacrament, as the substance of bread
received, nourishes the body: so Christ received by faith, nourishes the
soul. Even as Augustine very well notes this analogy, in his 23. Epistle, in
these words. Si Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sunt
Sacramenta non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent, etc. Hac autem
similitudine plerunque ipsarum etiam rerum nomina recipient. Sicut ergo
secundu^ quendam modu^, Sacramentum corporis Christi Corpus Christi est,
Sacramentu^ sanguinis Christi Sanguis Christi est: ita sacramentum fidei, fides
est. If sacraments had not a certain resemblance of those things whereof they
are sacraments, they should not at all be sacraments, and by reason of this
resemblance, for the most part they take the names of the things them selves.
Therefore as the sacrament of the body of Christ, after a certain manner, is
the body of Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of
Christ: so the sacrament of faith, is called faith.

Now this similitude or proportion by you, is clean taken away, while ye take
away the substance of bread that should norishe the body, and so consequently
ye take away the nature of a Sacrament by Saint Augustines reason.


Campion. The similitude is not taken away, though there remain no substance
of bread and wine, for there remains accidents which do nourish. Do not
qualities feed? bread may feed by accidents in all the qualities of bread.


Goade. This is strange. I might tell you that this is against Philosophy,
that accidents without substance should feed: but we are in divinity. The
very true and principal use of this sacrament, is to confirm our faith, that
as surely as the bread and wine feeds our bodies, even as certainly the body
and blood of Christ received by faith, feeds and nourishes our souls.

Now by your taking away the substance of bread, we are brought into doubt of
the nourishment of our bodies by the outward element, and so consequently of
the feeding of our souls by Christ the heavenly bread: and so ye destroy the
analogy and chief use of this sacrament.


Camp. When God does work a miracle, it is no marvel though there follow
wonderful sequeles. I say, that color may remain without substance, and
accidents may feed and nourish. I will defend it in the University: I would
I might have liberty to defend it.


Goad. What, will you defend that accidents without substance may nourishe?
that is too absurd.


Camp. No absurdity at all. If it please God to take away the substance of
water, and leave the quality of madefaction, what hurt were it, might it not
be sufficient? And if you will needs urge the analogy of feeding by the
substance, it is sufficient that there was also the substance of bread before
consecration, wherein may stand the analogy.


Goade. Let me make it plain unto this auditorie, how manifestly you take away
the comfortable use and analogy in this facrament. When I come to receive, by
this means I ought to strengthen my faith, that even as I know most
assuredly, that the substance of bread and wine serves to nourish, and does
feed my body: even so Jesus Christ being received by faith, does also nourish
my soul unto eternal life. This is a most comfortable analogy or similitude
in this sacrament. But if I should believe that the substance of bread and wine
is clean gone, and though before consecration the substance remained, yet
before I can receive the sacrament, the substance is taken away, and there
remain nothing but accidents: how can I be assured that my body is nourished
by the outward elements, and so in like manner my soul by feeding on Christ?
Thus by your doctrine of Transubstantiation, you overthrow both the nature and
use of the sacrament, and would spoil us of the comfort and streng thning of
our faith, which we should have by this notable comparison: the ground
whereof rests upon the certainty of nourishing our bodies with the substance
of the elements.


Camp. Nay, now ye preach: I thought ye had come to dispute. Make a Syllogism.


Goad. I open this more plainly for the edifying of the hearers, that they may
the better see the fruit and comfort of your doctrine of transubstantiation.


Campion. I would I might appose: the ancient fathers are all on my side.


Fulke. Not any one of them, ye abuse the auditorie: if you can bring any
thing, do it by writing, and I will answer you by writing.


Camp. Mine answer and assertion is, that we are fed by accidents without
substance, by that which is left, the quantity and quality.


Goade. Can you show any ground or word for this?


Campion. This is word enough for me, Hoc est conpusmeu^, This is my body.


Goade. Those words do nothing prove your assertion, as has been showed.


Campion. I would I might be suffered to show my cards, as you have done
yours.


Goade. Whatsoever you can show is well enough known, and has been showed by
others of your side, and is sufficiently answered.


Fulke. I reason thus. That which Christ gave at his supper Argument 5.
was bread:

Ergo there remains bread in the sacrament.


Campion. I deny that it was bread in substance that he gave, but only in
show.


Fulke. It was pieces of bread that he gave:

Ergo it was bread.


Campion. He gave not substantial pieces.


Fulke. I never heard of accidental pieces. But Cyrillus says, speaking of yt
sacrament, Dedit eis fragmentapanis, In Ioh. cap. 4. He gave them pieces of
bread:

But bread is substance:

Therefore he gave them pieces of substance, or substa^tial pieces.


Camp. It is all one, to give pieces, and to give bread:

The whole is not bread:

Ergo the pieces were not bread. It was consecrated bread.


Fulke. How answer you to Cyrillus, that said, he gave them pieces of bread?


Campion. Every piece of bread is called bread: he speaks after the common
manner, because it was bread by appellation.


Fulke. What gave he? or whereof were those pieces but of bread?


Camp. He gave pieces of bread in appellation. The Doctors acknowledge it to be
no bread.


Fulke. That is utterly false. The Doctors always called it bread, and pieces
of bread: and no Doctor within 600. years after Christ said, that the
accidents of bread and wine only did remain, and not the substance.


Camp. I have answered, and given three reasons before, why they called it so.


Fulke. You have answered nothing: but you teach the Doctors to speak. Name
one Doctor for five or six hundred years after Christ, which says that there
remains no substance of bread in the sacrament, or so speaks as you would
expound them.


Camp. The Doctors say, that after consecration the bread is made the body of
Christ.


Fulke. I believe and confess as much.


Camp. Then you must believe that the substance of bread is turned into the
body of Christ.


Fulke. It follows not.


Campion. Master Doctor, if you fear not your cause, for charity answer me.
I challenge you, that you can not answer the Doctors.


Fulke. It is not in me to give you leave to oppose. I come hither by
commandment to oppose you: otherwise as I told you the last day, you are not
the man whom I would take for my adversary.


Campion. I speak to you to be a mean for me. I compare the cause with you,
and not my person with you.


Fulke. I have answered else where, whatsoever could be opposed by your betters,
Heskins and Saunders: and nevertheless, if you can bring any thing that they
have omitted, put it in writing, and I will answer you, as I have often said:
therefore I will go forward. As Cyrillus calls the sacraments pieces of
bread: so Belasius calls it a portion of the holy body, as it is in the
decrees cited by Gratian. Comperimus autem, etc. We have found out of a
certainty, that certain men after they have received a portion of the holy
body, do abstain from the cup of the holy blood, etc.


Camp. Now we shall have an other disputation, whether the cup be necessary
for lay men.


Fulke. Though the communion under both kinds, be proved vnuincibly by that
testimony, yet I bring it only to show that term (a portion of the holy
body:) which proves that there remains bread which is broken, for the very
body of Christ is not broken.


Campion. He calls it a portion by a popular speech: because the sign being
divided, Christ's body is in every part of that bread, which is not bread in
deed but in appearance only, and so seems to be divided into sundry parts.


Fulke. This answer of popular speech is with you Tanqua^ Delphicusg (...),
to avoid all authority that makes against you, be it never so plain: but in
deed it is a figurative speech, not used of the people.


Camp. Is not a figurative* speech common and popu^? They say we drink the
(...). Therefore mine answer is, it is a popular kind of speech, because
when the sign is broken, the thing it self is said to be so.


Fulke. Do the people say, the Lords body is broken, when they mean that the
accidents only are broken? such kind of speaking and meaning, is far above
the peoples ^itie.


Camp. The signs are broken, not the body of Christ it self.


Fulk. Again, in that counterfeite epistle ascribed to Cleme^^, which he
should write unto S. James, exhorting him that he should keep the Pix
diligently from mise dung and putrefaction, he calls ye sacrament which is
reserved, Reliquias fragmentoru^ corporis Dominici, The relics of the
fragments of our Lords body, and Puluis dominici corporis, the dust or small
crummes of the Lords body, and fragme^ta Dominici corporis, and fragme^ta
dominicae portionis. The fragments of the Lords body, the fragme^ts of the
Lords portion. What are al these relics, fragments, dust or crummes, but of
bread?


Camp. All these remnantes and breakings are in respect of the exterior form
of bread, an improper kind of speech.


Fulke. These speeches are improper of yt body of Christ, which can not be
broken: but they are proper of the bread, of the which Cyrillus speaks
plainly.


Camp. Prove you that the substance of bread remains, and not the accidents
only.


Fulk. I have proved that the bread remains which is broken: and bread is
substance: therefore substance remains.


Campion. The sign is broken, but not the bread.


Fulke. You show your judgment. We must take all your answers: when the bread
is broken, the signs are broken.


Came. I could make as good sport about yt incarnation of Christ.


Goad. It is no sporting matter: we are in earnest, and about weighty matters.


Fulk. These speeches may become a Jesuit, but are not semely for a Christian.
This is like your iugling trick the other day, which ye said, belike Christ
did play.


Goade. I will now come to examine the ground, whereupon ye would build your
transubstantiation: and I reason thus.

If the bread and wine be transubstantiate, then it is grounded 6. Argument
upon some part of the Scripture:

But it is grounded upon no part thereof:

Ergo the bread and wine are not transubstantiat.


Camp. I deny your Minor, it is grounded upon some part.


Goad. If upon any, then upon the words of the institution, This is my body:

But not upon those words:

Ergo upon no part of Scripture.


Camp. I deny your Minor, It is grod^ed manifestly upon those words of Christ.


Goad. If upon this place, then upon ye true sense of the words:

But not upon the true sense:

Ergo not upon this place.


Camp. It is grounded both upon ye words, and the true sense also.


Goad. If upon ye true sense, the^ it is a plain and a proper speech:

But it is not a proper speech:

Ergo not upon the true sense.


Camp. It is a proper speech.


Goad. It is a figurative speech:

Ergo not a proper.


Camp. So far forth as it is figurative, it is not proper. It may be
figurative and proper both.


Goad. This is strange, but ye shall hear the judgment of y^ fathers, yt it
is merely figurative. Augustine epist. 23. in y^ words before alleged, makes
it a Metonimical speech, when by reason of the near similitude, the name of
the thing it self is attributed to the sign: which he says is usual in
sacraments. So Circumcision is called the Lords covenant. So the Pascall lamb
is called y^ Gene. 17. Exodus 12.
passover. The same Augustine upon the 3. Psalm, Christi mira^da patientia
adhibuit Iudam ad co^uiuium, in quo corporis and sanguinis sui figuram
discipulis tradidit. The great patience of Christ received Judas unto his
feast, wherein he gave a figure of his body and blood unto his disciples.


Camp. Wherefore bring ye this, it is from ye matter in question: we spoke even
now of proper speeches, this is not a proper argument to the matter.


Goad. I am come to this point orderly to prove the speech to be figurative,
and not proper, and now ye see your self brought in some streightes, ye would
draw me back again: but answer out place of Tertullian against Marcion lib.
4. Which does notably expound the words of the Institution, to be figuratively
spoken.


Camp. We shall then go to the forenoones question.


Goade. No, It serves for the point we are now come unto, being very
weighty to expound the words of the Institution, This is my body. Whereupon
ye would build your transubstantiation. Belike you fear ye place of
Tertullia^, and are loath to come to it.


Camp. I fear not, let us hear it: we lack a moderator.


Goad. I would we had one, we should then dispute more orderly. The words
are: Christus acceptum panem, and distributum discipulis suis, corpus suu^illud
fecit, hoc est corpus meu^ dicendo, id est figura corporis mei, figura autem
no^ fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. The bread which Christ took and gave
to his disciples, he made his body, saying, this is my body, that is, a figure
of my body, but it could not have been a figure, unless Christ had a true body.


Camp. I answer your place of Tertullian, two ways. First, for the
understanding of the people, and after, in respect of the learned. For the
people thus. He had to do with ye heretic Marcion, who denied that Christ had
a true body. Tertullian proves that Christ had a true body, because he gave a
true body to his disciples, saying, this is my body. The words that follow, Id
est, figura corporis mei, are not Tertullians, but are added by the Heretic,
who would have Christ to have had but a figure or show of a body, and not a
true body: Tertullian says to the heretic, Christ says, this is my body,
thou say a figure, admit it were a figure, yet it must be a figure of a true
body.


Goade. You show your self ignorant in this place of Tertull. which is a
known and familiar place: the whole words are Tertullians, and nothing at all
here, added by the heretic Marcion: both the words and sense of Tertullian
is plain, consider better of them.


Camp. Tertullian took upon him the person of the heretic, and makes the
objection, which he thought y^ heretic would object.


Goad. You are greatly deceived in this place of Tertullian, who reasons thus
against Marcion very substantially, to prove yt Christ had a true, and not a
fantastical body as Marcion supposed. That must needs have a true body,
whereof there is a figure:

But Christ in the Institution of his supper, gave a figure of his body, when
he said, This is my body, that is a figure of my body:

Ergo Christ has a true body. This is Tertullia^s reason, as it appears in
ye next clause. Figura aute^ no^ esset, nisiver it at is esset corpus. But
there could not be a figure of a body, except it had relation unto a true body.
And in the next words following, yet more plainly, Caeterum vacuares, quod est
pha^tasma, figuram capere non potest. But an empty or vain thing, such as is a
pha^tasme; can not be capable of a figure. Take the booae and peruse this
place, ye shall find it to be as I have opened the mind of Tertullian.


Campion. I know the place. I made one answer before in respect of the people,
now mine other answer is for the learned: that Tertullian uses to allege
many hard and obscure places, and figures out of the old testament, he must
be read with judgment and great diligence, the words, Idest figura, are not
in way of exposition, but of objection.


Goade. You show your skill in the fathers. This is not Tertullians exposition
only, but also Augustines, upon the third Psalm before alleged, and Tom. 6.
against Adamantus. Non dubitauit Dominus dicere hoc est corpus meu^, quum
signu^ daret corporis sui. The Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when
he gave a figure of his body.


Camp. Then belike ye would altogether exclude from the sacrament, Christ the
substance, making him altogether absent, allowing only of a bare sign in the
sacrament.


Goad. The words are Augustines, that Christ gave a sign of his body.
Howebeit, we exclude not the substance, which is Christ him self, who
together with the sign is received by faith of the godly, and so we make not a
bare sign, but we say he is not upon earth touching his body included in the
sacrament.


Campion. It is well known to the learned, that the sign excludes not the
thing signified.


Goade. I grant: neither do I exclude the thing. It is a sacramental speech
usual (as has been said) in the Scriptures to give the name of the thing to
the sign, for the similitude between both, and therefore must be
sacramentally expounded, propter similitudinem signi, and rei signatae.


Campion. That makes for me, that the sign has the name of the thing.


Goade. Does it make for you, that y^ sign is so termed Secu^du^ quendam
modum, after a certain manner, as Augustine says before, and yet simply is not
for The Sacrament is not the thing it self, but in a kind of speech
sacramentally: as Circumcision is said to be the covenant, which was not the
Covenant it self, but a sign thereof.


Campion. Make your argument.


Goade. Seeing ye will have me draw it into an argument, thus I reason.

It is usual in the Sacraments, for the Scripture to speak figuratively,
calling the sign by the name of the thing signified, as in Circumcision, Genesis
17. the Pascall Lamb, Exodus 12. and the rock in the wilderness. 1. Cor. 10:

Therefore the like in this sacrament of the Lords supper.


Campion. I deny your argument, they are not alike.


Goade. I prove it. The same reason of Augustine from the analogy to take the
name of the thing, holds in all sacraments: Ergo in this. And for example he
brings this: Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi,
corpus Christi est, Therefore as the Sacrament of Christ's body, after a
certain manner is said to be the body of Christ, etc. Also the very manner of
speech in the other Sacraments is like, viz. of circumcision, This is my
Covenant: of the Pascall, This is the Passover: of the rock, The rock was
Christ.


Camp. I say they are not like, for Christ was not naturally present in those
sacraments of the old Testament, as he is in this Sacrament.


Goade. You bring an instance by Petitio principij, but I overthrow your
particular instance by the general.

The like usual speech is used in all Sacraments both of the old and new
Testament:

Ergo in this sacrament of the Supper.


Camp. The speech and sense is this in the sacrament, Hoc est corpus meum,
This that I see is my body, as the quantity and color.


Goade. You answer not mine argument. I have said enough for the true
understanding of these words, it must have a sacramental sense. I leave it
unto judgment.


Camp. I grant a sacramental sense, so far forth as goes to color. The
fathers you allege, but those that I bring can not be answered.


Fulke. They have been, and may be, as time and occasson will serve: but now
your lot is to answer. I will take away your common and only answer.


Campion. I have answered already.


Fulke. Your answer shows, that you understand not the scope and purpose of
Saint Augustine, which is to prove that this saying, Anima est sanguis, is such
a kind of speech, as this of the sacrament, This is my body. For these are his
words: Nam ex eo quod scriptum est, etc. For of that which is written, that the
blood of a beast is the soul of it, beside that which I said before, that it
pertains not unto me what becomes of ye soul of a beast, I can also
interpret this commandment to be made in a sign: for our Lord doubted not to
say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Here you see,
Augustine having disputation with the heretic Adimantus, which held that the
blood of a beast was the soul thereof, affirms that the blood is but a sign
of the soul, as the sacrament is a sign of the body of Christ: and yet is
called the soul, as the other is called the body of Christ.


Campion. You are answered already.


Fulke. This is your common answer: You are answered already, and you have
answered your self, when you have none other shift. You understand never a
place of the Doctors, that has been yet alleged.


Campion. Twenty years ago I have read this book.


Fulke. I do not believe that ever you read it, you are so ignorant of the
argument of it. But sure I am, that xx. years ago you had not read it. You
would seem to be an older student in Divinity then you are, by a great deal.


M. Norton. Where were you Campion, twenty years ago? were you not a poor boy
in the hospital:


Camp. I was two and twenty years old, and then I was Bacheler of Art.


Fulke. You might read that place noted out by some other, but the whole work
of the author you read not.


Camp. I did not say that I had then read his whole work.


Fulke. It is not a dosen years ago, since I heard you at Garbrandes staule in
Oxenforde ask for Irenaeus Epistles, wherein you showed that you were but a
young reader of the Doctors at that time.


Campion. Peradventure I might ask for Irenaeus works.


Fulke. Nay, you asked for Irenaeus Epistles, and namely, that to Victor.


Campion. Why might I not, having read in Eusebius of his Epistle to Victor,
ask of the Stationer whether that Epistle were extant:


Fulke. I deny not but you might: but yet that argues that you were but a young
man in the Doctors, that knew not what works of Irenaeus were extant. But
how answer you to Saint Augustine?


Campion. I answer, Saint Augustine says, that Sanguis is a sign of the
soul present, as the bread is a sign of the body of Christ being present.


Fulke. Saint Augustine says, that the blood does only signify the soul,
and is not the substance of the soul: but you utterly destroy his argument,
and so, help the heretic very well.


Camp. The heretic thought it was an absurdity, that Sanguis being eaten,
anima is eaten. Augustine shows, because Sanguis is a principal part of life,
it is called the vital blood, etc. Like as this Sanguis is a token that Anima
is near, so the sign of the bread is a token that Christ is near.


Fulke. You go quite from the matter. The question was not whether the blood
be a sign of the soul, but whether it be the soul it self.


Campion. Let it be noted: why is blood called Anima, but because Anima is
near it, and because it exercises his functions therein: So he gave bread,
that was a sign of his body present. The question was never, whether the blood
were the substance of the soul, but whether the blood being eaten, the soul
were eaten? Therefore in that saying of Saint Augustine, Christ doubted not to
say he gave his body, when he gave a sign of his body, there, sign is a token
of his presence.


Fulke. That is a mere fallacion: sign a token of presence, as blood a sign
that anima is near: Augustine is clear, that the blood is not the soul, but
a sign thereof: as that which Christ gave, was not his body, but a sign
thereof. Or else the heretic had his purpose, in saying that eating of blood,
is eating of souls.


Campion. I must not eat his blood.


Fulke. You have many words to no purpose in the world.


Campion. Why is a man's brain called his wit: It were reason that I also
should have my course sometime to oppose, and you to answer: which if it fell
so forth, I doubt not but I could urge you as well in these matters, as you do
me, and drive you also to narrow shifts, in the defense, how Christ took
flesh of the virgin Marie.


Fulke. To take upon me the person of an answerer, is not my choice and yours:
as also the place of opponent, which I now sustain, was not sought for by me.
And to grant that which you now require, rests in the superior powers.


Camp. Well then, use the help of your friends to sue for obteining of the
same. For if you or the like were in Catholic cities, that I know, and did
but once signify your desire in the like case, free disputation and conference
would out of hand be procured. And I in my defense challenge you here, if you
dare, to answer to such points as I shall object against you.


Fulke. I will make no suite for the matter, neither are you the man whom I
would choose mine adversary, to match my self withal.


Camp. In deed, I think to obtain that suite, would not be for your
advantage.


Fulke. Think of your self as highly as you list, yet when you have reckened
all, your gain will be little or nothing. I will come to mine argument.

The elements go not from their nature and substance:

Ergo there is no transubstantiation.

Campion. I deny your Antecedent.


Fulke. I prove it by authority of Theodoret Dialog. 2. Neque enim signa
mysticapost sanctificationem recedunt a natura sua. Mauent enim in priori
substantia, figura, and forma, and videri and tangi possunt sicut prius. For
the mystical signs after sanctification do not go from their nature. For they
remain in their former substance, shape, and form, they may both be seen and
touched, as before.


Camp. I answer, he is so to be understood, as he may confound the heretic
with whom he did dispute.


Fulke. Uery well, and for that purpose he says, the nature of the signs
remains, to move that the nature of Christ's humanity remains after the
assumption.


Campion. Nature is not taken for substance.


Fulke. Theodoret says, they remain also in their former substance.


Campion. He speaks popularly, he must not be taken so strictly. The word
substance is often times taken for being, therefore it must not be here taken
for a special substance, but generice, for a general being.


Fulke. Then it would follow, that the proper substance of Christ's body
remains not, but a general being thereof.


Camp. The heretic granted that Christ had a body, but he said it was a
phantsticall body, and not a true body.


Fulke. And your answer will help the heretic very well. As the signs
remain not in their proper substance, but in a general being or accidents: so
the humanity of Christ after it was assumpted by the Divinity, was absorpte
of the same. But Theodoret against the Eutichean, by the similitude of the
mystical signs remaining in their nature and substance after sanctification,
proves the verity of Christ's humanity after his incarnation.


Campion. You must not press the similitude so: substance is taken generally
for being.


Fulke. You were best to say as Saunders does, that substance is taken for the
bulk of the bread, though there be no bread.


Campion. I say it is an improper speech.


Fulke. If ever we must speak properly, we must do it when we dispute against
heretics, as Theodoret did.


Camp. I have answered: by substance he means a being, and such have
accidents.


Fulke. That answer will not stand with Theoderets words. For Christ has not
now those accidents with the which he was incarnate, but the same substance.
You shall hear the argument of Epanister the heretic. As the symbols of the
body and blood of our Lord are one thing before invocation, and after
invocation are changed and made other things: so the Lords body after the
assumption, is changed into the divine substance. But Theodoret tells him,
that he is taken with his own net. For the mystical signs depart not from
their nature, but abide in their former substance, form and shape. Here you
see he speaks both of substance and accidents.


Campion. I grant, so far forth as it made against the heretic.


Fulke. But it makes not against the heretic, unless transubstantiation be
denied.


Campion. Yes, it makes against the heretic, that the bread being turned
into the very body of Christ, proves that Christ had a true body.


Fulke. You do open violence to the place. His argument is not of the body of
Christ, to prove his humanity: but by the remaining of the mystical signs
in their former substance and accidents, to prove the perfect remaining of
Christ's humanity after his incarnation.


Campion. Every argument used by the Fathers, must not be pressed farther then
their purpose, which was to confound heretics.


Fulke. But herewithal is his mind expressed against the heresy of
transubstantiation.


Camp. I grant it does carry some suspicion against transubstantiation, but it
does not make against it.


Fulke. He could not more plainly have spoken against it, then to say, the
nature and substance, form and shaperemayneth in the Absurd: Substance must
be in a certain vacaunt or void emptines, and yet forsooth in quantity and
quality. 8. Argument.
bread and wine after sanctification.


Campion. He is to be understood, that the substance does remain in
vacuitate, sed tamen quantitate and qualitate. etc.


Fulke. Every man may see how seely shifts you be driven unto, and how far
you roue from that ancient fathers meaning. I will press you with another
authority.


Goade. I will urge you with an other argument out of the same author, whereby
his judgment shall appear in more places then one, that he is flat against
transubstantiation: his words are these, dialog. 1. qui dicitur immutabilis.
Volebat enim eos qui sunt diuinorum mysteriorum participes, non attendere
naturam eorum quae videntur, sed propter nominum permutationem, mutationem quae
fit ex gratia, credere. Qui enim quod natura corpus est, triticum and panem
appellauit, and vitem rursus seipsum nominauit, is symbola and signa quae
videntur, appellatione corporis and sanguinis honorauit: non naturam quidem
mutans, sed naturae gratiam adijciens. For he would have those which are
partakers of the divine mysteries, not to regard the nature of those things
that are seen, but for the change of the names, to believe that change which
is made by grace. For he which called that which by nature is his body, corn
and bread, and again called himself a vine, even he did honor the symbols and
signs which are seen, with the name of his body and blood: not changing
nature, but adding grace unto nature. Out of which words I reason thus.

The symbols and signs remain in their own nature after they be consecrate:

Ergo there is no transubstantiation.


Campion. In great and weighty matters they are forced to use these terms, he
speaks generice generally, not strictly.


Goade. You answer nothing to the place: read the words, and consider them
better. He speaks plainly, and in special of the nature and substance of
the sacrament still remaining.


Camp. I have answered before, that by nature he means the exterior form, as
accidents and quality.


Goade. By nature it is plain he means the very substance: for he does
confound these two, as appeared in his other place before alleged. Non
recedunt a natura sua, manent enim in priori substantia. They leave not their
nature, for they abide in their former substance. When you find the word
nature sometime in the fathers, yt seems to make for your transubstantiation,
then you triumph, then you urge the word that it must needs signify
substance. Now when the same word is urged against you out of Theodoret, and
the same Theodoret explaning also himself, that he means the very substance
of bread and wine, yet it must be nothing but quality and accidents.


Camp. When the coherence of the place yields it, then we say it must
signify the substance. It can not always he taken for the substance. For I
pray you, is not heat the nature of the fire? yet it is not the substance of
the fire.


Goade. Heat is a property of the fire. But what is this to the answering of
Theodorets place? where both the coherence and his own exposition, does show
it to be all one with the substance?


Campion. I have answered, the substantial part does not remain.


Goade. Then I see we shall have none other answer to Theodoret. I will prove
how you will answer Justinius Martyr in his Apology.


Campion. These Doctors were great Philosophers, and therefore no marvel
though sometime they speak as they were wont.


Goade. The substance of bread and wine remains.

Ergo they are not changed.


Campion. It does not remain.


Goade. That which nourishes the body, remains:

But the substance of bread and wine nourishes the body:

Ergo the substance of bread and wine remains.


Campion. This is answered already. When the substance is present, it
nourishes by the quality.


Goade. But the quality can by no means nourish without the substance.


Campion. The quality nourishes alone, if it can be there without substance.


Goade. But it can not be there without a subject. Now consider the words of
Justinius in 2. apologia. Non enim vt communem panem aut communem potum haec
accipimus, sed quemadmodum Jesus Christus seruator noster per verbum Dei factus
caro, and carnem and sanguinem nostrae salutis causa habuit: sic etiam cibum
illum, postquam per precationem verbi illius fuerit benedictus, ex quo sanguis
and caro nostra per mutationem nutriuntur, edocti sumus esse carnem and
sanguinem illius. etc. For we do not receive these things as common bread and
common drink, but as Jesus Christ our savior, being made flesh by the word
of God, had both flesh and blood for our salvation: so also we are taught, that
that meat after it is sanctified by prayer of the word, by which meat our
flesh and blood is by change thereof nourished, is the flesh and blood of him.


Camp. The accidents alone wheresoever they be, they may nourish.


Goad. You speak against learning, reason and sense. Will you say, that
accidents without substance, can nourish our blood and flesh?


Camp. That is, physica quadam ratione, naturally it can not be: but where
there is a miracle supernatural, the miracle being granted, the other
follows.


Goad. But your imagined miracle is denied, and it has been showed out of
Augustine, that there is no wonder in the sacraments. This is an easy answer
to all arguments, when ye have nothing else, then to say it is a miracle: and
this is your common answer.


Camp. When the substance is present, the quality nourishes. I would this
question might be handled in the University.


Fulke. You would feign be removed, but it lies not in us to remove you.
Gelasius against Eutiches, writes thus: Certe sacramenta quae sumimus corporis
and sanguinis Christi, diuina res est propter Argument 9.
quod, and per eadem, diuina efficimur consortes naturae, and tamen esse non
desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini. Et certe ^ago and similitudo
corporis and sanguinis Christi, in action mysterioru^ corporis Christi
celebratur. etc. The sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which we
receive, are a divine thing, and therefore by them we are made partakers of the
divine nature, and yet the substance, or nature of the bread and wine cease
not to be. And surely a similitude or image of the body and blood of Christ is
celebrated in the action of the mysteries. Therefore, it is showed unto us
evidently enough, that we must judge the same thing eue^ in our Lord Christ him
self which we profess, celebrate and receive in that which is an image of
him: that as by the working of the holy Ghost, these things pass into a divine
substance, and yet abide still in the property of their own nature: even so
the same principal mystery does show that one Christ, whose efficiencie and
truth it does truly represent unto us, abides whole and true, those things
of which he consists properly, still remaining. What say you to this plain
testimony of Gelasius, who says, the substance of the bread and wine
remains.


Campion. Make your argument.


Fulke. I have made it already.

The suhstance of the bread and wine remains:

Ergo there is no transubstantiation.


Campion. I deny your Antecedent.


Fulke. The words of Gelasius proves it.

The substance of bread and wine departs not:

Ergo it remains.


Camp. Gelasius and Theodoret have one answer: in the mysteries, which are the
body of Christ, there remains that which appears bread and wine.


Fulke. Gelasius sateth, the substance of bread and wine remains, and not the
appearance only: and so says Theodoret.


Campion. I told you they mean to prove that there is not a third thing, as a
fantastical body, but one Christ, God and man.


Fulke. This is nothing to the purpose. The substance of the bread and wine
cease not to be in the sacrament: for your credit sake, answer to the
authority. Gelasius was a Pope, he could not err.


Camp. The substance of the bread and wine remains, that is, the being.


Fulke. Even now, you denied my Antecedent, and now you grant it: you go
backward and foreward. In deed you know not what to say.


Camp. His answer is, substance is taken for being.


Fulke. What being, a general being:


Camp. Such a being, as is in all the predicamentes.


Fulke. Ergo the sacrament is a transcendent.


Camp. I deny the argument.


Fulke. The bread and wine are the sacrament:

Bread and wine are transcendentes:

Ergo the sacrament is a transcendent.


Camp. The being of them both after consecration, is a transcendent: the bread
is a sacrament, as it is a sign.


Fulke. Take the sacrament for a sign, and then you will say, it is a
transcendent, which is in all predicaments. I pray you what remains:


Campion. Aliquid, the signs of bread and wine.


Fulke. Hoc aliquid nihil est. There remains the substance of bread and wine,
says Gelasius, that is to say, the accidents, as you expound him. By like
reason you may expound him by white, to mean black, by hoate, cold: you
might as well say, when he speaks of God, he means the devil, by such
monstrous interpretations, all heresies may be defended.


Camp. Your arguments carry a show, because you reason physically: but we must
not be led by senses in these mysteries.


Fulke. I reason truly: and truth is able to stand with all true sciences
against all gainsaiers.


Goad. There remains the substance of one of the elements: 10. Argument.


Ergo there remains the substance of both.


Camp. There remains substance in neither.


Goade. The substance of the wine remains:

Ergo of the one.


Camp. Wine does not remain substantially.


Goade. Cyprian epist. 3. ad Caecilium. Dico vobis non bib am amodo ex ista
creatura vitis, vsque in diem illum quo vobiscum bibam nouum vinum in regno
patris mei. Qua in part inuenimus calicem mixtum fuisse quem Dominus obtulit,
and vinum fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit. I say unto you, I will not drink
hereafter of this creature of the vine, until the day that I shall drink it
new with you in the kingdom of my father. In which part, we find the cup
which the Lord offered, to be mixed, and that it was wine which he called his
blood. By these words it appears that wine remains. He says, we find
that it was wine, etc.


Campion. His intent is to prove that Christ did consecrate in wine, and so
must we do: he does not call it wine after consecration.


Goade. I prove that his meaning is after consecration, as Christ him self
does call it, whose words he does recite.

He says, it was wine which he offered, and called his blood:

But he did not offer and call it his blood till after consecration:

Therefore it was wine after consecration.


Campion. That is, he took wine to make it his blood, and when he took it,
it was wine: he says not, that when Christ did offer it, it was wine.


Goade. He says that it was wine, which he called his blood, and he did not
call it his blood before consecration. I leave the place to the judgment of
the learned. I will farther confirm this out of Irenaeus. There remains an
earthly substance after consecration:

Ergo there is not transubstantiation.


Camp. There does not remain any substance.


Goade. Hear his words, Iren. aduer. hereses lib. 4. cap. 34. I am non
communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duaebus rebus consta^s, terrena and
coelesti. Caeleste hoc quidna^ est? Dominus Jesus. Terrestre autem quid? panis
qui ex terra est, quique corpora nostra pascit quemadmodum reliqui panes. Now
it is not common bread, but the Euchariste consisting of two things, one
earthly, and the other heavenly. This heavenly what is it? the Lord Jesus. And
what is the earthly? bread which is of the earth, and which does feed our body
as other bread does.


Camp. He says the sacrament consists of two things. There be nine
predicaments beside that of substance, and this word Res, or thing, may be in
them all, and they may be all said to be earthly things.


Goade. You can not so shift of Irenaeus plain words. I will prove that Res,
in this place, must needs signify a substance.

Sacraments consist of two substances, the one earthly, and the other heavenly:

Therefore, it must needs be understood of substance.


Campion. I deny that they consist of two substances: they consist of two
things.


Goad. You will grant that Christ the invisible grace, is one substance: and
so that part of the sacrament which is heavenly, is a substance. The earthly
part, namely the elements of bread and wine, remain also in their proper
substance: for as Irenaeus says, the bread is of the earth, and does nourish
our bodies, as other bread does.


Campion. It is enough to consiste of two things: of Christ, and the grace of
Christ. An evil man may receive Christ, but not the grace of Christ.


Goade. Do you make the two things to be Christ and his grace: the^ one of
these two must be earthly, according to Irenaeus. And it has been confuted
before, that the wiched can not eat Christ: for whosoever is partaker of
Christ, must also be partaker of his spirit and grace.


Campion. I say that the wicked may receive Christ, yet t^ their condemnation,
when they receive that part of the sacranie^t which Irenaeus calls the thing
earthly, being not the substance, but the accidents.


Goade. The wicked receive the sacrament, the thing earthly, to their
condemnation: but Christ they receive not. I have before proved that by the
earthly thing must needs be understood the substance: but ye are much
beholding to accidents and miracle, they have helped you well to day, when
ye had nothing else to answer.


Fulke. Irenaeus calls the sacrament a sacrifire. I think you like the
phrase in regard of yourmasse, but he faith, it was such a sacrifice as does
not sanctify the offerer. lib. 4. cap. 34.

Therefore it was bread and wine.


Camp. You say that it is a sacrifice, so it is in deed: but he means by
the offerer, Christ which does sanctify, not man.


Fulke. He means clean contrary, you shall hear him speak: he means man.


Campion. Man is also the offerer, after a sore.


Fulke. You hurt your self, because you will not hear the place, but take
upon you to answer you know not to what. His words are (speaking of the
sacrament) Igitur sacrificia non sanctificant hominem, non enim indiget
sacrificio Deus: sed conscientia eius qui offert sanctificat sacrificium pura
existens, and praestat acceptare Deum quasi ab amico. Therefore the sacrifices
do not sanctify the man, for God needs no sacrifice: but the conscience of
him that offers being pure, sanctifies the sacrifice, and causes God to
accept it as of a friend. Hereof I infer:

That which ye conscience of man must sacrifice, is bread and wine:

Therefore the sacrifice is bread and wine.


Campion. He means, except the conscience of the offerer be pure, it
sanctifies not the man.


Fulke. Not only that, but he says the pure conscience does sanctify the
sacrifice.

But no man's conscience does sanctify the body of Christ:

Therefore the sacrifice of bread and wine, are not the body of Christ.


Camp. The pure conscience makes it an holy sacrifice to him that offers,
but otherwise it is holy of it self.


Fulke. Irenaeus affirms that the sacrifice has no sanctification, but of
the pure conscience of the offerer.


Campion. If that be wanting, it signifies not the man that is holy.


Fulke. But if his conscience be never so pure, it sanctifies not the body of
Christ:

Therefore there is no way for you to escape.


Goad. If there be transubstantiation, then Christ is really present in his
true body: 12. Argument.


But Christ is not really present in his true body:

Ergo there is not transubstantiation.


Camp. Christ is really present in his true body.


Goade. He is not present in his sensible body:

Therefore not in his true body.


Campion. I deny your argument.


Goade. It is the argument of our Savior Christ, who neither deceives, nor
can be deceived, Luke 24. 39. See my hands and my feet that it is I, handle
me, and see. etc. Here Christ proves his true body to be present by the senses
of seeing and handling, as reasoning thus:

You see and feel my body:

Therefore I am present in my true body.

And it is not a spirit as you fear, as if he could not have been seen and
handled, then not to be believed to be his true body.


Camp. The argument of Christ is good. The body that might be felt, must needs
be a true body. The body of Christ is always sensible, but he does when it
pleases him, withdraw this property.


Goad. Then by our Savior Christ's reason, we may doubt of the truth of his
body.


Camp. It is said of Christ, that he vanished out of their sight, yet his body
was visible. And can not Christ be present now without our seeing him?


Goad. He was taken out of their sight, and then how could they see him? but
you say his body is present with us. Will you challenge more unto you then
Christ him self does? It pleased Christ to be judged by our senses, touching
the presence of his body, our senses do see, feel, smell and taste nothing but
bread.


Campion. Christ's pleasure is enough: (...) the (...) ^e him rise out of his
sepulcher


Goad. It pleased the Lord to hold their eyes, (...) astonished for fear: so
when he (...), it is true that we can not use this sense.


Campion. Then his body may be (...) to ^s if he will, and yet he in him self
is always sensible: so the cause of not seeing him, is in him, and not in mine
eye.


Goade. Yea, if our eyes were holden that we could not see: but it is manifest
that the Apostles knew nothing of this doctrine of real presence in the
sacrament before Christ's resurrection. For if they had been taught before in
the (...), that Christ was present in the sacrament in his natural body, and
yet they saw and handled nothing else but bread, this argument now after his
resurrection drawn from their senses, had been of small force.


Campion. Ye have heard mine answer, though now it pleased him to show him
self palpable, yet there may be impediment in him, and also in us, why this
is not always so. Here was no miracle when Christ did thus show him self,
but Christ will be present in the sacrament miraculously.


Goad. Let us end with prayer. We yield thee humbly thanks most gracious God
and merciful father, that it has pleased thee to call us to the knowledge and
profession of thine everlasting truth revealed in thine holy word: and
although it be the lotte and condition of the same truth, always to have
adversaries and gainsayers, that set themselves against the clear light of thy
word: yet we beseech thee so to establish and confirm our faith in the known
truth, that we be never offended by reason of errors and heretics, knowing
that as there has been always amongst thy people, so there will be still false
prophets, which privily shall bring in damnable heresies: yea there must be
heresies in the 2. Pet. 2.
Church, that they which are approved, may be known. But rather O Lord, by
this means stir us up the more to study and 1. Cor. 11.
meditate in thy law. And specially vouchsafe to work in our hearts a
greater measure of zeal and love toward thy truth, seeing that of thy just
judgment thou use to send strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
which would not receive the love of thy truth. And amongst the multitude of
those that wander 2. These. 2.
in blindness and error, we beseech thee in thy good the, so many of them as
pertain unto thy kingdom, of thy mercy to convert, and the rest that are
obstinate against thy truth and glory, of thy just judgment to co^de: and
finally to break the might of Satan by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holy spirit, be all glory now and ever.


Amen.
William Fulke.
Roger Goade.

A remembrance of the conference had in the Tower of London, betwixt M. D.
Walker, and M. William Charke opponents, and Edmund Campion Jesuit respondent,
the 27. of September, 1581. as follows.
1. Whether the Scriptures contain sufficient doctrine The questio^^.
for our salvation. 2. Whether faith only justifies.
MAster Charke began the action with this godly prayer, but Campion refusing
to pray with them, becrossed himself on the forehead, breasts, and other
parts, after his superstitious manner.

Our help is in the name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth. O
eternal God and most merciful father, we thy servants do humbly
acknowledge, that we are by nature miserable sinners, full of darkness and
error, without thee neither meet to receive the love, nor able to yield the
obedience of thy truth. Therefore we beseech thee in Jesus Christ, to throw
all our sins into the bottom of the sea, and to chase away all our darkness
with the brightness of thy wisdom, that we may grow up in the knowledge, in
the love, and in the obedience of thy most holy will. And because we are here
assembled to maintain thy truth against the error and superstition of
Antichrist, vouchsafe, O Lord our God, to be present in this action by thy holy
spirit, and so sanctify our hearts and govern our tongues, that our corrupt
affections being suppressed, all things may be done in a godly zeal for thy
truth, and nothing against it. Moreover, for those that are come to hear,
grant that as many as love thy Gospel, may be more and more confirmed in the
knowledge thereof, by that which shall be faithfully delivered out of thy holy
word: such as be otherwise minded, we pray thee that they may yield either
to the manifest truth, if they appertain to thy holy election: or being none
of thine, that they may appear guyltie and convicted of a lying spirit, such
as is gone out into the world to deceive those that will not receive the love
of thy truth, but delight in darkness. These things, O Lord, and whatsoever
thou know to be good for us, we ask in the name of Jesus Christ, and by
that form of prayer, which he has taught us. Our father etc.

After the prayer was ended, M. D. Walker entered with this preface. Walker.
Gentlemen, ye shall understand that we be sent hither by authority, to talk
and confer with one called Campion, an English man borne, and brought up in
this realm in schools and places where good learning has been taught, so
that he might have been a good instrument in this common wealth and Gods
Church: but contrary to his bringing up, his friends expectation, and hope
that this Church might have conceived of him, like an unnatural man to his
country, degenerated from an English man, an Apostata in religion, a fugitive
from this realm, vnloyal to his Prince, has not only fled to the man of
Rome, an adversary to Christ and his doctrine: but has gotten a courage from
that Romaniste with certain other his sectaries, to come into this realm
again, to undermine the Gospel of Christ, to seduce Gods people, and
withdraw her Majesty's lawful subjects to disobedience and sedition, and
has been (disguised in Ruffians apparel) in diverse places of this realm, to
plant secretly that blasphemous Mass and other Popery, whereunto it
appears he has allured many unstable fools: and in Yorkshire where his
Sectaries and disciples are apprehended and justly imprisoned, now they rage
(as I hear say) and curse him that ever he came there. So ye see what manner of
man we are to talk withal. What good we shall do with him, the Lord does
know, other manner of men then we are, and of another calling, were more meet
to talk with him then we: notwithstanding we will do our best that we can,
God give it good effect. As for you, Campion, I hear say, that you use to
scoff and jest at such as come to confer with you: we come not for that
purpose, it is not our profession, yet I give you warning, Si quam maledicendo
coeperis voluptatem, eam male audiendo A prouerbial speech signifying thus
much: If you take any pleasure in speaking evil, you shall lose it in hearing
evil.
amittes.

Now to the question, which is, that the scriptures contain all things
sufficient to salvation, against the assertion of your book: For you say that
the Lutherans have cut off many books from the body of the new Testament, and
so divided them from the Canonical scripture, which is not true.


Camp. Yes that they have, and therein they have done evil.


Walker. Here Master Walker read the words out of Campions challenge.


Campion. Luther has cut off the Epistle of James, the second epistle of John,
Jude, and the second of Peter. Luther has found fault with these, and
improued them in his prefaces upon those Epistles.


Walker. Luther has not doubted of them himself, but showed that others have
doubted of them.


Campion. It is one thing to doubt, an other thing to cut off. Bring me the
books, and I will show that he has cut them off.


Walker. That can not be showed, if the books were here: For the Doctors do
not agree, concerning these books that are of the Canon. Some recite more, and
some recite less, as Origin, Hierome, and others, and yet it were hard to say,
that they cut off any of the Canonical books. They do, as Luther may, show
what books were doubted of in their time, and yet no whitte prejudice the
books of the Canonical Scripture.


Campion. Well, I say whatsoever they might do then, yet now seeing the Church
has otherwise determined, it is blasphemy for any to doubt of them. The
Lutherans do doubt of them: bring me the books, and I will show where Luther
doubts, and therefore blasphemeth, because the Church has taken away the
doubt, videlicet the third Council of Carthage, and that of Laodicea.


Walker. I do not profess my self a Lutheran, but a Christian. But if old
fathers and old Councils have not received these books for Canonical and
books to ground our faith upon, then can not new men, nor the Tridentine
Council (being full of errors) make the^ Canonical. August de doct. Christ.
lib. 2. ca. 8. leaves out Baruch, and the two last books of Esdras.
Hieronymus praes. in li. Reg. Hu^c prologu^ galeatu^ principiu^ vocat. He
says, Igitur Sapientia quae vulgo Salomonis inscribitur, and Jesus filij Syrach
liber, and Judith, and Tobias, and pastor, no^ sunt in Canone. Macchabaeoru^
primu^ libru^ Hebraicu^ reperi, secu^dus Graecus est, quod ex ipsa phrafi
probari potest. Eusebius also ecclesi. hist. lib. 6. cap. 18. fol. 368. and
sequentibus, omittit tertiu^ and quartu^ Esdrae, Tobiae, Judith, Baruch,
Sapie^tia, Ecclesiastici, Machabaeorum libros. Paulo post: De eo (inquit) qui
est apud Hebraeos nonnulli dubitauerunt. etc. Sed ego dico ficut mihi a
maioribus traditum est, quia manifestissime Pauli est. Ibi de secunda Petri
Epistola a no^nullis dubitatur. De duabus vltimis Iohannis Epistolis apud
quosda^ dubia sententia. He omitteth in the forenamed place the third and
fourth book of Esdras, the books of Tobie, Judith, Baruch, of Wisdom, of
Ecclesiasticus, and of the Macchabees. A little after: Concerning that (says
he) which is written to the Hebrews, many have doubted: but I say as has been
delivered unto me from mine Elders, because it appears most manifestly to be
of Paul's. There also, concerning the second Epistle of Peter, he says, that
it was doubted of many: and so with some were the two last Epistles of John.
The same Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 26. loquens de Melitone Episcopo Sardensis
Ecclesiae, qui recitans volumina veteris Testamenti, omittit Esdras, Tobi,
Hester, Judith, Baruch, Sapientiae, Syrach, Macchabaeorum. etc. Speaking of
Melito the Bishop of the Church of Sardis, who reckening up the volumes of the
old Testament, he omitteth Esdras, Tobie, Hester, Judith, Baruch, Wisdom,
Syrach, the books of the Macchabees, etc. And the Laodicean Council omitteth
Lukes Gospel and the Apocalypse. You see therefore that these old fathers have
left these books out of the Canon, and yet were they neither called
heretics, nor blasphemers.


Campion. It is not lawful to cut off the books of the old Testament from
the Canon: which not only, as I have said, Luther has done, but also Calvin.
The one has rejected those books I have named, and the other rejects the
books of Tobie, Ecclesiasticus, the book of Wisdom, the books of Maccabees,
Baruch, and the like, which are de syncero Canone.


Walker. What is this to that I have said: I have showed that the old Doctors
have refused them for Canonical, and therefore so many may we refuse: and they
them selves will de no further admitted then they agree with the Canonical
Scriptures: and these books which you name, have always been esteemed
Apocrypha. Augustine contra Maximinum Arrianorum Episcopum lib. 2. Cap. 14. Nec
ego Nicenum, nec tudebes Ariminense tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre Concilium:
nec ego huius authoritate, nec tuistius debueris: Scripturarum authoritatibus
non quorumcumque proprijs, sed vtrisque communibus testibus, res cum re, causa
cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet etc. August. against Maximinus the
Bishop of the Arrians. Neither ought thou to bring the Council of Arimine,
nor I the Nicene, as it were to prejudice the truth: neither should I be
holden with the authority of this, nor thou of that: but let it be tried by
the authority of the Scriptures, not the proper witnesses of any, but common to
both, let matter with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason try it,
etc. And Hierome writing to Laeta de institutione filiae, fol. 58. wills, not
to read some without doubting, and other some warely: but he says, Caveat
omnia Apocrypha, Let her beware of all the Apocrypha, (which he names in
Prologo Galeato.) Et si quando ea non ad dogmatum veritatem, sed ad signorum
reuerentiam legere voluerit, sciat non eorum esse quorum titulis praenotantur,
multaque ijs admixta vitiosa, and grandis esse prudentiae aurum in luto
quaerere. And if at any time she will read them, not for the truth of
opinions, but for the reverence of signs, let her know that they are not
theirs whose titles they bear, but that many vicious things are mixed, with
them, and that it is a point of great wisdom to seek out gold in dirt. Lo,
here you see that he biddes her to beware in the reading of them.


Camp. The Scripture is principally to be admitted: but I would we might have
an argument.


Walker. Then thus I reason.

That which he bids to beware of, is not to be holden authentical: 1.
Argument,


But he bids to beware of the Apocrypha:

Ergo the Apocrypha is not to be holden authentical.


Camp. Apocrypha are taken two ways. First, for those books which are doubted
of: and then, for such books that are not allowed. Such were ye prophecy of
Enoch, Jacobs testament and such like, which he calls Somniolenta
deliramenta, vitiosa, etc. of those Hierome speaks in this place, and not of
those others. For what point is there in Ecclesiasticus, the book of Wisdom,
that is to be found fault with that is vitiosu^, and not good?


Walker. They are called Apocrypha, that are not in the Canon received and
allowed to have proceeded undoubtedly from the holy Ghost: these Apocrypha are
forbidden to be read. And Hierome in praefat. in lib. Reg. says, Hic prologus
scripturarum etc. Si quid extra hos est, inter Apocrypha est ponendum etc. They
are not in the Canon: therefore Apocrypha are only to be read.


Camp. Would Hierome forbid the gentlewoman to read Ecclesiasticus, where
there are given so many moral precepts? Non sunt in Canone Hebraeorum, sed in
Canone Christianorum. They are not in the Canon of the Hebrews, but they are
in the Canon of the Christians.


Walker. They may be read for moral Lessons, but not for matters of religion,
which must be proved by Canonical scripture. What say you to the second book
of Macchabees? Think you that to be holden for Canonical scripture?


Camp. I think so: What should let?


Walker. What say you to yt sentence 2. Macch. 12. thrust into the text,
Salubris est oration pro defunctis, and to that which follows, Et si quidem
been, and vt historiae competit, hoc est vt ipse velim, sin autem minus digne,
concedendum est mihi. And if I have done well, and as is meet for a story,
this also my self did wish, etc.


Camp. It is marvel that you should say that it is thrust in.


Walker. It is noted so by other, and the duty of an historiographer is to
report things done truly and plainly, without arguing like a Logitian: but
he says, Ergo salubris est oration pro defunctis, Therefore prayer for the
dead is healthful, which appears first to have been set in the margent. But
how avoid you the last? Can such asking of pardon be of the holy Ghost?
wherein has he failed? or of whom shall he be pardoned?


Camp. The interpreter asks pardon of his speech for his style, and not for
the doctrine. The holy Ghost asks no more pardon, then Paul did when he
said, Rudis sum sermon, I am rude in speech, when he spoke in a base and low
style.


Charke. Campion, howsoever you labor to avoid the direct course of
disputation, and have obtained some change of the question, I must call you
home by and by. Notwithstanding, I mind a while to follow this your course,
and to find you out in your own trace: where I marvel how you dare thus
speak in this assembly. For what a blot is it to the holy Ghost, to affirm
he should ask pardon: and to the Apostle Saint Paul, to say his style to the
Corinthians is a base and low style: But to use no further preface, I will
thus prove that the 2. book of the Macchabees was not indicted by the holy
Ghost.

Whatsoever needs pardon either for matter or manner, was 1. Argum.
not indicted by the holy Ghost:

But the story of the 2. book of Macchabees needs pardon, either for matter
or manner:

Therefore it was not indicted by the holy Ghost.


Camp. This man would be angry with me, if he knew why.


Charke. If I would, know I not why to be angry with you, a notable and
vowed enemy of the truth of God, and a seditious man against the state? But I
come not to deal with your person, but against your errors: Answer the
argument.


Camp. I say the writer of the Macchabees asks pardon of his speech, neither
does Paul blotte the holy Ghost when he said that he was rudis sermon, that
he spoke not so eloquently, nor so finely, as sometimes he might.


Charke. You answer not directly: and beside, you affirm an error. For S.
Paul craves no pardon for his style, but sets his plainness against the set
and curious speech of the false Apostles, who did come in gay appearance and
show of words, as if they had had al ye power of truth that might be: and
yet in this plain style, the Apostle was of al others most mighty and most
eloquent. As for the 2. book of Macchabees, which you make Canonical
seripture, here I will make this challe^ge (if you dare answer it) to prove
many lies in it through (...), and that therefore Ignorance of the story.
it was written by a profane spirit for the matter. But to come to the
Syllogism, and to disprove your distinction, I reason thus.

The writers of holy Scriptures ask not any pardon at all, either for the
matter or for the manner:

Therefore they ask no pardon for their style.


Camp. I deny your Antecedent: Paul says, Rudis sum sermon.


Charke. If Saint Paul says Rudis sum sermon, does he (I pray you) in those
words crave pardon for his style? how hang your words together? I will prove
my Antecedent by the place of Peter. (...). Pet. 1. 21.


None that have written, as they were directed by the spirit of God, crave
pardon either for matter or for manner:

But all the holy men of God that wrote the Scriptures, have written as they
were directed by the spirit of God:

Therefore none of the holy men of God, that have written the scriptures, crave
pardon either for matter or manner.


Camp. This acknowledging of the weakness of his style, is in the Apostle an
humility coming from the holy Ghost.


Charke. You answer not to the Argument: therefore to avoid the cauil,
consider the Syllogism again in this sort.

Whatsoever is the word of God, is full, sound, and perfect, it does neither
ask, nor need pardon in any respect:

But the second book of Marchabees, does both need and ask pardon in some
respect:

Therefore it is not the word of God.


Norton. If you will stay a while and speak leasurely, you shall have the
Argument written: and while it is writing, if you Here was a common good liking
of this way.
will have any thing added or changed, it shall be done. It will be more
profitable for the hearers, and greater ease for your selves.


Camp. With a good will. I answer: In it self and for it self it neither
needs nor asks pardon, but for circumstance. In respect of dainty ears, it
may ask pardon.


Charke. Why Campion, shall the holy Ghost beg pardon in respect of dainty
ears?


Camp. Sir, Put this in also, that I say it was in respect of the style, for
the form and the manner of it.


Norton. Well I have put it in so.


Charke. Let him put in all his shifts and helps, clogging his Campion did
often add and alter his answers, while they were in writing.
answers as much as he will, we will cast the clogges upon his own heels:
and thus I reason against all your cauils. Whatsoever is in the word of God is
all of the holy Ghost, both for matter, for style, and for circumstance, and
the holy Ghost asks no pardon for any of these: Therefore the 2. book of the
Machabees asking pardon is not of the holy Ghost, nor canonical scripture.

Here Campion ^eeing hasty before master Norton had written it through out,
master Norton willed him to stay a little. Before he desired it, and now being
straightned he disliketh it and counts it loss of time.
Campion replied, that it was loss of time. To which Master Norton answered
again, that it was a gaining of the time. He desired that the word all might
be inferred in the Antecedent.


Charke. I said, all.


Norton. So it is, and rightly set down.


Camp. Then I answer thus. This circumstance, of asking pardon, is of the holy
Ghost: for it is a speech of humility, proceeding from the holy Ghost, as is
Saint Paul's speech, Rudis sum sermon, I am rude in speech: Et non in
persuasibilibus verbis humanae sapientiae. Not in the perswasible words of
man's wisdom.


Charke. Rudis sum sermon comes often and rudely in: and yet the alleging of
it has been disproued long ago. Nevertheless seeing it pleases you so well,
it shall be a weapon of your own giving, to use against your self. For the
Apostle, of purpose avoiding the wisdom of man's eloquence, does justify that
which his adversaries called rudeness of speech, as lawful and good. Neither
does he (as you imagine) confess any want, or crave pardon. Therefore your
example is false, deceitful, and unlearned. It is a trim thing for you to
abuse the multitude under opinion of great learning, and to match those that
are no scriptures with scriptures, sometime affirming one thing, and another
time another: sometime that the Apostles speech is rude and the style base, and
needs pardon in respect of dainty ears: and now last that it needs no
pardon, but is done for humility: whereas the holy Ghost never asks pardon
of man for any thing he does: for that were to bring God under man, and make
the spirit of God subject to the allowance or disallowance of sinful flesh.


Camp. I answer, that neither this of the Macchabees, nor Paul's speech has
need of pardon in it self.


Charke. It is too too much and absurd to accuse the holy ghost of waste and
needles speech. For if there needed no pardon, it was not according to the holy
Ghost to crave it.


Camp. I have said, neither this nor the Apostles speech needed any pardon in
it self, and yet it was not waste and needless, because it proceeded of
humility.


Charke. Will you charge the holy ghost with dissimulation? speaks he one
thing, and means another?


Camp. I say it was not waste, because it proceeded of humility, to crave
pardon.


Charke. Well, I prove my assertion against this your imagined humility of the
holy Ghost to sinful flesh.

Whatsoever is without cause is waste and needless:

But your self confess it to be without cause for the holy ghost to crave
pardon:

Therefore by your own confession it is waste and needless.


Camp. I deny the Minor. For there is cause: For in truth the style is simple.


Charke. How often have you granted the Minor, saying, he The adversary against
himself, and yet turned from all his shifts.
needed not to ask pardon? and now (as forgetting your self) you say there is
cause of asking pardon: For (say you) in truth the style is simple. Your
speeches are contradictory. Set it down that y^ adversary is not at one with
him self. Besides, he was driven before to grant the style is not base or
simple.


Camp. I have set down no contrariety, but in respect.


Char. In respect, is a simple shift. Are not these contradictorie
propositions? He needs not pardon, but asks it in humility: and He needs
pardon, for in truth the style is simple.


Camp. I pray you read the place of the Maccabees.


Charke. Thus you retire: and ask moreover that which needs not. For the
place is well known, and was read before. But In English. If so be I have done
well, and as agrees with a story, this I do desire: if not so worthily, it
must be pardoned in me.
I will read it again. Et si quidem been, and vt historiae competit, hoc and
ipse velim: si autem minus digne, concedendum est mihi. This I would have all
the company mark and understand, whom you labor with indirect speeches to
abuse and draw from the truth, that whether the author of this book excuse
himself and crave pardon in these words for his style, or for his story,
neither can be of the holy ghost: because (as has been proved at large) the
holy ghost fails nothing at all in any point of speech, of matter, or of
circumstance. Thus your distinctions and cause fall together.


Camp. I have answered you in what respect he craves pardon, and if that
cannot satisfy you, leave it to God and this company to judge of.


Charke. Sure your satisfaction is very weak: far from satisfying God that
hates such fond distinctio^s to darken his word, or those of the company that
seek to be edified. But you give me new occasion to prosecute this matter.
What think you therefore of the story of Judith, touching the dressing and
decking of Judith 10. 3. 4. Judith 10. verse. 12, 13. and 11. 19. and 12. 14.
Iud. 9. verse. 10.
her self with apparel and ornaments fittest to deceive Holofernes eyes? and
what say you to her lies and prayer that he might be taken with the snare of
his eyes looking upon her? the speeches untrue, and the action unchaste in
outward appearance, were they (think you) of the holy Ghost?


Camp. I marvel not that you so speak of me, when you so speak of a blessed
woman, to bring so holy an action into doubt. Surely you greatly offend me in
so doing.


Charke. I speak of the words and story as it is plainly written, she
prays, saying, Capiatur laqueo oculorum suorum in me, and Let him be taken
with the snare of his eyes set on me: and smite him with the lips of my love.
Turn my speech into fraud.
Percuties eum ex labijs charitatis meae. And again, Verte sermonem meum in
fraudem. Do you think this speech proceeded of the holy Ghost? Nay rather
(howsoever it displease you to hear of the matter) it proceeded from a
profane spirit, as I have said, to charge the holy ghost with fraud, and to
pray for such an effect, that Holofernes might be taken with her love, and snared
with her kisses.


Camp. There be no such words in the book.


Charke. Here you are manifestly overtaken: for they are word for word in the
9. Chapter: and after your translations, the vulgar and Vatablus.


Camp. Is that to be esteemed fraud, which the holy Ghost By Campion^
doctrine, no practice is unlawful, so it be for the delivery of their Church.
deuiseth? Is it fraud to deceive the devil? blame you her, who did that she
did to a good end, and for the delivery of the Church?


Char. What dealing is this? Even now he denied the words: now finding them
strong against his cause, he would avoid them with a distinction of good
intents, to justify bad parts, Thus you Papists hold against the word of God,
that we may do evil that good may come of it. No Campion, Gods spirit is
always like Romans 3. 8.
it self: It is not agreeing with the majesty of the spirit of God, for any
woman to pray that a stranger should be taken with the snare of his eyes
looking upon her: or that she may deceive by lies. This story therefore and this
practice proceeded not from ye holy ghost.


Camp. It is a shame for you to bring that example. She desires God, that it
will please him to turn the wickedness of Holofernes to the delivery of his
people. She prays not (as you say) that he should sin.


Charke. She does pray for it in plain words, and set out her self in
sumptuous apparel and ornaments to that purpose. It is a shame for you Campion
to maintain any such absurdity, and again to deny and misconster the
manifest words of that you would have Canonical scripture. We stand before ye
face of God for the maintenance of his truth, and give such honor thereunto,
that we acknowledge with our hearts, and confess with our mouths, that it is
perfect, full, and sufficient, and that there is no profanation in it: but you
would have that to be matched with holy scripture, which is far unworthy that
honor. What say you to the argument and the place? Let him be taken with the
snare of his eyes in me, and turn my speech into deceit or fraud. This is a
prayer for success in a matter of sin, most unseemly for the holy ghost.


Camp. I receive this book, first because the Nicene cou^cill has allowed it:
then I say further, that this was her meaning, that whereas God had given
Holofernes over to fleshly lust, yt he might be taken with the love of his eyes
toward her, to be besotted with her, y^ she might the better perform her
determinate purpose: she prays that God will turn his sin to ye delivery
of his distressed people. And what does she commit worthy of blame in this?


Charke. This is not only worthy of blame, but also to be condemned as sinful,
and sauouring of a profane spirit, that she Moreover Judith does praise that
act which the holy ghost does flatly co^demn vide Iud. 9. 2. and genesis 49. 5.
etc. Job. 13. 7.
prays God to bless her lies and falsehood, her tentations and allurements to
lust. For the Lord has appointed good ways for good purposes, and for the
performance of yt his work he needed not her deceit. For (as Job says) God
needs not any man's lie, or any man's fraud. Which is also true of the fraud
and dangerous allurements mentioned in that chapter.


Camp. What Chapter, what Chapter? Camp. knows not his own translation.



Charke. The ninth Chapter. Read and acknowledge the words you have denied.
Here Campion read in his own book, saying he perceived we builded upon our
own t^slation.


Camp. Well, this is mine answer. It was not truly and formally fraud, but
materially in the formal act fraud: as for example, when the people of the
Jews were commanded to steal from the Egyptians, it was in the act theft, but
not formally theft. So Abrahanis intent to kill his child, was to do murder
in the act, but formally it was no murder.


Charke. You would now in stead of a short and schoolelike answer draw me
to a (...), from the place in hand to the examination of new matters.
Therefore to take you where you will needs be, I say the Hebrewe word has
not that signification that it should import theft, but a spoil, which was
just and commanded of God, as after a victory, or for a reward of their
labors and service in Egypt: therefore no theft. But this fraud is another
thing. So ye first example is unlike and proves nothing, no more do the rest.
For Abraham's act was no murder, nor intent of murder, but a duetiful
obedience and service to God who had expressly commanded it. Lastly, you can not
think yt the Magistrate in taking the life of a transgressor, or taking away
y^ head of a traitor, is a murderer. No, this duty of justice is laid upon
him by his office from God, and can not but ignorantly be called murder. And
such was the warrant for Abraham in his office.


Camp. I mean killing, as it respects the taking away of life and no
otherwise.


Charke. How do you confound the special with the general? All murder is the
taking away of life, but all taking away of life is not murder. To kill and to
take away life from the wicked by the sword of justice is just, and in no
respect to carry the name of murder, which is evermore evil.


Walker. Concilium Laodicenum, The Council of Laodicea has left out Toby,
Judith, the book of Wisdom, Ecclus, Baruch, Maccabees, Esra the third and
fourth, and in the new Testament Luke and the Apocalypse, these are the words:
Quae autem oporteat legi and in authoritatem recipi haec sunt, Genesis, Exodus,
etc. But those which ought to be read and received for authentical are these,
Genesis, Exodus, etc. Where the forenamed books are omitted.


Camp. The Laodicene Council, was particular and not general. And again, it
reckeneth up those books yt were undoubted, and not douted of in yt part of the
world. But what makes this to prove yt they were douted of, of yt Catholic
Church? They were douted of in yt Church, or in yt part of the Church, Ergo
they were douted of, of the whole Church. How holds this? Therefore it is
plain yt these books were not doubted of in yt whole Church. For the same
Nicene Council accepts Iudeth, as Hierome testifies in the preface to
Iudeth. Further, because ye Church of Rome approves them, it follows not
that we should dout of them.


Walker. Then you confess, that the Council set not down all that we should
receive. And where you make the Council particular, it was provincial: and
further, was confirmed by the sixth general Council holden at Trullo,
Constantine being president, as Bartholomaeus Caranza writes fol. 71. and
therefore we may with them leave out of the Canon, Tobie, Iudeth, the book of
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Maccabees, etc. which your Council of Trent thrust
in as authentical. But to leave that, it is plain, that Cyprian upon the
Creed omitteth al yt Apocrypha, having rehearsed those which be Canonical, he
says: Haec sunt quae patres intra Canonem concluserunt, ex quibus fidei
nostrae assertiones constare voluerunt. Sciendum tamen est, quod and alii libri
sunt, qui non Canonici sed Ecclesiastici a maioribus appellati sunt, vt est
Sapientia Salomonis, Ecclesiasticus libellus, Tobiae and Judith, and
Machabaeorum libri, quae omnia in ecclesijs legi voluerunt, non tamen proferri
ad authoritatem ex ijs fidei confirmandam. These are those things which the
fathers shut within the Canon, by which they would have the assertions of our
faith to stand. Notwithstanding we must know that there are other books also,
which of our Elders were called Ecclesiast. and not Canonical, as Salomons
book of Wisd. Ecclus. the books of Tobias, Iudeth, and the Macca. all which
they would have read in the Church, and yet not brought forth, to confirm the
authority of faith out of them.


Camp. He is called commonly Author expositionis in Symbolum, and therefore
doubtful whether it were Cyprian or no: but admit it were, I answer to these
and all such like places, that when particular Fathers, and particular Councils
do reckon up such and such books, and omit others yt either were received
there or in other places since, they reckon up such as were the^ come to
their knowledge, and such as were approved in that part of the world, where
they the^ lived. But it follows not, they reckened no more, Ergo there were
no more. They doubted, therefore we must acknowledge no more. For the Church
has since put them out of doubt.


Walker. You answer not, but trifle: For those are not only omitted and left
vnreckoned, but they are set down for Apocrypha or Ecclesiastici, and so
certaynely named, and not Canonical.


Camp. Some might be set down then as doubtful, that now are out of doubt,
because they are received.


Charke. Hitherto you have gone from the matter: wherein I have been willing to
follow you a little, to clear the point that then was in hand when I began
with you. Now let us come to the questions agreed of between us.


Camp. Nay let us first speak of the authority of the Scripture, then (if you
will) of the sufficiency.


Charke. Of the authority we have spoken already, and it is not within our
question, which is only of sufficiency.


Camp. I defer to the scriptures all authority, and all sufficiency:
therefore you have nothing against me.


Charke. Yes, I have this against you, that you do not think the scriptures
only and alone sufficient to all doctrine of faith and manners. For whatsoever
you say, we know you hold and teach the contrary: namely that all things are
not set down and written in the word. This other day you were still calling
for Syllogismes, and when you had received a blow, and stood astonished under
it, yet you cried out, a Syllogism, a Syllogism, to make men believe that you
were not touched. Now you shall have Syllogismes: answer to them directly and
shortly. Thus I prove the sufficiency of the scripture without traditions.

What the Apostles taught viua voce, by lively voice, that also Arg. prim.
proving that the scriptures co^teine sufficient doctrine to salvation.
they wrote:

But they taught viua voce, whatsoever is necessary to salvation:

Therefore they wrote also* whatsoever is necessary to salvation.


Camp. Nego argumentum, I deny the Argument.


Charke. It is a Syllogism, you would have denied my Mayor, I think.


Camp. Prove your Mayor then.


Charke. What care they had over the Churches present, the same care they had
over the Churches to come afterward:

But their care over the Churches present, was to open to them all the counsel
of God:

Therefore they left the like provision in writing to al posterity, that they
might be instructed in all the counsel of God.


Camp. I answer to the Mayor. They had the same care, but in such sort as it
was expedient. It was not expedient that they should write all and every
syllable that they spoke: and yet notwithstanding they disclosed all the
counsel of God, either in special or general words written.


Charke. Uery well, then we are come to the issue of the matter, and you grant
the question, that all doctrine both concerning faith and manners, is either in
special or general words contained in the Scripture.


Camp. I agree. But hear mine answer out of S. Augustine against Crestonius.
Where it can not be aduouched in scripture by special words that the baptism
of heretics is good, yet it is delivered in the scripture by general words,
forasmuch as the scripture does command us to obey the Church which has
allowed this baptism being conferred in forma Ecclesiae. So the In the form
or manner of the Church.
doctrines not particularly discoursed in scriptures are yet contained in these
words, Obey your prelates. The Church is the pillar and supporter of truth.
And if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee an Ethnike and Publicane.


Charke. You say particular matters are contained in those general words, Obey
your Prelates. Do you mean yt we must obey them in causes not contained in the
word? Then you may bind us to what you list, and disalowe what ye please.
Therefore, sir, that I may seek your corners and find you out, what mean you
by this when you say that General commandementes allow particular traditions?


Camp. I named not traditions.


Charke. But it is the effect and scope of your speech for obedience to your
Church Prelates, in matters not expressed in the Scriptures.


Camp. I say there be points wherein we accord with you, as the baptism of
heretics, the baptism of infantes, the holy ghost proceeding from the father
and the son, that baptism is a Sacrament and Preaching is none, being both
commanded at one time, that the Eucharist is a Sacrament and washing of feet
none, being commanded at one time: and such like. etc.


Charke. To say that the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father and the
son is not expressed in the scripture, is a blasphemous speech.


Camp. Show me any sentence expressing it in the scripture.


Charke. It suffices to show it inferred in the scripture by good proofs of
consequence and implication. But what say you to traditions, decrees and such
like, which the Church of Rome maintayneth as the very word it self? Let us
speak of them being now in question, and not break out into new matters not
in controversy.


Camp. I will not go from my question.


Charke. You shall come to it, if you take upon you the defense of your
traditions, which I disprove in this manner.

If the Apostles left nothing unwritten that is necessary to salvation, Arg. 2.
the scriptures are sufficient:

But the Apostles have left nothing unwritten necessary to salvation:

Therefore the scriptures are sufficient.


Camp. I grant it as before, referring it to yt Church, and supposing always
a true Church. I pray you of what Church are you?


Charke. We talk of the true Church, and therefore this question is needles.
Are we to obey any thing contrary to the word of God? You can imagine nothing
left to the Church, that is not manifestly contained in the scripture.


Camp. Call you manifestly particularly:


Charke. To what purpose is that question: I must bring you to a Syllogism,
lest you avoid disputation by digressing into other matter.

If any thing be left obscure or not fully handled by the Apostles, it was
either because the Apostles could not, or because they would not write
manifestly and fully:

But it is a blasphemy to say they could not, and it is false to say they
would not:

Therefore they have written all, manifestly and fully.

Here Campion repeated the Argument, and then said thus:


Camp. I answer to the word manifestly: either in general or particular
terms manifest, and this the Apostles both could and would. For this is
manifest enough, Believe the Church: but it is not particular.


Charke. While we dispute of the manifest and full contents of the scripture,
leave to choppe in the needles term Particular: manifest generals include
particulars. And where, I pray you, are we commanded to believe the Church in
matters not contained in the written word? By this uncertain rule you may
warrant all former traditions, and bring in any new absurdities.


Camp. That is not the question.


Charke. But it is a necessary note for the confutation of your answers and
doctrine of unwritten verities. Therefore I thus prove against you.

To leave a door open to any chaungeable or doubtful traditions, is not to
teach things manifest enough in the scriptures:

But to send us to your Church prelates in matters not expressed in the written
word, is to leave a door open to chaungeable and doubtful traditions:

Therefore to send us to your Church prelates in matters not expressed in the
written word, is not to teach things manifest enough in the scriptures.


Camp. To leave a door to traditions, which the holy ghost may deliver to the
true Church, is both manifest and seen: as the baptism of Infants, the holy
ghost proceeding from father and son, and such other things mentioned, which
are delivered by tradition. Prove these directly by the scripture.


Charke. Which proposition in the Syllogism do you deny?


Camp. Prove the baptism of children and the proceeding of the holy Ghost, not
to be traditions.


Charke. I maruayle you thus avoid the Syllogism, and what you mean to match
doctrines contained in the word of God with unwritten and uncertain traditions
of men. It is plain, that the baptism of children is proved by the analogy
of Circumcision Romans 4. 11. Colos. 2. 11, 12. Genesis 17. 12.
with baptism, children being circumcised the eight day. Also by that the
Sacraments of the old Testament, are the same 1. Cor. 10. 1.
with the Sacraments of the new. The proceeding of the holy ghost is evidently
proved by this that our Savior promises to Luke 22. 49. Ioh. 15. 26.
send the holy Ghost.


Camp. Prove the proceeding of the holy ghost Ex part filii: That is on the
sons part: For that is the point.


Charke. It is proved by my former words, and where Christ breathed upon his
disciples and said, Receive the holy ghost. John 2. 22.



Camp. Well, leave that and talk of baptism, which this company understands
better. Suppose that I am an Anabaptiste: And y^ Anabaptist denies this
argument, because children should Campion was readier to move 2 new matters,
then to answer one argument.
not be baptized till the eight day, and the scripture wills them to be
baptized that believe: so that first they must have Faith, or else they may not
be baptized.


Charke. I reply to you, that Infidels, of age to understand and believe, must
believe before they be baptized and admitted to the Church: but the children of
believers being the seed of the faithful, they may receive the seal of the
covenant of God made to the Fathers and to their seed, according to that of
the Apostle, If the first fruits be holy, the lump also: If the root be
holy, Romans 11. 6.
the branches also are holy. But to the question. Notwithstanding the
scriptures be the only rule and trial of all questions in religion, and do
fully prove the matter in hand: yet (because you will not be contented without
them) answer a place or two out of ye Doctors. Eusebius lib. 3. cap 35. of his
ecclesiastical story writes, that Ignatius being carried prisoner to Rome,
did exhort the Churches to cleave unseparably to the tradition (that is, to the
delivered doctrine of the Apostles) which for safety it was necessary to put
down in writing, that we might not depart from it. Which excludes the
general bringing in of unwritten verities under the color of that text, Obey
your prelates.


Camp. Read the place.


Charke. (...). In English thus: He exhorted the Churches to cleave
vnseparablie to the traditition of the Apostles, which he supposed and
testified now for safeties sake necessarily to have been set down even in
writing.


Camp. What word do you infer? Tradition I grant is not always taken for
unwritten verity. This place makes for those traditions which were not then
written. Ignatius was S. John's scholar, and he was Oculatus testis, An eye
witness of things that were not then written, but went from hand to hand, and
therefore he thought it necessary to leave in writing such truth as he had
heard and was not written before. For the Gospels were not then written, and
Ignatius wrote no Gospel, and the text notes that the things whereof he
spoke, were such as himself wrote.


Charke. You mistake the meaning of the place. For Ignatius spoke not of your
doubtful and multiplied traditions, but of the certain Tradition, that is, of
the delivered and written doctrine of the Apostles, to the which we must cleave
(...), that is, so steadfastly that no force, no art may cut us off, or
withdraw us from it: no not an Angel from heaven, much less any mortal man,
howsoever magnified with the high titles of Popedom, or Prelacie, or
Apostolical authority.


Walker. You have granted that all things are written in the word, and that
such traditions as can not manifestly be gathered out of the Canonical
Scriptures, are not to be received. Thereupon I reason thus.

The same that the Apostles wrote, the same they delivered in tradition:

But they have written and delivered the same things that they read in the
Canonical scripture:

Ergo their writings and traditions be all one and the same.


Camp. The same, that is to say, nothing contrary.


Walker. The same and no other is needful to salvation. Hear the Apostles
words. 1. Cor. 4. Hac de causamisi vobis Timotheum, qui est filius meus
dilectus, and fidelis in domino, qui vobis in memoria^ reducet vias meas quae
sunt in Christo, quemadmodum in omni ecclesia doceo. Who is my beloved son
and faithful in the Lord, who will put you in mind of my ways which are in
the Lord, even as I teach every where in every Church. That he wrote and
taught in one Church, he wrote and taught in another, and therefore 2. Cor. 1.
he says, Nam gloriatio nostra est testimoniu^ conscientiae nostrae, etc. Non
enim alia scribimus vobis, quam qu^ legitis and agnoscitis. For this is our
glory, even the testimony of our conscience, etc. For we write no other
things unto you, then which you read and know in deed. Again. 2. Cor. 2.
Quales sumus sermon per epistolas cum absumus, tales sumus and cum adsumus,
facto. The same that we are in speech by our Epistles, when we are absent, such
we are also when we are present.


Camp. The same, no contrariety. For there were afterward many scriptures
that were not then written. Now therefore could they teach all things? This
Epistle was not then written, and diverse others. The meaning is, they taught
one Faith, one Christ, one doctrine: but he speaks not of the Scriptures.


Walker. He taught the same things that Moses and the Prophets taught. Quales
sumus sermon per Epistolas, tales and facto.


Camp. I grant the same testimonies out of Moses and the Prophets: and Paul
was as stout in speaking as in doing. But what proves this against me? For he
said more then he wrote.


Walker. He said no more then is written in the Scripture.


Camp. It is true that the Apostles proved all that they preached out of the
scriptures, out of the Law and the Prophets, and thereby justified their
preaching: and yet that part of the new If the Apostles proved all by
Scripture (as Campion grants) why should not all others do the like?
Testament which was afterward written, was not superfluous: therefore
sufficiency employeth not that it must be expressed, but that it may be
gathered.


Walker. You are one absent, and another present. You would bring in Idolatry
under the name of your traditions: but I show you, that whatsoever we are to
receive, it must be in ye scripture.


Camp. These are but words, they need no answer.


Walker. Well, I will urge you with matter out of Ambrose, 1. Cor. 4. Super
verba, regnetis vt and nos vobiscum regnemus: Quicquid ab Apostolis traditu^
non est, sceleribus plenum est. Whatsoever is not taught and delivered by the
Apostles, is full of wickedness.


Camp. He disputes against false Apostles, and by way of comparison he
seuereth the traditions of Catholics, from those of Heretics: and this he
does to show the difference of traditions, and not to condemn traditions.


Walker. It is an universal proposition, that all traditions that came not
from the Apostles are full of wickedness: but those which they wrote came not
from them. Ambrose also lib. 3. dc virginibus: Nos noua omnia quae Christus non
docuit, iure damnamus, quia sidelibus via Christus est. Si igitur Christus non
docuit quod docomus, etiam nos id detestabile iudicamus. We do justly condemn
all new things which Christ has not taught, because Christ is the way unto the
faithful. If therefore Christ has not taught that which we teach, we also
do judge that to be most detestable.


Campion. This is against false prophets, whereof there were many that then
went abroad from place to place, teaching many things under the names of the
Apostles that were none of theirs.


Walker. Uery well. So there are things taught by you under their names which
are none of theirs: wherefore we may conclude you to be in the number of false
prophets. Christ says, John 15. Omnia quae audiui a patre meo, nota feci
vobis. I have showed all things to you which I have heard of my father. He
showed all things necessary to salvation: and therefore this is the
conclusion. John. 20. Haec scripta sunt vt vitam habeatis: ideo vita consistit
in ijs quae scripta sunt. These things are written that ye might have life:
therefore life consists in those things which are written. Tertullian de
praescriptionibus Haereticorum: Apostolos enim domini habemus authors, qui nec
ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent eligerunt, sed acceptam a Christo
disciplinam fideliter nationibus assignauerunt. Itaque etiamsi Angelus de
coelis aliter euangelizaret etc. We have the Apostles for our authors, who
neither themselves chose any thing that they brought in of their own brain,
but they faithfully assigned that discipline which they had received from
Christ to the nations. Therefore, albeit an Angel should preach otherwise from
heaven. etc.


Campion. Christ did teach all, and therefore the Apostles writ all that
Christ taught? Nego argumentum. I deny the argument.


Walker. Why, Haec scripta sunt vt vitam habeamus: These things are written
that we may have life: what need we more?


Campion. Enough is written, but in such sort as was said before, either in
general words or special: either discoursed, or touched.


Walker. Although as the Evangelist says. John 21. Multa alia fecit Jesus in
conspectu discipulorum suorum, quae non sunt scripta in hoc libro. Jesus did
many other things in the sight of his disciples which are not written in this
book: as true it is, he wrought many miracles before his death, to declare
himself to be the son of God, and after his resurrection to declare that he
had a true body, which both did suffer, and was raised up again. And Luke
Act. 1. says, Scripsi tibi Theophile de omnibus quae Christus tum fecit tum
docuit. I have written unto thee o Theophilus concerning all things which
Christ both has done and has taught. He says, De omnibus, non singulis. For
then if every particular word and act of Christ had been written, the world
could not have received the volumes of books that should have been written,
John 2. 5, 9. But these things are written. John. 20. 9. that ye might believe,
and in believing have eternal life. Wherefore, Scrutamini scripturas, quia in
ijs, non alibi vita quaerenda. John. 5. Search the scriptures, because in them
is life, and not else where to be sought.


Charke. This you have been enforced to grant, that all things necessary to
salvation, are contained manifestly in the Scriptures.


Campion. I grant it with my distinction: they are either manifestly written,
or contained under that general commandment, Obey your prelates.


Charke. To prove, that whatsoever you teach, ought to be in the written
word of GOD, I have a plain place out of Tertullian against Hermogenes, which
also makes strongly against you. His words are these. Scriptum esse doceat
Hermogenis officina: si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud adijcientibus aut
detrahentibus destinatum. Let Hermogenes schole show that it is written: if it
be not written, let him fear that curse appointed for them, which add or take
from the scriptures.


Campion. Where, say you, is this place of Tertullian?


Charke. In his book aduersus Hermogenem.


Camp. Aduersus Hermogenem? I think ye are deceived: there is no such book in
Tertullian.


Charke. I do not only think, but know of a certeintie that you are
deceived, and will show you the book.


Camp. Note this objection. This is mine answer to it. Hermogenes the Heretic
did allege a bastard tradition, and Tertullian does call him to prove his
opinion by true scriptures. For Tertullians argument is not to say, It is not
written, Therefore it is not true: but to call him to prove the Scripture true,
which he alleged for him.


Charke. And note this answer. He that even now knew no such book, takes
presently upon him to discourse of the argument thereof. What great boldness is
this? From what present revelation does it come? Beside your boldness, your
error is great, in affirming that Hermogenes brought a bastard tradition: For
there is no such thing, as may appear to any man that for trial hereof will
read ye book. Hermogenes is confuted for saying as an Aristotelian
Philosopher, ye God made al things of materia prima. Again, of your answer I
conclude, that of necessity the proof of every particular tradition must be
by a true scripture. And it is (...), a general position: Tertullian would
have Hermogenes prove all that he held by scripture.


Camp. I say it is not to show a bastard writing for his tradition, but that
which is true scripture.


Charke. And that is all I ask: for what do I seek more, but to prove that
every tradition must be proved by true Scripture? when therefore you Jesuits
bring in unwritten traditions concerning your Candles, your unholy grains,
your Agnus deis and such beggarly stuff wherewith you abuse and pester the
world, Tertullian says, you bring a Vae upon your selves, except you can prove
the use of them by Scriptures.


Camp. Why, I say it must needs be proved there, or else it is not to be
received.


Charke. Remember what you grant: I ask no more. To leave Tertullian with
you, to advise better of: I allege also a place of Basil out of his treatises
called (...), capite (...). This place does clearly establish the sufficiency
of scripture, and banisheth all unwritten and self will worshippings. Consider
the place, for it is worthy of consideration, as making against you in this
question: and charging you with pride and apostasy, for bringing in things not
written.


Camp. Well, let these your speeches pass: Read the place. S. Basil is not
against us.


Charke. (...). etc. It is a manifest Apostasy or falling away from the faith,
and a fault of high pride, either to dissalowe any thing written in the
Scriptures, or to bring in any thing not written: seeing the Lord has said,
My sheep hear my voice: with other arguments to that purpose.


Camp. I will not trouble the auditorie with this place. For Basil declares
that in some things we must be referred to tradition, he speaks only for the
alleging of false scriptures, and has nothing against me.


Charke. Then nothing can make against error, if this make not against you.
But you abuse the auditorie, and know not the drift of Basil in this place,
and that I will make evident to all the company. Take the book and read it
if you can, the place is easy Greek, and the sentence but short.


Camp. I had rather read it in Latin then in Greek: I understand the Latin
better. I marvel you are so much in your Greek.


Charke. If I should not have brought it in Greek but in Latin, then you
would have taken exception against the interpreter. I bring not the
interpretour, but Basil him self in the tongue wherein he wrote. Here
Campion being long in turning the Latin book, could not find the treatise,
but desired Master Charke to find it, who answered, I have it ready in Basil
him self. If you flee to the interpretour, turn your own book.


Camp. I have answered you. Saint Basills meaning is, as it was then, a common
doctrine: that it is a great fault to disalow true scriptures, or to bring in
false scriptures: and to father a false writing upon the Apostles.


Charke. I protest, that having perused the circumstaunces of the place, I
find no such general or particular drifte of the father, as you misreport:
but a plain doctrine and sundry arguments to prove it, that nothing is to be
received or brought into the Church, that is not written.


Camp. Your protestation is no argument. I am acquaynted with this dealing
since the other day. But the scope of Saint Basil is as I have said.


Charke. My true protestation does ouerway your misconstruing, as well of
Basil now, as of Tertullian before, and therein I refer my self to the
examination of both places. If you will or can read but twenty lines further,
your own eyes shall see and give sentence against your self.


Camp. I have given you the sense of the Doctors words, and need not read
the place.


Charke. Read first, and then answer. What Author, or what place can make
against you, if you will of your self frame an interpretation after your own
purpose, without reading the words, or making conscience what construction you
give?


Campion. Saint Basil in other places is of a contrary judgment: and I am
sure he is not contrary to him self. The Apostles had faith before they wrote,
and therefore it must needs be the scope.


Charke. What kind of answer is this? Speak to the purpose, or confess your
insufficiency. Basills own words in this place do evidently prove that he
is against you: answer them, or acknowledge your self not able to satisfy
the Doctor.


Campion. Was all written when the Apostles first taught?


Charke. Is this any answer to Basil? Propounde no new questions, but
answer the former place so full against you.


Camp. You see mine answer.


Charke. I see and all men may see your untruth to shift off the matter.
Basills words are too strong against you. To your new question, I answer,
that since the word of God was first written, that which has been written,
contained sufficient matter to salvation.


Campion. Then what needed so many additions since, of the Prophets and
Apostles writings, if we had sufficient before?


Charke. The most honorable addition of the Prophets and Apostles served to a
clearer manifestation of Christ, of whom Moses had written before, but added
nothing to the substance. John. 5. 46.



In the after noone.
The Question Whether faith only justifies.
M. Charkes prayer. OUr help is in the name of the Lord, etc. Almighty God
and merciful Father, we acknowledge against our selves, that we were conceived
and borne in sin and corruption, that we remain unprofitable to any thing
that is good, and most prone and ready to that which is evil in thy fight.
Ignorance does possess our minds, and dullness rules in our understanding,
so that of our selves we can not see into thy glorious and excellent truth:
and in our selves we find no health, nor hope of health. Therefore, according
to thy rich mercy, O Lord, take away our sins, and heal all our diseases,
through the righteousness of Jesus Christ our only salvation. Open our eyes
we beseech thee, that we may at this time behold, and so frame our hearts,
that we may gladly embrace thy most holy truth as thou have left it unto us,
by thy holy servants, the Prophets and Apostles. Grant this knowledge and love
of the truth, with daily increase, not only to us, O Lord, who through thy
grace already make profession thereof, but also unto all those that yet set
them selves against the same: that they acknowledging the truth of thy word,
may cleave to it, forsaking all superstitious vanities, and seeing the all
sufficient righteousness and sacrifice of thy only son, may lay hold of it,
denying them selves, and renouncing their own merits and falsely named
righteousness. Grant us these things, O heavenly Father, for thine only sons
sake Jesus Christ our alone savior and redeemer, in whose name we ask the,
praying as he has taught us: Our Father, etc.


Walker. We have in the forenoone entreated of the Canonical scriptures and of
their sufficiency. Now we have to entreat of faith: God grant us grace that
we may see the truth, and having faith may rest in it to our endelesse
comfort. Let us before we enter into the matter, declare somewhat concerning
the state of the question. We hold therefore that we are justified by faith
only, and that freely, no other works concurring for that purpose. And yet
we set not down a bare and naked faith, as our adversaries charge us. For we
confess that faith, hope, and charity are coupled and lincked together, and
that love is the greatest. But we affirm, that faith only is that instrument
whereby we lay hold upon the love of God, which is the only foundation of our
salvation. By that title therefore we exclude all men's works and virtues as
meritorious, and only look to the merits of Christ.


Camp. I will declare to you my meaning also. We are agreed that God does
justify, and for Christ's sake only, through his grace, and through his mercy
alone, through his Sacraments and through baptism. Thus far we agree: but
herein we disagree. For we say, that when God does justify, he does give us of
his grace three distinct gifts, faith, hope, and charity, and these are as
three causes of justification, and charity a principal cause, which frames
the first act in us. We say therefore, that as grace is put in us in
justification, so also our righteousness is enlarged through good works, and
is inherent in us. Therefore it is not true that God does justify by faith
only.


Charke. Campion you are not to use your old slight in running from the
matter, and loading one thing upon an other. The question is, whether we be
justified by faith only: that is now that which is in question, and to be
decided: (...), and you are not to change the state of the question.


Walker. Well, let your declaration stand for defense, although we agree not.
For there are sundry causes of justification, final, and middle. But faith is
the first thing in us that receives justification, and yet it is not of us.


Camp. I grant that there are mo causes then one.


Walker. Well, though I be an old man, and have been long from the
university, I mean yet to examine you in the grounds of these things, and to
go with you from point to point, and so we shall find out our disagreement
best. I pray you what is the Etymon of faith?


Camp. It is called faith, Quia fit quod dictum est, Because it is performed
that is spoken, as I take it.


Walker. That is true, Dicitur a fiendo, quia Dominus fidelis est, Because the
Lord is faithful, standing to his word and keeping his promise with us. But
in us, faith is a certainty or sure persuasion, and therefore it is called by
the Apostle (...) or elenchus, foundation or argument. It is therefore the
ground, and before all other things that come after it, as the foundation is
before the building.


Camp. I grant it: But what infer you hereof?


Walker. This I infer. Faith is the ground and before all things that come
after it: Ergo it is before hope and charity.


Camp. In nature it is before them, but it does not justify before they do
come.


Walker. Prius and posterius, First and last, be taken diverse ways. It is not
before Tempore, but Dignitate and ordine: Not in time, but in dignity and
order.


Camp. That is contrary to S. Paul: For he says, Charitas est mayor, Love is
greater.


Walker. You must understand what Paul means thereby. It is Mayor duplici
respectu. It is greater in a double respect. In respect of God, and in respect
of men, and so extends further.


Camp. Uery well: I like your causes well, but it is simply greater and more
excellent.


Walker. Let me proceed then. It is greater in that it is more necessary to
the life of man, and also in diuturnitie, because it never dies, nor has any
end.


Camp. I grant you all this. But what are those to the matter of justification?
But let me add a third also, that it is dig^ior, because faith and all good
works are nothing without love. But let us hear your argument.


Walker. The ground is before that which is grounded upon it, and in all good
order we use to set the most worthy first: Thus therefore I reason.

Faith is the foundation: ergo before the other.


Camp. If you mean in dignity, it is not true. It is before in order, but not
in dignity. For the root is not more worthy then the tree, though it be
before it.


Walker. Paul says Fundati and radicati in fide, speaking of the assurance
they had in their salvation. And it was necessary they should be thus grounded
and rooted in the faith, before they could bring forth the fruits of faith. The
fruits were good works, which were not the cause of their justification, but
the effects of men, engraffed in Christ and justified already: this root was
before ye fruit.


Camp. I grant as before: In order but not in worthiness. For the fruit is
more worthy then the root.


Walker. Omnis causa efficiens est dignior effectu. Every efficient cause is
more worthy then the effect.


Camp. I deny that faith is the efficient cause of good works. It is a cause
antecedent, but not efficient. But we are agreed upon this. Let us go to
another argument.


Walk. Uerie well, it is called (...) a sure argument of things that are not
seen: a thing undoubted.


Camp. Where is the place? It is called the foundation of everlasting life, and
an argument of things not seen, because I know it is by no other argument but
by faith. But what infer you?


Walker. You shall hear anon. What is Subiectum fidei, the subject of faith:
and what is Obiectum fidei, the object of faith? In quo versatu^ fides and
circa quod: In what and about what is faith occupied?


Camp. Subiectum fidei, The subject of faith, is man: to whom God has given
the gift of faith, and thereupon man is denominate faithful.


Walker. Does man consist of one part or more?


Camp. Man does consist of body and soul.


Walker. Whether do I receive faith into my body or soul chiefly?


Camp. Faith is received into the soul by the instrument of the body.


Walker. What part of the soul is it received by? For the soul has diverse
potentias, faculties. Receive we it per memoriam, voluntatem, or intellectum:
by the memory, will, or understanding?


Campion. I answer, the soul does receive it per intellectum, by
understanding illumined by faith, because that part was properly corrupted by
error.


Walker. Why then, Intellectus humanus is subiectum fidei, in quo versatur, and
so intellectu nos cognoscimus deum, Man's understanding is the subject in which
faith is, and so, by the understanding we know God.


Camp. Intellectu illuminati per fidem cognoscimus. I grant we know God, our
understanding being illumined by faith.


Walker. And what now is obiectum fidei, The object of faith?


Camp. Obiectum fidei, is truth inspired from God.


Walker. Whether it be inspired or no, Truth is Obiectum still. Aeterna veritas
est deus, ergo Deus est obiectum fidei, promissio Euangelij. Gods word and his
truth is the object of faith, and so says Thomas of Aquine one of your own
doctors.


Camp. It is no object to me, till I look to it. God as he is to be known, is
the object of faith, and as he is to be loved, of charity.


Walker. It is true: but God is incomprehensible, and we know so far of him
as he has revealed of himself, as in creating to be Almighty, in governing
to be wise, in preserving to be true, and helping to be good, and in his
promises to be sure and true: and so much he has revealed of himself. And
this to apprehend, is sufficient to salvation.


Camp. To apprehend these things effectually, so that we also obey his
commandments, and not only to grant them to be true, but also to apply these
things to our selves through the passion of Christ, this is salvation and
sufficient.


Walker. Hact enus conuenit. Hitherto we agree. But Paul Romans 4. writes: Non
haesitans fide, and nititur promissione. Not doubting in faith, and leaning
upon the promise. So that there were two things: the promise, which must be
believed that it is true, and the power of God, that he is able to perform.


Camp. Concedo, I grant it. And that made the faith of Abraham to be fruitful
and meritorious.


Walker. What, meritorious: But that is Perergon. I will come nearer to the
matter. You will grant likewise, that hope has suum subiectum, and obiectum,
her subject, and object.


Camp. Yea that I will, and that it is in the same soul of man, but more
properly in voluntate and affectu, then in Intellectu, in the will and
affection, then in the understanding.


Walker. That is very true. Now tell me what is Obiectum spei, The object of
hope.


Camp. The good of the life to come.


Walker. But what was the object especially of Abraham's hope:


Camp. The same that is common to all other men, but seorsum: the coming of
Christ the Messiah, promised to him and his seed after him.


Walker. What commodity is promised to us in Christ:


Campion. Salvation, which is to have eternal life with Christ.


Walker. This promise being believed and known by faith, is looked for by
hope, and every Christian man has a great desire to this salvation promised.
Either he has or should have, as Saint Paul, Cupio dissolui and esse cum
Christo, I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ.


Camp. When God has enlightened his heart by charity, then he has that
desire steadfast.


Walker. Well then I will leave the object of hope and come to the subject of
charity: What is the subject of charity:


Camp. The affection of man.


Walker. What is the object:


Camp. It is God as he is beloved, quatenus appetitur propter se.


Walker. Uery good: then you see the foundation and causes with the whole order
of our justification: what need all the world have any more, but first to
believe these things, next to look for that which we hope for, thirdly to love
him who has made us this promise, and has given us these great benefits.
Now see whether we are justified by faith alone, or faith, hope, and charity.
But I leave the persecuting of this to Master Charke.


Camp. I grant that this is the order of our justification, wherein these do
jointly con^re and work together.


Charke. You may not avoid the point and issue of the question, as you did in
the forenoone, which is, that Faith only justifies. It is a chief question,
and you can not carry the matter so uprightly betwixt the old popery and the
new, but we shall easily find you out: you say faith only does not
justify, but with faith, hope and charity also are requisite, as causes and
merits of our justification, This is your cunning and new Popery to mention
only hope and charity: yet under these words you carry the old Popery,
which adds popish shrift, penance, pilgrimages and other satisfactions: all
which you would match with the death of Christ, if you might recover your
kingdom. But I have to prove against you, that Faith only does justify,
without these merits and works which you add, as though the righteousness of
Christ were not enough.


Camp. I deny it: for you have it not in all the word of God, that faith only
does justify.


Charke. Surely if you acknowledge any doctrine to be true in all the
Scripture, this of justification by faith only, will be proved most trus: if
any plain, this will appear most plain. And thus I prove it.

Every doctrine, the substance and sense whereof is contained (...). Argum.
in Scriptures, is true:

But the substance and sense of this doctrine, Faith only does justify, is
contained in Scriptures:

Therefore this doctrine Faith only does justify, is true.


Camp. I answer that this proposition Faith only does justify is not to be
found in all the word of God: and therefore I deny the Minor.


Charke. I have affirmed in my Minor that the substance and sense of this
proposition Faith only does justify, is contained in the Scriptures. For
proof hereof I have in the word of God eleven places all negative, excluding
works in the matter of our salvation. Namely Romans chap. 9. verse 11. where the
Apostle says, Not of works. Again chap. 11. ver. 6. Not of works. Also
Galat. 2. ver. 16. Not of works. Moreover Romans 4. 6. Without works. Chap. 3.
ver. 21. Without the Law. And so in the rest.


Camp. Let me answer them.

Here the rest of the places were demanded by them that wrote, and by others.


Charke. Turn further to these places. Romans Chap. 3. verse 20. chap. 4. verse
13. Ephesians. 2. ver. 8. and verse 9. 2. Tim. 1. 9. Tit. 3. 5. beside some other.


Camp. I do but request that I may answer them severally, for not one of them
proves your assertion.


Charke. If you answer any of them, I will subscribe to your doctrine in this
point. Tush Camp. you may not think to face out the matter with these bare
words: Dare you say our justification is partly of works, when the holy Ghost
says so often plainly and exclusiuely, Not of works: Without works: Not of
the law, but without the law: Herein I challenge you that make challenge
against the truth, and will prove that this weighty and great cause which may
worthily be called the soul of the Church, is directly and plainly set down
in all these places. Deny it if you can.


Camp. Bring one of the eleven places.


Charke. What say you to the Apostles conclusion Romans 3. verse 20: Therefore by
the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be justified.


Camp. Will you give me leave to answer, and to speak somewhat generally to
this:


Charke. You have a particular place, make a particular answer, plainly and
to the issue: roue not in general discourses, that come not near the mark.


Camp. The meaning of Saint Paul in such places, is to exclude the Jews
Ceremonies. For the Jews asseuering the observation of the law, the keeping
of their sacrifices and ceremonies, as Circumcision, etc. to be necessary to
salvation: S. Paul informs the Gentiles that these things were not so
necessary, but faith was sufficient. This he urges throughout the Scripture:
By Campions own answer the Apostle speaks of faith only. Here again it
appears by his answer that the Apostle teaches faith only.
So that faith is urged, but not faith only. Again, by faith is meant all
Christianity and the whole religion of Christians, which is sufficient,
without any parcel of the Jews religion. This is one general consideration,
why Paul so often urges faith, throughout the Epistle to the Romans, and else
where. Another general consideration is, for that the wise men of the Gentiles
did allege their moralities as a cause of their election, which Paul in the
same Epistle stood specially upon, and meant to confute, as is before said.


Charke. Whether of these two interpretations you will allow, it follows by
your own exposition, that the Apostle concluding for faith against works,
concludes that it is Faith only that justifies: shutting out all such works
as are opposed unto it. Now whereas you say that the works opposite to faith,
are only either the moral works of the Gentiles, or the Ceremonial of the
Jews: I will easily overthrow the distinction.


Camp. Overthrow it then.


Charke. First, there was never any such error maintained in the Church, that
the moral works of the Gentiles should justify: therefore Paul never
labored so much and so often to confute that error which did not trouble the
Church. As for the Ceremonial works, the Apostles writing to the Ephesians,
not justified with the observation of Jewish ceremonies, had no cause to bar
ceremonial works from justification. Therefore he teaches that all the
works of the faithful, even of Abraham, are excluded from being causes of
justification, and not Ceremonies only, or the moralities of heathen men, as
you imagine against the Apostles argument, and scope in those places.


Camp. The general scope of Saint Paul, is to exclude all works both of Jews
and Gentiles in that Epistle: but in the way of discourse I deny not, but
incidently an other answer is to be given.


Charke. This last part of your speech is (...): the first does grant all
that I desire. Nothing to the matter.



Camp. He excludes the precedent works of Abraham.


Charke. The end why works are secluded from justification does prove for me:
for the Apostle in that place shows the final counsel and purpose of the
Lord, to be far otherwise then you suppose. And to remember my promise of
Syllogism, I will prove it by the very form of the Apostles words.

The end and the means differ not:

The end of our justification was to exclude all works precedent or
consequent from being causes of justification:

Therefore the means also must exclude even all works precedent and
consequent, going before or coming after.


Camp. The end was not to exclude all works consequent.


Charke. Whatsoever it was wherein Abraham might glory, that was excluded from
justification:

But in works consequent or following he might glory:

Therefore they also and al other works whatsoever, first and last, are
secluded and can be no cause or piece of cause, in our justification.


Camp. The example of Abraham proves that Abraham was just before the covenant
of Circumcision, and so, before the law of Moses was given: and therefore he
infers that the Jews must not glory of justification through their law
and by the ceremonies thereof, seeing their father Abraham was just before
circumcision, and therefore circumcision not necessary to justification. But
though works void of Christ are nothing, yet through grace they serve to
justification.


Charke. Is this your way to answer Syllogismes, to tell a tale of your own,
and expaunde new matter, leaving the question? Answer shortly.

Abraham has nothing left to glory in:

Therefore all works whatsoever are excluded: and so, faith only justifies.


Camp. That is another place.


Charke. Answer it then, be it another, or the same.


Camp. The Apostle means to show that Abraham was justified by works done
in grace, and not by works without expectation of Christ, or void of Christ.


Charke. An open contradiction to the holy Ghost: note it. The Apostle (faith
Master Campion) proves that Abraham was justified by works. I reply against
you with a double argument. First, Abraham had all his works of Christ, for
he 1
was faithful: therefore the works excluded, are works wrought in grace.
Secondly, he speaks not of him as of an infidel, but as 2
being the father of believers: Therefore the Apostle excludes not works
without expectation of Christ as you speak. Answer it, Campion.


Camp. I answer, that no works of Abraham are excluded.


Charke. And I have proved that all are excluded: and you can neither answer
the syllogism, nor satisfy the place of Saint Paul. The text and argument is
clear.

If Abraham were justified by any works, he had wherein to glory:

But he could not glory in any thing, (for that were absurd by the Apostles
reason:)

Therefore there were no works of merit or justification in him.


Camp. This is the Apostles reason, All the good works of Abraham were founded
in Christ, and by these good works he was justified: therefore he was
justified by Christ. For if he had been justified by other works excluding
Christ, he might have gloried, and not been justified by Christ.


Charke. I can go no further in this argument. For (...) is against you, that
is, the plain text and argument. Also I aduow The very word.
it and make all this company witnesses, that you have uttered in these
straytes, plain contradictorie propositions. The Apostle proves that Abraham
was justified by works, he leaves nothing for Abraham to glory in: but you
leave wherein he may both glory, and justify him self. You have also said
the precedent works of Abraham were excluded, and (which is the contrary)
that no works of Abraham were excluded. These things are very bad, which I the
rather repeat, to lay open your contradictions for some that I think are
present, and look for no such weakness in their Champion.


Camp. What need you aduowe? I aduowe the contrary. And I say, that Abraham
was justified by good works in Christ.


Charke. There is no such word in Paul, but the contrary very often. Therefore
your affirmative is contrary to the holy Ghostes often repeated negative, Not
of works, Without works.


Camp. I say you must repent before you die, or else you shall find what it is
to charge me with that which is not true. A particular example must have a
particular answer. His works be not to his glory, because his works were
founded in Christ, therefore Christ must be all to his glory. Ahraham was
already just and in the favor of God before these things were said, and so
being just, he was made more just: and so first just, and afterward justified,
and was not justified by works that went before his justification, but being
already just was made more just by works. And this was one of his good works,
Credidit deo, he believed in God: and to say the Creed is a meritorious work:
and the work of faith is a work.


Charke. These discourses you might well have spared, and framed a short
answer to my argument: For yet you answer not the Apostles negative, which
overthrows both your affirmative and your distinction contradictorie to the
Apostles words. For, to be justified without works, as the Apostle says, and
to be justified by works, as you say, are contradictorie: if your words be
true, the Apostles are false. But seeing I can have nothing for answer but
indirect speeches, or words full of contradiction: I will give place a while.


Walker. We that be the children of Abraham, and Christians, are justified by
the same faith that Abraham was justified:

But Abraham was justified by faith only, and by nothing else:

Therefore we are justified by faith, and by nothing else: that is, by faith
only.


Camp. I answer to the Mayor: As Abraham being a just man, was made more just
by a living faith: so the children of Abraham being already justified,
eucrease their righteousness by a living faith.


Walker. Do you think that we are borne of our parents, as the sons of
Abraham, or as the sons of Adam? Are we justified by the fame means that
Abraham was, or no?


Camp. Yea, by the same means.


Walker. But Abraham was justified by faith only: therefore we.


Camp. I deny the Antecedent.


Walker. Paul says, Sed robustus factus est fide, etc. Romans 4. Imputatum est
illi ad iustitiam. And whether did faith give credit to the promise of God,
whose proper and only office it is?


Campion. To give credit to the promise is the proper office of faith: but to
give credit to the office of God effectually, is the office both of faith and
charity.


Walker. In the office of giving credit, you add that which is not in the
text.


Camp. It must needs be understood, because the Apostle speaks of Abraham
already justified, which had not been possible, if he had not had faith and
charity.


Walker. What made him give glory to God? Robustus factus fide, dedit gloriam
deo. Being made strong in faith, he gave glory to God.


Camp. The good work gave glory to God: For it was a good work in Abraham.


Charke. I will use another Argument.

Whosoever is justified, is justified according to the tenor either of the
first or of the second covenant (for there are but two 3. Argum. Exformula.
covenants:)

But no man is justified according to the tenor of the first covenant, which
is by the works of the law:

Therefore by the forine or tenor of the second, which is by Faith only.


Camp. I grant all in this sense: By Faith only, not as Faith is distinct
from charity, but as faith is distinct from the old law: so that the word
only does exclude all things impertinent to faith, and include all things
inherent to faith.


Charke. Words. I will prove them to be but words, following my argument. The
charter or stipulation of the first covenant is, Do this and thou shall live:
of the second, The righteous man shall live by Faith. Therefore this form of
Gal. 3. 11. and 12
speech in the Covenant, excludes your implication and all joining of works
with faith.


Camp. I answer, that the Formula of the second covenant, is Christ.


Charke. You understand not then what Formula is.


Camp. Teach me then.


Charke. I will teach you. Christ, I grant, is the cause and author of the
covenant of salvation: but the form or tenor of a covenant are concepta and
stata verba, the set and standing words, whereby the condition and issue of
the covenant is expressed. For example, of the first covenant published in
Sinai, this is the form: Hoc fac and viues, Do this and thou shall live: of
the second out of Sion, this: Iustus ex fide viuet, The just shall live by
faith: which is in effect, Believe this and thou shall live.


Camp. The second covenant is all the religion of Christ, which includes
faith, hope, and charity. For otherwise the Eucharist were excluded. He
means therefore by faith all obedience.


Charke. This is expressly against the Apostles doctrine and argument, Galat.
3. verse. 11, 12. who there proves, that faith and works are opposite causes
of salvation.


Camp. The second covenant is, that we shall be saved by doing those things
that Christ commanded: and the first covenant was by doing all that Moses
commanded. And this is the very interpretation and meaning of the Apostle. The
righteous shall live by faith, that is, by faith of Christ.


Charke. A false position. I pray you, is obedience the faith of Christ: Is it
faith to fulfull that which Christ comma^deth, or not rather to believe that he
has promised and performed?


Camp. Yea, that it is.


Charke. How can that be, seeing the Apostle Gal. 3. verse. 12. does not only
set down the two covenants in Sinai and Sion, with their several form of
words, but adds plainly, The law is not of faith, and makes works and
faith opposite causes of Gal. 3. 12.
justification: teaching that he yt is justified by Christ is not justified by
works: and he that is justified by works loses the benefit of Christ. Your
words therefore must have a third covenant, that the righteous man lives
partly by faith, and partly by works, or else they cannot stand.


Camp. I answer to this, The law is not of faith: that is, the law as it is a
naked commandment is a burden, and so it is not of faith, that is, it does
not give the justice which we have by faith of Christ.


Charke. You have given a false and gross interpretation: and thus I prove it.
If your distinction be good, then there is either a third covenant, or the
covenant of the law is mixed with the covenant of the Gospel: But no man will
say that there is a third covenant, and the Apostle proves yt in the work of
our justification the covenant of the law does no way participate with the
covenant of faith: therefore your distinction saying, as it is a burden, is not
good, and your interpretation absurd and false.


Camp. I answer to the Minor, that the law is considered two manner of ways.
The covenant of the law, as it is of the law, is no way mixed with the
covenant of the Gospel: but as it is the covenant of the law eternal, of the
law moral, of the law of nature, it is mixed with the new testament, and
Christ has renewed it in the law of charity. Moses gave it one way: and
Christ another. Moses the law maker: and Christ the law giver. Praeceptum
nouum do vobis, vt diligatis inuicem. I give you a new commandment, that ye
love one another.


Charke. What absurd speeches are these, to make a substantial distinction of
the law in regard of the minister, or of the time: The moral law and
commandment of God is evermore the same in substance.


Camp. I understand not what you mean. I say it is mixed: but as it is mixed,
it is not called Moses law, but y^ law of Christ, who gave it more perfectly.
etc


Charke. Again, I say this is absurd: for the law of God was always the law
of God: and therefore the same, and exacteth the same obedience: which because
no man can perform, no man can live thereby.


Camp. You are still gathering absurdities.


Charke. I must gather them where you scatter them. For what material
difference can there be made of one and the same thing. The second covenant
offers life, only by faith in Christ: the former only by works: and these
cannot be confounded, as you confound and huddle them together. Thus your
answers are from the arguments.


Camp. My answers are to the purpose. What is it that you would have more of
me:


Charke. Is your answer to the purpose, that mixeth and confounds the two
covenants, which are so opposite by ye Apostles place alleged, that he which
cleaves to the one, can receive nothing by the other: For the covenant of the
law can bear no transgression: and to justify us, the covenant of faith
needs no satisfaction or works on our part, Christ having most fully wrought
and satisfied for us. Therefore, it is the pride of man to think, and the
error of man to teach, that the righteousness of Christ is not sufficient
without addition of our righteousness.


Camp. Well, show me but that negative sola, only, in all the Scriptures.


Charke. This is a new matter: I would have the old first satisfied.


Camp. Show it me: can you not show it:


Charke. Seeing you would shift off the former argument by craving a new: I am
contented to prove that exclusive term, which you call negative.

Whatsoever excludes all other causes in justification, that remains
Argument 4.
a sole cause:

Faith excludes all other causes in justification:

Faith therefore remains a sole and only cause.


Camp. Prove your Minor.


Charke. The absolute negatiues so often repeated in the Scripture, Not of
works: Without works: Not of the law: Without the law: do plainly exclude all
other causes.


Camp. Will you by this argument exclude al causes besides faith: Then with
good works you will also exclude the mercy of God. What is your meaning:


Charke. What a vanity is there in this question: Understande you not that I
speak only of causes in us, excluding no former causes, as the eternal
decree and love of God, the obedience and righteousness of Christ:


Camp. Prove that Sola fides, only faith is in the scripture.


Charke. I have proved it: and why do you not answer the argument:


Camp. What argument would ye have me answer:


Charke. The last. All other causes in us are excluded by the word of God,
where it is said so often, Not of works: Not of the law: therefore sola
fides, faith only remains, by many testimonies of the Scriptures.


Campion. This fides is Christian obedience, and has good works.


Charke. I grant as the good tree has good fruit necessarily, so faith has
good works: but these good works, though they be not separated from faith,
are yet separated from being any cause of justification with faith. As light,
though it be not separated from fire: yet it is separated from the force of
burning: for the heat burns, and not the light of fire.


Campion. But where prove you that sola, only, is in the Scripture:


Charke. My argument has fully and plainly proved it: you neither will nor can
answer it. Therefore to prove it again, because the text Deuteronomy. 6. has the
negative, Thou shall serve no strange gods: Christ Mat. 4. adds the word
ONLY, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall thou serve. So
we by the same warrant and word, do in this question of justification take
these words, Not by works, Not by the law, to import as much as faith only:
for all works whatsoever, being excluded by these negative speeches, faith alone
remains.


Camp. Why, does he say, Thou shall worship by faith only:


Char. I had hedged you in before, that you should not leap over to run at
large in your bie questions. I said Christ Mat. 4. thus alleged against the
tempter, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
This negative ONLY is not in Moses, yet added by Christ for interpretations
sake, to expound words importing it, as I have said before: and so do we in the
matter of justification, finding all righteousness by works or by the law so
oftentimes excluded, do conclud thereupon, that faith only does justify.


Camp. The word adorabis does of necessity infer so much, and therefore Christ
does well to expound it by only. But the word justify does not necessarily
infer the excluding of works. And therefore you do not well to infer,
Faith only justifies.


Charke. What: do you not blush to bring this strange and false distinction
against a clear truth of God: Or will you overthrow a maine pillar of Popery
for avoiding the force of one poor argument: Does the word adorabis exclude
all other creatures, and necessarily enforce that God alone must be worshipped:
The^ Ca^pion condemns al images, all adoration of the crucifix, all
invocation and worshipping of saints. For to adore or to worship (says he)
imports that adoration and worship is due to God only: and so he Canisius in
Ca^ech. Payu. Andr. lib. 9. Orthodox. Expl.
excludes all creatures from worship, even the crucifix that they say must
have the adoration done to it, which is due to Christ himself.


Camp. What needs all this: it follows not which you say. There is much
difference between to adore and to reverence or serve. For latria or to adore
is due to God only, and dulia to serve, is that which I may yield to any
Saint, or creature.


Charke. Yes, the speech needs, and the argument follows. For your verbal
distinction of Greek words to deceive English people, is unlearned and
impious, to say (...) is for God only, (which yet, as I said, you allow to
the bare image of Christ) and (...) for Images. Can all know and keep a just
weight and measure in their devotions, giving no more but just (...) to
saints? To be short, the error and vnlearnednesse of your distinction
appears, that not understanding the use and proper signification of the word
(...), you have allowed it to be given to Images, being a word that notes as
base and as slavish bondage as any word in the Greek tongue: so by your
distinction the worshippers of the Church must be as bondmen to their Images.
Thus you see only is gathered fitly of the negative, and that your distinction
is both false, and also against your own doctrine of Image worship.


Campion. I say it is gathered from both, and the negative not sufficient
alone, but because of the matter speaking of God.


Charke. Why then I perceive you will borrowe of me for a need. Before you
said Adorabis included only, now you come to me and say it is gathered also
of the negative. This is al I can desire.


Camp. Faith only as it is a good work, joined with hope and charity, does
justify.


Charke. I would not have you to abuse the company, in granting faith only,
and yet you will expound it, Faith not alone. It is a strange only, that is
not alone. Furthermore, Faith as it is a good work, does not justify, being
always imperfect, but as it apprehends the righteousness of Christ which is
perfect, That is, as it is a piece of obedience to the promise of God, it does
not justify, but as it apprehends the precious promises.


Campion. You are still charging me with abusing the company: but if you will
give me leave, I will declare how faith is a work. There is an habit,
which is called Fides, and the act of this habit within a man is credere, to
believe, an act interior proceeding from this habit. An act exterior
proceeding from this habit, is to profess this faith consonant to the
Apostle, With the heart I believe, and with the mouth I confess. Now, I say,
to believe is first a good work, and to profess this faith, is also a good
work. As to give an alms, to fast, to do penance, etc. and this faith
Abraham had. And your saying is contrary to Saint James. Abraham pater noster
nonne ex operibus iustificatus est, offerens filium suum Deo? Abraham our
father, was he not justified by works, offering up his son?


Charke. My saying is not contrary to Saint James: but your objection is (...),
far from the question in hand. We dispute what be the causes of salvation,
and you run out to the notes and effects of him that is justified.


Campion. Let me oppose. Is it not reason that I should oppose?


Charke. Yes, when you are thereto appointed, and you shall find enowe to
answer you. Yet because you have so often challenged us to answer you an
argument, though I come not with any commission to suffer you to prove your
erroneous doctrine: I will notwithstanding, suffer you to oppose and make an
argument in this matter. First giving the company to understand, that you
would deceive them with an opinion that our advantage is great in replying:
but it is not so. If your cause were good and your skill great, you might make
it harder to reply, then to answer. For the answerer may with a word deny the
proposition, and so, soon take from the replyer all his weapons. But make your
argument.

Here Campion paused long before he could frame his argument. Whereupon Master
Charke said: a Syllogism, Campion, a Syllogism. Yet staying longer, Master
Charke said, We shall have it anon.


Camp. He that was justified for believing, was justified by a good work:

But Abraham was justified by believing:

Ergo Abraham was justified by a good work. The Mayor is out of Saint James,
Chapter 3. Suppleta est Scriptura, dicens, etc.


Charke. Prove your Mayor in the sense we dispute of, and I will answer you to
two other Syllogismes.


Camp. It is easily proved.


Charke. How can you prove it out of Saint James, that faith is a good work?
When Saint James says, Abraham was justified by good works, his meaning is,
that Abraham is declared and known to be just according to that phrase,
Wisdom is justified of her children. Again, all the people and Matthew. 11.
19. Luke. 7. 29.
Publicans justified God.


Campion. I will none of your interpretations: the question is clear with me.


Charke. I would feign have of your answers, so they were to the purpose of
the argument.


Campion. Proceed, and prove somewhat for your cause.


Charke. I have proved more then you can answer. And because you generally
slander us, that our doctrine concerning this, and other principal points of
religion, is against the Doctors: (although the Scriptures be large, full and
sufficient enough, and are the only touchstone for the trial of sound and
true doctrine,) yet I will not stick a little to follow you in this.

Cyprian, Basil, Ambrose, Theodoret, Hierome, Gennadius, Arg. 4.
all these Greek and Latin Fathers, do flatly and fully teach that we are
saved by faith only.


Campion. Bring me one of them, and I will answer you.


Charke. There is a notable place out of Basil (...), where, of purpose
disputing of humility, among other notes he shows that we must attribute
all to the grace and righteousness of God, who alone is our glory, our
wisdom, and our justification. Thereupon falling into this question, he
says, a man must acknowledge him self void of true righteousness, and
(...). That is, a man must know, that he is justified by only faith in
Christ. I English it to your hand, because you deal not with the Greek.


Campion. I acknowledge your places: and yet your doctrine is utterly new. For
the Fathers when they urge that doctrine, they did it in respect they had to
deal with Jews and Infidels and Pagans. And further, by faith they meant
Christian religion, excluding Paganism, and not excluding charity and good
works.


Charke. Our doctrine new, and yet the ancient Doctors teach it: I ask
with what conscience or judgment you can say it. Did the Apostle writing to
the Romans, to the Galathians, to the Ephesians, Churches so effectually
called and reclaymed from Gentilisme, that he terms the^ Saints and
brethren, and affirms that they are no more darkness, but light in the
Lord: Did the Apostle (I say) writing to them, deal as against Jews and
Pagans? I maruayle you blush not at so foul a shift and so palpable an error.
But will you not vouchsafe the Doctors an answer? shall they be sent away
before they have received their answer?


Camp. They wrote upon occasion against an heretic, having affiance in works.


Charke. Be it so: then they write as well against Papists, having affiance in
works.


Camp. They had affiance in works done without Christ, and are therefore
reproved by the Fathers.


Charke. This is only said, to shake them all off with one false distinction.
Again, it was a strange occasion (you speak of) that made the Fathers write
an untruth. But rather you are strange to expound them directly against
their words, saying, Faith only does justify. I could here help you with a
better answer, which the better learned on your side use to this objection.


Camp. It was the heresy, that most troubled Christians in the Primitive
Church.


Charke. This is a new question, and in doubt. But how will you ever be able
to prove that the Apostle disputing for justification by faith against
justification by works, excludes only Paganism: Answer this.


Camp. I have answered.


Charke. In deed you have still somewhat to say, but not to answer that point
of ye argument which most wounds your cause. Therefore a Syllogism against
your shift. Arg. 5.


The Apostle excludes the moral Law from justifying:

Therefore your distinction is wast.


Camp. But he excludes not charity and good works.


Charke. What a But is that? Is there any charity, or be there any good works
not contained under the moral and eternal Law of God? If the deeds of the
moral Law be shut out from the causes of our justification by S. Paul, what
door can you open to let them in again?


Camp. I say, charity and good works are not excluded.


Charke. And I say this is still to beg the question, and not to answer the
Argument. So your doctrine is sufficiently overthrown.


Walker. Besides a great sort of places that master Charke has brought,
Sadolet one of your own, has a plain place in Epist. ad Romans Abraham attulit
tantum fidem, non sua opera. And again, Quantum quisque affert de sua
iustitia, tantum defert de diuina beneficentia. etc.


Camp. It is but lost time that you you allege Sadolet. He was but a man of
late years, whose credit is not to be set against the determination of the
whole Church: besides, his meaning was, that man should not trust in his own
works.


Walker. You will allow no man, neither those that are against you, nor with
you. But if he had dealt as soundly in other things as in this, he had been to
be striued withal. He shows by an apt similitude, that if a man take a Pot
having some troubled water in it, and goes to the clear water to fill it, the
troubled foul water in the pot does not become clear, but rather troubles
and defiles the water which was clear: Even so, the more we bring of our
own, the less we attribute to God, and the less we receive from God. We
must bring nothing of our own to God. It is troubled water when we mingle our
works and righteousness with Gods.


Camp. Let the similitude be rehearsed. It is an apt similitude. He that
comes to be justified by Christ must not bring troubled water, but clear:
that is, those good works that he did before, and those prayers that he made
before, his moral deeds, his alms, his fasting, etc. For all the moral
works that are done before, they are troubled water: but those we do
afterward, they are made clear in the Passion of Christ, although they be not
in all respects perfect.


Charke. I will so prove that good works have no place in justification, that
you shall not be able to answer: and because the Doctors can have no answer,
I will return to Scripture.

Sanctification and justification are two sundry things:

Therefore good works, the fruits of sanctification, have no place in
justification.


Camp. Make your Syllogism.


Charke. Whatsoever is an effect of sanctification that follows, is not a
cause of justification that went before:

But charity and other good works are effects of sanctification which
follows:

Therefore they be no causes of justification which goes before. Answer if you
can.


Camp. I deny that they are only of sanctification: they are of both.


Charke. They be disparata, handled by the Apostle as diverse things: also the
one, some degrees before the other. Therefore you do evil to confound priora
and posteriora, the effects of the latter, with the causes of the former.


Camp. Is this the argument that can not be answered? I say whosoever is
justified, is also sanctified: and so, good works proceed from both.


Charke. Let all men mark the absurdity of this speech. If good works
proceed from sanctification, and sanctification from justification, how can
good works go before them both as a cause, seeing they come after both as an
effect: Thus you are entoyled.

Here was an open misliking of the answers, and some speech of making an end.
Then M. Charke said, I would feign use one argument more, to turn Campion
out of all his shifts, and to let the company understand his weakness, and
especially the weakness of his cause.


Campion. Let us hear what argument this is, whereof you make such bragges.


Charke. The authority and truth of scriptures for my cause makes me so
confident. Therefore mark the argument well.

We are justified by Imputation only: Arg. 6.


Therefore by faith only.


Camp. Nego Maiorem. I deny your Mayor.


Charke. I prove the Mayor, if you so call it.

Christ died only by Imputation:

Therefore we live only by Imputation, and are consequently justified by faith
only.


Camp. I deny the argument.


Charke. I prove it by Analogy.

Christ died only through the imputation of our sin:

Therefore if we live, we live only by the imputation of his righteousness.

And therefore to say that we live by any imputation of our own good works, is
as much as to say, that Christ died by imputation of some of his own sin. For
this analogy and proportion betwixt the causes of Christ's death, and the
causes of our life, does necessarily hold, and must diligently be observed.


Camp. I answer to your similitude.


Charke. If it be a similitude, it is by good analogy and demonstration of
truth out of the scripture. It is you that abuse the hearers with similitudes
that are not similia: my argument is demonstratiue.


Camp. I answer then to your analogy. So far as the scripture does intend,
it holds: like as Christ did bear our sins, so we have in us the justice
of Christ. The righteousness that we have, is given us by Christ. Christ had our
sins by imputation only, because he was not capable of sins inherent. But
we are capable of justice inherent, which Christ does give us, and therefore in
us we have the justice of Christ, both by imputation, and also inherent, given
by him. And therefore it is called the justice, Non qua ipse iustus est, sed
qua nos iustos fecit, Not whereby he is just, but whereby he has made us just.


Walker. Sins inherent in us, and righteousness inherent in Christ:


Camp. Nay, I say righteousness inhere^t in us given by Christ.


Charke. Campion ye answer not the argument, but in place of answering you lay
down new positions. Your inherent righteousness is not granted you: if it
were, yet it follows not that it should be a fellow cause in our
justification with Christ's righteousness.


Camp. I say we have inherent righteousness, and Christ had not inherent sin.


Charke. What answer is this to my argument? If we had it, yet it follows no
more that it should justify us, then the inherent spark and light of nature
which is leaft, should make us able of our selves clearly to behold the hidden
mystery of the grace and mercy of God, revealed only by faith in the Gospel.


Camp. Will you not admit an answer?


Charke. You are graueled. It is no answer to bring a new and false position,
and that not applied to the argument. But I will not let you rest in this
starting hole, you shall have Syllogismes.

Our sins alone were of full sufficient force by imputation to condemn
Christ unto death:

Therefore his righteousness alone is of full and sufficient force by imputation
to justify us unto life. Again, and shortly.

In Christ there was no inherent sin to be any cause of his condemning:

Therefore in us is no inherent righteousness to be any cause of our justifying.


Camp. I dispute not how he might have justified, but by what means he does
justify us.


Charke. This is plainly (...), to say the least. Answer the To trifle and
shift by childish words.
reasons. Do my arguments prove how he was able, or rather prove they not
most manifestly how he has justified us? But as the Scribes and Pharisees
supposed some inherent sin in Christ, so you their successors, suppose some
inherent righteousness in us: and we shall as truly live by this, as he justly
dyed for that.


Campion. I deny the argument, because his will is otherwise.


Charke. Here again is a new proposition brought in place of an answer. But
I have proved that GOD has done it: and therein revealed his will which is
most holy and most perfect in all proportion of justice.


Camp. I deny it. For we have inherent righteousness.


Charke. I would you would so answer as men might see with what judgment ye
use so many denials. But I will follow my argument, and prove there is no
inherent righteousness in us, whereby we are more or less justified.

If we have any inherent righteousness as a fellow or helping cause of our
justification, then the righteousness of Christ is not alone without us, so full
and absolute to our salvation, as were our finnes to cause his condemnation:

But Christ's righteousness alone without our inherent righteousness, In fact and
deed.
is de facto, as full and perfect every way:

Therefore we are as well de facto, justified only by the imputation of his
righteousness, as he was condemned only for the imputation of our sin.


Camp. I deny the Minor.


Charke. You deny it manifestly against the doctrine of the Apostle. Romans 5.
teaching that there was more force in the righteousness of Christ to salvation,
then was in our sin to condemnation. Whereupon you are turned out of your
shifts, and must confess that as Christ was condemned only for the
imputation of our sin, without any inherent sin of his own: so are we
justified only by the imputation of his righteousness, without any inherent
righteousness of ours. Which who so denies, he shall be found to match man's
supposed righteousness, with the righteousness of God: and to exalt flesh and
blood against the almighty.


Here Master Lieutenant signified the time was past.

Let us conclude with prayer.
Almighty GOD and most merciful Father, we give thee humble and hearty
thanks in the name of Jesus Christ, for all thy goodness, especially, for the
alone and all sufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ, beseeching thee, that
renouncing all opinion of any righteousness of our own, we may by faith lay
hold of his righteousness to our everlasting salvation. Also we thank thee
for the inestimable treasure and armor of thy holy word, whereby thou make
thy children rich in all spiritual and heavenly wisdom, inhabling them, even
the weakest of them, to triumph against proud and bold ignorance, against the
deceitful and lying spirits gone out into the world in these last times, to
deceive those that receive not the knowledge and love of thy truth. Moreover,
good Lord, as it has pleased thee to vouchsafe some blessing upon our labors
this day, for which we likewise give thee thanks: so we beseech thee yet
further to bless them, that the truth may be more and more precious to thy
children, and that they which are yet without, may either acknowledge the power
and light of thy Gospel, if they belong to thee: or being none of thine, may
stand convicted in their own conscience, as children of darkness, and have
their mouths stopped, which they so open against the light and truth of thy
most holy word. Grant us these things, O Lord, and whatsoever else may serve
to thy glory and our salvation, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior.

Amen.
Io. Walker.
W. Charke.



Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Anno 1583.


