SIONS TEARS LEADING TO JOY: OR THE WATERS OF MARAH SWEETENED.

First preached at Clonenagh in the Queens County in several Sermons, and now
published for the benefit of the Church.

By Ri: Olmstead, Minister of Gods Word, and Master of Arts.

MATT. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ADAM Lord Vicount LOFTVS of Elie, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, and one of his Majesty's Justices for the government of this Kingdom.
Right Honorable,
I Humbly beseech You to accept this poor model of my labors, as did
Artaxerxes a cup of cold water at the hands of silly Synaetus, even from me,
the meanest of Levy his sons: It shall be much honored if it please your
Lordship to pardon my presumption, and to afford your patronage thereunto.

The subject is worthy your Lordships consideration in it self, if the evil
cooking of it by my unskillfulness, detract not from the luster thereof; but if
I had inioyed either that Academick leisure, (...)
the benefit of some Amaraean Library, or conference with men of excellent
both parts and graces, I might have produced a more co^pleat Minerua; but being
pressed with the care of a large family depe^ding (though not upon tent-making,
as Paul) yet upon my industry, now these seven years, without any annual
revenue from the Church, besides my weekly labors in preaching too, and
catechizing my people, denies me to furnish it as I would. If I be asked, why
I publish a Treatise of this subject: 1 John. 2.18.
I answer with S. John, these are the last times, wherein our Savior says,
Mat. 24.12.
Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. (...)
Aristippus and Aeschinus being fallen out, one asked the other, what was
become of their friendship, the answer was, it was asleep, but he would awake
it. Now Right Honorable, seeing the most lie like the people of Laish, Judge.
18.7.
wretchlesly and securely upon their lees, that neither our own sins, the
sins of the times, afflictions of the Churches of God abroad, nor the
consideration of the signs and symptoms of Gods Judgments, dependant or
powered out upon us (especially spiritual vengeance at home) can awaken, I
think it my duty, to make an experiment by this poor Work to stir up and
provoke this frozen age to humble themselves before God in the sense both of
their own and the sins of others.

This point (my much honored Lord (though sacred, yet a paradoxe and ae^aigma
to nature, and the world, the natural man not perceiving the things that be
of God, because they are spiritually discerned. I may truly apply that saying
of Themistocles to this purpose, (...)
who beiog exiled his native Country, and being better entertained in the
Persian Court, said; I had perished, if I had not perished: that whereas this
simple World are opinionated, that to mourn under the sense of sin, is most
vnco^fortable, and the way to deprive themselves of all solace and joy, every
true Christian is assured, and may say, perijssem si non perijssem, that if he
had not sorrowed, he had forfeited his joy and his soul also.

Right Honorable, In your absence and affliction, this Commonwealth and Church
of Ireland, doubting of the success and issue, and experimentally sensible of
the want of your Lordships indefatigable labors in the execution of justice
impartially to al, many of her faithful children were not wanting in their
daily supplications to God, waiting your Lordships happy return, as for the Job
29.23.
rain, gave me assur^ce of Gods special blessing to honor your Lordship; as
Ambrose said to Moni^a the mother of August: Non potest peri^e tantarum
lachrymatum filius
the child of so many prayers and tears cannot possibly perish; the most High
has pleased to hear their prayers (blessed be his most sacred name) in your
Honors safe return, with a largess of honor. Fail not then (my dear Lord)
the expectation of the spouse of Christ, and that trust which the most High and
his Majesty has committed to you to be a faithful servant, Heb. 3.2.
as Moses in the house of God, for the eyes of men are not only cast upon you
(my noble Lord) and the whole land intent to be hold your life, In re vnum
cunctorum oculos etc. Hier. ad de.
but God and Angels expect your faithful service, to which end my daily prayers
shall be to the most omnipotent, that he will not fail you with his spirit;
being assured that your Lordsh: (...)
inte^ds to imitate that saying of Alexander, It profits not to possess all
things, and to do nothing, as appears by your Lordships painful industry
(in the judgment of all that behold your insupportable affairs beyond humane
strength, I am bold to exhort your Honor in the words of an Apostle, (not to be
weary of well doing, for in the end you shall receive the crown, if you faint
not: assuring my self that that Proverb so often inculcated by Hierome of
Cicile will for ever be your disposition: (...)
That none who spoke freely to him, did importune him, or was unseasonable.

Thus craving pardon of my boldness in dedicating this tretise to your Lo: to
which my affection are love and duty to your Ho: the zeal of the glory of God,
and the care of the prosperity of this church and commo^wealth, with the
particular comfort of humbled and afflicted consciences, has transported me: I
humbly beseech your Lo: and this whole church, to accept this poor mite at my
hands, most humbly and heartily entreating the most high to water it with the
dew of his blessing, who only can make the labor both of minister and people
fruitful: Rebeeca may cook the venison, but Isaak must give the blessing: we,
nay Paul can but speak to the ear, it is the Almighty that must speak to the
heart and conscience by his Spirit, and persuade Iapheth to dwell in the tents
of Shem. Thus wishing my much esteemed Lod, to your self, your noble Lady, and
posterity, not only with the Philosophers prosperity, physitia^s length of
days with health, the common people joy, Romans safty, and increase of honor,
but with that blessed Apo. Paul, the peace of God which passes understanding,
with eternal glory in the highest heavens, I remain

Your Lordships in all humble service RI: OLMSTEAD.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Charles Coote Knight, and Baronet, and of his
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel for the Kingdom of IRELAND.
Right Honorable:
I Penned this ensuing Treatise in the time of your great affliction, intending
it only for your private use, by the divine documents contained therein, to
lead your Honor through the waters of Marah, into Elim the sweet waters of
spiritual joy and consolation, not purposing ever to make it public; but
showing it to the most Reverend Lord Primate, he desired the publishing of it
to the view of the Church.

These poor meditations shall be much honored, if you vouchsafe as gracious
an aspect to them written, as you did an honorable zealous, and reverend
attention to them uttered by voice; though as a picture expresses not the
life, so neither can writing demonstrate the lively Energie of the voice which
consists in utterance and action the two ornaments of speech.

I know you delight not to have your goodness diuulged but rather be good then
seem so, and that you account virtues fairest Theater to be a good conscience
those who shall receive any instruction, refreshing, or consolation, by this
poor work, owe the acknowledgement (next unto God) to your Honor, who have
so watered, and encouraged my poor studies with your benefice^ce, that my
barren heart has (blessed be God) both by preaching and writing yielded some
fruit.

I hate to be a Sycophant and flatterer, yet from my heart I wish that all the
world understood your Honors disposition both to my self in particular, and
the Commonwealth in general, that all other might be instigated by your right
noble example. First for my self, I acknowledge to have received, out of your
free bounty my means and maintenance for which I humbly bless the most high
God, and your Honor.

Lysippus the Caruer worthily reproved Appelles that exact painter because be
had pictured Alexander with a thu^derbolt in his ba^d as a God, the other with
a Spear in his hand as a valiant Prince, I am persuaded they are more pleasing
to your honor that only give you your due, the^ which ascribe to you that
which your Hon: (...)
will not assume. Envy follows virtue flattery nourishes vice. The first
Themistocles well perceived who being yet young, said he had done no
excellent thing, because he was not envied. That memorable work of your Honor
worthy to be recorded in pillars of Marble, cleansing and purging (like a happy
Physician) this country, with some parts of Vlster frothose cursed vipers,
and Cockatrices the rebellious kearne who so infested the Country, that no man
had any security, that either his goods, life, wife, or children in the
evening could be in safety until the morning. insomuch as that night truly
be applied to those parts of the Country where they ranged and reigned, for
four years space, which Deborah expresses of Israel in her song: In the
days of Shamgar the son of Anath, Judge. 5.6.7.
in the days of Iael the highwaies were unoccupied, and the travelers walked
through by-ways, until you rose up an honorable Father in this our Israel.

How did those rogues and villains run up and down the countries, robbing
and spoiling all, delighting and satiating their greedy and insatiable lusts in
rapine, blood, murders, thefts and burning the Kings Majesty's most loyable
Subjects, and if the State by your Honors indefatigable labor, both of mind
and body, had not carefully prevented that mischief, long ere this time, our
bloods had run down the streets, our wives, children and goods made a prey
to those merciless, and greedy villains.

Right honorable, let your memory be blessed upon earth, and le^ these lines
keep the remembrance thereof to sacceeding ages; yet in this so praise worthy
and blessed a work, so prospered by the providence, and good hand of the
Almighty, your Honor escaped not the black n^outh of cankered en^ie, like
Shimei his railing at David, (...)
but these are blown over, and they are now ashamed of their wicked scandals.

The other Phocion knew well, to whom when the people gave a plaudite for his
Oration, said, have I spoken any thing amiss unawares, intimating that popular
applause, and flattery works upon some infirmity. Many have prevented
treachery that could never beware of flattery, David whom the valor either of
A^ner or Amasah, 2. Sa. 16.3.
or the wisdom of Achitophel could vanquish, 2. Sam. 11.
was yet seduced by Ziba his false tale to iniure honest and plain hearted
Mephibosheth, yea how did smiling ease and prosperity corrupt that man, Neh.
6.10.14.
according to Gods own heart. Nehemiah could well beware of Tobiah and
Sanballat railing and menacing adversaries, but he was greatly in danger by
Shemaiah and Noadiah dissembling Prophets.

The way Right Honorable to be safe from the sting of these Farantulas, Sirens
and sycophants is, to take David's counsel, Psalm. 101.6.
to have faithfall associats, servants, and followers. The faithful in the
land shall dwell with me, the upright in heart shall serve me. And to desire
with him let the righteous smite me, for that shall be a precious balm.

Thus humbly craving of the most high long to continue you under his Majesty
by your faithful counsel a muniment to the decayed estate of this poor
Church, ^n oritament to the Commonwealth, a proppe to Religion a pillar of
Justice, a Father to Orphans, a comfortable succor to distressed widows, a
sweet and delightful husband to your noble Lady, and a directing father to
your beloved children. And the same God preserve you all unblameable in your
spirits, souls and bodies, until the appearing of Jesus Christ: So I remain
bound to

Your Hon: in all humble observance R. Olmstead.

SIONS TEARS: OR, THE WATERS OF MARAH SWEETENED.
THe Wiseman says, that A Pro. 25.11.
word spoken upon his wheels, is like apples of gold with pictures of silver;
that is, a word spoken seasonably, in respect of time, place, and persons;
either to awake the drowsy, instruct the ignorant, comfort the afflicted, or
strengthen and corroborate the weak and feeble, is most pleasant and
acceptable. If ever there were a time and age when, or place where, GODS Titus
1.7.
Stewards, 2. Cor. 5.10.
Ambassadors, Mal 2.7.
Angels, Job 33.23.
messengers, and Ministers, had need Is. 58.1.
cry and not spare, then this is the age, and this Island the place: For if
monstrous, abominable, and odious profaneness on the one side; and impious,
wicked, and detestable Idolatry on the other side, with a high contempt of God
and his sacred ordinances, may make a people immeasurably wicked, if sin
brings the curse of the most High (as sure Deuteronomy. 28. Le^^ 26.
it does) then the condition of this Land is woeful and miserable, not only in
respect of judgment already powered out, but also depending, especially
nourishing in her bosom those locusts and vipers, who wait but opportunity to
eat out the heart of their mother, as will appear by their own Writers and
practices, in that one gunpowder plot, how had the devil assembled in one
Court, all the black Guard of hell, treason, superstition, Atheism,
ignorance, murder, blood, fire and sword, to bring all to a confused Chaos)
worse then that Tohn and Bohu, Genesis 1.2.
when the earth was without form. And all this (forsooth) was for the
Catholic cause, plotted by the Ignatian Scholars the Jesuits, tutored by
the Devils themselves, and shall we look for any better from them here? Let
me entreat you, Right Honorable, Reverend, and grave Senators, now to be
assembled this Parliament, to take this into your serious consideration; and
that you may the better see what these monsters amongst men are, at your
leisure take but a view of their own Writers, cited in the Acosta de Proc.
Ind. sal. l. 4 c. 3. Io Metell. seq. presat. in Osor Arnauld. in Iesuis.
Plasina in hist. Pontis.
margent: For my Brethren the Ministers, I am unwilling to lay open their
nakedness, to publish it in Gath, or in the streets of Askelon, lest the
uncircumcised rejoice and laugh at it, 2, Sam: 1.20: yet I never consider of
it, but I see cause of complaint with the Prophet, Ier. 4.10.
O my belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart: I cannot say, our days
and times are so evil, as sometimes the Prophet spoke of the age wherein he
lived; There is not one Prophet left to tell us when these things shall end.
For (blessed be the Highest) Gods Word soundes, or might sound in the cares of
many; for God has vouchsafed some Prophets scattered here and there, who have
received both Vrim and Thummim, light of doctrine, and light of holy
conversation, whose preaching (as Aarons bells) ring sweetly amongst the
people, and that not without some special fruitt. Yet liver here still swarms
of mighty oppressing Nimrods, proud Pharaohs that say, Exodus 5.2.
who is the Lord that I should serve him? wicked and ungodly Ahabs, 1. King. 21
25.
that have sold themselves to do wickedly in the sight of the Lord:
Abominable Ieroboams, that not only sin themselves, but cause others to
sin, yea Romans 1.31.
favor and delight in them that commit iniquity* And alas on the contrary, how
small is the Flock of the Lord JESUS among us, faithful as Abraham, righteous
as Lot, religious as David, true-hearted as Jonathan and Nathaniel, zealous as
Iosuah, and burning in spirit as Paul, devout as Cornelius? these are almost as
rare as black swannes, and as the Micha 7.1.
summer fruit Mat. 7.14.
this gate is straight and narrow, and few find it. God has sent amongst us
his Prophets, but those are despised, and they hate him that reproues in the
Gate, each bigamist, cavallier and bankrupt, who^ the Church, and his native
Country for his wickedness has spewed out, can reproach them, he has
tendered his spirit, as Acts 7.52.
Steven speaks to the Jews, but that they resist, he has sent us his
mercies, as peace, prosperity, plenty, with a largess of the Gospel: but these
are abused, warned us by his judgments, as wars, pestilence, and cleanness
of teeth, but these we have neglected. Apoc. 2.12
The Devil never busier, for his time is but short, Antichrist never more
furious, fraudulent, and subtle, eagerly set to enlarge his kingdom, Apoc.
16.33.16.
by those frogs which come out of his mouth his Euphrates drying up by the
Angels pouring out of the sixth vial, that they might excite the Kings of the
earth to that Armagedon, which oh our Lord hasten, and I verily believe is at
hand, Sin never more common; and though the Lord pronounce a woe upon them,
yet Is. 5.18.
they draw it with cords of vanity, and as with cart-ropes, and Job 16.16.
drink it in like water (as Job says) men sleep and continue in sin, and
it is safer to commit it, then to reprove it. Oh that abominable and accursed
Idol the Mass, for which there is no shadow of warrant in all the sacred
Scripture, nor any of the ancient Fathers. Let any man show me, if ever any
Nation continued long, that forsook the truth, and fell to Idolatry: search
all Histories, Chronicles and Records in all Ages of the Church, if ruin and
desolation were not the guerdon and recompense of this villainous and cursed
Idolatry, and shall we think to escape? Observe the sacred Histories of the
Judges, Kings, and Chronicles, if GOD plagued not the Israelites his own
people by special covenant; I confess the Lord has showed long patience
toward the Heathen, who never had the lively oracles, but never such as he
had betrusted with his statutes and testimonies, as he has done us; my flesh
trembles at the consideration hereof I fear some heavy and speedy vengeance
from God upon this profane and idolatrous kingdom, if we prevent it not Amos
4.12
by meeting the Lord with speedy and unfeigned repentance: the Lord open our
eyes, to see and consider it. Shall we now be silent, and cease to speak at
all, or with the false Prophets speak false things, and Ezech. 3.18
sow pillowes under men's armeholes, that the woe of GOD should come upon us? No
verily, that is neither good for us, nor for you.

1. It is not good for us to be silent, for then the Apostles 1. Cor. 9.16
woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel, will fall heavily upon us.

2. Not to speak pleasing for then the Prophets woe will follow us at the
heels, Ezechiel 13.16.

3. Not for you, for we shall but flatter and deceive you, as the Lord says by
the Prophet, Ier. 6.14.
They have healed the hurt of the daughcer of my people, saying peace, peace,
when there is no peace; Is 57.21.
for there is no peace to the wicked,

It is not the fairest and calmest Halcyon day that purifieth the air, but
thunderings, lightnings, and blustering stormy winds: Sweet potions seldom
purge, especially tough humors, but bitter, healing playsters cure not
fistulaes and old sores except corasiues precede; Therefore the wise Lord
inioynes the Prophet, Isoy 58.1.
to cry aloud, to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, etc. And elsewhere Ierem.
1.17.
Trusse up thy loins like a man and speak all that I command thee, be not
afraid of their faces least I consume thee before them. We must therefore
purge, corrasiue, and apply the knife of the law, cut and lance, and stir in
your sick souls, though you murmr against us as Israel against Moses, Number
16.41 Amos 5.10. King. 22.24. Ierem. 37.15 Matt. 14.10
hate us that reprove you as the people did Amos, smite us on the face as
Zidkiiah did Michaiah, imprison us as the Princes did Jeremiah, and behead us,
as Herod did John Baptist, for it is better to incur the anger of a mortal
man, then the ire and indignation of the eternal God whatsoever this silly
sottish world think. I thank God I hate no man's person, but love all from the
heart-roote in Jesus Christ, but I fear no man's face. This subject calls me to
transform my self into all shapes, sometimes to be as James and John Mar.
3.17.
Boanerges, a son of thunder, and sometimes Barnabas Act. 4.36.
a son of consolation, for should not my words be sweet and pleasanc to
the upright, or should I be a false Prophet to speak peace to the wicked Isa.
57.21.
to whom there is no peace.

This subject that I purpose to entreat of is, to direct the humbled sinner (as
the Genesis 11.19.
Angel did Hagar to the spring of water, to refresh her thirsty Son Ishmael)
to the living waters of spiritual and true consolation, a Riddle, a Mystery,
and a Paradoxe to nature, and the world, to whom it is a true axiom, and
maxim, that every like begets his like, as beasts, birds, fishes, and
creeping things being the sensible creatures, and all plants, herbs, and
trees, being the vegetative creatures having only the life of increase, it is
also a position true in nature that contraries do not beget or preserve their
contraries, but destroy and consume them, as the fumes being hot and dry, and
the vapors and clouds cold and moist Job. 36.33
What combat and opposition is there as appears in thunders and lightnings,
which are never quieted but by the rupture and breaking of the clouds and
vapory substance, to make way for the fiery exhalations evacuation? But behold
here one of the wonders of the most high, for his works in creation,
providence, and the regenerating of men are contrary to all the understanding
of nature, as he brought Genesis 1.3.
light out of darkness, the rainebow Genesis 9.12.
a sign of present rain for the most part, and yet an everlasting sign of
the Covenant that God made after the deluge that he will never destroy the
earth any more with water. He brings life to all his elect but out of death,
even the death of his Son, he brings good out of evil, even out of the most
exquisite villainies that ever were, as out of Judas his treason and all the
wicked conspiracy of the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees against his
eternal Son, so in this particular, joy, comfort, peace and felicity is
promised to the righteous, but arising out of a strange branch, and that which
is opposite thereto in all men's opinion: even sorrow and howsoever it cannot be
a true position in natural things, yet it is a sound and sure position in
Divinity, for being both graces of the spirit of God they do conserve, and
not destroy each other.

The inducements persuading me to this subject are:

1. If it were possible to awaken this sinful world to consider that God
calls them to mourning, girding with sackcloth, fasting and prayer in the sense
of their own sins and the sins of the time and land where we live, and
behold as the Prophet says Isa. 12.13
Killing Oxen and slaying sheep, eating and drinking, etc. a horrible sin to
be set upon their jovall and mad mirth as the wise man speaks, throwing axes,
edgetooles, firebrands, and deadly weapons at the faces each of other, saying,
am I not in jest? When the Lord calls for lamentation and mourning. Luke 6.25.
O ponder the woe of our Savior you that forget God, Woe be to you that now
laugh, for you shall mourn, it may be when it is too late.

2. That I might direct the poor humbled Soul (which though they be but few,
scarce one of a family, or ten of a Tribe) the true way to the consolations of
GOD Isa. 55.1.3.
that they may receive the wine and milk of comfort and their souls may live,
time has been. (Oh that I might truly say time is) when we that are the
dispensers of the mysteries and treasures of God, I speak experimentally have
not inioyed time three or four hours after a Sermon to eat or refresh our
selves, for answering the doubts of perplexed and afflicted consciences, a
happy work: But now Oh the obdurate and adamantine hardness of heart; an
afflicted spirit is as a sign and wonder in Israel, yet blessed be God some
there are, for whose cause, and of a tender commiseration, and respect, my
soul desires to undergo any task or travail for their ease refreshing and
relief; I have known some in terrors of conscience, Prou. 18.14.
and under the vexation of a wounded spirit, which the wise man says Who can
bear, ten, twenty years, when I was not so able to administer consolation,
which might have been soon directed and recovered, with the assisstance and
blessing of the spirit of God.

Now for the point, it is a certain truth, that there is no true joy to be
expected before the heart be humbled with sorrow in the sense and feeling of a
man's sin.

1. Because the current of all the promises run thus. Our Savior who best
knew to administer a word in season pronounces mourners only to be happy.
Matt. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, and David by the
spirit of God teaches this, Ps 126.5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: Again Ps. 30.5.11
Weeping may abide in the Evening, but joy comes in the Morning: And in the
11. verse. Thou have turned my mourning into joy: thou have loosed my sack and
guirded me with gladness, thus he proclaymeth this experiment to the comfort
of all succeeding ages, and professes that he will for that favor praise God
for ever.

2. A broken heart are the sweet odours and sacrifices acceptable to him, and
the Prophet vtters it as if it were all, better then all Psa. 51.17
The sacrifices of God are a broken and contrite heart, and that he will never
despise it, what could be spoken more amply then this?

3. The Lord himself professes that he will take up the contrite heart to
keep his royal Court of refidence there, and to revive that spirit. Isa. 66.2.
To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word, that is, receives my word and doctrine with fear and
trembling.

Quest. But does the promises of happiness and beatitude belong to all
sorrows indefinitly.

Answ. That were too large, and lays open a door of happiness to many which
sorrow, and that excessiuely, and yet shall undoubtedly perish; there must be
therefore issued out (as the Lawyers say) a Writ of melias inquirendum, which I
will do by a distribution of sorrows and mourners into their several ranks:
and answer till I come at the true sorrow, as the Lord answered 1 Samuel 16.7.12.
Samuel when he sent him to anoint David King of Ifrael, the sons of Ishai
being brought Eliab, Abinadab, and Sbamuah, the Lord said to each severally,
the Lord has not chosen him, nor any of Ishais seven sons, until David
came, and then the Lord answered, anoint him King over my people, for this is
he. We are therefore to observe three kinds of sorrows: 1. Natural sorrows.
2. Unnatural, diabolical, or devilish sorrows. 3. Supernatural.


The sorrows of the afflicted and scandalized I call natural, because they
proceed from nature and natural causes.

The sorrows of the afflicted for crosses, losses, and outward troubles and
afflictions, are common and ordinary, such as Job speaks of, Job 6.2.
Oh that my griefs were well weighed, and my miseries laid together in the
balance, for it would he now heavier then the sand of the sea: and such was
that sorrow Mat. 2.1^
in Ier. 31.51
Ramah, where a voyee was heard, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not
be comforted, because they were not: but this must not be it, being too
universal, I were better preach universal grace, then this doctrine, which
will fetch within the compass thereof universally all the sons of Adam; for
there is no man, but at one time or other, laments the loss of wife, children,
lands, possession, goods, good name, wounds, sicknesses, diseases, and such
like; and yet millions of these perish, and that eternally; there is no man
except he be a Stoike, ouer-whelmed with stupidity and blockishnes, but has
natural passions and affections, and the world skip and leap at this as the
fish at the bait but poor souls they deceive themselves, latet anguis in
herba; and there is a hook within this bait, when they hear of the promises
made to mourners, the devil and their deceitful hearts make the^ believe, and
they fondly speak, they hope they have their hell here, and their heaven
hereafter, whenas they are but the beginnings and first fruits of the wrath of
the eternal God, and forerunners of that full harvest of vengeance, which the
Just will inflict upon them for ever in hell; for the Lord as not so prodigal
of his best mercies, as to diffuse and scatter them thus universally upon all:
but as aversly deal they with themselves, and with the bounty of God; for if
he turn the wheel of prosperity, and give them abundance of peace, plenty,
and outward blessings; they turn their songs, and say, if God loved them not,
he would never bestow and cumulate those variety of favors upon them, as the
children of Ephraim, when God menaced them with wrath for their sins, answered,
Hosea 12.8
Notwithstanding I am rich and increased in all my labors: And the Church of
Laodicea said, Apoc. 3 16 17
she was rich, etc. Thus, which way soever the Lord turn himself toward
them, they put poison into the cup which God fil^ out to them, and drink it to
the ruin of their souls, never inquiring for assurance, whether God gives
these conditions to them in his Love, or Wrath; nor considering that which the
Wiseman speaks, Eccles. 9.23.
All things (that is) in these outward things, Eccl 9.1.2.3
God promiscuously bestows) all things alike to the good and bad, to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, to him that swears, and fears
an oath; as is the good, so is the sinner: So that by any of these outward
things, no man knows Jove, or hatred. Hos. 13.11.
There are many rich men wicked, God gave Saul to Israel in his wrath; and the
prosperity of the wicked, Prove. 12.32.
is their ruin: There are also many poor men abominably wicked, carrying
about them many black characters, and plague tokens of reprobation: It is also
as certain, that GOD chooses, (though not many) rich, noble, learned, and
wise, to be vessels of grace, mercy, and glory, as Abraham, Job, Solomon, and
others; and many poor, as S. James says, Iam. 2.5.
Hearken my beloved, has not God chosen the poor of this world, that they may
be rich in him, and heirs of the promises.

Quest. But may not Gods children grieve and mourn for outward afflictions,
losses and troubles in this world?

Answ. They may, but with these two cautions or rules.

1. That their heaviness be rather for finne in themselves, which might cause
that cross, then for the affliction it self.

2. That their heaviness and sorrow be moderate, as Paul advises, 1 Cor. 7.30.
Let them that weep, be as if they wept not: and for the loss of friends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
not to weep as men without hope for them that sleep, etc.

Quest. But when is sorrow for afflictions moderate?

1. When it exceedes not the measure of sorrow for fin, that is, liberty
enough, if not too much, for a large measure and degree of sorrow for sin is
required and necessary.

2. When it with-drawes not the heart from God, and the holy use or all his
ordinances, through passionate and incredulous perturbations, for that is not
according to the Apostles Canon: weep as if ye wept not: fie upon that sorrow
for outward losses that drives from God, and the duties either of general or
particular callings, as of husband, wife, father, child, or our outward
profession and calling in this world.

3. Is. 54.7.8.
It must be but for a season, because the troubles and afflictions of Gods
children are but for a moment, Psalm. 30.5.
God hides his face but for a little while; and the reason is, because
afflictions are used of God, as plasters, medicines, or as a furnace, Now in as
much as the Godly will speedily judge themselves, and make their peace,
therefore the Lord will soon draw off the affliction: Sweetly speaks our
Savior to this purpose, Job 36.7.15 John 16.20, 23 Phil. 4.6. Luke 18.7.8.
Verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice, and ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. The
plaster shall lie no longer, then till the sore be whole: the goldesmith will
let his metal lie no longer in the fire, then till the dross be melted off,
or fit for his work. For whether the Lord remoues the cross, or pulls out the
sting thereof, or sweetens it with special mercies and favors, ouer-valuing
the affliction How should this check the unquietness of our hearts, as David
says. Ps. 42.11
Why art thou cast down my soul, and unquiet within me etc. and to be
ashamed of the failings of our hearts, Psalm. 73.26
My flesh fails, and my heart also, but GOD is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. And to turn the current of sorrow against our selves,
that we should make so much of our crosses, and so little of Gods mercies.

Quest, What motives can you give me to mourn less for outward afflictions?

Sol. First they as you see, are but for a season, and therefore learn to Heb.
10.23.38.
hold fast the confidence of our hope, and live by faith.

2. If the Lord be angry, Psalm. 73.26.28. Hab. 2.4.
to hide our selves for a little season, till the indignation ^s past, by
unfeigned and godly sorrow, confession of sin, prayer for pardon of sin,
renewing our covenants daily, to live better in time to come: and such like as
these.

3. Seriously to consider, if greater losses have not befalne us, then these
terrene and outward things, as houses, lands, revenues, goods, and credit.

Quest. But may there greater losses befall a man, then loss of wife,
children, etc?

Answ. The world thinks no; but it is sure, many have, and the dearest child
of God may; and to turn the edge of our grief and sorrow, a taste whereof I
will give you in these few particular instances: A man is never worse spoiled,
then when his soul suffers spiritual losses. Job his losses by the Sabeans
and Shabeans was great, but theirs are infinitely greater,

1. That lose the good seed sown in their hearts, as the most do, Mat. 13.19
whenever a man hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not,
the evil one comes, and catches away that which was sown in his heart: and
so he betrayeth the seed of Gods Word into the hands of the devil. Oh how
many lose the benefit of many a Sermon, and bewail it not.

2. That lose the Kingdom of God, in losing the means of the Kingdom, the
ministry of the Word, by which an entrace is made into the Kingdom of Grace,
and by which they are built up and stablished in that Kingdom, Mal. 21.43
The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that shall
bring forth the fruit thereof. How many weep and wring their hands for the
loss of these earthly things, this Mammon, but can live without means to save
their souls, and never shed a tear for the want thereof. Oh those blessed
times of Hierome, when his mouth was stopped, the people cried out, It had
been better the Sun had been plucked out of the firmament.

3. That lose their first love which sometimes they had, so threatened by our
Savior, Apoc. 2.4.
I have somewhat against thee, because thou have lost thy first love.

4. That lose what they have wrought, even all that they have done throughout
their life, because they have not been done of faith, and therefore John gives
this caution, 2 John 8.
Look to your selves, that we lose not the things we have done, but that we
may receive a full reward, etc. that is, some take pains about the way to a
better life, but labor not aright, and therefore lose all, and themselves.

5. That lose the presence of God, not the presence of his effence, wherein
Moses was singular but the presence of his grace, and signs of his favor and
mercy* which the Lord himself threatens to take from Ephraim, Nos. 5.15.
I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their sins, and
seek me in their affliction, they will seek me diligently.

6. That lose the taste of the life to come, Hab. 6.2
as the Aurhour to the Hebrews says, and all those seeming graces which
sometimes they had.

7. That lose the joys of their salvation, Hs. 51.13.
which David did, as in his doleful prayer he expresses, Restore me to the
joy of thy salvation, etc. and questionles it is so to many a child of God for
a time, to their great sorrow and heaviness.

8. That lose the stability and steadfastness of their faith, Ps. 51.12.
as David, for howsoever it is a truth, that faith cannot be totally, and
finally lost, yet the stedfastnes thereof has been, and may be in the best of
Gods servants.

9. That have lost those things they had sometimes in spiritual things, Mat.
13.12
Let this be no wonder; for as touching degree, it may be, and is true in
sundry of Gods servants, though it is not true of the graces themselves.

10. Most of all that lose their crown, which is either in the hypocrite
leaving his perseverance, Apoc. 3.11
or in Gods Child, growing cold and careless.

But alas this is not the true sorrow: for of this worldly sorrow the Apostle
says, it 2 Cos. 7.10
brings death, both temporal and eternal, so far is it from bringing life or
grace.

2. The second state of natural sorrows, far enough from this blessed sorrow,
which will bring consolation, is the sorrow of the scandalized, or melancholy,
which the Apostle Paul speaks of in the whole fourteenth Chapter, and
beginning of the fifteenth of his Epistle to the Romans, calling him by, the
name of the weak Christiau: but indeed, because many are deceived in this
sorrow, and lose their souls; and many also think the godly sorrow to be but
sickness, passion, conceit, or melancholy, and because it changes the body
often, they think it arises from the body: but there is no disease like to
this for symptoms and torments: and therefore here I will consider two things:

1. The difference betwixt godly sorrow, and fits of melancholy.

2. How it comes to pass, that this sickness being in the soul, yet often it
infeebleth the body.

Touching the first, there are four differences.

1, They all are natural, whether it proceed from the corruption of the blood
universally, or the blood in the brain only, engendered through inflammation,
and evil affect about the stomach and sides, which are all distinguished by
Physicians, by their causes and symptoms, which in some are almost incredible
and strange: but this is supernatural, a plant of Gods own planting, and that
it is so, needs no other reason to prove it; then that God commands it; for
natural things need no commandment, is a ruled ax^ome in divinity.

2. They from the constitution of the body; but this is from the constitution
of the soul.

3. In melancholy the humors first, and then the imagination; but in this
sorrow, the conscience first, and the hu^ors after, are affected to the
weakening and wasting of the body.

4. They, even all kinds may be cured by natural remedies and medicines,
bringing nature to his right temper; all natural medicines under Heaven cannot
cure this sickness; yet I confess, that sometimes these are mixed together,
sickness of the body, and the mind, and then is it hard to cure the one
without the other: but the cure must be indeauoured by spiritual and bodily
helps continually.

2 That the body is often infeebled by the sickness of the mind, is; because of
the near conjunction, sympathy, and union of them, both being united in one
person; for the soul possessed with fear, sorrow, languishing, and
heaviness, it is not possible that the body can take any delight in natural
and bodily comfort, the sleep will be short, and not so brief as troublesome,
and tempestuous; meats and drinks shall be tastelesse, or loathsome, or
mingled with tears, as David says, Psalm. 102.4
I forgate to eat my bread: the use of wife, children, house, lands, etc. shall
be vnco^fortable to him; for the natural, vital, and animal spirits being
all distempered by the soul, which (as Solomon says,) Prove, 18.14
the spirits of a man will sustain his infirmities, that is, all natural
infirmities, sicknesses, losses, and molestations; but when these fail, in the
want of the consolations of God, what shall vp-hold him?

2. It comes to pass by the righteous judgment of GOD, who as they have finned
undivided, so are they not divided in the smart thereof, but are corrected and
afflicted together, the body has been a servant to ehe lusts of the soul,
and receives the guerdon and wages of sin with it. David abused the vigor
of his body, in the sins of adultery and murder, and the Lord chastneth him
in both-Thus of natural sorrows.

2. Unnatural, or diabolical, and devilish sorrows.

1. Of the desperate.

2. Of the disappointed.

1. The sorrow of the desperate, as Job says, (...) Job 3.20.
they desire to see the grave, they seek death, and cannot find it; that is,
they feel such a rack, torment, and vexation in their conscience, and being
without hope of the consolations of God, are not able to endure this
insupportable burden of a wounded spirit; and therefore are driven to one of
those woeful shifts, either which come to drive it away, by calling in other
distractions, (helpless alas, and comfortless) as marrying wives, building
cities, inventing muficke, and such like bables fit for fools and children;
buc never turn their thoughts to GOD, to seek for favor, much like the vile
world now, that drink away the thought of their latter end: but alas, what
good is in this? nothing but to still the out cry and clamor of conscience for
a time, that they may have a greater freedom to sin, and not be disquieted,
or else desperately to seek death, as 2 Samuel 17 25.
A^hitopbel, and Math. 27.5
Judas, by laying violent hands upon themselves, a medicine as evil, or worse
then the disease; or else sink under the burden as those Priers and Papists,
who lay like fools under stocks, crying out bitterly, in the sense of their
tormented consciences, Francis Spire
wishing that their plagues and torments in Hell might be but as many years,
as there are drops of water in the Sea, or as many years as a little bird
would be in carrying away a huge mountain in her mouth for then there would be
an end, but now it will be eternal. What shall I speak of Latonius who died
roaring, as if he had been possessed body and soul with the Devil, or of
Hosfminster Eccius, and other whom stories make mention of.

2. The sorrow of the disappointed, as of Haman when his wicked devise he had
against Mordecai and the Jews was prevented Hest. 6.12
hasted home mourning, and his head covered: When Ahab could not obtain
Nabaoth veineyard, 1. King. 21.4.
went home to his house heavy, lay upon his bed, and would not eat: So Amron,
David's son, when he had missed his lust with his sister Thamar 2. Sam. 13.24.
he fell sick for her, the world is filled with these cursed deuillish
sorrows when they cannot atchieue their wicked plots, stratagems, and hellish
devises, but this is a diabolical and wicked sorrow, and neither of these yet
is that true sorrow, which brings true peace and joy, and therefore we must
seek for another.

Thirdly supernatural or religious sorrows, which are of two sorts Legal.
Euangelical.


This legal sorrow goes before faith, being a grief wrought by the preaching
of the Law, inlightning and wounding the soul in the sense and feeling of
sin, racking, tormenting, and disquieting the conscience, and making it
speak and cry out with inutterable clamors, and following him with hew and
cry; so as wheresoever he becomes he carries his accuser, Judge, tormentor,
and executioner about with him, and this has and must be the condition of
every one whom God purposes to save, at one time or other, and in some degree
or other, for the Lord heales none but the wounded, with the wine and oil of
the sweet promises of the Gospel; and indeed they feel no want thereof,
Matt. 9.12.13.
The whole need nut the Physician says our Savior, but those that are sick,
these he came to call to repentance, not the righteous, that is such as are
righteous in their own account, and howsoever this be no saving grace, but as
the Schools speak, a general grace, or a grace of preparation, not of
composition, such as he promiscuously bestows upon the world as well as his
people, though he gives them more. Yet let all men know for certainty that
till legal sorrow, has though serious fence of sin made a man tremble, and
sorrow even in respect of the vengeance and wrath of God, and brought him to
despair in regard of himself, he is not moved to consider seriously, which
is the first wheel of all like the spring in a watch, which moves all the
rest, much less to desire mercy, which is the opening of the door of the
heart to let in the Lord Jesus into the soul. Therefore has the Lord set up a
Ministry in his Church, that partly by the laws preached, drives men to their
wits-end, as those three thousand Conuertes that at Peter's Sermon cried out
Act. 2.37.
What shall we do? and partly by his works, as the Iayler when the earthquake
and opening of the prison-dores made him tremble, and cry out: Act. 16.29 30.
What shall I do? And Manasseh, God binds him in chains and sends him to
Babell, 2. Chro. 33.12.13.
and then he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and God
was entreated of him and brought him back into his own land: Many are the
gashes and wounds Satan and sin has made in our souls, we must and shall
feel the smart of them before we be thoroughly healed. To this purpose has God
set up and placed his monitor conscience in man's foul to cry aloud, and tell
him what he has done amiss, to apprehend him, and set up a Gibbet in his
soul to which it adiudgeth him, and all to bring him to himself to sue for
pardon.

Yet is not this the sorrow which has the promise of joy and comfort annexed
to it, though this be not altogether separated from it, yet is this legal
sorrow in reproba^es and devils, Act. 24, 25
when Felix heard Paul dispute of temperance, and the judgment to come he
trembles, etc. And S. James says: Iam. 2.19
That the Devils believe and tremble, which is more then many a wicked man
does. Hear this ye Profane obdurate, and hard hearted monsters, and be
ashamed at your condition, that in this respect are worse then the Devils, and
infernal damned spirits, and fiends, and if you will not learn and be taught
by your eternal sovereign Lord and King learn thus much of the Devils least
they rise up in judgment against you and condemn you, as our Savior said of
Sodom, and G^morrah, that they should rise up in judgment against the Jews.

2. Now are we come to the true sorrow, which will appear 1. Sa. 16.11
as David the last, least and youngest of all the sons of Ishai, fair,
ruddy, and of a comely countenance, so is this a blessed sweet amiable grace,
peculiar, and special to Gods people, Mat. 10.15
and a specificall work of the holy Ghost, never yet did God vouchsafe this
gift or grace upon hypocrite or reprobate, but upon his own special beloved
ones, and never did true believer want it, though some have wanted the sense of
it, styled in Scripture 2. Cor. 7.10
godly sorrow, or a sorrow for God, offended, and beloved put in the forefront
of the blessed Covenant which God makes with his people. Ezec. 26.3^
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put in your bowels,
and I will take away your stony heart, and give you a heart of flesh.

But that we may apprehend, and receive this grace more perspicuously what it
is, let us a little consider the rife and immediate branch, out of which it
springs, and sprouts which is love, in this manner, when faith has apprehended
the love of God for the pardon and remission of sins, our full justification
and adoption, through the blood of Christ, Gods love being shed abroad in our
hearts by the holy Ghost, the heart is immediately ravished and inflamed with
the love of God again, and then the consideration which is as a blessed light
held out to the mind, lets the soul see as in a crystal glass all the
sins that it has committed against the mercy, goodness, gratiousnesse and
bounty of that gracious loving Father, how they have dishonored his blessed
Majesty, grieved his good spirit, and deserved his wrath, now it looks upon
Christ whom his sins has pierced through, and considers with it self, it
was not Judas, Pilate the High Priest, Scribes and Pharisees, that crucified the
blessed Son of God, but my sins have nailed him to the Cross, and pierced
his pericardion, and caused his heart blood to issue forth; thus does Peter
beat home this point to the conscience, in that excellent and fruitful
Sermon, wherein three thousand were converted. of whom (says he) Acts 2.3.16.
Ye are now the betrayers and murderers. Could they or the whole world have
crucified Christ? no verily, when he did but ask them, John 13.4.
whom seek ye? they fell baeckward to the ground; his words were able to
vanquish infinite millions; and as himself speaks to Peter, Mat. 26.5
think thou not that I can now pray to my Father, and he would give me more
then twelve Legions of Angels: one whereof 1 King. 19.5.
slew a hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night: and Genesis 12.29
all the firstborn of Egypt in a night. It was then thy sins, and my sins,
and the sins of all the ^lect that crucified Christ, which the Prophet
Zachary aptly expresses, Zach. 12.10
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced through, Amaritudine
afficientur sicut amaritudine affic^tur quispiam.
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for the loss of his only son;
And for the measure of their sorrow, the Hebrew expresses it lively: and
Arrius Montanus translates it significantly, amarificare enm, etc. This, this I
say is the sweet branch whence this blessed grace does issue and spring
fonrth; and he which mourns with this sorrow shall have the issue and fruit
thereof in joy here, and consolation unspeakable and glorious hereafter,

Quest. May not a godly man dear and precious in Gods account mourn, and
sorrow for sins, with deep lamentations, and yet not be the right and true
godly sorrow?

Sol. Yes questionless, it is the case of many a good man, and that will
appear by these reasons.

1. Because the sorrow even of some special beloved ones, continues long upon
them, I have known some seven, ten, yea twenty years in afflictions of
mind, tormented and vexed with the sense of their sins, and yet have found
little or no comfort, which they should have done, had their souls been
directed, by any that had the tongue of the learned to administer seasonable
direction, for so is the ordinary current of the promises: Ps. 30.5.
Sorrow over night, but joy in the morning: Again Ps. 126.5.
They went out weeping, and carried precious seed, but they shall return with
joy, and bring their sheaues after them. Thus in the examples of 2 King. 20.25.
Hezechias, who turned his face to the wall and wept and presently received
consolation. And Josiah who when he heard the Book of the 2 King. 22.8.12.13.
Law found by Hilkiah, and read by Shaphan, rent his clothes and wept sore,
and sent to Huldah the prophetess to inquire of the Lord for him and his
people: received a gracious answer, and was comforted.

2. When even a godly man cries and roares only in the sense of the pain and
smart of sin; yet it neither brings glory to God, nor consolation to his own
soul, it is not godly sorrow, yea though the object be God offended, as

1. When men are impatient, or distrust GOD of his word, providence, and
promises, the Highest is so far from being honored thereby, as that he is
highly dishonored, and himself no way eased, but his grief augmented and
increased.

2. That sorrow which brings glory to God, and good to the party, works in the
soul a sweet motion and inclination of the heart to love God, and so to pant,
desire and breathe after the sense of Gods favor and love, as the Spouse in
the Canticles, Cant. 5.^.
Christ let fall some drops of his precious grace into her heart, which
inflamed her so, as it enforced her to seek him indefatigably, until she had
found and embraced him, and had been embraced by him: but if the Ps. 51.1^.
Spirit in sorrow being grieved, with-draweth himself, and the heart is dead,
and feels no motion to sue unto God. O beware of such a sorrow, trust it not,
it is like to be unfound, as Genesis 3.8.
Adams, which caused him to run from God, and hide himself in the thicket,
which brought naught but shame; but the sorrow of the Luke 15.18
Prodigal, inclined his heart to return unto his father: and Inbn 12.3.
that of Mary Magdalene, drew her heart and body nearer to Christ.

3. That sorrow under pain, though God offended be the object thereof, which
is not accompanied with confession and relinquishing of sin, though of a
godly man, is not right, because it has not the promise of remission, which
only is made to a true confession, which issues only out of godly sorrow:
John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and true to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanst us from all unrighteousness. Oh sweet ground and foundation of
consolation for faith to lay hold upon: but on the contrary, Pro. 28.13.
he that hides his sin, shall never prosper, that is in grace and
consolation, and not only to confess, but to relinquish the sin; else men
do like a Cutpurse, that cries mercy, mercy, at the judgment seat, but
keeps the purse still; so do men often, especially hide the sweet morsel of
their beloved finnes under their tongues, the sin of their nature, and the
sin of their calling, not considering what the Lord says, Isa. 1.16.17
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your works, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc.

True confession has these particulars.

1. The most wicked and reprobate man that ever was, may, and often will confess
his sin by lump, and in general, to say, we are all sinners, etc, but this
brings no glory to God, or comfort to the party confessing: but there is a
confession which indeed brings much glory to God, which Joshua advises A chan
to set his heart upon: Ios. 7.19.
My son, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and confess this day. This,
this (I say) is that which will bring true peace to the conscience: thus did
David when he had confessed all his sins in particular which he knew,
intreates the Ps. 15.12.
Lord to purge him from his sec^rt sins: as if he should have said, O Lord
now I have confessed all my known sins, there are yet infinite secret sins
which I know not, and if I knew them all, I would confess them in special and
particular to thy Majesty, for otherwise there were no hope of the pardon and
remission of them, and this brings case to the heart and comfort to the soul,
so did Dautd also, and found comfort: Ps. 32.5.
I confessed my sin to the Lord, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my
hands. I verily believe there was never any known sin pardoned to any man
before it was acknowledged and confessed before God in specie, and in
particular.

2. Confession which brings most glory to God, is a private confession, not
before, or to man but in secret, as our Savior advises in prayer, whereof
confession is a part, Mat. ^.6.
When thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut the door, and pray to thy
Father in secret, etc. an hypocrite may confess his sins, and that largely
in prayer, and yet perish; but when the sinner is pinched at the heart with the
sense and feeling of his sin against God (beloved) whom he has grieved
thereby, seeks some secret chamber, closet, house, wood, where he is sure to
be furthest from the eyes and ears of men, and there power out his soul
before the Lord in a corner, notonely in Paul's, Christ Church, and S.
Patrickes, as the manner of the Pharisees, anciently was, (...), non in Te^^plo.
and of our ignorant people now is, to content them which saw; but in secret,
this is pleasing and acceptable to God.

Neither do I in this infringe or deter from public confession in these
particular cases:

1. When men have given public scandal and offense, public confession is
necessary, so did (y) A ^han give glory to God.

Josh. 7.19.
2. When after our confession of sins, God has been pleased to assure our
souls of his mercy in the free remission and pardon of them, we confess them
to comfort others, as Paul relates his persecution and blasphemy, to comfort
others, if any should ever so deeply be plunged into the like wickedness.

3. We should in some cases not be ashamed to publish our sins to all the
world, to testify our true repentance, and through effectual turning unto
God* at David ^se.

4. It must be free, and not exhausted and wrung from us, as was that of Josh.
7.17.18.
Acban, first he was pulled out by the Tribe, then by the Family, and after by
the people, till which time he held out without confession, when sin has
found out the sinner, and he can hide it no longer, it is no gramercie (as we
speak,) I am not peremptory, but that God may, and sometime has mercy upon
thieves, varlets, and wicked men, brought before judgment seats, and to
execution for their villainies, when they confess their sins; but scarce one
of a thousand of these confessions are sound, and would look for a great many
of sound signs before I should speak comfort to such a man; but when it comes
free in times of health, peace, prosperity etc. it brings glory to God, and
comfort to the Confessor.

5. It must be to God, not to a Priest, which has no foundation in sacred
writ; thus did David, Hs. 51.4.
against thee, against thee only have I sinned, etc. Have I offended a Priest,
or what Law of his have I transgressed, that I should confess to him? or has
he power to remit my sins? the very Jews and Pharisees could say, it was
blasphemy for a mere man to say, Luke 7.48
thy sins are forgiven thee: Yet we deny not private confession of man to
man privately in these two cases only.

In private injuries betwixt man and man, when by our offenses we have injured
them as often we do, though the sin be principally against God, 2. Sam. 11.11.
as David wronged Vriah, and in this case it was necessary that David should
have confessed his injury done to him, in deflowring and defiling his wife, and
not have seconded his first wickedness, by writing murtherous lines to Ioab,
to deprave him of his life, and that for two reasons:

1. To testify our repentance to be unfeigned and sound toward God, to our
selves, and the party whom we have offended.

2. To testify that we are thoroughly and soundly reconciled each to other,
and this is intended by our Savior Christ, Luke 17.4.
If thy brother trespass against thee seven times a day, and come and say, it
repents me, thou shall forgive him. Thus God sends Genesis 20.7.
Abimelech to Abraham, whom he had unwittingly wronged, to reconcile himself
to him, and so obtain his prayers, Job 42.7.
So are Jobs friends sent to Job to confess their censoriousnesse of him, and
to importune him to entreat a pacification of God for them.

2. In perplexities of conscience, when a man has used all private means, as
humiliation, confession of sins, private prayer, fasting, searching again
and again over the Lords Records, and can find no ease, that the conscience
may find ease and peace, the Spirit of God advises us to use the help of
some other special man of wisdom, gifts and secrecy, not a Minister only,
but any other, and to confess to him both his affliction of spirit, and the
cause thereof James 5.16.
Confess your sins one to an other, and pray one for another, etc. Now I
confess, the Minister ought to be the best prepared, Mal. 2.7.
his hopes should preserve knowledge, and the people should learn the Law at
his mouth: he ought also to have the tongue of the learned, and to be studied
in cases of conscience to administer and give consolation to a wounded and
weary soul, and has special promise to be heard in his counsel and prayers,
as being a Minister of reconciliation between God and his people, and it is
not causeless that the Lord uses this reason to Abimelech, Genesis 20 7.
go to Abraham for he is a Prophet: and that which is spoken in Job 33.23
Job, If a messenger or an interpreter one of a thousand declare unto man his
righteousness, etc. yet these places do not prove that the troubled conscience
is obliged to one person, nor to a Priest, having for the most part as little
skill or experience of the estates of afflicted consciences, as Balaams Ass,
but to be performed also to private Christians, Therefore this is far enough
from this Auricular Confession to the Priest, which was invented by the Devil
and the Pope, and his wicked seculars and regulars, to fill their purses; for,
no money, no absolution, like their Purgatory, Indulgences, Trentals, Dirigies,
Masses, and the rest of their devised trumpery, to gull the people, and delude
their souls: Again, to know and diue into the secrets of all States, Courts,
Houses, and secret thoughts of men and women, and the dispositions of all
particular persons, and so to know fit patients for their lusts, whereof I
could produce many horrible instances, and both name and prove them in this
Island if it were seasonable: as also fit agents to perpetrate any villainies in
stabbing of Kings, as Raviliak; Massacres, as the Duke of Guise, and the
Cardinal of Loraine at Vashti, and to blow up Parliament-houses as Faux:
Lastly, it is so far from easing the conscience, as it is a rack and
tormentor thereto, and therefore miserable and lamentable is the condition of
these poor people under these cruel taske-masters: Lord open their blind
eyes, that they may see and discern the subtilties and stratagems of these
abominable deluders of their poor souls.

1. Quest. But if there be so many kinds of sorrows, which deceive men's
souls, and that Gods people in their sorrows even for sins, miss the right
sorrow, and so continue without ease or comfort? what shall become of me, that
cannot mourn, but feel an obdurate and hard heart, which I cannot get
molified?

Ans. I cannot deny but that this godly sorrow may be without rackings and
terrors in some, the easiest and lowest degree has these three things ever
true in them to their consolation.

1. They vex and grieve, because they can grieve no more, they are sensible
of, and discern the hardness of their hearts, which is a degree of softness,
for corruption is not discerned by corruption but by grace, and therefore they
cry out with the Church, Isa 63.17.
Why have thou hardened our hearts and caused us to err from thy commandments,
return, etc.

2. They hate their special and beloved sins with a deadly hatred.

3. They endeavor a through reformation of their lives both internally, and
externally which are good evidences of some softness of spirit, though mixed
with some hardness and corruption.

2. Quest. But is it possible to discern this sorrow?

Sol. Yes, and I am so far from the opinion of Popery concerning assurance,
that I am assured, that it is hard to have any saving grace, but it will be
perceived and discerned, yea it will evidently manifest it self to all that
have skill to discern it, and that for these reasons,

1. Grace cannot be without external fruit, Mat. 7.16.
and by their fruits says our Savior ye shall know them, men do not gather
Grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, and though these graces be hidden
and secret in themselves, yet do in the true convert show themselves by
certain demonstratiue effects, as by confession in times of persecutions, as
Master Glouer, who though he had no sense of the assurance of Gods love until
he came in the flames, yet endured the former scorns, and that torture, and
then cried out (to his servant according to his request, that if he felt the
consolations of the Spirit at that last time, he would give some token) John
he is come, etc. Profession notwithstanding the scorns and disgrace of the
world, by victory over the world, love to the word more then their appointed
food, and lastly by their love to Gods people.

2. Grace cannot be truly received but it works a wonderful change and
alteration, the spirit of God having bound the strong man the Devil that had
formerly possessed the heart there bussels, throws down the Chair of estate,
alters the disposition and practice, affections, and all the conversation both
internal and external, and all this stir in reformation is liable to
observation.

3. The Devil lies still and quiet whiles men content themselves with common
effects of historical and temporary faith, because they feed presumption, and
leaves them under the power of damnation safe enough, but so some as justifying
faith, godly sorrow and other graces, (for they are never separated) are got in
the least measure into the heart, and begin to work in purifying the heart and
life from beloved sins, (though they work never so weakly) he bestirres
himself by his agents by carnal and wicked counsel, what will you (say they)
become precise and live mopishly, come lets be jovall and merry, and drink
away these dumpish thoughts, carnal company, a troop of the roaring laddes,
fit instruments for the work of the Devil, and then in comes the Cards,
Tables, etc. or temptations, reproaches, scorns, slanders, difficulties, and a
thousand hellish devises, to make this painful, and if possible an untimely
and abortive birth, daily experience teaches this to be true. The flesh
boyles and strives within, and the Devil injects his fiery darts into the
soul, the world is presently upon the neck of them, and pursues them, and
wonder as birds at an Owl, John. 16.19
at this sudden change and retyring 1. Pet. 4.4.
if men run not with them to the same excess of riot: Isa. 59.15*
He that refrianeth himself from evil makes himself a prey.

4. Lastly, the Graces of God are like lamps or Sea-sconces, or Lanthornes in
a dark night set upon a mountain or Hill to direct the lingering Pilot to
beware of sands and Rocks, and to conduct him to some Harbor or depth where he
may securely anchor from the violence of the storm and tempest, or like
Diamondes and other shining and orient Pearls which give luster in the darkest
night, and can these be hid?

3. Quest. Seeing it is certain that these graces may be discerned, and will
show themselves, by what symptoms or tokens may this grace of godly sorrow be
discerned?

Answ. It may be discerned by these symptoms or remarkable characters.

1. It is wrought by him, who as S. James says, is the Iam. 1.17
Author of every good and perfect gift, which is from above even from the
father of light, etc. Even a supernatural work of: Gods own planting,
whereas all other sorrows arise from nature, but this grace may as all other
graces be called Gods work, because it is he which does all the work, his
spirit making his ordinances effectual, and therefore is that spirit called
Zach. 12.10
the spirit of mourning and supplieation, and promised to all the faithful,
yea put in the forefront of that blessed new Covenant which the eternal makes
with his people. Ezec. 36.26
A new heart will I give them, and a new spirit will I put in their bowels, and
I will take away their stony heart, and give them an heart of flesh. And this
spirit apparently manifests it self in godly sorrow by refasolating and
comforting the heart, strengthening, quieting, and refreshing the soul with
sweet showers and influences from the head Christ with unspeakable secret
joy, peace, and contentation, as also affecting so the heart, as it bends the
desires thereof to the obedience of God in all things, in truth though not in
perfection.

Yet this we are not to suppose the Spirit does without means miraculously
and extraordinarily, but by such ordinary means, as God in wisdom has
appointed to the same purpose, as.

1. The ministry of the word is the principal, as appears in these 3000.
Conuerts, David, Josiah, and others; When they heard it says the Text, Act.
2.41^
They were pricked in their hearts, etc. When Nathan sent by God himself to
preach to David, and had delivered his message, cried out, 2. Sa^ 1 ^0 13.
I have sinned against the Lord: 2. King. 22 11.
When Josiah heard Shaphan read the Book of the Law, he rent his clothes and
wept, etc. And says Jeremy, Ier. 23.29.
Is not my word like a hammer that breaks the hard stone.

2. The sacrament of the Supper is another means, for by it (says the Apostle
1. Cor. 11.
We remember Christ his death,) and both these are intended I doubt not by
Paul, when he says to the Galat. 3.1.
Galatians, that Christ was before them crucified and slain: in the ministry
of the word to the ear, and in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper crucified and
slame by the eye to the understanding, in the breaking of the bread and pouring
out of the wine visibly before the people, and thus is this godly sorrow
wrought ordinarily in the heart, both by the word and Sacrament, that blessed
sweet grace of consideration wrought by the spirit of God; making both the
other effectual for this purpose, that a man now bethinkes himself my sin
is the cause of all this torment, which Christ the blessed Son of God
endured, and therefore affectes the heart with godly sorrow for it. Yet does it
not immediately break forth, but the Word and Sacraments sometimes inject
certain scintillutae or sparkles which lie hid sometimes in the heart a good
space, even in the child of God, and therefore the Lord uses another means

3. Afflictions which are his rod, which though they are not able to convert a
soul, no more then the Sacrament, yet are afflictions preparatory means to
set the word on work, as in 2. Chr^. 33 11.
Manasseh, he questionless had often heard the word in the time of his good
Father the Paragon of all the Kings of Israel and Judah, but it little helped
him, therefore God bound him in chains and sent him to Babell, and when he was
in prison and fetters, he bumbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers, etc. This also is manifest in 2. King. 20 2.
Hezekiah, and especially in the Act. 16.29
Iayler when he saw the Earthquake, and opening of the prison doors, he cried
out, What shall I do, etc. So that I say not that afflictions can convert a
soul to GOD, for then me thinks Pharaoh must of necessity have been a
convert who had ten fearful plagues, and yet drowned, and likely damned,
but I say sometimes they make way for conversion, by preparing the soul to
attend, and hearken to the word, and also when men have heard the word, and the
immortal seed is sown there, as a grain of corn sown in a field lies
sometimes long until a ground rain moysten it and then springs, and as in
Physic a pill or potion lies in the stomach an hour or two, and never
stirs the party, yet let him drink warm broth or posset-ale which have no
faculty of themselves to purge, yet sets the Physic on work, so does
afflictions, the word preached, and the seed sown ten, twenty, or thirty
years before; and it may be affected the heart therewith at the present, but
it blows over again, with thorny cares or pleasures then comes the rodd of
God; and sets all that word on work, and brings forth not an Embrio, or
abortive birth but this blessed grace of godly sorrow, which when it once
seazeth upon the heart eats up all worldly and carnal sorrows, as Exodus 7.12
Moses his rod did eat up all the inchaunters rods and Serpents, yea the
least scruple of this godly sorrow would weigh down a pound of carnal or
legal sorrow, and end in sweet true joy and contentment. Consider this ye
that spend days, weeks, Months, and years in worldly sorrows without ease
or comfort, learn this lesson, and practice it, and my soul for thine, thine
end will be peace and invaluable consolation.

2: Sign of this godly sorrow not only that it is fruitful, but brauncheth
forth into variety of good and happy fruit: and therefore not only true
believers in Scriptures, are compared to Psalm 1.4.
trees, planted by the rivers, which bring forth fruit in due season, and in
every season, as the tree of life bearing twelve sorts of fruit every month,
but especially true mourners, whose sorrow ends in joy, Is. 61.5.
To appoint unto all that mourn in Zion, and to give them beauty for ^shes,
the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, that they night be called true of righteousness etc. And th^se
parties, and these graces are not such as are obnoxious sterility and
barrenness, or to bear evil fruit; but such as by nature are fertile and
bear good fruit, as Psalm. 30.^ 14. Psalm. 52.8 James 3.12.
vines, olives, figs, and such like. Therefore in such trees, barrenness or
unfruitfulness alone is cause enough, to make them fuel for the vengeance and
wrath of the Almighty; and so, not only the Is. 5.4.
wild vine that bare wild grapes, and bad fruit, contrary to the expectation
of the Husbandman, Zach. 15.2.3.4. Luke 1 6.7.
but the barren vine and fruitless fig, and Mat. 3.10. and 7.19.
every tree that bears not good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. Now let us see what fruits this grace brings forth, that by the
branches and fruits we may know it to be right, and a plant of saving grace,
planted by the finger of God, Mat. 7.16.
for by the fruit it shall be known.

These are of two sorts.

1. Special, or respecting our own particular.

2. General, or respecting others.

Those that are special and respect our selves, are of five several sorts;

1. For corruption of nature,

2. For special sins after calling.

3. For hardness of heart.

4. For the absence of Christ.

5. For want of the means.

General, or respecting others.

1. For the dishonor of God in public abominations,

2. For the miseries of the Church:

3. For Gods anger and threatening.

1. Point. For the corruption of nature, thus Paul cries out, Romans 7.24
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And
David, Ps. 51.5.
I was conceived in sin, and warmed in iniquity: and this like a loathsome
leprosy and gangrene, harh spread it self over the whole man, howsoever not in
the substance, yet in all the faculties of soul and body; and made us as a
tainted seed, poisoning and contaminating every thought, word, and action, and
is the bell-damme of all the evils that proceed from us, as our Savior says,
Mark. 7.20 21.22.23.
from the heart proceeds adulteries, murders, thefts, evil thoughts etc and
these defile a man; yea it so defiles us, that, until we be washed effectually
in the blood of Christ, al our thoughts, speeches actions natural and civil,
are sin and our best actions are (as the fathers speak) but beautiful sins and
after our regeneration and effectual calling, it puts a stain^ upon our best
services even ou^ prayers, hearings, readings, etc* that we had need to return
an^ ask forgiveness and pardon for the defects of them, and these robes must
be tinct and washed Ap^^. 7.14.
white in the blood of the Lambe^ that they may appear amiably in the eyes of
God, without which there is pollution enough upon them, to cause the Lord to
abhor and detest them; and this we do, and must carry about with us so long
as the soul inhabits these earthly tabernacle Oh where are these mourners that
lament and bewail this spawning and mischievous sin; if a man should poison
the fountains and springs of waters, all men would cry out against such a
monster; but this is infinitely more vile, and yet who complains of it, is
sorrowful under the sense and feeling thereof, or cries for the crucifying
power of the Lord Jesus to subdue it? Yet this depraved condition is the estate
of every mothers child, as well he that sits upon the Throne, as he or
she that grindeth at the mill, Job 15.15.
what is man that he should be clean or he that is borne of a woman that he
should be just: behold he found no stedfastnes in the Angels, and the beauens
are unclean in his sight, how much more abominable is man, etc. This Paul
proves out of the Psalm, Romans 3.10.11 Ps. 14.1.3.
There is none that does good, All are gone astray, etc. Oh that men would
thoroughly consider this, how would it cause all the jovall Laddes of this world
to turn their tunes, from songs, drinkings, merry-meetings, and healthings,
into howlings, lamentations, and sorrows; and it would change our sorrows
that be Ministers, into rejoycings, and thankes-giuings, to see them with
humbled hearts, and cheeks bedewed with brinish tears, inquiring after
wholesome Physic for the quieting of their crasie and wounded consciences,
and salvation of their souls: Oh that God would open the eyes of this blind
foolish world, that they might know and feel this woeful misery; and, Oh that
it would please his Highness to give his poor Messengers occasion of labor
and rejoicing this way.

2. Point. For special sins after effectual calling, for which there is in
the child of God, a large measure of sorrow and grief for diverse causes.

1. Because God has vouchsafed more mercies then to the world, or to
themselves before their calling, to common and ordinary blessings he has
added supernatural, spiritual, and celestial favors, and therefore looks
for better fruits: Mat. 25 29
for to whom much is given, of them much is required.

2. Because he has given his Spirit, and all the graces thereof, so that as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.7.
they are not destitute of any grace, and therefore of more ability to resist
tentations then formerly; the sinners of Sion are the most offensive to his
blessed Majesty; the sins of the world, even their grossest abominations, as
drunkenness, whooredomes, oaths, blasphemies, are not so vile as the sins
of his own people, they have more knowledge of his righteous will, of the
stratagems of Satan, deceitfulness of their own heart, and the danger of
sin. Oh that therefore we would be admonished to beware of the^ for time to
come, and to bewail such as are already passed us in the superabundant
patience of God.

3. Ephesians. 4.30
They grieve the Spirit of God, by which they are sealed up to the day of
redemption, that blessed Guest having taken up their hearts to be his
habitation Ephesians 3.17
by faith, when they open the doors to let in rogues, and villains, his
enemies to rob and spoil his habitation, to defile, and like swine to
lay-staule it: is there not great cause of grief to that sacred and blessed
Spirit? who could endure this indignity? If any man should offer it to a Kings
Palace, would it be tolerable? and shall the Eternal God suffer it without
special correction and chastisement thereof; especially considering the good
motions daily of this sweet Guest, and his combating and resisting against
them, is it any wonder if he visit them with terrors of conscience, want of
the sense of his presence, and joy of his salvation, and such like buffetings?

4. These awaken the conscience, who has admonished them against those sins
being sanctified by the holy Spirit, and now set on fire with clamours and out
cries against the offenders, that wheresoever they ride or come, they carry
this tormentor about them, a woeful condition, and it will never be quiet to
rest or be silent, except it bring them upon the knees of soul and body, to
seek reconciliation, or else be hushed and stilled with buffetings and ill
usage to benumme it, a medicine worse then the disease.

5. These cause the Enemies of God to blaspheme the way of righteousness, every
base Varlet will exclaim against such a man; yea, the floud-gates of blasphemy
will be opened against, not only him, but against all that profess the same
truth, and against the profession, the roaring Laddes, and society of
drunkards, and the riffe-raffe will make songs of him, as they did of David, as
himself speaks, Psalm. 69.12.
the drunkards and abject slaves made their songs of me: and all the country
will be on a hurry, that the people of GOD hang the head with grief and sorrow
to behold and hear these things, and in all these respects is there not great
cause (think you) that a good heart should be touched with deep remorse and
godly sorrow as in the examples of the Lords Worthies, who as their failings
are left upon eternal tallie, so also their humiliation, godly sorrow, and
repentance is recorded, as beacons to give warning to all to beware of the like
wrackes upon such rocks and sands, so also to be instructions and examples to
chaulke out the way of returning to God, and seeking our reconciliation and the
renewment of our peace: see it in David, Hezeckiah, Peter, and the rest of his
Highness memorable servants. Oh that we rhatare Ministers could see the
Protestants of our times, lamenting not only their seldom, but frequent evils
committed by them, by which they scandalize our Religion and Profession amongst
the sottish Papists, that they might be low in their own eyes, and almost
swallowed with grief, then should we gladly administer wholesome cordials to
refresh their fainting spirits, as Paul would have the repentant incestuous
Corinth to be comforted, lest he should be swallowed up of over much
heaviness, but professers can sin in drunkenness, fornications, and such
like, and yet pass it easily over: a woeful and black character of an hypocrite.

3. Is. 63.17.
O Lord, why-hast thou caused us to err from thy voice, and hardened our
hearts from thy sear? return for thy servants sake, and for the tribes of
thine in heritance. Now that we may the better conceive what this hardness of
heart is, let me by a distribution distinguish it from that hardness which is
in reprobates, or such at least as are in the state of reprobation, wherein we
are to consider, that there is a three-folde hardness of heart.

1. Total and final, as in the wicked and reprobate.

2. Total and te^porary, as in the Elect not yet effectually called.

3. Partial and temporary as in all the elect now converted and called, and
this kind of hardness of heart may stand with saving grace, that is, when it
feels, complains and mournes under the sense of the hardness of it, there
must of necessity be some softness; for corruption is not discerned by
corruption, but by grace. Now that this must of necessity be the estate of
the child of God to bewail his obdurate heart, is evident.

1. Because it is put in the forefront of that Covenant which the eternal God
has made and ratified to all the Elect, and that whereby he begins and
continues his mercy toward the^. Ezec. 36.2^
I will put a new spirit within their bowels: I will take away their stony
heart and give them an heart of flesh.

2. It is a sound and undoubted mark and symptom of the child of God, for
the Gospel shows sin more ugly then the law can, for it shows Christ in the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments bleeding upon the Cross, and the Spear
thrust in, and letting out his heartbloud, and considers it was my sin that
did all this, whom yet God the Father vouchsafes in his beloved Christ to call
a son.

3. If it look to God, it sees him infinitely provoked, yet infinite in power
and Justice, which makes him prostrate his soul before God both lower and
oftener, then Genes. 33.9.
Jacob did his body before Esau to procure favor.

4. Again it sees Psalm. 51.17
that a melting and bleeding heart is a sacrifice of sweet smelling odor to
God, and no sacrifice pleasing without it: It sees the infinite wisdom of God
in all his courses, who never heales, but such as his spirit wounds and makes
sick with the sense of sin. (n) Never comforts such as never mourned, Is.
57.15.
he dwells in acontrite soul to refresh it, to grace it, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and it is the usher to honor here, and glory hereafter.

5. It looks upon it self as the Peacocke upon his black legs, to pull
down his gay plumes, the sight and sense of his own unworthiness,
expeperience of the temptations and methodes of Satan, a slavish subjection
under cursed lust, his infinite debt which he can never examine, much less
satisfy, and therefore sees matter of daily humiliation: It sees and esteems
every creature better then it self, yea the vilest Toad, Cockatrice or viper
to be better then it self, and then weighing the infinite mercy of God in
pardoning all, and of Christ in Psalm. 120.5.6.
satisfying the justice of his Father, thinks it self happy with the Luke
15.19
Prodigal if it may be but as a servant in his house, and in the (...) 26
Syrophenissian, as a dog to gather crumbs under Christ's Table, is thankful
for every mercy, because it esteems it self unworthy of any, and bewayles
daily the vnthankefullnesse and stony heartedness that cannot grieve for all
the dishonor it has done to this loving Father; and the indignities put upon
Christ, and so labors to stir it self up to lamentations and sorrows.

4. Moses was singular in seeing the face of God, and the presence of his
essence is invisible, yet there is a presence of his Grace, which God commands
we should seek: Ps. 17.8.9.
Seek ye my face, to which David's heart answered: Thy face O Lord will I
seek and a promise that we shall find if we seek it with our whole heart.
Now there are four sorts of Gods people that want either the joy, or at least
the sense and feeling of this presence of Gods spirit.

1. Some that are in the bud and cradle of their conversion, who have this
presence of the spirit and joy of their salvation, but yet never observe it,
either through ignorance of the doctrine of the consolations of God, that if
they were asked, as the Disciples Act. 19.2.
if they had received the holy Ghost, answered, they had not heard whether
there were a holy Ghost, so they would answer if they were demanded have you
received the presence and comfort of the Spirit? We have never known what it
means, or else through negligence, not observing how the Spirit does exhibit
and show his presence in the due use of the holy ordinances of God, as in the
Ministry of the Word, Sacraments, prayer, meditation, etc. or else they use
some of the ordinances of God as the public, and neglect the private, and often
times they use and perform some but neglect others, and therefore the use of
all the rest are blasted, and yields them little or no feelings of that blessed
consolation and presence of God.

2. Some have this joyful presence of God, observe it, and are affected with
it for a time, but forget and lose it again, especially in times of
affliction, Helr. 12.5.
Ye have forgotten the consolation which speaks to you as to sons.

3. Some true believers are in their souls, as many a poor man or woman in
their bodies, who are always diseased and crasie, and so have little joy in
all their riches, state, life, etc. So is it with many a soul always diseased
with spiritual maladies, and that sometimes till death, as with pride,
passion, or strange effects of melancholy, and these how ever they pant and
breath after the sense of Gods presence, yet it is possible for them to live
and die without any evident sense and feeling of Gods presence and joy.

4. Some so fall after effectual calling into somegrosse sin for a time, that
they may so lose the joy of their salvation and presence of God, as they may
never recover it to their very end, though they mourn for the want of it, as
David did, who sometimes recovered the comfort again, as in Psalm. 30.7.11. But
after his gross sins of Adultery and Murder, it is doubtful whether ever
he attained the former sweet sense of Gods presence, or at least in the same
degree: Yet to all these there is cause of comfort when there is a sense of the
absence and want thereof, its a true sign of life when there is complaining of
weakness of the spirits in weariness or sickness, or agitation of them by
violent exercise of the internal or vital parts. Now if this godly sorrow be
in the heart, it will express it self by mourning for the want of consolation
and Christ's absence: as David in many Psalms, Psalm. 77 7.8.9.
Have thou shut up thy tender mercies in displeasure, And have thou forgotten
to be merciful, will thou absent thy self for ever? Psalm. 51.8.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. And Verse 11. Cast me not away from thy presence and take not thy holy
spirit from me: Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with
thy free spirit, etc. O Dauld where is all the state, riches, strength,
fortitude, the comfort of thy wife, children, friends, etc. that thou art thus
off the hinges? Where is the glory of a Crown, Diadem or Kingdom, that none
of all these will comfort thy heart, but to be thus complaining, mourning, and
full of heaviness and sorrow: In this case nothing will consolate the soul
but the inioying of his presence wherein is life, and his absence worse then
death it self.

Yet in some this sense of Gods presence after assurance is habitual and
constant, expressed with admirable joy and gladness of heart, and truly not
with much interruption, but then they are such as observe these five rules.

1. They voluntarily seek godly sorrow for their sins, for this Ps. 126.2.6
Isa. 61.3. Math. 5.5
presence and joy is promised too, and most felt by such as mourn for sin;
but for all the rest of the world, I say Masters hands off, as Solomon says:
Pro. 14.10,
The heart knows the bitterness of his soul, and the stranger shall not
meddle with his joy.

2. Lose not Gods presence, but keep him in thine eye still, and walk before
him in sincerity, for Psalm. 16.11
at his right hand is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.

3. Be fruitful in well doing, even in all kinds of duties, for sterilitie
and barrenness in god-Iynesse is comfortless, and grieves the Spirit of God,
but fertility and abundance of fruitefulnesse 1. Cor. 15. vl^im. Col.
1.9.10.11.
glads the Spirit and makes our joy abound.

4. Nourish the love of no sin, for then it is as impossible to keep the
sense of Gods presence, and joy of the spirit, as to keep fire and water in a
pot mixed together, as the wise man says: Prou. 12.13 Prou. 12.^0.
In the transgression of an evil man is his snare; but the righteous does sing
amd rejoice: And deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the
counselors of peace shall be joy.

5. Upon the first feelings of Christ's absence complain betimes, if possible
let not the Sun go down upon it, do as in the Canticles: C^nt. 5.6
I opened to my well-beloved, and my well-beloved was gone and past: I called but
he answered me not. Delay no time, spare no labor nor cost to seek him, go to
the watchmen, enquire and search with all diligence, Can. 3.1.2
lie not in thy bed of security, seek him in the use of all his Ordinances,
Ministry, Sacraments, Prayer, examine the cause why he absents himself,
humble thy soul with godly sorrow, confess thine unworthiness, renew thy
covenants, vows, and promises never to be so sleepy, fruitelesse, careless,
and unthankful for his sweet presence for time to come: Search the Records of
Gods promises again and again, give him no rest day nor night, be
importunate, for that pleases him: Add fasting as a wing to thy prayers,
observe the least motions of the Spirit, and the beginnings of comfort, and be
thankful for it, and be constant never to give over thy search till thou
find him whom thy soul loves, and he will at the last be entreated, as he
was of the Spouse she found him Cant. 3.4
took hold of him and would not let him go, etc.

5. David thou had a great degree and measure of this grace, intimating it
self in thy panting and longings after the bread of life, even the heavenly
Manna and ministry of the word: Ps. 42.2.4
My soul thirsts for God, the living God, when shall I come and appear
before the presence of God. When I remembered these things, I powered out my very
heart, because I had gone with the multitude, and led them into the house of
God with singing, etc.

The people of God, even when they sat by the pleasant Rivers of Bebell which
was an outward comfort to them, yet there Ps. 137.2.4
they sat down and wept when they remembered Sion, they hanged their Harpes
upon the Willowes, etc. and said (when the Babilonians in scorn called for a
song, a song, an Hebrew song,) How shall we sing, a song of the Lord in a
strange land? Admirable were the affections of the Church to the Ministers in
the days of the Fathers under these Heathenish persecuting Emperors, who when
their Ministers, guides and leaders were taken from them, came out as if
distracted, and crying to them to take all they had so they would leave them
their guides, and of Hierome they said it had been better the Sun had been
pulled out of the firmament, then that his mouth should have been stopped: and
Lord vouchsafe this mercy to us thy poor Ministers, that our eyes might but
see such happy days, that the people might have David's spirit, who when he was
exiled his native Country, and though not ignorant of that blessed promise
which GOD makes to his Church, when they were in captivity, that Ezech. 1.16.
he would be a little Sanctuary to the^ in the countries where they shall
come; yet his blessed hear breaks forth into that patheticall acclamation,
Psalm. 84.1.2 3.
O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy Tabernacles, That his soul fainted for
the courts of the Lord. as also that the sparrow and swallow were happy, that
might build their nests, and lay their young by his Altars, etc. This lively
affection is in every one of Christ's blessed members: O that it were in the
same degree; but it is in some measure, and that for these causes:

1. They are spiritual fathers 1 Cor. 1.15
to beget men to God by the effectual and powerful preaching of the Gospel,
as instruments making us of children of the Devil, 1 Pet. 2.2.
newborn babes, and the sons of God in Christ. And as spiritual mothers
travail in birth of us, Gal. 4.19.
till Christ be formed in us, undergoing great pains to bring us forth to God;
and whereas other mothers bear children into misery, these into a blessed
condition: After they have begotten them thus, they do not as the Job 39.13.
Estridge, which leaves her eggs in the sand, to be scattered by the foot, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7
but as gentle spiritual nurses cherish these children; 1 Pet. 2.2.
and therefore as newborn babes they desire, and in want thereof will cry for
the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby, as every creature
does in nature. They know that this is the food of the soul, and therefore
rather then they will want this blessed Manna, they will as Jacob, send into
Genesis 12.2.
Egypt for food; and knowing that when the Eternal God intends a plague with a
witness against a people, he sends the^ a famine, Amo. 8.11.
not of bread, or a thirst of water but of his word, that they shall travail
from city to city to find the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, they
will not willingly bring this curse upon themselves, as most of our Nobility
and Gentry do; but if the Lord send this misery upon them, they mourn under
it as a most bitter cross. Mat. 5.14.
They are the spiritual light of the world, which without them lies in
palpable, thick, black Cymerian darkness, and therefore having received Exodus
28.20
Vrim and Thummim, Apoc. 1. (...)
as stars in the darkest night, shine to others in the light of doctrine, and
good example; and as candles and torches, spend and consume themselves in
giving light to this dark Egyptian world, Dan. 12.3.
and therefore shall as stars shine most resplendently in glory for ever and
ever: Besides, God has appointed them in Christ his stead, to seek and save
what is lost; not health impaired, as Physicians; nor wealth controverted, as
Lawyers; but the lost soul, by applying the means appointed by Christ: Job
33.24
To deliver the man that he go not into the pit; not by working the means,
which is the office of the Spirit, but applying them, and pronouncing the
sinners discharge, which is the duty of the Minister. These things considered,
is it possible that a true believer should live without the ministry of the
Word, and not be plunged into deep heaviness and sorrow in the want thereof?
it is impossible.

Quest. But may not selfe-respects carry men along with desire after the
hearing of the word preached, and to complain in the want of it?

Answ. Yes verily they may, and I reduce these to three heads.

1. They desire knowledge, and endeavor to get it, not to edify themselves
(that were divine and heavenly wisdom, as Solomon says, Pro 9.12.
If thou he wise, be wise for thy self) nor to edify others (this were
gracious love indeed, and a sign of saving grace, as our Savior said, Luke
22.32
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren) but these are like the
butterflye, which flies from flower to flower to adorn, bespangle and
beautify her wings; so these go from Sermon to Sermon, to know something to
be able to discourse and find table talk, (which is mere Vanity.) If the
honor and glory of the Highest were their aim in the salvation of their
souls, and laboring to know the will of the Almighty that they might do it,
our Savior pronounces them blessed.

2. Is worldly profit, so long as there is hope that they shall gain either
credit or profit, they will hear the Word joyfully: Acts 2.18.
Simon Magus will follow the Apostles at the heels, profess he believes,
admire and desire to have power to exhibit the visible gifts of the holy
Ghost, and offer large sums of money, and all for cursed lucre. The Jews
after Christ had fed them with bread, could never be rid of the^, following him
from place to place; but wherefore was it think you? was it for his doctrine,
miracles, or himself? no verily, but because of the loaves. Profits,
pleasures, and preferments, will make a man hear diligently, profess openly,
and Ministers to preach painfully; Job. 6.16.
but if Christ bring no loaves, he shall want auditors; if the Minister be
rich, invite them to his table, lend them money to answer their necessities,
and will be ready at every turn to help them in their bodies with cure in
Physic, in their estates to help them out of straites, dangers, troubles,
etc. O then they cry out, a blessed Minister, who would not hear him: but if
he be poor, and need their aid, then they forsake him 2 Timothy 4.10
as Demas did Paul; and if ever the complaint of the Apostle were just, it is
now of Professors, Phil. 2.21.
al men seek their own, and not that which is Christ's. If he reprove their
ill dealing, covetousness, tale-bearings, whisperings, hypocrisy, they cry
out, Amos 7.10
the earth is not able to bear his words: if he speak any thing against
Diana, Acts 19.24
then Demetrius the silu^^ Smith raises tumults in defense of his shrines, and
cries out, great is Diana of the Ephesians: we have such spirits in our
Congregations, every lame hypocrite, and halting Professor, can draw factions,
invent scandals, aspersions, and slanders secretly (and therefore the more
sinfully) to detract from that Ministry which sometimes they have praised,
admired and magnified; but this is no new thing, and for mine own part, I
expect no better, seeing they did thus to a Luke 23.31
green tree, even the Son of righteousness, how much more to a dry.

3. Curiosity and nouelty, men have itching ears. A new Preacher if he come,
away with the old, he is then either too plain, or too eloquent, or he has
over many points, or over few, or he uses to repeat over long, or else he
never speaks of a point but once, or he preaches naught but the Law and
damnation, or else he speaks of nothing but the promises and the Gospel, or
he is too earnest, or too soft, or in his conversation he is over familiar, or
too austere, rigide, and strange, right like those sullen boys our Savior
speaks of, that would not be drawn out of their sullenness, neither by Math.
11.16.17.
piping, nor mourning, and then to hatred, envying, backbiting, and
slandering; or if his conversation be so apparently gracious, as they think it
boots them not to traduce him openly, yet they cease not to follow him with
secret whisperings in corners, where the Devil has prepared sit ears to
attend, that he may further his own stratagems to keep their souls under his
vassalage, till the hand of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Magistrate draws
forth the sword of Justice to dissipate such hypocrites, and then they either
fall away, or get to some other new Preacher; if possible a soft spirit that
will suffer them, or if they be deceived, and meet with a man of courage, then
begins a new broyle after trial, for their spirits cannot keep in, unless
they be Lords and Rulers over all: I speak this by lamentable experience, and
could point out such as these. Again, some when a strange matter never heard
of before, is taught, it draws multitudes to hear, because (say they) we
never hear, but there is something which we never heard before, like the Act.
17.20
Athenians which would hear Paul, and inquire the meaning of his doctrine,
because (say they) he brings strange things to our ears, and it was their
delight and life to heart and tell news; but Athenians grow weary both of that
matter and man, when he cease to be new: Like the ungrateful Numb. 1.6.7
Israelites, when Manna first comes, commend it, admire it, rejoice in it, feed
upon it grow strong by it, wherefore I pray? It is a new and strange meat: But
after, they murmr and loathe it, because of the stalenes, notwithstanding
their good GOD gave it them every day new: But Lord, where are these mourners
for the want of this spiritual Manna? For the most part it may be said as
those to the Prophet, 2 King. 2.19.
the Land is pleasant, as thou my Lord see, but the waters are bitter: so men
when they come into this Kingdom, choose pleasant situations, and fertile
soyles, but their waters (if any) are bitter, all their care is for a body, a
body; but the immortal soul is never regarded, but pynes and starues, and yet
they are senseless of it: Lord awaken their hearts to consider their misery,
and bewail it, that it may appear to their souls, that this grace has
possessed their hearts to their eternal consolation.

Thus of the five first that concern a man's own particular:

The second, such as generally respect others.

1. This godly sorrow affects the heart to mourn for the dishonor of God in
public abominations; so was David affected with the sins of his time, Psalm.
119. ver. 136.139 158.
Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because men keep not thy law. And
Jeremiah wishes, Iere^^ 9.1.
Oh that mine head were a fountain of tears, and mine eyes rivers of water,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people,
etc. Thus the good servants of God called up their hearts to the performance of
this duty, and it is necessary for true Christians so to do:

1. Because it is an indelible mark of a child of the Highest, and by which
the destroying Angel knows to reserve them (...) the vengeance and Deuteronomy. 4.24.
and 32.22.
wrath of God, which burns like a consuming fire to the bottom of hell, and
cannot be quenched, and shall consume the earth with her increase, etc. but
having this mark and character upon their foreheads, that mourn and cry for
all the abominatious that be done in the midst of Jerusalem, when these were
thus marked, Ezech. 9.4.5.6.
the other Angels had charge to go after him through the city, let your eye
spare none, nor have pity: Destroy utterly the old and the young, the maids,
the children, and the women; but touch no man upon whom is the mark, and
begin at my Sanctuary etc. If this be so, how few then are rhere, which in
this Island may not fear the direful vengeance and wrath of the Almighty
every day, how few (I say) are there which take things to heart as they ought,
or as the occasion requires? what cause has each particular person given him
of grief, by our own sins, and the sins of the land we live in, by Gods
judgments abroad and at home? And yet how little grief any-where, except
carnal and worldly sorrow, of which the land is full, (such as that of the Ho.
7.14.
Israelites, when they howled upon their beds for corn and wine) because
they are abridged and disappointed of their wonted profits and pleasures, if
only these are stamped with the character of the Spirit of Adoption, that
mourn for the abominations of these times: O Lord, where are any almost of the
visible Church professing thy truth, whose case is not woeful and m^serable?

2. It is a grievous sin not to mourn, yea not to be sick with sorrow for
the sins of the times we sieve in: Paul says, (...). 5.1.
It is heard certainly, that there is fornication amongst you, and such
fornication as is not once named amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his
Fathers wife: And ye are puffed up, and have not rather sorrowed, etc. as if
he should have said, it is your sin that you have not applied it to your
hearts to mourn, that God is so dishonored amongst you. It is then a woeful
sinful world which we now live in, where is there a man of a thousand that
mournes for the abomination of this sinful Island, and those which do, are
as signs and wonders in Israel, the Lord give us the grace of repentance for
this hardness of our hearts.

3. It is certain in these sinful days, the Lord calls upon us to practice
this duty, and pronounces a woe upon us if we do it not, and threatens
vengeance to all such as in these times sit upon their merry pinnes, giving
themselves to feasting, drinking, and jollity^, clean contrary to Gods
Commandment and charge which he expresses by the prophet Isay, Is. 22.12.14
In that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, cutting of
bayre and guirding with sackcloth: But behold slaying of Oxen, and killing of
sheep, eating of flesh and drinking of wine. Let us eat and drink, say they,
to day, for to morrow (the Prophets say) we shall die. Hebrals. and reuelabitur
in auribus meis Domini exercitunm Montanus.
And it was revealed by the Lord of hosts in my hearing: Iunlus.
Let me not live, if this impiety be done away till you die for it. By which
the Lord expresses his vnapeasable wrath against this detestable iniquity
after the manner of an Oath, that no sacrifice shall purge that sin: So the
Lord swears of Elies house, for the intolerable wickedness of his sons,
That he has sworn concerning Elies house that the impiety thereof 1. Sam.
3.14
shall not be expiated with sacrifice nor offering for ever. And to his former
threatening adds, says the Lord, The Lord of bostes, doubling the speech for
the greater certainetie, and that no power shall deliver or free them from the
vengeance, for he is the Lord of hosts. But alas a man may take a Torch and
seek through Jerusalem, yea through Sion until his strength fails, and his
spirits agitated, yea wasted before he shall find a man mourning, and the
tears trickling down his cheeks for the abominations of these times: We had
need call for all Ierem. 9.17
mourning men and women that they may come, and weep for the abominations of
these days wherein we live, for the whole world are set upon mad mirth, and
as Job speaks Job. 21.13
go suddenly dancing and ioually to hell. Notwithstanding the Almighty calls
them from this, and pronunceth several woes against such, Is. 5.11.14
Woe be to those that rise early in the morning to follow strong drink, and
sit by it till night until the wine have inflamed them: That have the Harp
and the Viole, the Taber and Pipe with wine in their feasts: but they regard
not the act of God, nor consider his handy work. Therefore is my people led
captive, because they have no knowledge of these things: and their honorable
men are famished, and their common people destroyed with thirst: Yea therefore
has hell enlarged himself, and vvidened her mouth beyond measure, and their
glory and their multitude, even all those that make merry among them: Let their
condition be what it will, as well he that sits upon the Throne, as he that
works at the Anuill, shall go thither down together, Consider ye jovall
and roaring laddes of this age, that delight in nothing but feasting, drinking
and merryment, and think the whole world mad or foolish that follow not your
guise, that your destiny is already read, and your doom pronounced by no
less then the eternal Son of God himself: Luke 6.25
Woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall wayle and weep. Ye have your joy
and melody here, but your woe and misery shall as assuredly follow, as if it
were already effected: When you shall see Abraham, Math. 8.11.12.
Isaac, and Jacob with all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, yea all the
faithful in the kingdom of heaven, and your selves shut out of doors: You
have your heaven and light here, but your torment follows, as the Lord says
by the Prophet Isai, Isa. 65.13 14.15
Behold my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry, etc. My servants
shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: My servants shall sing for joy of
heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and bowl for vexation of spirit,
and ye shall leave your name as a curse, etc. O miserable men that ye are,
even in mirth and the chief of your jollitie, Pro. 14.13
Your hearts are heavy, you have your flings and tortures of conscience, and
the end is worse, for it ends in heaviness. This the Lord threatens to all,
and swears by the excellency of Jacob Amos 8.7, 10.
surely I will never forget any of their works. And verse. 10. I will turn
your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lameneation, and I will
bring sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head, and I will
make it as the mourning of an only soune and the end thereof as a bitter day.

But are these mourners the only beloved ones of the highest charactered and
stamped with the special mark of Adoptions Alas then how few shall be saved
from the stroke and plague of the destroying Ezech. 9.4 Psalm. 6.6
Angel when Gods wrath is let lose? Assuredly they are like black Svva^^^ or
the Phoenix almost: Where are those that water their couche^ with tears
every night with David? That set some times apar^ to bewail the abominations
o^ this sinful age and Island, especially that sequester times for fasting
and prayer, that stand i^ the gap, Ezec. 22.30
to auert the judgments of God that justly han^ over our heads for our sins:
y^^ some I know there are, to who^ I say with the Prophet: Isa. 62.6.7
Y^^ that are the Lorals remembrante^^ give him no rest, until he set up Si^^
the praise of the world, I dare not say with Jeremy: Iere. 12.11
There is (...) man that lays it to ^^cart: or with Isaiah, Isai. 64.7
There is no man that calls upon Gods name, or that stirs up himself to
lay hold on him: Or with Ezechiel 22.30. There is no man that stands up in
the gappe. Some there are which I know, and if I should say none, my heart
would rebuke my pen. The Lord increase them as Ioah said to David a thousand
times so many more: But I fear there are but a few, yea very rare, scarce one
of a Family or ten of a Tribe, and the bestand forwardest of us (the Lord
help and pardon it) are I fear defective this way, and come short of that
which should be in us.

Thus of the first.

2. This godly sorrow affects the heart, to bewail the calamities and
miseries of the Churches of God in general, and the afflictious of the
particular members of Christ, I will handle these two distinctly.

1. That the miseries and distresses of the Churches of God should affect the
heart of each true member of the Church, is manifest to be not contingent
only, but necessary. First from examples: It is recorded of famous Nehemiah,
that though he lived in Persia in the Court of Artaxerxes Neh 1.1.11 and 2.1.
being his Cupbearer, Neh. 1.4
and in high estimation and honor with him, yet when he heard of the calamity
of the Jews, then the only people of God, he was so affected with their
oppression and misery, that as a man oppressed with grief he sat down Neh.
1.4
and wept, fasted, prayed, and mourned sundri^ days together: Yea so great wa^
his grief that his spirits we^ dejected, and it appeared so in hi^ countenance
that the king could not but take notice of it, Neh. 2 2
and that it was not bodily sickness but grief of mind. The like is said of
Daniel, though for his own particular condition in respect of outward
preferment he had cause of joy, being chief President under the great
Monarchs succeeding each other Da^^r. 48.
Nabachadnezar, Dan. 5.29. and 6.2.
Balshazar, and Darius: yet considering the calamity that the Church was, and
had been in a long time, he mourned three whole vveeks together Dan. 10.2.3
in in which space he eat no pleasant meat, neither came flesh or wine in
his mouth, nor any ointment (which was usual amongst the jews in times of
rejoicing) upon his body.

2. It is an Apostolical Canon which Paul gives to all the members of the
Church to be affected with the afflictions of their brethren, and to sympatize
with them in their welfare: Romans 12.15.16.
Rejoice with those that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, and be
like affectioned one toward another: And those that feast and are frolic in
the miscries of Sion the Lord threatens with a most heavy woe, etc. Amos
6.5.6.7
They lie and siretch themselves upon beds of Ivory, and eat the Lambs of the
flock, and the calves out of the stall, they sing to the sound of the viole:
they invent to themselves instruments of music like David: They drink wine
in bowels, and anoint themselves with svveete ointments, but they are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph: Therefore non shall they go captive with
the first that go captive, and the sorrovv of the^ that stretched themselves
is at hand: Oh that all such as sit at ease and sleep, snugge in the miseries
of the Church, would but consider and lay to heart this dreadful threatening of
the immortal God, and we of these Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, that
stand and gaze only upon the ruins of other Churches, and like Athenians love
to hear and tell news, but make no use to return into our own bowels to
cause them lament and turn within us, and to express our inward affections to
Sion by our sorrows, and earnest supplications prayers, and tears with
fasting without ceasing until the Lord return and have mercy upon his poor
desolate Spouse: Little consider we that our turn may be next.

3. The eternal Son of God, even our Head Christ, is afflicted with the
calamities of his Church; As says the Prophet: Ps. 63.5.
In all their troubles he was troubled, and the Angel of his presence went
before them. He sympathizeth in all the welfare and woe of his Church; observe
his speech to Saul; Act. 9.15.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and I am Jesus who^ thou persecutest: Our
Savior he suffers in his members, Mat. 25.2^
I was hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, harborlesse, and in prison; that is, he
has his share in all the wants, necessities, streights, and miseries, that all
his members in all parts of the world sustain and endure for he is not in
want, says August: August in Ps. 75.
in regard of any misery, and yet he wants in regard of mercy: he suffers
not in his deity of himself, and yet he suffers out of commiseration to his:
and the Apostle Paul says, he fulfilled Col. 1.24
the rest of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh for his bedies sake which
is the Church: I am not ignorant that there is great ado amongst Divines about
those words: The Jesuits Rhemists in their marginall notes upon this place
affirm, that Christ did not suffer all that was necessary for man's freedom
for sin; but left much to be suffered by his members, especially men of
principal note, and hence grew their Diabelicall Supererogation, Satisfactory
pains, and Indulgences kept in the Churches Treasures, a Cow that gives as
good and store of milk as any in the Popes deiery, except Confession, and
Purgatory, which are his mints. But that this gloss corrupts the text, and
cannot be the intention of the Apostle, is apparent: 1. Because that doctrine
of Popery is contrary to the analogy of faith, and opposes these express
texts of Scripture: Is. 53.4.6.10.12.
Surely he has home our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, he was wounded
for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities, and the chastisement
of i^ peace was laid upon him, and by (...) stripes we are healed, etc. And
the Evangelist says, that when o^^ blessed Savior Ioh. 19.30.
had tasted the vinegar, he said, It is finished: what better testimony then of
the Son of God himself? and if finished, Heb. 10.1. to 15. and ^.14.2.26. 2
Cor. 15.14 1 John 2.1. Ps. 49.7.8. Ezech. 18.20. Gal. 6.5.
what need any more propitiatory sacrifices? Many other texts of Scripture
might be alleged, some whereof I annexe in the margent for brevities sake, to
be read at men's leasures. 2. Augustine is flat against this sense, when he
says, August. tract. 44. in Iohau. Le^.
when brethren dye for brethren, yet no blood of Martyrs is shed for remission
of sins, this Christ only has done: Doctor Fulke in his answer to the
Rhemists, alleges Chrysostom upon this text, homil. 4. Ambrose and
Theodoret, yea their own Writers are against them, a Pope could say, The just
receive, not give crowns: And their own School Divines are flat against
them, the Gloss has it; for you, for the confirmation of you in the doctrine
of the Gospel; others affirm, that to say, Aquinat. Caietan.
that the passions of the Saints are added to make up, or fulfill the passion
of Christ, is heretical.

3. The next verse declares this, for he did thus suffer, according to the
dispensation given him of God, and it is evident, he was given to edify, not
to redeem the Church.

4. This Rhemistical sense brings in a strange and gross absurdity; for if the
words be understood of the sufferings of Christ, left to his people to endure
for propitiation for sin, then the consequent must of necessity be, that
Paul suffered all that was wanting, and so there should remain nothing to
suffer: For he says, he suffered the rest of the sufferings of Christ. and
therefore this text is nothing to their purpose: Now they may be said to be
the sufferings of Christ, either as Christ is taken for the whole mystical
body, as Paul 1 Cor. 12.12.
by Christ there, means the body of Christ, or as he is the Head of the
Church, and so the afflictions of his people, may be said (...) be his
sufferings, or else because they were imposed upon him by Christ, for the
Churches good, or because they were for Christ and the profession of his
doctrine, or because of the union and sympathy betwixt Christ and the
Christian, who accounts them as his sufferings, and this is principally
intended by the Apostle, for it is questionless, that Christ does so feel the
calamities of his people, that he esteems them in that respect to be his own
miseries, as has been proved by variety of Scriptures before, (...)
and undoubtedly from hence came that witty distinction of Christ's sufferings,
into the sufferings he endured in his own Person, and the sufferings he felt in
his members.

Thus of the necessity of sorrow for the Churches afflictions in general.

2. It is as true, that every member of the Chusch, whereof Christ is the Head,
must of necessity (or else no true member of the Head Christ) sympathize with
their particular fellow members in all their wealth and woe, even the meanest
of them, so says that worthy Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11.29
who is weak, and I not weak with him? who is scandalized, but I burn with
it? and so elsewhere, 1 Cor. 12.26
If any one member he honored, all the rest rejoice with it, if any one
suffer, all the rest suffer with it. Thus is it in the natural body, if any
tread upon, or kick the least toe or foot. will no the head feel? will not
the tongue say, why do you tread upon, or kick me? and thus it cannot but be
in the mystical body of Christ. O Lord if this be true, where are there any
true members of Christ to be found in this age, let me but find such a man or
woman, that when they see Christ's members. I mean his believing neighbors
hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, imprisoned, scandalized, and he or she humbly
cares for them, for care and joy are the two fairest daughters of Love, and
out of his care is affected with his misery, prays to God for his relief,
and indeauors to furnish his necessities. So on the contrary, if God turn the
wheel of prosperity, then to rejoice with them, especially in spiritual
prosperity after desertion, and then I will believe that such a man or woman
is the child of God, and has attained to this blessed godly sorrow, as a
mostnecessary and true symptom and character thereof: and if it be otherwise,
it plainly proves, and is a black mark of reprobation, as will appear if we
consider these reasons.

1. It plainly intimates, 1 Ioh. 5.14.
we are but dead men, and not translated from death to life, 1 Ioh. 2.10.
that we are still in darkness, and without the true light: it testifies to our
selves, Angels and men, that we are not only benumbed or paraliticke members,
but rotten, putrified, and mortified members, which must be cut off; these are
like wooden legs, that feel nothing of the bodies or members malady: how
can thou think thy self a true member of Christ. and cryest not out under
the afflictions of the poorest true believer, and expressest not thy sorrow by
thine earnest endeavor to ease the cross and affliction? what? living
members, and feel nothing? It is impossible that a true believer and member of
Christ should be thus blockish and senseless.

2. It plainly manifests want of zeal to GOD and his glory, when either the
cause of the Churches calamity, or the particular afflictions of Gods people
strike us not at the very heart, which should be more dear unto us shall I
say, then our own wealth, safety, life? yea I may truly say, then our own
salvation: where is the zeal of Moses, blot me out of the book of life, Exo.
32 32.
rather then destroying this people, the heathen should insult and say, because
God was not able to bring his people into Canaan, therefore he destroyde them
in wilderness, it was Gods Name that stroke Moses at the heart, and this is
often eclipsed by the afflictions of Gods people: Oh the miseries and woes of
infinite millions of men and women, with whom it is all one what condition
befalls the Church or any particular member thereof. Were old 1 Samuel 4.18, 19.
Eli and his daughter the wife of Phineas now alive, would not the captivity of
the Arc be their deaths, to hear of the desolations that are made in that
famous and most ancient Church of Bohemia, and her sister the Palatine, with
other parts thus wasted and depopulated, the Name of the Lord of hosts to be
dishonored by that relation which our adversaries make of the victories,
triumphs and successes had by that Popish and Iherian faction, and that
unnaturally by the Natives and Popish English, which should be his Majesty's
loyal subjects in this Island But alas what do I insist upon these reasons to
incite us to commiserate the afflictions of the Churches of Christ abroad,
great is the dishonor of God at home even in this Kingdom, and the state of
both Sion and Jerusalem is so miserable, that it gives us just cause (oh that
we had their affections) to cry out, La^. 1.2.16. La^. 2.18. Ier. 13.27.
mine eye droppeth, etc. Oh that we had not only cause to say with the Prophet
Jeremy, Because of eathes the land mourns, but we have just occasion to say
with the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, that Hos. 4.1.2. etc.
God has a controversy with us, because there is no mercy, truth, nor
knowledge of God in the Land: by swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and
whoring they break out, and blood touches blood, therefore shall the Land
mourn, and all that are therein shall be cut off, with the beasts of the
field, etc. I may add, the abominable drunkenness, oppression, idolatry, with
swarms of those Locusts, the Friars, Priests, and that Ignatian brood the
Jesuits, swarming in every corner by scores, seducing and beguiling unstable
souls, robbing and impouerishing not only the poor Natives, but the whole
Kingdom, by their intolerable exactions, it is almost incredible, the mass
and sums of money that they daily rake together, I could not believe it
until I saw it by probable demonstrations, that at the least 500000 pound
sterling and upward of treasure, is exhausted out of this poor Kingdom
yearly, to maintain that woeful generation at home, and corroborate and
animate the enemies abroad, that the Kingdom, of necessity, must grow full of
penury, and their insolency increases so fast, and our sins provoking the
Highest in such degree, that except Am^s 4.12
we prepare to meet the Lord by speedy repentance, as the Eternal himself
advises his people, what may we look for, but some bloody massacres, as in
Paris and Vastie in the days of Charles the ninth in France; or at Antvverpe
in the Netherlands, or else some other grievous judgments another way. Oh that
we which are Is. 62.6.^.
the Lords remembrancers, would give him no rest till he repair his Jerusalem
and Zion. Oh ye Reverend Fathers, let these silent lines speak in your cares,
and be not incensed against them, why do you not employ the Churches weapons,
which are praeces and lachrymae, to implore his Majesty and the State, for
reformation of these horrible and detestable abominations, GOD persuade your
hearts to this, I know it is the desire of sundry of your souls to see the
prosperity of Bethell and Zion, and the ruin and desolation of Bethauen and
Babell; and you Right Honorable, the Nobility and State of this Kingdom,
pardon the importunity of these rude lines, and let them incite your noble
spirits, to entreat our God by unfeigned and carnest supplications and prayers,
Heb. 5.7.
with strong cries and tears, as our blessed Savior (restified by the Author
to the Hebrews) did in the days of his flesh. As also beseech his
Vicegerent our dread Sovereign, (whom the almighty long continue) to drive
out these Canaauites, which are Indg. 2.2
thorns in our eyes, and goades in our sides: and the Lord give his Highness
a heart to pity us, and vouchsafe him the zeal of his House and Glory like of
that worthy 2. King. 22.1.2.3.
Josiah, the Paragon of the world to effect it, and to see the erection of the
House of our God, and advancing the Kingdom of Christ, that he may be
blessed in his blessed soul, body, government, and posterity; and we all as
already, may have renewed occasion to bless him, and to bless God for him.

Thus of the second.

3. And lastly this godly sorrow affects the heart to bewail and mourn for
the threatening anger and wrath of God, it is true that anger in man is a
perturbation or passion in the mind, but in the most high, unspotted and pure
nature of God it is an effect of his justice, for my own part I am of opinion
that anger and wrath are properly in his highness, not improperly and by way
of Anthropopatie as the most have thought: As for that Text Anger is not in me:
it is only to distinguish his most just and righteous anger and wrath, from
that which is in man's, for in his most blessed and pure nature is neither
passion or perturbation, but in his excellency it is. First, an effect of his
justice: Secondly, in such a blessed and holy manner as is agreeable to his
blessed name, and to us inconceiueable and inutterable. Thirdly, according to
the meaning and sense revealed in his sacred word, to the better unfolding
whereof I must consider two things.

1. The dreadfulnesse and fearfulness and greatfulnesse of it, therefore
Moses in his prayer by way of interrogation propounds it: Psalm 90.11
Who knows the power of thy wrath, and according to thy fear is thine
indignation, as if he should say, no man is able to conceive thy wrath nor know
sufficiently to fear thee proportionable to thine indignation. The Prophet
Nahum expresses it, Nah. 1.4.5 ^^
that it dries up the sea, wastes Baashan, Carmel and the flower of Lebanon,
it makes the mountains tremble, and the bills melt, burns up the world, and
those that dwell therein, who can stand before his wrath? or who can abide
the fierceness thereof, it is povvred out like fire: Deuteronomy. 4.2.
It tears the rocks, and rents the mountains in sunder: And to the
infiniteness and exequisitenesse of it, Moses compares it to a consuming fire,
and adds Deu. 32.2
that it burns vnquenchably to the bottom of hell: but will consume the
earth with all her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the
mountains. Variety of examples prove this past and present, as Gods
foredamning and reprobating so infinite millions of people following Adam with
such inconceiueable and inutterable plagues and judgments upon himself and
his: drowning of the old world, burning of Genesis 19.24.
Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboni, ouerwhelming and swallowing up Exodus
14.2^
Pharaoh and his host in the sea, Act. 17.30
leaving all the Gentiles in a most forlorn and desperate condition by the
space of four thousand years, as Paul says, and now the miserable estate of
the Jews the first borne of God, now runnegates and vagabounds, yea a curse,
astonishment, and a hissing throughout the earth. The insupportable wrath that,
he laid upon his own Son, which made him cry out in the anguish of his soul;
Math. 27 46.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me, and in his agony; Luke 22.44.
to sweat drops of water mingled with blood trickling down to the ground
though but a furetie for us miserable sinners. The tortures of afflicted
consciences plainly explicate this point, what rending of clothes, and hair
sorrows and tears with outcryes and sighs proceed from their racked
consciences in their desperate condition that their spirits are disabbed to
support them; yea but a drop of his Anger let full, and out of commiseration
and love also upon his own children, how has it enforced them to bitter
lamentation and sorrows to the wasting and consumption, both of their flesh
and spirits, as the examples of Job, David, and Hezethia is apparent in their
own relations left upon eternal Record to all ages. Lastly the infinite
miseries and calamities that as a flood does continually break in upon the
particular bodies of men in diseases and sickenesses which they are infinitely
surprised with all, as the stone, strangurie, gowte, palsies, apoplexies,
agues, and other molestations upon their goods, vanity mutation and losses,
upon their good name, infamies, disgraces, shame, scandal, and reproach: And
upon the soul, ignorances hardness of heart, deadness of spirit and such
like with errors, and heresies, etc. all which are evident signs of the wrath
and indignation of the Almighty: But the time is coming and hastens apace when
the mighty God will manifest this to the full. 2. Pet. 2.10.
When the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the work that
are thereon shall be burnt up, and all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn,
and the cry of the damned and reprobate world in all the four corners thereof
shall cry Reu. 6.16. Isai. 2.19. Luke 23.30. Hos. 10.8.
Mountains cover us and rocks crush us to pieces, and break all our bones
that we may never appear before his presence, for the day of his wrath is
come and who can stand: especially the flames of hell and the tortures of the
damned shall manifest this to the utmost, and therefore consider this and lay
it to heart all ye that think God is all mercy, and that there is neither
justice nor wrath in your creator.

2. The signs and tokens of the anger of the highest against kingdoms,
Churches and public states, are these.

1. When GOD leaves his Church without Prophets, for as the eternal puts in
the forefront of the signs of his special favor I will give or send them
Prophets according to mine own heart, so when he means a plague with a
mischief to any state, ordinarily Isai 57.1
the Lord takes away his righteous servants from the evil to come, observe the
lamentation of the Church Lam. 2.9.
There is not one Prophet left to tell when these things shall have an end, or
when God sends them many false Prophets, and but few faithful, it was ominous
to Israel and Ahab when there were four hundred false Prophets to ouerbeare
one good honest 1. King. 22.6
Michaiah by whom the Devil seduced Ahab, and does ordinarily seduce Kings,
kingdoms and public states, Sycophants, Parasites and flatterers, of whom
Jeremiah complained in his time in that Patheticall acclamation: Iere. 14.13.14
Ah Lord the Prophets tell them no such thing that the sword shall not devour,
etc. Its a sign of Gods wrath.

2. When God does send variety of faithful Ministers and preachers, and they
comparing times with times, sins with sins, and the Lords dealing formerly
with his own people, and the menaces of his most righteous law against such
sins as are frequent and ordinary howsoever they have no prophetical and
immediate spirit of revelation to foretell things to come, (as extraordinary
Prophets in former times) yet if they with one consent, with instance and
earnestness do foretell and that in diverse places, upon observation of Gods
former dealing who is immutable, it is time for the world to awake and
consider, for as Ames says Dan. 7.7
The Lord will do nothing but he will reveal his secrets to his servants the
Prophets, and God will ratify their righteous menaces, howsoever this sinful
age esteem of them.

3. Public afflictions are signs both of Gods wrath begun, and of greater
vengeance to come, as pestilence, famine of bread, Amo^ 8.21.
famine of the word, wars, Is. 57.1.
the frequent death of the best men, and such like, especially when there is a
sting and curse of hardness of heart not to make a good use of them when the
heart is not bent toward the Almighty nor yields to him in this godly sorrow,
as the Prophet Jeremy says, Ier. 5.1.
Thou have smitten them but they have not forrovved, thou have consumed them,
but they refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then
a stone, and have refused to return, what think you of this Island? Has not
the immortal God smitten it with wars and consumed them with famine, and may
not we say as Jeremy, sed non deluerunt, but they have not sorrovved? But it
may be said of us as the drunkarde says of himself Prou. 23.35.
They have smitten me, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but I felt it
not, never the worse, and therefore in truth never the better.

Quest. But why is this a sign of future wrath?

Ansvv. Because when the just and most almighty God begins to correct a
Nation, and they stoop not nor bend under his correcting hand, he will never
desist til he bend or break them as himself says to the Jews Louis. 26.21.
If ye walk stubbornely against me I will walk stubbornely against you
and plague you yet seven times more for your sins, etc. Most lively does the
Prophet A^^^ express this, Amos 4.6.12.
I have sent you cleanenesse of teeth, mill-devves, yet have ye not returned
unto me says the Lord: therefore this will I do unto thee, and because I
will do this, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.

Seeing therefore these symptoms and characters of Gods fearful indignation,
are upon us, even upon this miserable Island, what cause have we to cry out
with the Prophet, Psalm. 77.7.8.9.
will thine anger never cease? have thou forgotten to be merciful? have thou
shut up thy mercies in displeasure? And to pray convert us unto thee, and show
to us thy joyful face, and then we shall be safe: to observe that which the
Lord calls upon us for, by Joel: if we would have ^oel 2.13.14.
the Lord return and leave a blessing behind him, to sanctifle a fast, and
humble our selves before our God: as also you that are Magistrates, to labor
to stay this wrath of God by the severe execution of justice upon malefactors,
that keep and maintain Faires and Markets upon the Sabbath, upon drunkards,
swearers adulterers, as Number. 25.7
Phineas did upon Zimri and Cosbi, which stayed the plague. Lastly, let all of
us, after the example of the King of Ionvh 3.5.
Ninive, to turn from our evil vvayes; ye natives from your Idolatry,
superstition, theft, ignorance and oaths; and ye English from your
profaneness, drunkenness, luke-warmnesse, and all other sins, and let all
cry mightily to God, that he will be pleased to accept the blood of his Son
to pacific his indignation toward us, that we may be delivered, ^ach. 1.11.
Command. 3.
as Ierusale^^ out of the captivity.

2. Signs of Gods anger to particular persons are

1. Spiritual plagues upon his soul, the bottom and dregs of the vials of
the indignation and wrath of the Almighty, and the forerunners of his eternal
vengeance, as blindness of mind, deadness of spirit, hardness of heart, a
benumbed conscience, a punishing of sin with sin, a reprobate mind, and such
like.

2. If a man find himself directly under the menaces and threats of Gods
eternal truth, as swearing, Command. 3.
commandment the third: and that which the Lord speaks dreadfully, Deuteronomy. 2^.5^
If thou vvilt not fear this glorious Name the Lord thy God, I will make thy
plagues vvonde^full, and the plague^ of thy seed, etc. Lukewarmnesse in
profession, Apoc. 3 15.
which the Lord will vomit as a loathsome thing out of his mouth, as he
speaks to Laodicea. Again M^l. 1.8.
to offer to God the hault, blind, and lame in his service, to perform the
holy duties of his blessed worship, as prayer etc. perfunctarily without all
life and affection; and sinally, all that live in such sins contained in any of
those catalogues which the Scriptures denounce vengeance upon, as 1 Cor. 6.9
be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor ^dulterers, murderers, nor
drunkards etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

3. If a man feel not himself bettered by his afflictions and crosses, so as
there is in them a curse, and God fighting against him in them, either in the
disquieting and vexing his soul, or else in the hardness of his heart that as
Elihu speaks, he Job 36.13
calls not when the Lord binds him, it is a fearful sign of wrath, and
that increased and enlarged upon him.

4. If a man bless himself when God curses him in the threatenings of his Law,
and say as the Lord speaks, (x) I shall do we^ enough though I walk after
the stubburnesse of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, he
meets with the worlds common plea, God is merciful, etc. the Lord answers, he
mill not be merciful to that man, but his wrath and jealousy shall smoke
against him, and that he will heap upon him every curse, and every plague
written in the book of the Law till he be destroyed.

5. If a man have not the characters, marks and symptoms of an Adopted child
of God upon his soul; for, whom God loves, he does indelibly Ezech. 9.3.4.
mark with certain graces, as faith, love, godly sorrow, repentance, and such
like; which, if upon examination, and through trial, he cannot find he has
cause to fear and tremble, and in the want of them to mourn with godly
sorrow, and never give over until the Lord answer his soul by the witness of
the spirit of Adoption. Oh brethren, ponder and consider these things, and God
give you understanding and grace to find all these branches of holy sorrow in
your souls, that so you may be assured of a plentiful crop and harvest of joy
here, and glory afterward: and so I proceed to the third sign of this sacred
and holy grace.

3. Remarkable sign and symptom of this sound godly sorrow is, when it
passes not the limits, extent and bounds, which God in his eternal truth has
set it, which if it do, it becomes sinful and evil for it is with this grace
as with the moral virtues, which must not exceed their medium, the Eternal
has bounded it as the sea, by the little sands, as the Prophet speaks, and
given commandment as to the Israelites at the giving of the Law upon mount
Sinai, beyond which if they presumed, it Exo. 19.12
was death. Now it exceedes and passes limits two ways:

1. When it exceedes in time, that men lie under it not only night, and days,
but months and years, yea ten, twenty years, as I have known some, it
is a plain sign, that howsoever GOD offended is the object of their sorrow,
yet it is his justice which their eyes behold, and legal sorrow at the
fairest, and selfeloue is the maine wheel which sets this sorrow on work, the
sense of his fearful wrath, like the roaring of the Lion, makes them tremble,
if they could make their part good against him, they would never shed a tear,
or be perplexed in their spirits: Or if not so, yet in some it is want of
instruction or knowledge of this grace, and how to carry themselves, which if
they did, their comfort would be both special and speedy, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 30.5.
Sorrow over night, but joy comn^^^h in the morning, and they should fear if
they find it not. And no matuaile though some of Gods servants miss of this
right sorrow, when as such an ^^perienced soldier as David missed of it, and
was filled with roarings and perplexity, with a roaring sorrow, which was not
joined with so much as particular confession of that special sin that
perplexed and troubled his poor soul; but when he had recalled his thoughts,
and plucked up his spirits, resolving upon the rightsorrow, be confessed his
sin to the Psalm. 32.5.
Lord, and presently found consolation; for your sakes therefore that travail
under the burden of your sins, and find no rest, nor know how to set your
souls in a way to true comfort, I have undertaken the labor to lay before
your sight this open way, to turn you from all those waters of Number. 35.9
Marah, into Elim, from bitterness, to sweet fountains of water, to satisfy
your thirsty souls: me thinks I see in that sacred Emblem of the Lord,
comparing the sorrow of the godly, to the sorrow of a I^r. 6.24.
woman in trauail, aliuely description of this grace. Tribulation apprehends
us, as of a woman bringing forth: And to the same purpose speaks the Lord by
the Prophet Isaiah, As a woman with child nee^e her travail is vexed and
cries, so have Is. 26.17.
we been before thy face Jehovah; and the sorrow of the godly (if the right
sorrow) is like it: 1. Nor only in the extremity and bitterness of it for
the time, but 2. that as the one and the other tend to a birth: 3. There is in
both hope of deliverance, and therefore even in that extremity there is some
joy mi^^t with the sharpness of the sorrow^, faith sets the heart on work to
expect better, nay there is in both an expectation of fruit, and therefore of
necessity there must be joy in the midst of the sorrow. 4. It is but short in
either which ou^ blessed Savior confirms. A Ioh. 16.21.
woman when she^ brings forth, has sorrow because her hour is come; but when
she is delivered, she remembers not the sorrow for joy that a man child is
born^ and our Lord applies this, so are you now in sorrow, but your heart shall
rejoy^e, observe then thy sorrow for the time and continuance, if it be long,
suspect it.

2. It passes the limits when it exceedes in measure, now it passes measure:

1. When it vnfits the body or soul for the duties either of our general or
particular callings, or from the cheereful and lively performance of them, both
which, the Eternal God requires at the hands of his people; he required in the
Law, not dead, but living sacrifices, the dead were abomination to him, and he
blamed hi^ people for their vncheerefulnes in his service, and threatens them
for it: Deuteronomy. 28.47.48.
Because thou did not serve the Lord thy God with cheerefulnes and a glad
heart in the abundance of all things, thou shall serve thine enemies in hunger
and thirst, and in want of all things, and I will put an iron yoke upon thy
neck, etc. Let men observe their sorrows, do they deter and keep them
back, either from hearing the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. or from a
cheerful performance of them? they are then from the Devil, and not from
GOD: yea if they do not further them in all these and draw them nearer unto
GOD, beware of such sorrows, and avoid them; so also may I say of duties to
our brethren, GOD loves a cheereful giver, and as of alms, so all other duties
of charity to our neighbor, visiting the afflicted, comforting the dejected
spirit, and such like.

But alas, what will become the^ of worlds of sorrows, which are upon men that
refuse the House of GOD, and do as it were excommunicate themselves not only
from the power of Gods ordinances, but even from the use of the ministry of the
Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, though it may be they use some private helps,
which yet it is to be feared few do.

It is also dangerous when sorrow vnfits men from family duties, as reading the
Word, instruction of children, and servants, and prayer, or the more private
duties, as secret examination, confession of sins, secret supplications,
thanksgiving, meditation, conference, or renewing of covenants with GOD; and
lastly, if it hinder and keep men or women from conjugal duties, or to abhor
or sequester us from the use of meats and drinks necessary to the
sustentation of nature, by which the body is unfitted to perform his
necessary service to GOD our neighbor, and the soul. Lastly, when i^ keeps
men from the duties of their special callings, to the detriment and hurt of
the wife, children, and family, which is an ordinary fault of young professors
in mine own observation, any of these are ill signs of a bastard sorrow, and
not of the true spiritual gracious sorrow, which has the sacred promise of the
Immortal GOD to end in Ps. 126.5.^
joy, and therefore beware of it.

2. It passes his limits and measure, when it makes men forget consolation,
and drives all joy out of the heart, even for the time; for these being both
graces of Gods Spirit, and are not like sire and water, exhalations and
vapors, but they conserve and preserve each other, yea increase one another.
Grief even for sin must not swallow us up and ouerwhelme us, the Apostle would
have the incestuous Corinth comforted, ^ Cor. 2.7.
when humbled, lest he should be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness. It must
not cause us to forget the consolation, which speaks to us Neh. 12.5.
as Children, nor cause us break or violate the charge which GOD gives; Phil.
4, 4.
Rejoice always, again I say rejoice: so that howsoever it is true, that
earnall sorrow and joy can not be in the heart at one ^nne, yet spiritual joy
and sorrow may and must, though in diverse respects: this made the Apostles
Paul and Acts 16.25. Doctor Ridly John Baynam M. Glouer.
Sylas sing in prison, and the Martyrs to go to the stake as to a feast, and
account it as their marriage, to sing in the flames as in a bed of down, clap
their hands with joy in the sense of Christ's presence, and even in their sorrow
for special sins, there is cause of joy, for Faith persuades the heart of
the remission and pardon of them, and the pacification of Gods wrath, and so
appeaseth and quieteth the cry and blustering of the conscience.

If this be true, what shall we say of the sorrow of such as will not hear of
any consolation, to whom I may say with Job, Seem the consolations of God
small unto thee, or though they seem not little in their eyes, yet they refuse
all comfort, and turn off the promises as if they pertained not to them, I am
tenderly affected in my judgment, as also in my affections toward such as are
in sits of temptation, desertion and melancholy, yet this I say, their grief
is not right, and therefore let them be advised, and look that the object be
true which is God offended and (...) ued for himself, without which they
torment and vex themselves all their lives, and find little comfort, for whom
my daily prayers shall be, that our most loving and gracious Father even the
God of all comfort will vouchsafe unto them the Spirit of illumination, of
says and consolation.

Thus of the third sign.

4. Vbi (...) detor, desici^ p^ni^^tia. August. de vera p^^it. cap. 13.
Symptom of this godly sorrow is the continuance of it, its never dried up or
is totally extinct in the heart, so says Augustine, Where sorrow cease
repentance cease, to the which also the speech of Paul is pregnant, 2 Cor.
7.10
Godly sorrow causes repentance never to be repented of, and this will appear
evidently by these reasons.

1. Job, Job 4.6.
Therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes, Psalm. 6.2.3.32 3.51.1. etc.
David is often and wonderful in this, as appears in all his penitentials,
Josiah when he heard the Book of the Law 2 King. ^^.11.12.13.
Rent his clothes, and his heart also wept and sent to Huldah the prophetess
to inquire of the Lord for himself and his people: Mar. 1^.7^.
Peter when his Master looked upon him with the eye of his blessed compastion
went out says the text and wept bitterly: And Paul, all these were persons
truly converted, and yet this grace of godly sorrow was never extinct or
abolished in the^.

2. This true spiritual gracious godly sorrow is never wanting wholly, because
the cause thereof which is sin, never cease: but so long as we carry about us
these earthly tabernacles, and bodies of flesh, we also must of necessity
carry with it a body of sin and corrupt on which will cause us also cry out
with the Apostle, Romans 7.1^
O wretched man that I am.

3. Because the root and branch of which it immediately springs, is faith and
love, neither of which is ever deficient in this life, therefore the fruit
also is indeficient, and renews often: yea even upon all occasions, and
therefore such persons as flatter themselves in their first sorrow, at their
seeming conversion, and never feel any operation thereof afterward, but give
themselves to security, yea though they fall into horrible gross sins that
justly occasion a large measure of renewed humiliation, and yet can bear it
out and be pleasant, are to consider that temporary faith has legal sorrow,
and deep wounding of the heart by the law, but after they once receive some
seeming comfort by the promises, they grow jocund and merry, and put off all
with a conceit of that first humiliation; but let all flesh know and tremble
before God when they bring their hearts upon the anuill of through examination,
and find not this blessed grace of humiliation continue, it was never sound,
nor had they ever that true joy which is the blessed immediate fruit thereof.
To these I might add, that repentance is a continued act all a man's life, and
without it no hope of remission of sins, and this repentance springs 2. Cor.
7.9.
from godly sorrow, and lastly God has in his wisdom appointed, that the
true believers should not only as 2. King 5.3^
Naaman the Assyrian wash in Jordan seven times for the cleansing of his
Ieprosie, but sin is such a renewing leprosy that requires washing (...) all
a man's life; and this is one of those duties of mortification, even those
chrystaline streams and fountains that the eternal has in his wisdom
appointed us to wash in, for our cleansing, and there is not a man upon earth
has ever had, or shall have, any true comfort in the assurance of remission
and pardon of any one known sin, which he does not bewail with godly
sorrow, confess particularly, and privately to God, and pray, yea beg,
importune, and cry unto God, for remission as for life and death, let the blind
world, doteing hypocrite, or carnal Protestant, think or speak what they will
to the contrary.

5. True godly sorrow as it begins in God and has his blessed Majesty the
Author of it being a plant of his sacred planting, and a supernatural grace
and gift of his spirit, I may say of it as Solomon of the waters. Eccles.
they all come from the Sea by the influence and operation of the Sun, so they
all go to the sea again: So this godly sorrow wheels about and ends in God,
and not only leads to God as the sorrow of the Luke 15.17
Prodigal when he came to himself for he was mad and out of his wits before
(as every unregenerate man is) forced him to go to his Father with tears in
his eyes, repentance in his heart, and confession in his mouth. I will go to
my father, and say, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy son, etc. but also ends in God, and goes not
away without the sense of his love, and the consolation of the spirit and joy
of salvation, as in the example of Psalm. 32.
David, Josiah, and others of Gods, scruants which is true joy and comfort
indeed, as David speaks to the Courtiers of Saul, wherein he professes if
it pleased God but to lift up the light of his countenance upon him, he should
have more delight then the world when their Ps. 4.6.7.
Corn, and wine, and oil did abound. This was the lose and farewell of the
sorrow of that worthy 1. Sam. 1.7.
Hanna, when she was vexed by Peninah, she fasted and wept: but faith
persuading her heart that God would grant her request she weat her way (says
the text) eat and drank, and looked no more sad: And this is the ordinary end
of the sorrow of the godly, if right; But when sorrow departs with the ceasing
of pain; or increase of outward things, or if men drive out sorrow with
feasting, merry company and such like, it has an ill end, and is not from God,
but from the Devil, and corrupted and depraved nature.

6. Finally the Apostle Paul to the Corinthes has seven several signs or
notes of this godly sorrow, the first whereof in our ordinary translation is
care, others have it study, Montanus adds in the margent solicitudo a
restless care or diligence, (...)
or study in the mind how to walk so as we may be pleasing and acceptable
unto God; and that in these two things especially:

1. In that which is our maine errand for which we were borne and came into
this world, and wherein the chief and principal honor we possibly can give
unto our Creator consists, as Peter speaks: 2. Pet. 1.10
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, that is, study with all
diligence to make your calling sure, and then ye make your election sure,
Armilla aurea.
for these graces are like a golden chain, that one link depends upon
another, and are never segregated or divided, he that has one, has all, and
to this purpose speaks the Author to the Hebrews: Hebr. 4.11.
Let us therefore study, (...)
or rather study with all have and importunity to enter into that rest, etc.
So that this grace of godly sorrow or remorse for sin, quickens up the
heart to a wonderful serious and sedulous diligent care about the assurance
and evidence of Gods favor in the remission and forgiveness of sins, and
all other graces of the Spirit, and assuredly I have in my poor observation
seen this seldom or never fail, or such a person seldom or never to fall
back again; whereas such as have been industrious about speculations
chronoligies, genealogies, and such like, but not intended that special maine
point, have seldom continued, and therefore let every child of God lay up
this, as a special remarkable note:

2. Our study and solicitous care must be so to live as beseems such mercies
and favors, as our gracious Father has vouchsased to bestow upon us in giving
us so much and forgiving so infinite a debt, Ps. 119.15
we must aim at Gods Commandments as a^a mark, and as the Apostle says,
to walk worthy of the Lord and please him in all things, being fruitful in
all good works. especially show it in these particulars.

1. Study to walk with God in the sense of his blessed presence, so knowing
and being affected with his love as we forget not his sacred presence, as the
Lord commands Abraham, Gene. 17.1.
walk before me and be upright.

Object. I but may the poor humbled sinner say, I have such a corrupt,
wandering, unmortified heart, as I cannot bring it to this pass?

Answ. Micha 6 8.
Learn and practice that advise which the Lord advises by the Prophet, Hamble
thy self before him, to get a better ability and power to walk with thy
God, for godly sorrow with fasting and prayer will get it, or nothing will.

2. Set the law of God always before thee as the only perfect rule of all thy
actions, as David, this is to be upright in our way, and to walk in the Law
of the Lord which makes a man a blessed man: Psalm. 119.1.
as for those that walk by crooked and by paths will the Lord lead with the
workers of iniquity, but peace shall be upon Israel.

3. Observe the motions and stirrings of Gods spirit within thy soul to any
good, else the spirit will be grieved within thee, which by no means thou
may do, for that is against the Apostles charge: Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the holy Spirit of God by which ye are sealed up to the day of
redemption: But in any case and by all means be careful to obey the motions
thereof, and that without reasonings against it, or delays which are
dangerous, but with all readiness, speed and cheerfulness, this is to walk
after the spirit, Gal. 5.25.
and not after the flesh: to reuine the spirit and not to quench it. Romans 8.1.


4. To excel all civil and honest men and hypocrites in this, that we carry a
careful eye and respect to all Gods Commandments, 1. These. 5.19.
which will assure us of safety, then shall I not be confounded when I have
respect to all thy Commandments, and we shall live according to the wish and
desire of GOD himself: Oh that there were such an heart in this people that
they might fear me and keep all my Commandments always that it might go
well with them and with their children after them: Psalm. 119.
Deuteronomy. 5.29.
So that to make co^scieuce of every sin; by prayer and the practice of all
the duties of mortification, to avoid it, and also to obey God both in our
souls and bodies, and that in every part and faculitie of both, and that all
our days, so would it go well with us, and we should lay up a good inheritance
for our children after us.

5. We should so admire Gods love, Ps. 1 16.8.9.12
in delivering our souls from death; our eyes from tears and our feet from
falling, that we seek the face of God in the light of the living, and never to
come empty handed, but to study with the kingly Prophet David, Ps. 56.12.13.
what to render to the Lord for all his mercies, and so let Gods vows be upon
us, and we should ever be rendering praise, which is our best sacrifice, yea
all we can retribute to him again.

6. And the second of the seven which the Apostle has, (...)
is defense or apology even the stipulation of a quiet good conscience which
makes request to God, 1. Pet. 3.21
for it is the proper work of a quiet good conscience to make Apology or
excuse us before GOD: whence arises tranquillity of mind, which the Apostle
calls the peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7.
which he prays may possess the Philippians minds in Christ Jesus: This is
a blessing peculiar to Gods people, that have it washed by faith in the blood
of Christ, and in the lauers of mortification, for this can proceed from no
perfection in man; true it is that Adams conscience in his integrity, did
excuse him before God, because there was nothing in him blameworthie, but since
the depraved estate of man by the fall, no man's conscience can excuse him.

For besides those palpable sins of commission and omission, whereunto each man's
conscience is privy, is there a man living whose conscience can excuse him in
the best works that ever he did? may not all flesh cry out with the Church?
Isay. 64.6.
is not all our righteousness as filthy and menstruous cloa^hes, Ps. 43.2.
etc. and with the Psalmist, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in
thy sight shall none living be justified. And did not the Eternal appoint A
aron to offer sacrifice for the sins of the offerings of the children of
Israel? but faith assuring the heart and conscience of remission of sins,
and the pacification of the wrath of God justly conceived against us for them,
breeds love, love works godly sorrow, which is a sweet witness of Gods love to
us, and so quieteth the conscience.

Obi. It may be objected, that many wicked men's consciences lie quiet?

Answ. There is in man, a quiet good conscience, and a quiet ill conscience,
which is improperly said to be quiet, but only seems to be quiet, yet is it
but for a time, which if it be once awaked and rowsed up either by the law,
afflictions, or judgments of God, it will rage and storm like a fell dragon,
tiger, or fierce cruel lion or mad dog, as did the consciences of Kaim, A
chicophel, and Judas: Mat. 27.5.
The reasons why the consciences of the most wicked men lie quiet and still,
and that in the most till death, are

1. Ignorance, as did Paul's conscience, he thought he did GOD service in
persecuting the Saints, and that be ought to do many contrary things against
the Name of Jesus: it was the ignorance of his conscience which was the cause
of his vnfeelingnes.

2. Impurity, for the conscience is defiled, and so defiles the actions, and
makes them unclean, as Paul says, Tit. 1.15.
to the impure and unbelieving, nothing is pure, for even their minds and
coosciences are defiled: and how can the conscience do his office being thus
defiled?

3. In constant, because vngrou^ded, and so is carried and hurried hither and
thither upon every supposition.

4. Deceitful, having lost the plainness and innocence which it had by
creation, and is restored to the true believer by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.12.
which Paul rejoiced in, and does now nothing but juggle, foyst, and deceive.

5. Injustice, so that in judging it determines against the truth, against God,
and against the salvation of the soul: a woeful condition,

6. Lastly, through ill usage (...) has lost his tenderness; for when it has
cried often times, it has not been heard, or not regarded, or that which is
worse, snibbed, buffeted, and beaten, and so resolved to admonish no more; but
as a scholar, apprentice, or servant, continually hained at, buffeted and
beaten, grows desperate, so is it with the conscience; that it is like that
which Paul speaks of those ancient Heretics, which had their conscience
feared with a hot i^oo. 1 Timothy 4.2.


Quest. How comes the conscience to make Apology, or to excuse us from godly
sorrow?

Answ. The conscience being delivered from darkness, the Son of God inhabiting
it, and bringing light into it, is able to discern what the soul has
performed, that which is commanded by God on his parn, and the promise and
covenant made by the Highest on his part, by which he has obliged himself to
be propitious and favorable, yea to give comfort and joy: Blessed are they
that mourn, Mat. 5.4. Psalm: 26.6.
for they shall be comforted, and they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy,
causes the heart to rest upon the promises with an holy security.

2. The Almighty has appointed, as all the duties of mortification to be
special means of this in particular, to mundifie and cleanse the conscience
from that impurity and uncleanness which naturally is upon it, that a man is
able to say with boldness, as Paul, Act. 23.1.
I have in all good conscience served God until this day: and so a great care
in all things to do uprightly.

3. Being thus cleansed and purified, it has in it that plainnes, innocence,
simplicity, and harmlesnes, which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 1.12.
Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that is, simplicity
and godly pureness, etc. we have had our conversation in the world, etc.

4. Which brings forth in the conscience a divine, sentence, so as in
determining it judges for God, and as God, according to the sacred Canon of
his everlasting word: and so

5. Constancy, and a kind of habitual peace and tranquillity, so as no power of
man or Devil can compel or shake it, as Job says, Job 27.6.
I will keep my righteousness, and will not forsake it, my heart also shall not
reprove me of my days:

6. And so becomes a continual refreshing, yea as Solomon says, Trev. 15.15
a good conscience is a continual feast: it will dwell with him, be with him at
bed and board, ride with him, be a sweet companion with him when he is alone,
comfort him in his most uncomfortable afflictions, like a loving faithful wife
that no chaunges or alterations can transmutate her affectionate heart from her
dearest beloved husband, so is it with this blessed guest, a quiet good
conscience arising from the sense of our reconciliation with God, will make
apology or defense for us against the world and Devil, in all times, places,
companies etc.

Thus have I according to my poor talent, opened and unfolded this point of
godly sorrow, which is one of the greatest paradoxes in all practical
Divinity, with as much plainness and perspicuity as possibly I can, if I
should further proceed as I have begun in the other five signs and notes of
Godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11.
which the Apostle Paul has set down in the Corinths, I should be tedious and
therefore there being amo^gs^ Divines no difference about the interpretation of
them, I referr^ thee to the blessed labors of tha^ Divine Master Calvin,
Caluines institut. Commentariis in 2 Cor. 7.11. Sermon of repentance.
as also tha^ worthy Master Arthure Deu^ who do particularly handle the only
a word or two by way o^ exhortation or use.

1. Here is a sound ground o^ consolation and comfort for a^^ true humbled
souls, if it be tru^ godly sorrow, they may say with Job, After darkness I
shall see light, this sense of misery shall bring me to the sweet sense of
mercy this sorrow may last for a night but joy shall come in the morning, after
two days he will remove us, and the third we shall live in his sight; and as
the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 6.2.
I know this hand which is heavy upon me, is under my head, to bring me light
out of this darkness, and life out of that which for the present is more bitter
then death it self.

2. It reproues the most part of men; first, multitudes think it an easy
matter to be saved, and that there needs not so much ado, that a few light
sighs, and Lord have mercy upon us, a little before, or at the last gasp, is
sufficient; and some say also, they thank God their sins never troubled them,
whereas it is certain, that never man went to Heaven, but with great
difficulty, and therefore our Savior being asked, if many should be saved?
answered: Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many shall strive, and
shall not be able to enter. Never yet man went to Heaven, but sailed by hell,
nor ever shall; and they that never felt yet the smart of sin, shall one day
find, and that to their cost and misery, that there is the more behind.

3. Many weep and howl for their sins, and yet poor souls, are easelesse
and remediless, because they are not directed to the right sorrow, and so
spend weeks, months, and years, but never the better, the smart remains,
and the gashes and wounds made by the Devil and corruption not cured, but the
heart left comfortless still, and for such this Treatise is useful, to lead
them to the sweet fountains of Elim, Numb. 33.
that they drinking of them, may satisfy their thirsty souls, and live for
ever.

4. This reproues all flesh, whose hearts are set upon foolish and mad laughter
and merriment, drinking, carowsing, banqueting, jesting, and such like, and
think all the world fools but themselves and such as they are, which cast
firebrandes, poll-axes, swords and spears at the eyes and faces of each other,
saying, am I not in jest, as Solomon speaks: Deuteronomy 32.29.
Oh that they would be wise, then would they understand, then would they
consider their latter end. Oh that these men would but take the advice which
God gave to his own beloved people, even to consider what will become of all
this foolish, wicked, abominable, sinful mirth, and whether it will hold out
and comfort them upon their sick beds, or before the Almighties Tribunal, as
also our blessed Savior, the wisdom of the Father, calls them from this mirth
and jollity, and curses them if they continue in it, w^e be to you which now
laugh, Luke 6.
for you shall howl and cry; and seeing it is a sealed truth, ratified in
Heaven like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be repealed, that
either men must mourn here, or be damned, perish and howl etenally
hereafter; Let me exhort; yea beseech you in the Name of the Lord Jesus, to set
on work about this grace speedily and seriously; and the rather, because no
time is properly ours but the present, for time past is irrecouerable, not to
be recalled by Angels or men, and for time to come, that is not ours, but the
Almighties, who knows the cotinuance of his life, are we not al tenants at
will, and therefore delay not, nor procrastinate, if the Lord do length out
thy days, thou art not sure of the continuance of the means God now offers
thee in the ministry of the word, the Candlestick may be removed, Apoc. 2.1.4.
as GOD threatened the Church of Ephesus: And the Kingdom of Heaven may be
taken from thee, or thy heart may grow obdurate and hard, as Pharaohs did, or
thou may over slip the time of the Lords gracious visitation, and so given up
to a reprobate mind, and have that curse set upon thy soul, which Solomon
speaks of, Pron. 1.
because I have called, and ye have refused, you shall call and cry, and I
will not hear you; but I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your
fear comes: and that which the Prophet Isay speaks of from the Lord: (...)
6.9 10.
Go and say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed, but y^^ shall not
understand: ye shall see and not perceive: make the heart of this people fat,
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they should see with their
eyes, hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert,
and I should heal them. To this purpose speaks the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. 8.6 7.
comparing the heart of man to the earth, and the ministry of the word unto the
rain and dew from Heaven, if it fall upon a soil, that is not only obnoxious
to sterility; but brings forth briars and thorns; it is near unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned. So that it is necessary that every man should take
the opportunity of the grace of God, and so the Scriptures call upon us to do,
seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near,
intimating to all flesh, that a man may let slip and pass over the season of
mercy and favor: and again, to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts, as in Meribab, etc. Al men observe their times, the Mariner observes
the wind and compass, the husbandman his seasons for seede-time and harvest,
al me^ their Marts, faires and markets, the season of Gods grace, and the
tender and offer of Christ and the promises of the Gospel in the ministry of
the word, is not always obvious, the wind is not always seasonable,
seed-time and harvest is not every season, every day is not the Mart, Fair and
market day, there is a time for the coming of the Bridegroom, and if men
sleep and be careless, not looking to get oil in their lamps, that is, saving
graces, and fruits of faith, their time may be past, Mat. 25.
and they lose their souls: there was a time when Esau seeking the birthright
with tears, yet could not obtain it: and it is possible that men living under
a powerful ministry of the word, and shut their ears against it, resist the
motions of the blessed Spirit, and cries of their consciences, that that curse
may be set upon that man's soul, (and I verily believe it is upon the souls
of many living under the Gospel) which our Savior set upon the fig tree, Never
fruit grow on thee hereafter, because when he looked for fruit he found nothing
but leaves: so when God looks upon congregations, and particular persons
(living under special, effectual, and powerful ministry) to find good fruit,
finds nothing but leaves of formal profession (if that) it is just with his
Majesty to curse that congregation and hear: never fruit grow on thee: Never
Sermon do thee good but harde^ thy heart, to thy deeper and mote fearful
condemnation, never mercy do thee good; or chastisment, but brawne up thy
heart unto further vengeance and wrath, this is the dregs and bottom of the
vials of the wrath of God in this world, and where this curse is upon any man's
soul, his case is miserable, Ierem. 15.1. Ezech. 14.14
and that which our Savior said, Woe be thee Corazin and Bethsaida, for if the
great works which have been done in thee, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon,
etc. and it should be easier for Tyrus and Sidon in the day of judgment, then
for thee, etc. Yea whole kingdoms, and Churches cases may be dangerous and
desperate, that God will hear no prayers for them, no, not of the most
righteous men, Job, Samuel, Daniel, and that he shall command his Prophets not
to pray for them, or if they do he will not hear them. Therefore thou shall
not pray for this people, neither lift up cryor prayer for them, nor entreat
me, Iere. 7.16.
for I will not hear thee. So that a Church or kingdom that profess
Religion may so provoke the eyes of Gods glory that their condition may be
worse, and more dangerous and desperate then the condition of the Heathen; for
concerning them the Lord himself sometimes gives commandment that his people
should pray for them. Ierem. 29 7
And seek the prosperity of the City whether I have caused you to be carried
away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it. This being so miserable and
woeful must of necessity be the condition of many a man, yea of some
Churches, the Lord give grace to this Island to consider it, and I conclude this
point with the speech of righteous Noah, The Lord persuade Iaphet to dwell in
the Tents of Shem. Thus of the duty.

Next of the fruit, benefit or privilege thereof which is strange and
wonderful, for the Lord works in matters of grace by contraries in the
judgment of flesh and blood, the thoughts of the Lord are not as the thoughts
of man, but as the Prophet Isai says, Isai. 55.9.
For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my vvayes higher then
your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Natural Philosophy, and man's
reason teaches, it is a sure axiom in natural things, that each like begets
his like, but in Divinity it is often as true and certain, that contrary causes
beget contrary effects; as life springs out of death, the way to be rich, and
to be Kings, yea to enjoy the Kingdom of grace here, and the kingdom of
glory hereafter is for me^ to be poor, as our blessed Savior says: M^^th.
^.3. John 8.
Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, Men must
serve if they would be free, and touching our point in hand, men must mourn
with true godly sorrow if they would be partakers of the consolations of God,
and thus run all the promises in Scripture: Matt^. 5.4
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: Again Psa. 126.5.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy Behold here one of the greatest
wonders in the world though no miracle, a Paradoxe to nature, and incredible to
the world, that the only way to a merry blessed life is to mourn, and also
that if never any man or woman did, or ever shall, be wail their sins with
this true godly sorrow, but it brings forth the pleasant and sweet fruit of
joy and divine consolation? If a man should ask a Divine this question, what
should I do to be merry when I am sad and heavy? Were it not a strange
answer, go mourn and we^pe, and yet it is not more strange the^ the course our
Savior took with the blind man whom he cured, John 9, ^.
he made clay with spittle and anointed his eyes, in all natural reason a
medicine fit to put out the eyes, rather then to procure sight, and yet it
cured him: much like the counsel he gave to the rich young man in the Gospel,
that propounded that sauory question: Good master what shall I do to enter
into life? When he justified himself to have kept the Commandments, bad him
if he would be truly rich, Go sell all thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven. This is the sacred and wholesome counsel
the holy Ghost gives often to all that would attain to a true sweet,
comfortable merry life, forsake and relinquish the profits, and carnal
delights, which at the best are but sensual, temporary, or natural, and get
thee with that Leprous Assyrian and wash in Iordane, get to the sweet lauers of
mortification, especially this chrystaline fountain of godly sorrow, set
before thine eyes God offended and beloved, let thine heart feel the smart of
thy sin committed, against a God, not of infinite Majesty splendour and glory
only, but of infinite bounty, goodness, graciousnesse and mercy, who has
not only bestowed and given thee so infinite favors, but also forgiven thee
so infinite debts: behold thy blessed Savior enduring the insupportable wrath
of his father, in his agony sweating drops of water mingled with blood,
nailed upon the Cross, shedding his most precious and sacred blood, and crying
out, Matthew. 27.46.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me, and all this for thy sins, say to thy
soul my sins are the cause of all these indignities, and torments which he
endured, it was not so much Judas the high Priests or Pilate that thus vexed
my dear Savior, as my sins, they were the traitor, crucifier, and murderer
of this blessed Son of God, and assure thy self, yea my soul for thine, the
sacred Spirit the comforter will refresh, refocilate and comfort thy poor
afflicted heart: this, this is the right way to the fountain of true
spiritual consolation, and this is the sauorie and wholesome counsel of the
spirit of God the only true comforter. Listen not to those Sirens of Rome that
advise afflicted consciences to go on pilgrimage to Rome, Go^postella,
Jerusalem, Croagh-Patricke, saint Swithens-well, or go cruciate and vex thy
self with whippings, going barefoote, or upon bared knees, or give so much
money to such a College, Fraternity, Abbey and such like, of all which I may
truly say as the Lord by the Prophet: Iere. 29.5
Who required these things at your hands: Thus did Martine Luther cruciate and
vex his soul and body but found no ease, but the pain, torment, and smart of
his sin remained still upon him, until he humbled his soul with this
sorrow. And as bootelesse and helpless is the counsel of the world, who when
they see a man dumpish and sad, advise him to imitate the practice of cursed
Cain to build Cities, etc. and the doctrine of our wicked, jovall, aduisers is
to drink away such du^pish and mopish heart quames, of all which I may truly
say as Job said of his friends: Miserable comforters are ye all.

Quest. But what is this joy and comfort that is promised to these mourners so
often in the sacred Scriptures, that we may know and desire it?

Answ. It is as hard to know and discern this joy, as it is to conceive the
sorrow, for nature teaches it not, but it is supernatural and a special gift
of the highest to his elected, and converted children, and those only know
what it is which voluntarily seek this godly sorrow, I will answer this
question therefore by a distribution as formerly of sorrows, so now of joy
into the several kinds until I come at that true joy, and there are three
kinds of joy.

1. Natural joys.

2. Unnatural or diabolical.

3. Spiritual.

Concerning natural which I call so, because they proceed from nature and
natural causes and these are of two sorts.

1. Such are mere natural joys which in themselves are neither good nor
evil, but are made good or evil according to the object they are set upon,
and the measure not passing their limits and bounds God has set them which
Solomon commends. Ecel. ^.15.
I praised joy, for there is no goodness under the Sun, save to eat and
drink and rejoice: like so Pro. 15.13
A joyful heart makes a cheer^efull countenance, etc.

2. Some are from nature depraved and corrupted, wherein men become sensual,
giving themselves up to Epicurisme, totally taken up with the delight of the
pleasures of this life, as banqueting, carrowsing, sports, for which the wise
man vpbraids and derides the young man, Eccles. 11.9
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, etc. And Job speaks of these wicked
persons, Job. 21.12, 13.
that they take the T^bret and Harp, and rejoice in the sound of the Organes.
Deuteronomy. 32.29
They spend their days in wealth and never look up to God, or consider their
latter end which would make them wise, but in that estate and condition
suddenly They go down to the grave, etc.

2. Unnatural or devilish joies and they are of two sorts. 1. More apert. 2.
More secret.


1. Those that are more express and plain are of two sorts.

1. To joy in sin, either our own sins as Sal^mon says, The fool that is the
wicked man, makes but a sport of sin, or else to rejoice in the evils of
others, and the sins of the times which we ought to mourn for, and bewail
with inward and hearty grief.

2. It is a diabolical and devilish joy to rejoice in the misery and
calamity of the Church of God, this is a grievous sin, for which the Lord
threatened Ezech. 25.5, 6.
Rabbah, that it should be a ^welling place for Camels, and the Ammonites a
sheepe-coate, even because they rejoiced in heart, clapped their hands at the
fall of the people of God.

2. Those which are more secret and hard to be discerned are of two kinds.

1. When as through impatience, shortness of spirit, and diffidence in sharp
and tedious afflictions, they are weary of their lives, and though they fear
to lay violent hands upon themselves, yet would be glad (a sin against nature)
that any would deprive them of life, of which Job speaks, Job. 3.21.22
They long for death, and if it come not: they would even search it more then
treasures which joy for gladness, and rejoice when they can find the grave.

2. A joy from the illusion of Satan feeding men's security with seeming joy,
delighting and rauishing the heart for the time mere conceits without
foundation from the sacred Scriptures, from whence all the co^solations the
spirit of God exhibites are derived. This is a mere presu^ption which causes
the hypocrite to rejoice when he has no just cause, he thinks all his seeming
graces to be sound and saving, a^ faith, love, sorrow, and repentance, when (if
he would brin^ them to examination and try all) all would be found far
otherwise. Like a beggar that in (...) drunken sleep dreams, that h^ is
noble, possessed of stately Palaces and large reuenews, his Ta^ble richly
furnished with fat an^ pleasant meats and wine in a^ boundance, full cofers,
plenti^ of at tendants, and costly apparel, with instruments of music etc. A
mere delusion, for when, heawakes, he is base, poor, naked, haroourlesse,
hungry, etc. O beioued let us not be deceived by the methodes and stratagems of
Satan to trust in vain hopes which will not profit us, as if we were true
believers, because sometimes we have either been amazed and terrified for our
fins at the prenching of the word, as Felix trembled at Paul's Sermon, and Aheb
was troubled at the hearing of Eliah: or because we have sometimes felt great
joy in hearing. It is questionless thou may either weep, or rejoice at a
Sermon and be damned for ought I know, if those be all the marks thou have of
the truth of thy saving graces. For the Scriptures are express and plentiful,
that an hypocrite may receive the word with joy, Math 13.20
Hebr. 6.5. and 10.
Tact of the heavenly gift, as a Cook, though not as a guest, have some
apprehension of Christ, some sight of the favor of God, some worthy gifts of
the holy Ghost, some glympse of the hope of eternal glory (all which make up
his joy.) And yet for all this be but an hypocrite, and fall totally and
finally from these graces of the spirit of God, and die under the sin against
the holy Ghost, be a reprobate and eternally damned in the end of his life.
This is so like and near the consolation and joy that no Ephraimite can
distinguish it, no more then Judge. 12.6. (...)
Shibboleth from Sibboleth, that not two and forty thousand only, but infinite
million of souls perish for want of the knowledge and examination o^ the truth
of this grace in the^ own hearts: and it is certain that no wicked man ever
did, o^ possibly can know, much less attain this blessed privilege: Pron.
14.10
The stranger shall not meddle wi^^ this joy, this is that R^ue. 2.17.
white sto^^ spoken of in the Apocalypse h^ving the new name written whi^^one
knows but he that receives (...)

3. Spiritual joys, which I call spiritual, because they are celestial,
heavenly and supernatural, wrought and exhibited by the spirit of God, and
perpetuated by the same blessed spirit for ever, this is a Riddle and Paradoxe
to nature, and therefore as the Church prayed: Cane. 4.16.
arise O North and come O South and blow on my garden that the spices thereof
may flow out: So I beseech the most high God to power upon me the spirit and
grace of illumination, and holy affections that I may conceive and be enabled
to unfold and make plain this sacred blessing to the understanding of the
simplest, that their souls may partake thereof.

Spiritual joys are of two sorts. 1. In this life. 2. In the life to come.


Those in this life are of two sorts. 1. The one a duty. 2. The other a grace.


1. That which is a duty, is that which man brings and ought to bring unto
God, as his commandment, the want whereof the Lord threatens to punish and
plague in his own people: Deuteronomy. 28.47.
Because thou did not serve the Lord thy God with cheerfulness and a glad
heart in the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve thine enemies
in hunger and thirst, and nakedness and want of all things, etc. This duty is
requisite and necessary in each particular service or worship which any man
performs to God or duty of righteousness or love and charity either to the
good, or evil, and I doubt not but this also springs from, and is much
furthered by Evangelical and godly sorrow, but yet it is not that which is my
purpose to speak of and insist upon.

2. Is a grace which God gives to man as a testimony and symptom of his
acceptance of our humiliation and godly sorrow, and the Lord not only
commands his servants to rejoice: Phil. 4.4
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice: Zeph. 3.1
Rejoice O daughter Sion, be ye joyful O Israel: be glad and rejoice with all
thine heart: O daughter of Jerusalem. So does David inioyne spiritual
rejoicing to all upright hearted, Psalm. 32.11
and rises by three degrees as appears in the Original.

1. Shimon of Shamac.
Be glad signifying inward and hearty joy conceived by the presence or hope of
some beloved and defirable good.

2. Gilae of Gil. Hormina of R^^^n.
Rejoice o^ express the joy by some outward gesture, sometimes used for
dancing.

3. Be joyful: or showte for joy, thus I say not only God commands his
people to rejoice, and commands his Ambassadors to comfort them: Is. 40.1.2
Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, etc. but also the gracious and mighty Lord is
obliged and bound by promise to give them special joy and gladness as a
special prerogative and privilege. For besides that the Gospel in general
is the doctrine of glad tidings, there are particular and special promises for
joy Isay 51.3.
Surely the Lord shall comfort Sion, he shall comfort all her desolations, and
shall make her desert like Eden, and her wilderness like the garden of the
Lord, joy and gladness shall he found therein, ^^ Isay 65.14
praise and the voice of singing. Again: Iere. 31.12
My servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, etc. And as the Lord binds himself in general to exhibit and give joy
to all his servants, so more specially to those that mourn does he not only
promise joy: but also to perpetuate their joy: Ioh. 6.22.
And yet now therefore are in sorrow, but I will see you again, and your
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you: Math. 5.4.
Blessed art they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: Psalm. 36.5
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Again, sorrow over night but joy
in the morning.

Quest. Wherein does this promised joy of these mourners consist? And this
question is necessary both to be propounded and answered.

1. In respect of the world; who object and say, they can see neither such joy,
or cause of joy in these Professors.

2. In respect of many poor weak believers themselves, who are either in the
bud and nonage of their conversion, or in some fit of temptation and desertion,
and so are not sensible thereof.

Answ. Their joy arises two ways: 1. Internally. 2. Externally.


1. Internal is twofold: 1. in things present. 2. In things to come.


1. In things present, and that in seven particulars:

1. They have the presence of God like the Sun to refresh them The Lord E^ph.
3.15 Ps. 84.11.
has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy; the King of
Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall see no more evil.
To this purpose speaks David, that God shall give them drink out of the
rivers of his pleasures. God is in the midst of his people by his special
presence Ps. 36.7.8
not of his essence, but of his grace, and is the same to them, and is more
excellent then the Sun is to the creatures, or the rivers and pleasane streams
to the thirfly: the vision of God is the greatest felicity of the Saints in
Heaven, albeit their great excellency and glory, and the presence and vision of
God by faith in the state of grace, is the believers special happiness and
felicity, even Heaven upon earth, this the miserable mole-eyed world
understands nor sees not.

2. ^h. 14.16.
They have in the^ the Spirit of God, even him that is called the Comfort,
whom our Savior prays may abide with them for ever, which no vnregenerat^
man has, or ever had, and this Spirit of God is an everlasting spring of
spiritual and heavenly joy, sweetning and refreshing the soul two ways:

1. In the testimony of the Spirit, Iuke 10.20.
that our names are written in the Book of life, wherein our blessed Savior
has bidden us rejoice, rather then that the Devils are subjected to us, and
this joy by the testimony of the Apostle Peter is (e) unspeakable and glorious,
he is the great Comforter of his Church.

2. The graces of the Spirit are full of heavenly delight to be assured, that
a man has received them effectually and sauingly. Faith has a special
sweetness and pleasant joy, and therefore called the joy of faith, Phil. 1.25.
yea the Apostle says, it has a power that reaches to the consolation each
of other, I long to see you, Rom 1.12.
that I may be comforted by our mutual says. And if temporary faith has
such joy, much more justifying and saving faith. So has hope also his pleasure
and delight in the expectation of the promises of this life, Romans 12.12.
and the pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore.

3. They have joy in the conte^plation and meditation of the miseries they are
freed and delivered from, as the wrath of God the power of death, hell sin,
the grave, the devil, that the sting of 1 Pet. 1.8.
all their enemies is taken out, and that they can behold them as vanquished
foes and adversaries, have they not much more cause to leap and showte for
joy, ^^od. 15.
then Moses; Aaron, and Miriam, and the people to take the timbrell, and to
dance at their deliverance from Pharaoh and his host; no wonder then though
there is heard in all their Tabernacles and houses the voice of melody,
Psalms, and thanksgiving.

4. They have assured knowledge of a right to all Gods promises to comfort
them, 2 Pet. 1.3.4
by which they are made partakers of the divine nature. This is a sweet
fountain, out of which they draw waters of refreshings and joy.

5. As there is great joy in the assurance and first evidence of the saving
graces of Gods Spirit planted and settled in the heart, so to see them bud,
sprout and spring, as men in the springtime delight and solace themselves in
beholding the seeds to spring, and budds to ^ut outin the several plants,
especially considering our Lord Jesus delights to come into the gardens to
walk there to delight himself in beholding the sweet and blessed growth in
graces and holy duties, and hence arises joy even in afflictions for the name,
and in the honor of Christ, as in all the Martyrs, and the Saints, Heb. 10.34.
who suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods. As also to see the weeds
of sin to be ouer-mastred, and rooted out thereby.

6. In the testimony of a good conscience, which is (as Solomon says, a
continual feast: Cor. 1.12.
having witness that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly
wisdom, he has conuersed. That a man has not moyled, and al be smeared and
durtied himself and the conscience in lusts and pleasures, but has maintained
a blessed combat, and cherished the pantings, breathings, and longing desires
of the Spirit, against the cursed lusts and corruption of the flesh: As also in
the favor of God, reconciled by Christ, the conscience testifying this
atonement, Romans 5.11.
the soul^ is at quiet peace and repose in his love, as the child in the
mothers lap or fathers arms.

7. In Jesus Christ who is in 2 Cor. 5.17.
us by faith, Gal. 2.20.
lives, and Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in us; and so as Paul say the we worship God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3.
and rejoice in Jesus Christ. The wise Merchant takes more pleasure in the
pearl, then in all his estate besides. Phil. 3.8.
And the Apostle accounts al but loss and dung in comparison of Christ:
Zaccheus received Christ joyfully, not into his house only, but into his heart
especially: And it is not possible to be otherwise for the faithful soul
being the sweet and beloved Spouse of Jesus Christ, should estimate, or
delight in any thing in the world above, or comparable to her amiable and
beloved Head and loving husband.

2. (...) Rom 12.12
For time to come, they find much joy in the hope and expectation of that joy
and glory which they shall enjoy in Heaven, in the mercy and salvation of God,
as David says, Psalm. 13.5.
I trust in thy mercy mine heart shall rejoice in thy salvation: In that
presence of glory where the Lord shall be more then a Sun to refresh and reviue
them, Ps. 84.11.
and more then a shield to defend them.

Thus of the internal means or well springs of heavenly joys.

2. External, or from without, and that in three particulars:

1. In the Word and blessed ordinances of God^; for the Word, Ps. 11^.
David esteemed and delighted in it more then in his appointed food, and
pathetically cries out O how love I thy Law, it is my meditation continually.
It is a character and true undoubted mark of such as fear God, that they have
great delight in his commandments. Ps. 11^.^.
In the Word are described and delineated the ways of wisdom, and the
invaluable pleasures and treasures thereof, which make a man, possessing her
truly happy. Pro. 3.13.18
Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and gets understanding: for the
merchandise thereof are better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof better then gold: length of days are in her right hand, and in her
left hand riches and glory: her ways are ways of pleasure, and all her paths
prosperity: she is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and blessed is
he that retains her. The Gospel is a deep and sweet fountain of precious
promises, Romans 15.4.
and the Spirit works consolation by the Scriptures. There is the joyful
tidings of salvation, the blessed doctrine and assurance of free remission of
sins, and our full justification, by the redemption of Jesus Christ,
published and proclaimed; there are the pleasures of Gods House, there is food
for the children of the most High and great King, to nourish them up to eternal
life; this they desire, 1 Pet. 2.2.
as infants clothe them with tissue or cloth of gold, bespangle them with the
most Orient pearls that the East or West Indies can afford, set most curiously
in the finest gold of Ophir or crusado, trundle before the^ apples of gold,
bring them instruments, make the most melodious harmony and music that Art
can devise, make them heirs of this great Universe, yet nothing pleases them
but the breast; so assuredly not any thing can satisfy the true child and
adopted heir of God, but the sweet sincere milk of the Word, that is their
proper element, they will trauail from sea to sea to find the word of the
Lord, they can no more live without it, then the fish without water, the mole
without earth, the camelion without air, and the Salamander without fire, and
when they find it, they feed upon it, and uourish up their souls with joy to
eternal life.

And for the ordinances of God they are as Is. 12 3.
wels and fountains, out of which they draw with joy waters of life and
comfort, as the ministry of the word they long after it with earnest and most
affectionate desires, as the Psalm. 42.1.
chased Heart pants after the cool chrystaline streams, when they are absent
from it and deprived of it, they cry out, Ps. 84.2.5.
Oh how amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord God of hosts. My soul longs and
faints for the Courts of the Lord: pronouncing the Sparrow and Swallow happy
that may build their nests near the Altar, concluding that they are blessed
which dwell in his house, for they feed upon the words of Christ unto eternal
life, and so have their hearts lifted up to ioyfulnesse and the praises of God.

The Sacraments are other blessed fountains and wels of joy, wherein Christ is
before them crucified to the eye, to the increasing and strengthening of faith
and all other saving graces of the spirit, which faith is the root and mother
of. In like manner is spiritual joy conveyed to the soul in the use of the
rest of the ordinances of God as confession of sins, godly sorrow, prayer,
reading, conference, and such like, whereof every true believer has experience,
in the secret consolations and rauishments of the heart, which the spirit of
God does exhibit in the due and serious use of these sacred ordinances.

2. In the sweet fellowship and communion of Saints they find secret joy,
Psalm. 16.2
David professes that all his delight is in them that excel in virtue. In
respect of this Paul longed to be with the Romans that he might be comforted
by their mutual says, Romans 1.
to have fellowship with them publicly in the use of the Ministry of the word,
Sacran ents, and prayer, and privately in the use of the more prinate duties of
godliness, as exhortation, they as Solomon says, The face of a friend
sharpens his friend, and as the Apostle says, whet one another to love and
good works, Psalm. 122. Hos. 6 2.
they surre up and inkindle the graces of God: I may say of such, as David, I
rejoiced when they said let us go up to the house of the Lord: pull brandes in
sunder, and you extinguish them, lay them together and they flame, and as the
joy and felicity of Gods people is enlarged by their mutual presence, so also
is it great joy to hear of their welfare being absent, either the prosperity
of any private and particular believer, or the welfare of the Church in
general: When Iethro heard of all the good the Lord had done for Israel,
rejoiced: great is the joy of every true believer to see the word to be
magnified, Exodus 18.9.
and the Gospel to have free passage, pulling men out of the fire of sin,
and snares of the Devil by the mighty power of it, in which the very angels
joy, much more man, but most of all faithful Ministers account it the chief
and principal part of their happiness in the world to beget and bring home
souls of wandering sheep to the fold of their Lord: yea they prefer
Jerusalem and Sion to their chief joy. And if this be a great portion of the
joy of the Saints in heaven, it is undoubtedly a special part of the true
believers joy on earth.

3. They rejoice in the fruits of their faith and that two ways.

1. In their Evangelical obedience or action, because they know it is both
pleasing and acceptable to God, to Christ, and to the spirit within them, Coa.
15.58.
as also because they are sure of a blessed recompense of reward, as Paul
says, Be steadfast, immovable always, abounding in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. They know that their
sweet husband Christ comes into the garden among the beds of spices, and to
gather Lillies, when the garden of their hearts bring forth abundance of sweet
flowers and fruits of holiness and righteousness, it is delectable and
joyful unto Christ whom they love, it must needs be joyful unto themselves.
They well understand, that if they feast Christ with their obedience, he
supping and feasting with them as he promises, will feast them, and with the
blessed influence of his grace and consolations of his spirit, Apoc. 3.20.
they herein are like to their blessed head Christ, whose meat and drink was
to do the will of his Father: Assuredly the experience of every child of God
knows this in his soul, that, that day wherein he is most f^uitefull in well
doing, his heart is most satiate with spiritual joy and heavenly contentment.

2. As they rejoice in their holy actions, and obedience, so in their passions
and afflictions, for the Gospel and name of Christ, Ia^es. 1.
they count it all joy when they fall into manifold tribulations, they know it
is a gift of God, not only to believe, but also to suffer for his name, that
the Son of God is a copartner with them in their sufferings. Thus it is
evident how the Lord in his eternal wisdom and love to his poor servants to
provide all these holy means to convey sacred and secret holy joy into the
hearts of his, and ye^ are they not exempted or barred from their portion of
joy in outward things (which is all the joy wicked men have) and in these the
worse and weakest beleeue^ has more right and cause of rejoicing then the
best, richest, and most potent carnal man in the world.

Before I pass this point I suppose it meet to answer some objections.

1. Oblect. The profane scorners say, that none rejoice in the word but such
as have nothing else to rejoice in only a company of poor people.

Ans. This is an impudent falsehood by which the Devil beguiles them, was not
David rich and yet he said: The law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands
of gold and silver. That kingly Prophet by the spirit of prophecy foresaw and
foretells of all the Gentile kings, when they should come and ta^^e the
sweetness of the Gospel, Psalm 119.7^ Psalm. 13.4.^.
should sing the praises of the Lord; because the glory of the Lord is great.

2. Object. The civil man says he sees no such mirth and joy in such as
profess: Nay it is a re^^^ued axiom, and maxim amongst them, that those who
indeed and good carnest resign themselves to live the Christian life, are
lumpish, heavy, and uncomfortable, and that they always bid farewell to all
mirth.

Answ. This is a gross imputation, and an impious scandal put upon religion by
their father the Devil, and their wretched hearts, and tongues, to bring
religion into disgrace, and disregard in the eyes of men: but:

1. It is to be observed, that Moles, Owls, and Battes cannot see the light,
nor the blind judge of colors, they have no understanding of these things.
The natural man, says the Apostle perceives not the things that be of God,
neither can he, because they art spiritually discerned: they must be Iewellers
that value pearls of price, ^ro. 14.10.
and of Gods Family, for the stranger shall not meddle with the^ joy. It is
true indeed that thi^ sweet joy is an immediate branc^ issuing and springing
out of godly sorrow, and no man ever was, or ^^er shall be truly cheereful, that
never was soundly humbled at the sight of his sins, and this pusseleth the
squint eyed world, who either cannot see, or have not faith to believe Gods
almighty power, who out of this darkness brings light, and joy to the
righteous.

2. They are deceived in the people of God, who after inlightning and
conversion having tasted of these celestial joys, cannot now rejoice carnally,
as before; but think and esteem all that joy, madness and folly, like fools to
throw axes, hammers, firebrands, and deadly weapons at the faces each of other;
but now fixes his eyes upon better objects and causes, which the world not able
to discern, think they have no joy at all because earthly joy is unsavory to
him at least in comparison of these: but I may answer with our Savior, I have
meat that ye know not of: so they have joy and mirth which they conceive not.

3. The world themselves are the cause to disquiet and unsettle the joy of Gods
people by those wrongs, injuries, scandals, and afflictions that they cast
upon, and bring them into, not willing that they should enjoy any gladness,
peace, or content, and then they lay the blame upon their profession.

3. Obi. The last objection is of such as profess Religion, who often complain
of their want of consolation, and are ready to murmr, and discouraged.

Answ. I confess there are many who want the comfort and sense of the joy and
consolations of God, as some in their nonage and cradle of godliness, and some
other in fits of tentation, or times of desertion, and many through their own
ignorance, negligence, and carelesnes.

1. In some it is through ignorance of the marks and signs of faith, and the
rest of the saving graces of Gods Spirit, and so are in doubts and fears, and
the Spirit of bond^ge, as the Apostle calls it.

2. Some are ignorant of the causes of true joy, as that their names are
written in the Book of Life: John 1.
that they are borne not of the will or bloods of men, but of God, sons of
the most high, heirs, yea coheires with Christ the natural Son, to an
eternal Kingdom by adoption and grace, members of Christ, estated into a
blessed interest and right, to all the creatures, blessings, and ordinances,
guarded by Angels, kept by the Almighty himself and his power unto salvation.

3. They observe not, or conceive how the Spirit of God does exhibit and give
this joy and comfort in the due use of his ordinances, as the ministry of the
Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, or else in the due use of the private, as
meditation, conference, prayer, reading, singing of Psalms, etc: Ioh. 16.24.
and so grieve the holy Spirit.

4. Ier. 33.3.8
They do not seriously seek the pardon of sins, as condemned prisoners at
the bar, importune the Judge for their lives: or if they pray sometimes, it
is but seldom.

4. They are not conscionable in the practice of all the duties of godliness,
they sow not good seed, Job. 4.36. Gal. 6.8.9.10
that be which sows, and he that reapeth may rejoice together. Could men be
more fruitful in well-doing, they should have Mat. 25.21 Is. 35.8.10
more joy; sterility and barrenness brings anguish and sorrow, and fruitfulnes
in obedience, brings consolation, and abundance of peace, and heavenly delight
and joy.

5. Many are encumbered and entangled with some gross sin, as the sin of their
nature, or of their particular calling, which hinders this consolation and joy
of the soul. Pro. 25.6.
The transgress on of the wicked is his snare, but the righteous does rei^ y^e
and sing.

6. They receive not the Law of God into their hearts, which if they did
behold the promise verse 11: Is. 51.7.11.
The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with joy to Si^n, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their beads, etc: they only have an idaea or
superficies in the brain, but it comes not into the heart.

7. Many live not in peace, but are passionate and contentious, and so break
off all their joy, or at least hinder and weaken it much, for passion,
contention and pride, do strangely, though secretly disturb and hinder the
consolations of God, and therefore does the Apostle exhort the Corinthes, Be of
good comfort, be of one mind, 2 Cor. 13.^.
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

8. They sorrow not for their sins, or not with godly sorrow, for if they did,
Ps. 126.5.6. Is. 61.1.2.3.
they should reap in joy.

Thus it manifestly appears that true Religion and the profession thereof is
not the cause of the vncheerefulnes, heaviness, and sorrow that is in the world,
but the clean contrary, and that the fault is the corruption which is in men,
and therefore let us lay the imputatio^ and blame where it is, in man's own
corruption and defects.

Again, such professors are to be blamed as lead a melancholic, he any,
vncheerefull life, because thereby they obscure the luster and glory of their
Christian profession, and are a dishonor to their Lord and Master, for the
world that know not the privileges and liberty of the sons of God, easily
think they serve a hard and rigide master, or father, who is not willing to
have his children and servants enjoy any sweet mirth, or live sweetly and
comfortably. They do besides all this, hinder and wrong themselves, by
detaining themselves from thankfulness, it is also an obstacle to their faith,
pravers, lays them open, and exposes them to temptations, or apostasy, and
generally, vnfits them to all the duties of piety and righteousness: And for the
most part this deapnes of spirit and sadness, arises from passion, pride,
worldly sorrows, and griefs, or some of the causes before specified.

Quest. But seeing so many sorts of false joys may be, and are often in the
soul, by what characters, and symptoms may the true joy be discerned, from
the counterfeit, especially the illusions of the devil, and temporary joys of
the hypocrite? because an hypocrite goes far, especially in joy, and yet lose
his soul, and be damned in the end, for he may receive the word with joy,
taste the heavenly gift, have some apprehension of Christ's excellency, some
sight of Gods favor, some worthy, (though but general gift of the Holy Ghost,
and an hope of everlasting life, as appears by the text of Scripture in the
margent) all which concur together to lift him up with false joy, and yet
lose all and his soul too.

Answ. I consider the examination of this grace three ways:

1. In the causes thereof, it arises from the apprehension of celestial and
heavenly things. It is kindled upon the sense of God^ favor, and is a blessed
handmaid of faith, and therefore the Apostle Peter annexeth it to believing. 1
Pet. 1.8. Psalm. 4.6.
Lord life thou up the light of thy countenance vpom me: thou have given me
more joy of heart, etc.

2. That our names are written in the Book of Life, a greater cause of
rejoicing by the restimonie of our Savior Christ himself, ^^^e 10.20.
then to work miracles, and cast out devils; and greater cause of joy then
wisdom, strength, riches, etc. to know God, that he is merciful, in the
assurance of Gods election, and blessed resurrection and eternal life, that
our souls shall live immortally happy.

3. It is exhibited and given by the holy Spirit of God, and ordinarily the
soul as it were retyring it self into the sweet presence of God, to have
some spiritual Soliloquie or private conference with him, but especially and
principally in meditation and primate prayer, are these sweet joys selt,
though not only, but the soul does draw the wine of joy out of all the wels
of salvation, Is. 12.3.
but every Christian soul, who usually trades with God, can experimenlally
justify this truth, that it is felt most frequently and lively in meditation
and private prayer. Is 32.3.


4. The Spirit never speaks comfort to the soul, but from the written word
and promises of God; and therefore the Apostle says to the Ephesians, After
they believed, Ephesians. 1.13.
they were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise. If it witness, seal, and
comforts not from the sacred promises, it is a delusion of Satan, and not true
joy.

5. It usually follows humiliation and godly sorrow for sin, which is that
true and right branch that bears it, our blessed Savior was sent to comfort
those that mourn in Zion, Is. 61.2.3.
to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
gladness for the spirit of beauiues, etc. Ioh. 16.20 23.
Verily I say unto you, ye shall weape and lament, and the world shall rejoice,
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Woe be to that joy that has not
humiliation anteceding it, it is hypocritical and unsound.

2. This true joy is known by the degree, for it carries a man into an
ecstasy, for as the object thereof excels all terrene and earthly things, as the
object of true joy, being God himself, Christ Jesus, the assurance of the
graces of the Spirit, the word, increase, and spiritual growth in grace, etc.
so does the Christians joy in them, exceed all other joys. Thy Law is better
to me then thousands of silver and gold. Ps. 119.7^. Ps. 137.6.
Again, If I prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy. The hypocrites joy never
exceedes the joy in the world, the profits and pleasures of this world do
more affect their hearts then the joy of these supernatural, superexcellent
and heavenly things. The truly wise merchant sels all for the blessed Pearl
of the Gospel, M^^. 13.46.
and goes away rejoicing also. And if this be so, how few found believers does
this world afford, that for the measure and degree of their joy, can free
themselves from being hypocrites, and who (if this be a truth) shall be saved.

3. It may be discerned and known by the blessed effects thereof.

1 This joy stands by a man when all other joys fade, relinquish and forsake
him, even in adversity as well as prosperity, and this the Proph^. Hab. 3.17.^^
Habakack lively expresses: For the sigge tree shall not flourish, neither
shall fruit be on the vines the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat: the sheep shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no bullock in the staules. What more miserable condition can befall
the sons of men, yet behold this sweet joy comforts them: But I will rejoice
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. So that no condition of the
true child of God can be so miscrable in this world, but that the joy of God
will comfort and sustain them. The same does Paul testify, we rejoice in
tribulation, Romans 5 3. Phil. 2.17.
and of himself and the rest of the Apostles he says, And though I be offered
upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you
all.

2. This joy marres and distastes all carnal joys whatsoever, it makes a man
sind little or no relish or taste in earthly delights, they will be to him as
the white of an egg, wherein says Solomon, what savor is there? If men had
received this true joy once, we should soon see a change in their
conversation, there would not be such wide gaping and laughter in vain, and
foolish jestes, apparel, and a thousand things of this sort, as now there is.

3. Ia^^^.
It will keep a man from masterlines and censoriousnes of others, as also to be
compassionate and tender hearted, to sympa^hize in the wants and sorrows of
others, especially such as are under spiritual afflictions.

4. And last effect of true joy is as it springs from true humility and godly
sorrow, so it ends in it, and destroys not, but preserues that blessed grace,
it keeps the soul in a preparedness and ape^esse to acknowledge his own
vileness, and vuworthinesse of so great a portion and mercy from God as this
joy is.

Thus have I according to my understanding and gift received from God,
expressed my thoghts and meditations touching this sacred point, and the true
trial thereof, whereas the joys which are temporary, or from the illusisions
or methods of Satan, comfort no man in adversity, find sweetness in carnal
joys, are masterly and censorious, and make men proud and advance themselves,
and are in all things contrary unto the holy true joys, which the Spirit of
GOD does exhibit and give unto those which seek true joy in unfeigned and
godly sorrow.

1. Quest. But may some humbled believer say, I can find little comfort or
joy, what aduite will you give me, or what shall I do to get this sweet grace
of happy joy into my heart?

Answ. 1. Take heed of such things as grieve the fountain of true joy which
is the blessed spirit of God, as the Apostle says: And grieve not the holy
spirit of God by which ye are sealed up to the day of redemption: of which I
will give you a taste.

1. Beware thou neglect not the renewing of thy holy faith daily, nor the
duties of mortification, as examination of thy slippes and faylings, which will
bring thee to unfeigned: confession and acknowledgement of thy sin to God, that
prouokes the soul to godly sorrow, and so to prayer, and opens a door to
consolation, for the heart gathers soil every day, and if it be not washed and
kept clean by these mundifying waters, the uncleanness of the soul will
grieve the blessed guest the spirit, and so keep out these blessed joys.

2. Beware of a barren and unfruitful heart, for unprofitableness is the
cause of much disrest to the soul.

3. Beware of neglecting the means, by which the spirit exhibites this true
consolation, which are both public and prinate, a Christian must not look for
miracles, but if he would have it, he must diligently attend the means, which
are the ministry of the word, Sacraments, and prayer, and for the private,
especially neglect not private prayer from whence the spirit of God does most
frequently administer this joy.

4. Take heed thou be not oner borne and over ruled by evil affections, as,
passion, envy; pride, immoderate cares, and the love of the world, all which
and many more do exceedingly quench and dead the consolations of the spirit of
God.

5. Lastly beware of the love of any one sin, though never so secret, for it
betraies the evidence of thine uprightness, and how eanst thou expect any
other then blasted joy and comfort when thou have lost or forfeyted the
evidence of thy assurance.

2. Be exceedingly careful to do such duties as bring true comfort: as

1. Be diligent to know the difference betwixt counterfe it graces and true
saving graces; for the Devil and man's corruption has framed a counterfeit and
shadow of every virtue, so that if thou be ignorant of the methodes and
deceites, and be not able to get good cuidences and signs of the truth and
soundness of them, the heart will be distracted with fears and doubts, and be
a means of unrest and unquietness, Is. 55.15.
and so deprive thee of this joy, to be Gods servant, which otherwise thou
might enjoy be sure.

2. Voluntarily seek godly sorrow, and try it according to the former rules,
be importunate with God by prayer, and the use of all the rest of Gods
ordinances, and never give over drinking every day a draught of humiliation
until thou feel in thy self some good degree of softness of heart, that it
may often bleed inwardly in the sense and feeling, especially of thy beloved sins
committed, not only against a God of infinite Majesty, Psaim. 126.23.5.6.
Isay 61.3. Maith. 5.^.
power, etc. but especially of infinite sweetness, goodness, mercy,
graciousnesse, bounty and love, who has given thee so much, and forgiven thee
so great a debt, and against CHRIST, pierced him through with so infinite
sorrows for these blessed joys are promised to, and most felt of those that
mourn most for their sins.

3. If yet thou find not comfort and these spiritual joys, add fasting to
put wing, and feruency to thy prayers, perform with through humiliation of thy
soul and seek in all the records of God, if ever any Church in general, or
any particular and private man ever went away without some special sweet
answer from God in his greatest disrest and unquietness, and think thy case
shall not be singular, but the Lord will be the same to thee, that he has
been to other of his servants in former times.

4. If yet thou find not answer to thy desires unfold thy grief to some
merciful experienced Christian who may administer true consolation, and
especially some faithful experienced man of God, who though (as Elihu speaks)
he be but one of a thousand to declare unto man his righteousness, Job.
33.23.26.
yet he will have mercy upon him, and will say, deliver him that he go not
down into the pit: for I have received a reconciliation. Then shall his flesh
be as fresh us a childs, and shall return as in the days of his youth. He
shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable to him, and he shall see his
face with joy, etc. Thus did the Spouse find her well-beloved, Cant. 3.
she went and inquired of the watchmen, and when she was a little past she
found him whom her soul loved: Many a poor soul is kept in heaviness a long
time by Satan's policy, laboring with them to keep secret his subtilties and
their own wants, which by wholesome counsel might easily and speedily be
relieved and comforted.

5. If yet thou getest not comfort, travail with thine own heart to delight
in the Lord, and then the promise is, he will give thee thine hearts desire;
thou shall never get these sweet refreshings and spiritual joys, except thou
love to be Gods servant, delighting in him and all his holy ordinances, observe
how lively and plainly the Lord expresses this. Also the strangers that cleave
unto the Lord to serve him, and to love the (...) of the Lord, Isay 56.6.7.
and to be his servants, every one that keeps my sabbath, and polluteth it
not, and imbraceth my Covenant. Them will I bring also to mine holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of prayer.

Quest. Sometimes I feel spiritual joys, bue soon loose the sense of them
again, what may I do to preserve both the grace and the sense thereof in my
soul that it may be habitual in me?

Answ. Trade seriously and often in all the holy duties of mortification, to
which the promises are frequently made. I instance in three particulars.

1. Confession of sins upon which God has pledged his fidelity to forgive
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1.9
confession if true has assurance of remission of sins and justification,
out of which springs true and solid joy.

2. Godly sorrow which as you have seen already, ends in joy.

3. Prayer, as our Savior advises: Ask and ye shall receive that your joy
may be full: these sweeten the soul, Psalm. 126.5.6. Mat. 5.5 John 16.23.
and are the ordinary conduites of consolation, the heart gathering soil and
corruption daily, must of necessity be cleansed by these, or else the spirit
will be grieved, and neither take away the unquietness, or administer those
sweet refreshings, which otherwise it might enjoy.

4. Beware of much carnal joy, or external rejoicing, for the immoderate
delighting in outward things, is like Opium to the body which stupifies the
brain, and makes it senseless, so do these earthly joys stupifie the soul
and make it insensible of the consolations of the spirit of God, bringing
thereupon hardness of heart in the things of God, and most people hereby are
gulled by Satan's stratagemes hindering themselves from this blessed comfort,
and never discern the cause thereof, when they give to these earthly joys
either prioritie or superiority.

5. Be plentiful in well doing, labor that the heart may be like the Tree of
life which brought forth fruit, not only some kind, but all manner of fruit,
and at al times, every Month, take up all opportunity to do good, for a man
can never have assurance of the sincerity and truth of his obedience, Psalm.
119.
unless it be universal to all Gods commandments: as David says then shall
I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy commandments. This the
Lord wishes in his people when they gave Moses those fair speeches. All that
thou commaundest us from the Lord we will do. Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 6.2
The Lord answers; Oh that there were such an heart in this people, that they
might fear me and keep all my commandments always that it might go well
with them, and with their children for ever. Do any think it shall go well
with them, or that they can possibly preserve the joys of God in the heart,
that are either partial in their obedience, or that perform it, but by sits
and starts, there must therefore care be used to preserve uprightness for such
shall have an harvest of joy, but if a man nourish but the love of one sin,
its impossible to retain the joys of God. Prou. 29.6.
In the transgression of an evil man is a snare. but the righteous does sing
and rejoice, especially be careful to preserve unity and peace, and procure
it in others, P^ou. 12.20
for to the counselors of peace shall be joy.

4. Get an humble and meek spirit, for as passion does disrest and unquiet the
heart, so does pride wonderfully quench and hinder the refreshings of God. Isay
29.19
The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men
shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.

5. Have an eye as to the Law, which is the rule of life, so to the promises,
which are the legacies of thy father wherein is bequeathed that to thee which
will continually refocilate and refresh thy soul, hang upon these as the breasts
of thy consolation, as the Prophet says: Isay 66.1.
That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her ^onsolation, that
ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. And in
this, two things are to be heeded.

1. A faithful remembrance of the promises, for that which is not remembered is
as if not known, the memory therefore must be careful to keep in this
office, and open the records and rowles of God to the soul, to put it in mind
of the privileges to be^ rejoiced in, or else look to find little or none of
these joys.

2. Blessed wisdom to apply the several promises, whether general or
special to thine own particular condition and necessity: else they are like
abundance of meat in a Cooks shop to a hungry stomach not eaten, so are
the promises not digested and applied by faith, though remembered, as fumes of
meat to a hungry belly, or spirits of wine to a thirsty man not eaten, not
drunk but poor refreshing or comfort.

6. Keep God in sight and in thine eye still, loose not his presence, but
walk before him in all uprightness and sincerity: For, At his right hand is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore.

7. Neglect not any one of Gods ordinances public or private, and add often
private fasting to thy private prayers, which will bring comfort, search all
the Scriptures, if ever God refused to give answer to the prayers of any of his
people when the wings of fasting were given to cause them soar up to heaven,
and its just with God to blast the use of the public, as ministry of the word
Sacraments and prayer, when either family duties are neglected, or the more
inward and private betwixt God and thine own heart are either neglected or
slighted. Again if there be performance of the private, and the public
despised or neglected, yea, if but any one of either public or private be not
conscionably performed, its no wonder though the spirit of God answer not the
soul, with his sweet refreshings.

8. If thou feel the absence or the leaf^ decay of these spiritual comforts,
complain betimes, for delays in this cause are dangerous, examine the cause
why thy beloved hides himself, be sure to remove the cause, call and seek
after him with all importunity, and never give over until thou have recovered
again the sweet sense of his presence as did the Church: Cant. 3.4.
to catch hold of him, Cant. 5.6.
and not to leave him: until h^^ have brought thee into thy Mothers house, etc.

9. Beware of the careless and perfunctorie use of any of the ordinances of
God, for to offer the halt, blind, and lame in sacrifice, Mal. 1.
is abomination to the Lord, be sedulous, Eccles. 4.17.
watchful and diligent to do all duties of piety to GOD with preparation, yea
that the very feet of thy soul be elevated and lifted, that thy affections
being raised, thou may offer not a dead, but a living sacrifice, always
acceptable to his sacred Excellency in JESUS CHRIST.

10 Lastly, take no care for the world, nor the things of the world, for where
the love of the world is, the love of the Father cannot dwell; can a loving and
kind wife carry that respective love to her husband, if she see him embrace
the bosom of a strange woman, and take her into his house to bed and board, is
it poffible that the Spirit of Christ who has taken possession of thy heart,
should show that sweetness in thy soul, as formerly if he see thee take into
his house, thy heart, that filthy strumper the world, it is not possible, and
therefore take heed of receiving the love of the world into thy heart, if thou
purposest to perpetuate this joy.

Quest. But are these joys sensible to every believer always? Answ. No: for
first some are in the nonage and bud of their conversion in whom these joys
are not felt for these causes.

1. Because of their ignorance of the doctrine, either of true godly sorrow, or
the true joys of the holy Ghost: They may say with the Church, being asked if
they had received the holy Ghost since they believed, they answered, They had
not so much as heard this there was an holy Ghost: how then can they have the
blessed sense of that which they are ignorant of.

2. Some know that there are such joys, but observe not how the spirit does
exhibit and give them in the due use of the ordinances of God, and therefore
deprive themselves of the comfort, by want of observation, and by a mere
neglect.

3. Some have this joy, observe, and are affected with it for the time, but
loose the comfort of it from two causes.

1. They soon forget, the consolation and the ground thereof as the Apostle
says, Ye have forgotten the consolation which speaks, ^ (...). 12.5.
to you as to sons,

2. Because they are not well grounded in the assured truth and soundness of
their joy they suspect it, and that breaks off their joy, and dasheth and
eclypseth all their solace and gladness.

4. Some feel exceeding flashes and passions of joy and gladness, but because
they are encumbered with passions of anger and violent perturbations arising
from their distempered constitution and natural turbulent affections, this joy
is hindered from being constant and habitual, as other wise it would be.

5. In some this joy is solid and habitual, which constantly arises from the
assurance of their reconciliation and peace with God though they often feel not
any great passions or rauishings of the heart: yet both these may be the true
joys of the holy Ghost, yet the latter I wi^^^ and desire from my soul good
Reader may be both thine, and mine own portion, and that for ever. Thus have I
lead thee the way by the seeming waters of Marah unto the true sweet fountains
of Elin^ where I leave thee to so^ace and satiate thy soul. But let the world
know that they have no part in this spiritual joy as Solomon says. The
stranger shall not inc^^dle with this joy, hands off, it is not for you, it is
the particular and special privilege of the household of faith, and there is
great reason because they have no cause of true joy, no nor of any joy at all
in them; For what cause of joy has any man who is dead in trespasses and sins,
as all unregenerate men are, till the second Adam who is made a quickening
spirit to all the elect revive them by his spirit and grace. What cause of joy
can he have that is a condemned man, as our Savior says. He that believes
not is condemned already, that is in Gods decree, in the sentence of Gods just
and righteous law, in his own conscience which has and does arraigne and
condemn him, if it be not a sleep? What joy can a man have in all his mirth
when our blessed Savior calls him from it, and pronounces a curse upon him?
Woe be to you that now laugh, for ye shall howl and weep. Lastly he can no
more rejoice in any of the creatures, then a thief in a true man's purse,
neither can that be true joy in the creature, which arises from the creature,
rests in the creature, and eleuateth or raises the heart no higher then the
creature, but such is the joy of the hypocrite and every ignorant civil and
wicked man, and therefort he has neither true joy or cause thereof. Miserable
then and woeful is the condition of all the iovall Lads of this world, whose
Comedy begins, and continues here with seeming mirth and shall end Tragically
in inutterable sorrow, heaviness and vexation and that for ever, Whereas the
Tragical beginning of the righteous, though it begin in true sorrow yet it is
soon recompensed with that true joy which even for the present is filled with
celestial and heavenly solace, and delight and perpetuated unto all eternity,
which I pray God to increase in thy heart by the spirit of comfort for the
Son of his loves sake. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 11. l. 24. for sensible re^d sensitive, p. 27. l. 11. for Shabeans read
Chaldeans. p. 30 l. 16 for things read degrees p. 36. l. 2 for which come read
with Caine, p. 37 l. 26. for Amron read Amnon. p. 40. l. 1. for though read
through. p 43. l. 22 for rife read right p. 53. l 18 for saw ^ead behold. p.
54. l 22 for people read powle. p. 56. l. 17 for deprave read deprive. p. 8. l.
6. for hopes read lips p 62. l. 16 for sense read sense. p. 64. l. 8. fer
some read soon. p 67. 14 for refasolating read refosolating, ^. 73 l 17. for
true read ^rees. p. 73. l. 19 add to. p. 134. l. 11 for name read nature. p
134. l. 9. for greatfulnes read dreadfulnes. p. 135. l 25. for Zeboni read
Zeboim. p. 136. l. 15 for disabbed read disabled. p 138. l 10 for cry read be
p. 173. l 9 for of read all. p 175. l. 1. for re^^one read reviue l. 2 add
day. p 184, l 21. for nener read ever. p 211. l. 22. lean out and p. 216. l.
11. for and discouraged rea^ and be discouraged p. 231. l 9 for perform read
perform them, p 134 for three read these.


