AN EPISTLE of the Reverend father in God HIERONYMVS OSORIVS BISHOP of
Arcoburge in Portugale, to the most excellent Princess ELIZABETH by the grace
of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland. etc.

Translated out of Latten in to English by Richard Shacklock M. of Art and
student of the Civil Laws in Louaine.

Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Die, Anno M.D.LXV.

THE TRANSLATOVR.
SEYLAN an I Will of flourishing fame
With precious pearls was wont to excel,
But now it has lost that notable name,
And Portugale for pearls bears the bell.
All spiritual goldsmythes can wytnes this well,
That this pearl sent from Portugale ground,
Surmou^teth al pearls which in Seylan are found.
This pearl of great price Osorius has sent
To a pearlesse Princess our excellent Queen
ELIZABETH of England most Royal regent,
God grant her grace take it as the giver did mean.
Th^e precious pearls plenty shall in England be seen,
If counterfett pearls being set a part,
This Catholyke pearl take place in her heart.
TO THE READER.
FOR so much as it is the duty of every Christian man, not only in heart to
pray with the Prophet David, saying: Deal mercifully O lord in thy good
pleasure with Syan, that the walls of Jerusalem (that is of the church) may
be builded up again, but also to put to his helping hand so much as he is
able to the repayring of it, I thought it to appertain to me, which am (I
trust) a membre of Christ his Catholyke church, to do as much as in me
lies, that the broken and battred walls of it may be reedified. And where as
it passed my strength, to bring any principal beams, any corner stones, by
writing new works of mine own invention, rather then I would be an idle
loker on, I thought it my part to be an inferior laborer, to bring mortar, to
carry sand, and as it were bear baskettes, by translatyng some worthy work of
some other writer. And although I did well know, that there were many works
in Latten, which being translated in to English, might help to raise up the
ruynous walls of Christ his church in England, yet among so many, this one
seemed to me to contain most spedy remedy and reparation: which as it was of
the first author dedicated to a most excellent Princess, so of me the second
translator (for one before me has translated it into French) is named not
without a cause, A PRECIOVS PEARL FOR A PRINCE. If any man marvel, what
moved me to translate this Epistle, 3. causes of this translation.
I do him to understand, that three causes styrred and provoked me. God
thanks, that allthough the eyes of them which dwell in England, can not
perceive those furiouse fyars, for so much as they dwell in the mystie vales
of heresies, yet that it has pleased him, to make great learned men, which
dwell on the high hills of the Catholyke faith, a far of to discrye the
flames which daily consume England, and not only to discrye them, but also to
send holy water of most godly council to quench them.

The third cause is, to styrr up all devout Osorius may be osores of all false
doctrine and heresy: which with Osorius may persuade her to come out of the
cockring bote of scismaticall noysomnes, in to the steadfast arcke of Noy, that
is of wholesome and catholyke unity: which with Osorius may instruct her to give
no ear to these deceptfull shypmen, A mete metaphor for such maryners.
which clymyng up in to their pulpyttes, as in to the topp of the mastes,
cry to them which be beneathe, that they see the port and saffe haven of God
his word, when in deed they be in the main sea of their own wavering
pha^tasies: which bear her in hand that they sail with a fore wind of the
holy ghost, when in deed they ride with a sydewinde of dyuellishe suggestion:
which make her believe, that she has with her the warm southe wind of
charity, and concord, when in deed they lead her with the cold Northewynde
of dissension and discord: which persuade her that they go Eastewarde, where
the bright Son of true doctrine does rise and appear, when to say the
truth, they go VVestwarde, where the clear beams of verity does vanishe
and shrynck out of sight. Oh that so noble a Princess should be so abused by
them which cry against abuses. But to my purpose. These be the three causes,
which hartned me to translate this epistle, notwithstanding I knew I should
displease some, for God is to be pleased rather then men: notwithstanding I was
not ignorant that our base tongue could not atteine to the majesty of Osorius
his Laten, for I regard not so much the fynes of words, as the diuynenes of
the matter: notwithstanding this epistle of Osorius is after a sort answered a
quoda^ osore veritatis, who shall be nameles, for all the world can wytness
that the answer osoris illius is no more to be compared to the epistle of
Osorius, then the light of a lamp to the light of a lynck, then the light of a
lynck to the light of the Son. Allthough being compared with other of his
own sect, I confess him to be as he is taken a man of handsome eloquence. But
compare him to the glistryng stars, which are this day in the catholic
church, and namely to Osorius, against whom he sets himself, he is but a
candle under a bushel, as he shall well perceive at Osorius next answer, if so
be Osorius thinck him worthy to be answered. But to leave all comparisons, for
that they be odious, I wish to that answerer not the eloquence of Osorius,
which I know he would abuse in setting out the false Church, but the grace and
spirit of Osorius, to be one of the true church. Then I doubt not, but he will
wish when he made that answer, he had don some other thing, but I will say no
more, for I almost had don his name to be understood against my will. Only,
gentle Reader, I desire the, diligently to read this epistle, in reading it
to learn, in learning to live according as it does council. For I assure the
this is a pretiouse pearl, which held against the Son of good understanding,
casts out such a glystring light, that Princes thereby may learn to rule,
subjects may learn to obey, wauerers in religion may be stayed, wanderers may
be brought in to the right way. If thou profit, give God the chief praise:
and if thou thinck me worthy no thank for that I have but declared and set
out in English an other man's his doing in Latten, I am well content. Yet
remember that many times we see those men, which have iewelles in keeping,
which be none of their own, to receive great thanks at their hands, to
whom they do show them.

Fare well, from Antwerp. xiiij. of March. R. S.

A PEARL FOR A PRINCE.
I WAS, I assure you (most noble Princess) here to fore sufficiently
provoked to the love of your Majesty and highness, when I herd say how much
you did prevail in wit, how greatly you had profited in Greek and Latten,
and how you did join your Princely dignity with liberalle learning and
knowledge: But after that certain men brought me word, that you willingly did
read my works, His book entitled De vera nobilitate.
my former good will was so much increased toward you, as in words I am not
able to utter. Whether they told me that unfeignedly, or that they meant to
curry favor with me, I am not able to say, but this I am assured of, that I
took great pleasure at their sayings, and bethought my selffe how in
writing I might witness my most loving and most lowly heart toward you. For I
mistruste not, but with the same favor with which you read my works (if it
be true, that you be not a littell delighted in reading them) you will
interteine these my letters.

Specially, seeing those other my works do concern the common profit of all
men, but these my letters intend cheifely the mayntenaunce of your estate, and
the auauncement of your Royal Majesty. The which thing, though I shall not
be able to compass, yet my good will is not to be displeasantly taken of you.
For why? mighty Princes are wont not so much to have an eye to the worth of
the thing which is presented to them, as to weygh the heart and the good meaning
of the presenter. For seeing the suerest defense and furnyture of Princelye
renome, does stay upon the frendeshipp and trustines of men, how can that be
mistaken of them, which they perceive to proceed of a hearty love and special
fidelity? and that here I may make an entrance to my writing, I am wont many
times to merueil with my self at the providence of God in appointing kings,
The merueilous providence of God in kyngly regiment.
that to a multitude of people al most innumerable, made of so sundry natures,
greatly disagreing one with an other, he has given such a mind, that it
will have an eye cheifely to one, that it will be kept in awe at the
commaundment of one, that it will suffer it self as it were to be tied short
with the laws and procedinges of one. In so much that whereas men often times
about other things, with deadlye hatred do war among them selves, and
outeragiously disagree, yet in this one point (for the most part) with
great consent of minds, they cleave and hold together. And as I greatly
wunder at this, so I account those kings, which at the appointment of that
high and everlasting king, do execute so worthy and paynefull an office, The
preeminence of kings above other persons.
to be men far surmounting in all kind of virtue, and all together endued
with godly perfection. For there is nothing greater or more honorable, nothing
so hard and paynefull to attchyue, as to brydell the affections of men, to cut
a way filthy desires, to maintain innocentie, with rewards to encorage
virtue, with punishment to discorage syn, and finally in establishing peace
and quietness, to make the hole common wealth to florishe and abound with all
commodities. Seeing no man is able to perform those things, but he which is
endued with heavenly grace, surely they which worthily behave the^ selves in
their kingly vocation, are to be accounted in the number of the heavenly
citezins, and worthy to be reuerensed as certain gods among men. If so be
notable men, when they give them selves wholly to preserve the common wealth,
and do uprightly, wisely and discretly rule their kingdom, A woman wisely
ruling is more to be merueiled at then a man.
be much merueiled at, surely when a woman shall do the like, she shall give
men greater occasion to merueile. For what is more to be wondered at, then to
behold in a woman a manly constantie, in a virgin an horehedded prudence, in
great abou^dance of richesse, great praise of temperaunce and modesty? What
can sooner astonish a man, then to see the tender and deintie nature of a woman
to be trimmed and decked with so many virtues, that she is able to uphold the
burden of the whole realm, and to be have her self in that office with great
commendation, which is scantly brought to pass with the advice, prouesse,
fidelity and authority of many excellent men? Wherefore (as it is to be hoped) if
you will so order the common wealth, that you will not swerve from the virtue
of your auncetoures, who only embraced godlynes, you shall so far go beyond
them in greatness of renome, as it is a greater matter for a young woman to rule
a Realm wyselie and stoutelye, then for men which are strengthened with ripe
years and experience. If there were ever any woman of excellent virtue, which
with a noble courage has bent her self to the care of the common wealth, and
by that carefulnes and government, A wyder wyndowe of winnyng immortal fame
opened to our Queen of England then to any Prince here to fore.
has won great commendation, your Kingdom has happened to you in such
a time, and you have gotten such a matter to work on, that if you will
constantly take in hand those affairs, which well become that princely
disposition which glistreth in you, with the brightness of your noble praise
and worthy doings, you shall ouershadowe and darcke^ the great acts of
most mighty princesses. And that we may boldly warrant the whole Christian
common wealth, thus much of your grace, Causes of good hope in our noble
Queen.
many causes do move us. For you are endued with a singular wit. You are
learned in the precepts of most noble sciences: you are praised above all
others for gentleness and mekenes, which well beseme your comelye beauty: and
as for those praises which are due to constancy, you well think, that you
ought not to deny them, or put them from you. Therefore if you will not
neglect and forget your self, you shall set a good stay in the common weal,
you shall bring all those mischeifes, which disquiet it, Great danger in
unskillful ruling the ship of the English common weal.
to an end: and you shall purchase your self everlasting commendation. But on
the other side, if in such storms and hurly burlies, you shall go any thing a
wrye, and shall vnskillfully rule the stearne of your charge* it is an hundred
to one (which God forbid) but that the ship of this your common wealth,
dashing against hidden and secret rocks, shall be all to broken: and the
passingers which be committed to your charge, shall utterly perish and be
cast away. Therefore seeing you be in that taking, that either you must wyn
great honor with the safety of your whole realm, or become a laughing stock
with the overthrow of your common wealth, I think that no riches nor
treasures ought to be so dear unto you, No riches to be prefered before
faithful counsel
that you should prefer them before faithful council, which intends the
staying and assuring of your kingdom. But perchance you will say to me, An
objection.
do you think me so ill bestead of friends and councelloures, that you need
now to tell me what I should do? or have you so much vacant time from the
affairs of Portugale* that you can intend to take care for the matters of
England? I think verily, The answer.
there be in England many wise men, greatly to be commended for their virtue
and godlynes, to whom if you will give ear, you shall provide very well for
your self and your realm, and trimlye maintain your princelye port and
estate. A goodly similitude.
But like as they which be much given to gather goods, allthoughe they have
great riches laid up in store at home, yet for all that do not refuse gold
and silver, which is brought unto them from other places, and look how rycher
they wax, so much the more they covet to have their good heaped and
increased: even so wise Kings, whose treasure ought rather to consist in the
prudent advise and faythfulnes of good men, then in the abundance of money,
although they have store of council. Yet if those riches, which they esteem
above all other, by any means be augmented, they ought not to set it light,
or despise it. Nether neade they to care, whether he which cou^celleth them, be
a country man borne, or a stranger, but of what intent he takes such an
office upon him. Beside this, counsels given of forenners, many times are
least to be suspected. For many treasons are wrought against Princes of their
howseholde servants, Inimici hominis domestici eius. Matthew. 10.
many crafty fetches are attempted in the court for love of lucre, many
things are covered with the cloak of dissimulation, partly to curry favor,
and partly for fear of falling in to daungerouse displeasure: so that there be
very few, which dare frelye speak their mind to Princes: last of al, I add
this, that I think no Christian Prince a forrener or a stranger, but I
profess my self to be beholding to all, but cheifelye to you, whom before all
other for the hope which I have conceived of your gentleness, I have set before
mine eyes only to be worshipped and reuerensed.

But that I may come to that, which I have taken in hand, two things
specially are to be considered of all Kings, 2. things of Kings to be
considered.
first the worthiness of the office which they bear, and secondly the
weightynes and paynefulnes in fullfilling that office. As for the worthynes of
it, it is so great, The worthiness of kingly office.
as greater can not be imagined in this life. For all Kings for their own
part, are the Vicares of God his authority, for it is as it were the office
and room of a God, that one man among all the rest, should so far excel,
that all with one agreement of mind, should yield them selves to be ledd and
defended of him, and that they should believe, that the strongest bulwarks of
their life, welfare, and worship, do rest in his wisdom, manhood; and
honesty. Now, as touching the difficulty of their office, The difficulte of
Kyngly office.
it is unspeakable. For if it be an hard matter to rule al affections, to
bridle dishonest desires, to subdue the unruly motions of the mind, and to keep
the whole state of the mind in such a frame, that nothing arise, which with
any boysterouse blast may shake or disquiet it, then what ado is it for one not
only to wayne him selffe from his own will, but also to tame and qualify the
affections of the whole people, after such a sort, that no out rage or
uproar burst out of their unruly minds, which may set the whole common
wealth out of order?

Therefore he which is charged with such an office, as requires first that he
should keep him self in order, (for it
can not be, that he should assuage other men's lusts, which can not tempre his
own,) and secondly, that with reason he should alay the trobles of the whole
common wealth, that as much as in him lies, he should make all his subjects
sober and discrete, and that he should ward them with the defense of all
virtues, I say, such a man is to be aided and socored with the help, not
only of man, but also of God, to the intent, that the thing which he has
lustyly purposed, he may luckyly perform. But that I may first entreat of man
his help (which nevertheless is contained in the aid and assistaunce of God)
I think, How necessary good men be for Kings.
that all the riches and possessions of Kings, which with great endeavor are
to be sought after, ought to stay upon the wisdom and honesty of good men.
For no Prince is able by any means, either in war to get the victory, or in
peace to mayntaine his honor, either in his affairs to behave himself
politikely, or in his leisure continewe quietlye, which is not as it were
walled with the company of good men. For how shall he be able with his own
eyes to see to all things, which Kings ought to look to? Or how with his
own ears can he hear the complaints of all clientes? Or with his own mind
and consideration, study for so many things, as be requisite to preserve the
common weal?

Therefore many are to be called to take part in the ordring of the kingdom,
what manner of men kings should call to their council.
which be men bewtified with the jewels of kyngly qualities, that is to say,
justice, temperance, manhood, sagenes, stedfastnes, liberality, and wisdom, in
which one virtue, all things which are praise worthy be contained. Yea these
men must be of such wisdom, wise men.
that they be able to try out all things narrowly, and by former causes long
before to provide, for things which may ensue afterward.

Their trustines must be such, Trusty men.
that no bribes, or advantage, may lead them a side from doing their duty,
and maintayning the truth. They ought to be of so valiant a courage, Stout
me^.
that nothing may dismay them from sayng that plainly, which may be
healthful to the common weal. A trim similitude.
For like as sick men often times loathe and abhor holsom medicyns, if they be
bitter and vntothesome, and long after those things which be enemies to their
health, even so now and then Princes being sore sick and diseased in their
sowles, refuse the physic of true council, and are delighted with counterfeit
fynes of lying, and deceaueable lickersomnes of flattery. So it comes to
pass, that all be it in the beginning they take a pleasure, yet in the end,
they bye their rashness, and folly, with hartbreake and sorowfulnes: and as
nothing is more godly then truth, so nothing is more healthful for the common
weal. For what other difference is there between wise men and fools,
Difference between wise men and fools.
but that wise men with ernest travail, purchase to them selves things which
are good in deed: but foles being beguyled with false appearaunces, hunt after
things which have a show of goodness, and in deed be very vain trifles, and
mockeries: and so at length whilst they covet false worship, and seek after
deceiptfully pleasures, they be branded with the marck of foul shame, and be
tormented contynually with the worm of their wicked conscience. Therefore all
the trade of a blessed life consists in truth, and all wretchedness stands
upon lying and dissimulation. For which co^syderation, all Princes which do
wish the safety of their common weal, and desire to co^tinewe and uphold
their honor, ought all ways to pretend this, both in word and work to
witness this, that nothing is more dear unto the^, then the bright beams of
verity. So they shall set all good men free from fear, and hold shameless
flaterers noses to the grynstone. The which thing that they may more easily
compass, what Kind of me^ Princes should banishe from them.
it is neadefull that they enriche and highely aduau^ce good and true meaning
men, but as for nawghtiepackes, coyners of lies, and forgers of flearing tales,
they ought to abandon them far from their acquaynetaunce, and to think them
unworthy of any preferme^t. For all flatterers be sworn enemies to the truth,
back friends to all good men, very poison of Princes, and not only deadly foes
to the whole c^munaltie, but also malishiously minded against God him selffe.
For he which wrastleth against the truth, wrastleth against the mighty ruler
of all things, who is the only and everlasting verity. Therefore these
naughty and pestilent persons, are to be put out of all co^ceipt, to be kept
a loofe from climing to honor, to be excluded from all company and
familiarity, yea to be banished as far as there is any land, lest the
infectyon of their myschefe, should spread it selffe to the utter undoing of
Kings, and waste the whole common wealth, with a remediless consumption. But
on the other side, they which ever speak the truth, never double or
dissemble, but esteem true virtue more then worldly riches* and draw the line
of their whole life, by the square of wisdom and honesty, they I say, if
they keep the^ selves secret, be to be pulled out of their prime closettes,
will they nill they, draw they back never so much, they are to be brought
acquaynted with kings, and to have whole heaps of riches bestowed upon them.
For those riches of Kings, Fidelity the suerest treasure house of Princes.
be in better assurau^ce, which be laid up in the fidelity of good men, then
those which be horded and couched up in their cofers. For being laid up in the
treasure house, they breed the cancker of envy, but being set a broad to
the use of good men, they make the King to be well spoken of, and fortify his
estate, with the faithful hearts of good men. Beside this, riches closed and
chested up, may either be carried away of thieves, or be lasht out and made
hauock of, through the falshode of the kepers. But the remembrance of a good
turn, is rooted for ever in tha^kfull minds, and can not be plucked out by
any man's pilfrie. More over, it is to be considered, that they which by no
false or soul fetches; but by true virtue and fair conditions, came to be
familiar with their Kings, do thinck that of duty they ought to bestow
those riches which they received of their Kings* to the profit of them by
whom they enjoy them. But they, which by hypocrisy, The properte of
hypocritical honor hunters.
have obtained great wealth of Kings, for so much as they gape al for
gains, as soon as they spy, where more advantage is to be gotten, they
forsake their kings, yea they betray them, and some time bid them battle.
Whereby we may gather, how mad all Princes be, which not regarding good men,
bestow riches and promotions upon wicked persons, and put all their honor
in the credit of them, whom covetousness will not suffer to be trusty and
faithful. But they which be of such wisdom, that displacyng naughty men,
do call good men unto them, and make them partakers of their councils and
charge, do provide very well for their honor and safety. For it can not be,
that the Safegarde of Princes should be betrayed of them, who hold fidelity
more dear, then all the wealth of the world: nether can their honor be
stained with any spotte of reproach, when it shall appear, that they be
fastened in the frendshippe and familiarity of vnculpable men. For as nothing
brings more shame to Kings, then the company and familiaritye of rakehells,
so the frendshippe of good men, does greatly increase their glory and renome.

For we so judge of them, like loves like.
as they be, with whom they be most familiar and co^uersant. Whereby we may
conclude, that those Kings be not to be counted rich and puissant, which
possess great pyles of gold and silver, what Kings are to be counted rich.
pretiouse stones gloriously glystring, great store of yuorie, many mines of
metal, and be Lords over many lands: but those rather, which be assisted
with a number of men excelling in honesty and trustines, which be lincked in
league, and frendshippe of all good men, so far as shall become their
Princely person and Royal majesty. For all those things before said, be
seldom obtained without virtue, Virtue with out riches is sufficient.
but they be never retained without the succoure of virtue. But turn virtue
naked out of all the robes of riches, yet she will hold her own, and make
her bright beams, be seen a great way of. Beside this, Riches with out
virtue be impotent.
if riches have not the aid of virtue, they can help nothing, but rather stir
up and kyndle the cole of covetousness in the hearts of many, to work treason
against them, whom they see pufft up with plenty of possessions.

But virtue alone, many times without reskue of riches, preserves the Prince
his estate, and does avoid the danger, which hangs over the common wealth.
But this may suffice, which we have spoken, as concerning the healpe of man:
now it follows in order, that we should entreat of the aid and assistaunce
of God.

Therefore, if the honesty and faithfullnes of good men be of such force,
that without their healpe, no Kingdom or common weal can long endure, then I
pray you, what shall we think of the healpe of God? For God is he by whose
Deity, council, will, kingdoms do begin, God is first to be sought for.
be enlarged, and mayntayned: by whose wisdom they be kept in order, by whose
help they be vpholden, and finally, by whose displeasure they decay,
ouerwhelme, and utterly come to naught. Therefore a Prince, which will acquit
him self well in his office, and comlyly handle the rule committed to his
charge, before all things must keep religion purely and vndefyledly, and in
his daily prayers desire God to prosper him, accompting all the happy success
in rulyng the realm, to stay upon the service and pleasing of God. For first,
if wisdom be so necessary for Kings, that without it, they can not have so
much as a piece of a common wealth, but they shall leave all things topp
feturuy, and seeing wisdom borrows her light of none other, then of that
passing and unspeakable clearenes of the wisdom and spirit of God, by the
which all things are led in the right way, and lightened, upon what things
should kings more bestow their study, then in ernest bendyng themselves to
religion, and purely praying for God his healpe and assistaunce? which thing if
they do, The effect which Kings have by serving of God.
such clearenes of Godly wisdom, such a brightness of wonderful virtue shall
shoot out of their minds, that they shall not only discern what is right,
honest, and profitable, and know to try what difference is between counterfeit
and current, but look what so ever they perceive to be right, that same they
shall stedfastlye put in practyse. For the mercy and goodness of God, works
both these things in us. For first it shows a most clear light to man his
mind, and armeth him with invincible valiantnes, so that by means of the one,
he never trippes or treades a wrye, and by reason of the other, is not abashed
of the danger or troble, that the executing of his office brings with it.

For there is nothing so hard to come by, nothing so cou^tregarded with
ingynes, which he shall not easily batter and beat down, which is endued with
Godly virtue. He must therefore speadily asuage all the brutishe mocyons of the
mind, what a Prince should do which seeks for god his help
he must wayne himself of his own will, he must scrape out all the blottes
and blemishes of vices, and so lighten all the state of his mind with the
brightness of honesty, that a meruaillouse amiablenes, beauty, and lively image
of God his holy spyrit, may clearly appear in it. For it can not be, but he
which in this life so much as is in man his power* with clear eyes does
behold God, and daily does vewe that pearlesse fayrenes and beauty, should be
raueshed with the love of it, and force him self ernestly to be like unto it:
specially, seeing he can not attain to resemble and be like unto it so much by
his own labor and travail, as by the goodness and graciousnes of God. And
lo, out of this likelihood of men's minds, The effect of the likely hood of
ma^s mind with god
with the spirit of God, there springs an everlasting band of amitye, which
causes God so to cleave to man's soul, that he will vouchsafe a gyltles and
devoutly disposed mind, plentiful to partake of his Godly treasures.
Therefore such a mind, he enformeth with counsel, he wardeth with virtue, he
compasses with conforte, and in all hasard does defend it with his godly
presence. Therefore they which be kyndled with the love of true virtue, Virtue
is full of good hope.
being hartned with this hope, though all the world be together by the ears,
though the ground open with earth quakes, yet they be not dismayed, but then
most of all they trust God will succoure them: and when in man's judgment all
hope is past, they stand styffly in this belefe, that God will save them
harmeles.

Whereby we may gather, that for so much as man's nature is so feeble, and that
there is no hold to be had in these transitory and glyding goods of the
world, and that all our life stands in the gunshot of dangers,
couragiousnes of mind, and confidence of vnprenable strength to be found in
them only, which consider that they have God on their side. Therefore seeing no
man can take upon him the office of a King, without wonderful wisdom, without
a special token of worthynes, without the stay of an unconquerable stoutenes,
and none of all these laudable virtues, grow out of the ground, but descend
down from heaven by God his inspyration, it is plain that Kings ought to
employ all their care and office, to be of an holy and blameles religion. For
they and none other, are to be reckned wise, dyscrete, and strong, which are
knyt with the knot of right religion to God, who is the author, and cheifetayne
of all wisdom, honesty, and valiantnes.

But what shall we now say of justice? can any man ministre it, onles he cast
all his mind upon the rule of the everlasting law, and conceive in his mind,
the well spring of righteousness, and diligently marcke the order and semelynes,
with the which that chief ruler sets all things in frame? and last of all,
unless he give him self wholly to the study of God his law? surely it is
impossible. For God only is the pythe, wisdom, and rule of the law: he is the
beginning and rote of upright dealing, and father of all justice. By whose
grace, all wholesome and profitable laws be enacted, by whose procurement they
be kept and preserved. Hereby it follows, that they only glystre with the
brightness of justice, which fix their eye upon that high and everlasting
light. Verily out of this agreement of mind, by the which men resemble the
justice of God, and stretch all the stringes of their study to profit the
common wealth, the love and hearty good will of men does grow, out of this
does issue the commendation of myldenes and courtesy, out of this (to be
short) does proceed all the swetenes of most true pleasure and delight. For no
bodyly pleasure is in any point to be compared with the pleasure which comes
of unfeigned honesty. For the pleasure of the body many times in a madness is
desired, The difference between the pleasure of the body and the mind
and in twinkling of an eye vanishes away, and afterward seareth the mind
with sadness, and leaves a print of shame behind it. But that pleasure which
true virtue does breed, is chosen out wisely, and is inioyed continually, not
able to be defiled with any lewd affection, or defaced with any villainy,
because it is far from all infectiue filthiness, and joined with excellent
honesty and comlynes, by reason of which, it comes to pass, that their life,
which be lincked in love with God, is not only adorned with Godly virtue,
endued with great riches, and put in sure hope of everlasting glory, but also
is replenished with steadfast and unspeakable joy and comfort, so that they
may lawfully cry with that most fayntely King, how great is the plenty of thy
sweet comfort, o Lord, which thou haste laid up for them which love the?
Therefore the love and carefulnes of religion, does conteyne all these
benefytes, with the which the labors sustained in virtuous practice, are
made more tolerable and easy, and requited with a certain exceeding swetenes,
and without the which, the Kingdom can not be well ordered. More over what a
notable thing is that? that all the subjects, except such which through
myschefe are grown to a monstrouse madness and crueltye, Subjects do love and
wyllingly obey religious Princes.
will greatly love those Kings, and use much fidelity toward them, if they
se them deuoutely to embrace religion? For it must neades be, that the picture
of divine fayrenes set before men's eyes, should make them greatly inamored,
and cause every body to be much delighted with it: and there is no man which
will let this sinck in his mind, that he which fears God and casts all to
please him, will once forsake his faith or shrinck from his service. Therefore
partly because they perceive him learned in the precepts and conncels of God,
and to be ernestly bent to care for the common wealth, partly because they
mistrust not his goodness, and stand not in dought that he will forget public
profit, whilst he licketh his own fyngers, they willingly obey him, and in no
wise grudge to be under him. Now then, if no Realm, no City, yea no house
can be vpholden without it be ruled, and the manner of ruling well, stands in
pure and perfect religion, surely nothing may be invented more profitable or
wholesome then religion, to keep a multitude of men in awe, and good order. For
what can more strengthen a ruler, then that all men may know and perceive, that
all his delight and study is, to profit the common weal? for so it comes to
pass, that the common wealth has him in admiration, loves him, and with
hearty good will does yield to his procedinges. Otherwise they will not long
lead in his line, but as much as lies in them, they will strive to cut or
snap it a sundre: for no regiment can long continue, which is rather
established with fear of punishment, then with love of virtue. If so be that
agreement does preserve and increase the common weal, but drawing diverse
ways, does tear it and minsse it all to ma^mockes, and the right religion of
the Prince does as it were glue his subjects together with this co^corde, (for
all with one consent do show obeisaunce to a religiouse Prince, and be ready
at his commandment) then without peradventure, all the saffegarde and surety
of the common wealth does bear it self upon religion. Moreover, that is not
to be lightly weighed, that untrue subjects will not be so bold to work
treason against their Prince, on whose side they think God to be. Neither do
his enemies ventre so sone to bid him battle, whom they see to be waited on
with the train and guard of God his healpe. For if they go about to work
wyles, or offer war, they do it fayntly and fearfully, so that naughtye
subjects being taken with the manner, may suffer for their offense, or for
fear be reclamed from their naughtienes, and enemies also may easily leave of
to move war and disquietnes.

For they willingly seek to be at one with them whose strength in war they
fear, whose fidelitye in peace they love, and whom they know to be such,
that they neade not mystrust, least they should break the truce, which they
have well agreed upon.

Last of all, seeing every common wealth does frame it self to the Princes
fashio^s, if the Prince be a worthy worshipper of godlynes and religion, the
whole common wealth must neades lay fast hold upon the same religion. The
effect of true religion.
And religion truly does restrain naughtye desires, it does keep wantones
under, it abateth pride, it staieth rashenes and folishe hardynes, it makes
men discrete, and obedient, both to the laws, and also to them which execute
the laws. For there is nothing of more power then the fear of God, to pull
back out ragiouse desires, to cut the combt of bragging and lightness. For when
we call to mind, how much we be bound to our high and most holy father
for his benefits bestowed upon us, and what pains be ordained for them which
defyle the beauty of their soul with syn and uncleanness, and when we conceive
in our understanding, that there be no lurkyng holes which can hyndre the
sight of God, seeing those things, which Iye hyd under the earth: yea even
very hell it self, which is wrapped with continual darcknes, appear brightly
in his sight, I say, when we weygh all these things with our selves we
break and disapointe our own will, partly least we should offend his eyes
with fylthines, or show owre selves unthankful toward him (then the which
nothing is more greuouse) partly least we should shame our selves, and work
owre everlasting woe, through owre own abhominatyon: and so being reskewed by
the healpe of God, we bear away the victory vanquishing and putting to flight
all kind of wickedness, for they which stand in awe of God his judgments, and
fear to displease him, be never forsaken of him, or left to shyft for them
selves. Therefore being assured of his comfort, they easily keep of the
assault of concupiscens, from scaling and inuading the main tower of reason.
So then, it is an easy matter, to live ordrely, to do as a man ought to do,
and to practyse all things which virtue does prescribe, when dyuellyshe
desires be quenched and subdued.

For who can avoid uncleanness, but he which with vndesyled eyes beholds that
high and everlasting honesty, trymnes and neatenes, which is in the beauty of
God? who shall be blameles in ministering justice, but he which does mark the
fashion, order, and comlynes with the which that mighty Lord rules all
things, fytly places all things, and in their several offices appoynteth
all things? who will not stick to put his life in danger, who in battle
will fight stoutely and manfully for the mayntenaunce of justice, and in the
common quarrel, but he which trusts that God will be ever at his elbowe? and
though he be slain in the field, yet trusts that God has not cast him of,
but rather believes for this short and fading life, to be rewarded with an
everlasting life, in which he shall enjoy all felicity in the company of the
blessed saints? Therefore if religion in time of peace, does make men discrete
and sobre, and merueillously agreing together in louable unity, willing and
ready to obey the laws, and Princes procedinges, and in time of war does
harten them above the common strength of men, and so rauisheth them with the
love of everlasting life, that they will spend their blood and life in their
cou^tryes cause, to the intent they may wyn heaven: is it not plain, that a
King which has an ernest desire to do his duty to the uttermost, ought to
set all his care and study in the well disposyng of religion? For so he shall
most royally abound with the riches and orname^tes of virtues, and shall flow
on every side with exceeding glory which shall never decay, and in all
doughtfull adventures shall be strenghtned with the aid of God, and shall
receive great comfort of the remembrance of so many good deeds: neither
shall he alone be in an happy case, but he shall make all the common wealth
committed to his charge, partaker of his happy and blessed life: The charge of
Kings.
in the which all the duty and office of a King does consist. For what other
charge has a King assygned him over the common wealth, then that he should
make the common weal florishe, and be in a blessed state? which no other wise
is brought to pass, but by a special devotion to virtue and religion.

But look how much the more religion surmou^teth all other virtues, (for they
all be borne of her, carried in her arms, and dandled in her lap) so much the
more it is to be feared, Heresye is an hypocrite.
least vice take upon it the name of virtue and religion, and under the
pretense of holiness, may overthrow and vndermynde all Godlynes. For as nothing
is more contrary to virtue then hypocrisye, so it evidently does bewray it
self, in feigned and counterfeyte religion. For horrible wickedness, cloking it
self deceiptfully with the name of virtue, myndeth nothing else, but the
rasyng of religion, and scrapyng of the remembrance of God out of men's
minds. Here most noble Queen, Notable and wholesome counsel to our noble Queen.
I desire you to consider the matter wisely: for seeing you be clogged with so
many cares, that by no means you be able by your own wit to avoid such
snares, and so peryllous pytfals, which be laid for you, and all
Christendom, and seeing all the swey of your Kingdom stands upon this one
point, that you should inbrace religion purely, that you should be assysted with
the healpe of God, and that you should keep the realm assigned to you, in good
estate and prosperitye, nothing ought to be better welcome to you, specially in
such disagreme^t of religion, then to be advertised of matters of so great
importance, by a man which wysheth your grace very well, which is far from
hope of all fylthie lucre, which also knows what belongs to true religion.
I dare be bold to say thus much unto your grace, that if I had mistrusted
your wisdom and gentleness, I would not have bestowed labor in writing these
letters. For it had been a point of great madness, to take that in hand, which I
have utterly dispaired of. But when your wit, learning, gentleness, and good
nature, The spoil of religion in England is not to be imputed to our
graciouse Queen
did bring me in great hope of your honorable Majesty, and when I understood
that the spoil of religion, which is committed in your realm, is not to be
imputed to you, but to many men which being verbes active I know not of what
mad mood, go about to pull insondre the fences and enclosures of all law and
religion, and that it is no God a mercy to them, but long of your graciouse
goodness, that any sparcke of Christian religion does remain, I dought not but
you will be well pleased to here me speak. Wherefore in most hearty manner,
3. Wise and godly requests to our royal Queen.
I desire you first that you will take these my enterpryses in good part, (the
which you shall do, if you will look in to my heart out of which proceadeth
all that I do:) secondly that before you have readen all which I purpose to
comprehend in this epistle, you will not give your verdict either to the
praise or disprayse of them: last of all, I request you by the faith which you
owe to Christ, that if by the craftye council of others, you have conceived any
wrong opinion, if right reason shall confound it, if evident truth shall
bewray it, if godlynes shall boult it out, that you will not refuse the good
grace of God, but willyngly give credit to those reasons which you shall see to
be more agreeable to Christian religion. For it is the point not only of a
proud and arrogant stomach, but also the token of a dull and blockyshe wit,
(which faults be very far from you) to be so addicted to certain chosen and
singular opinions, beaton in to the head by daily crying and calling on of
wicked persons, that it can not be removed from that opinion which it has
once taken in hand to defend. which thing as in every trade of life, is beyond
all God his forbode, so in wrong religion which is taken of a head, is most
perylous and dangerous. For the more trymme, excellent, and profitable any
thing is in his right kind, so the more vile, beggarly, and hurtful it is,
when it is cou^terfeit. Mark the manifold miseries caused by the false
preachers of our time,
The which I would God we had not tried in these troblesome days. For after
that by the naughtye persuasyon, and bedlem boldness of some, men forsook that
religion which from the Apostles time, even to our age has continued
invincible, and many being inuegled with painted words, have strayed from
that way which the disciples of Christ did first open, and many holy men in
whom the holy ghost dwelled, did afterward enlarge, that they might walcke in
that pathe, which with a show of lice^tiousnes and pleasure, did draw folish
and unadvised men unto it, I say, after that this new devised religion was
spredd abroad by means of many seditiouse sermons, and erronyouse books, we
have seen shamefastnes suddenly to be shaken of, honesty to be chassed out of
the country, man his law and God his law to be trodden under foot, holy
things to be profaned, godlynes to be iested at, boldness every where to escape
skotfree, unshamefastness to be mayntayned, many opinions contrary one to the
other, to be scattered abroad, the unity of Christ to be torn with suits of
diverse sects, and in every place where these mad men have come, the fire of
horrible discord to have been blown up. Out of this root have spronge deadly
displeasures, often vprores, perylouse dagger drawinges: hereof many blody
battayles have been fought, many slaughters done, many spoils committed, many
men's possessions destroyed with fire and sword. And now, I pray, you who is
so blind which does not see what crueltye appears in many of them, which
have been the authors of these opinyo^s, with what disdaynefull arrogancye they
do iette up and down, with what malypertnes and cursed speaking they rail
upon good men? Add now here unto, the breach of laws, the contempt of rule,
the hatred of Kyngly authority, the unmercifully treasons which these men most
dyuelyshly deuyse against Princes. Reckon here also, their secrette
whysperynges, when they cast their heads together how to destroy and undo
their Kings, and whilst most shamefully they work their woe, for whose wealth
and good estate, they ought to serve and call upon God. For who has so littell
wit, that can not perceive, that this sect is altogether for the peoples to
the, and to feade their humor, and that it is more fyt to styr up and
increase, then to asuage and diminish their folly and madness? But all these
people pleasers, for so much as they be men of no wisdom or discreti^o, but
be led with an inordinate desire of liberty, they love not law, they defye
iusticers, they wyshe in their hearts that kings were at the dyuel, that they
without co^ptrolme^t might live as they list. For they covet to be set free
from law and order, that they may be bond slaves to their own will and
naughty affecti^os, is there any m^a can deny this? have not we had the proof
of it by many examples? does not every man see that they shoot all at this
mark, that Princes being dispatched out of the way, there might none be left
which should once say, black is their eye? Therefore some Kings they have
poisoned, some they have attempted to kill with the sword, and have cast many
myschenouse fetches, how to pull them out of their seat. But peradventure
some man will say, An heretis call objection.
this has not chaunsed for any grudge which those good men have borne toward
Kings, but only for the diuersytye and variance of religion. And that it were
not to be feared that the mad and mysheuouse multitude might work them any
displeasure, if Princes would agree with them about ordring and appointyng of
religion He which will say this, of necessytie he must grant, A Catholyke
answer.
that it is the intent and meaning of this new devised religion, by hook or
by crook to seek the death of those Princes, which will not forsake the
religion in which they have been virtuously and wisely brought up, to come to
the lure of the mad people. Again, he does not wisely weygh, how that the end
of this sect, is ouermuche liberty, which can be kept in no order, then the
which, nothing can be more contrary to the office and regiment of Kings. For a
King his office is, to cut up vice with the knyfe of punishment, but the
unbridled people do desire to be delivered from the fear of all punishment. A
King is the executor, The office of a King and the will of the people be
contrary.
keeper, and maintayner of the laws, but the people as much as it is able,
with rashness does rent and al to tear them. A king studieth for peace and
quietness, but the people all together unruly, does seek troble and
disturbaunce. Last of all, a king does not think, that all things are to be
bestowed of every man a like, but as every man is more worthy then an other,
so he rewards him after the rate of his desert. But the people, would not
have one better then an other, and desires to have heaven and earth mingled
together. So that as in no sauce it can abide any superiors, so most
cheifely it hates kings to the death. For it can not away with any
excellency of more worthynes. and it stryueth all to this end, either to
destroy Kings utterly, or else to bring them in to a trappe of trobles. This I
grant does not appear at the first, but as soon as a company of mad
rakehels grows to any strength or power, then their boldness being encoraged
with long sufferaunce, and wincking at, bursteth out to the undoing and
overthrowing of the King his Majesty. Therefore seeing this is the nature of
the ignorant people, The nature of the ignorant people.
so sone as they have gotten people pleasyng captains, which with their
railing sermones may puff them up as it were with wyndy blastes, and raise
mighty waves of folly and madness, surely Princes do unwisely which do not nyp
wyckednes in the head, so sone as it does begin, but cherishe it with their
sofftnes, and strengthen it with their bearing. For they do not perceive that
they make a rod for them selves, when they suffer that to spryng and increase,
which at the last being grown to a head, will pull them out of their throne, and
so when it is to late, they shall se that they have bred their own bane, which
they shall not be able to remedy when they would. Wherefore then they shall
drink of the whyp for their madness, as all other Princes do, which take upon
then to further and maintain with public authority, the folish fansye of the
common people. But peradventure they will deny that this is a people pleasyng
sect. Then what is a people pleasyng sect if this be not? does it not every
where stir up sedityon? A proof that this new learning is a people pleasing
sect.
does it not break the bands of all justice and laws? does it not resist
rule and kingly regiment? does it not put all men in hope of to much lewd
liberty? For where is rule most dispysed? where are the Princes had in most
derisyon of the c^omon people? surely in those places where this pestilent
learning does get the upper hand. Therefore if this mad enterprise taken
myscheuousely in hand of these people pleasers, and unadvisedly wynked at of
Princes, shall grow to a rypenes, which way so ever it takes, it will quyte
ouerturne all the defense and strength of kyngly estate.

Believe me (o Queen,) this sect which for our sins has over run many parts
of Christendom, is the undoing of common wealths, the marring of good
ma^ners, the spoiling of kingdoms, and the destruction of all kyngly honor.
But you will say, that you set not so much by your reign, that for the love
of it, you would lose the riches of the everlasting kingdom, and that you would
willingly abide any adventure, that you might enter in to heaven. I will not
marvel if you will say this. For it is the point of a noble mind, to despise
the fletyng pleasures of this short life, and to be greatly in love with
immortalitye. For what goodness is in this life? what part of it is quyt of
danger? what is it which is not hemd in on every side with sorowfullnes? as
for laughinges, feastinges, mynstrelsye, sportinges, dalyaunces, many grefes do
follow them, and al delights are ended often times with pitiful and
lamentable mysfortunes. And put the case, that all things chance as we would
have them, yet we must abide the sharp shoure of death, which never is far
from us, but always is at our back, and daily pyncheth somethyng from our life.
For it is a folly to think death then to draw near when it makes an end of
our life, and not to feel the force of it, when daily it does crop and by
littell and littell wastes our life. For every day, death does incroche
upon us, and what so ever part of our age passes away, it is devoured by the
cruelty of death. Therefore seeing our life does so swyftly ebb away, and in
so little co^tinuaunce of time, is subject to so many grefes and miseries, and
all great possessions glyde away in a minute of an hour, what is a greater
point of wisdom, then to set at naught all the tryfles of this life, and to
give our mind to seek after heavenly and everlasting things? Wherefore if
this be your mind, that though you should hazard all your riches, you would
not weygh it a straw, so that by such means you might prepare your self away
to heaven, I can never worthilye praise the noble disposition of your princely
heart. Wherefore I give you council, that if the rayfers of this new religion,
can find out any means, how you may come a nearer way to heaven, although
great loss of goods should follow you by their doctrine, you notwithstanding
should make much of them, and thynk them worthy of all preferment. For small
things are not to be compared with great, worldly things with heavenly,
transitory things with everlasting.

Now then, what do they bring with them of such force to get heaven, that
ancient religion is to be forsaken, that the profit and high estate of the
kingdom is to be little esteemed? Peradventure some man will say: An
heretical excusation.
O yes, they bring with them a great furtheraunce to heaven, and wonderfully to
be com mended. For these men be not inuentors of novelties as fond men do
dream, but rather they labor to restore all things which were decayed, to
the perfection of their ancient and first institution: for it much greueth
them that the pureness of Christian religion, which Christ and his disciples did
leave behind, is choked with many superstitions, and corrupted with many
abuses: therefore they have found out a notable way, how they may put down all
superstition, and scour out all the blottes of Christian righteousness, that
so at the length, Christian religion may recover the light and pureness which it
had lost. A catholic consyderatio^ co^tayning an excellent quyppe.
Surely this is a worthy act, and deserving immortal praise. For what can be
inu^ted either better, for the profitablenes, or more excellent, for the
worthynes, then in such an infection and decay of good manners, in such a
spoil and overthrow of all good things, for one to step forth inspyred with
such virtue, that he can set a new glass upon old manners, that he can heal
things which are wounded, that he can repair things fallen in to ruin, that
he can cleanse religion from all fylth, and make all holy things perfect?

Wherefore it is no marvel, if many which were heartily in love with godlynes,
did take the decay of true religion heauely, and being intysed with such
goodly promises, did willingly follow whither those men did lead the^. But
before they had lept so far, they should have looked, of what abylitye these
promysers had been. what should have been co^sydered ere credit had be^ given to
these fair promisers.
For as merchaunt men do measure every man his fydelitye according to his
riches, for they never credit him whom they think unable to stand to his
promise, so in such great vauntes, regard was to be had, not only with what
words they did warrant, but rather muchemore it was to be weighed with
discretion, whether they were able to perform and acco^plyshe that which they
had spoken. Therefore it was requisyte, that he which should take upon him so
great and notable an enterprise, should be a man of a meruaylouse
vpryghteousnes, sagenes, sobrietye, manly courage, stedfastnes, ravished with
the love of heavenly things, furnished and replenished with great gifts of
the holy ghost. More over this is to be marked, for so much as in time past,
there have been many most holy and wise men, excelling in all kind of godlynes
and never any of them could find in his heart, to further this good intent of
youres after such sort as these men have first inverted, that it stands
with reason that these men which do take upon them to fullfyll your desire,
after such a new and unknown fashyon, should so far pass those excellent
worthies in virtue, as this maystrye which they have taken in hand, is more to
be praised then all the things which those holy men did in their life time.
But I pray you, is there any of these men, more holy, more sobre, more strong
to godward, then Athanasius, Basyll, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustyne, or other
fathers of most excele^t wisdom and religion? no doughtles* what then? could
such a great matter be brought to pass with mean and common virtue? it is
not to be believed. But let us relent thus much to them, and let us grant that
it might be, that God in our days would reuele to them which were of mean
behauyoure, Note.
that kind of doctrine inverted to redress and reform religion, which was
hyd from the holy fathers. Yet at the least, they must grant, that he whom
the wisdom of God would set over such an office, ought to be a man of
indifferent virtue and godliness. For God is not wont to commit honorable
offices of holiness and honesty, to naughty and wicked persons, and they can
bear no sway among wise men whose lives are defamed with dishonestie.
Therefore although to the discharging of so weighty an office, I did require
not without a cause excellent virtue and authority, yet for all that, because
it might seem unreasonable among such dreggishe doctoures, to look for the
examples of virtue and honesty which was used in old time, I will now content
my self with mean virtue and authority. Tell me therefore, who was he so
discrete, so perfect of lyffe, and ma^ners, that it was like that God did put
him in trust with this office? who was the beginner and founder of this
learning? Luther the first founder of this fond doctrine.
who was the hedd carpenter of this goodlye buylding? forsothe Luther. what
manner a fellow was this Luther? surely that I may speak the best of him, he
was a man neither sobre, neither discrete, but hedlong, rash, mischeuous,
Luthers lewd scollers.
seditious, and of all other the greatest people pleasure, and what manner of
men were they which afterward sprange out of his scole as out of a well?
vndoughtedly, bold, standing in their own co^ceite, puffed up with pride, and
(that I may say no wurse by them) men not so endued with virtue, that we being
moved with their authority, should forsake the rules of the religion in which
we were brought up. Therefore how can it synk in to a wise man his head, that
our most holy Lord, A question insoluble and able to choke all heretykes.
which always has embraced simple, lowly, and humble men, and has lyghtned
with his brightness the minds of such as take nothing upon them, now contrary
to his accustomed manner, should over hyp simple and humble men, and show them
this new and strange light, which have no spark of shamefastnes or modesty?
Now I say, how comes it to pass, that these fellows who as it appears by
many tokens, be given to worldly delights, have only most wittily spyed out
that which was unknown to so holy fathers, kyndled with the love of pureness,
and as it were set on fire with the desire of godly knowledge? But now I reason
not of what authority they be. For it comes to pass through the offenses of
many, that men can not perceive that they which are not to be reuerensed for
any notable virtue, Syn is the cause that men can not see the folly of false
teachers.
be not able to perform that which they do pretend. Let us therefore grant, if
it please them, that it may be by some means, that they which be not to be
praised for any excellent virtue, and go not beyond others in the love of
Godlynes, may take in hand and accomplysh that which men most famous for
their virtue and Godlynes were not able to bring to pass.

Therefore after what sort have they obtained that? An excuse commonly used of
all heretics.
Because (say they) those men whom you mean, although they did follow the
spirit of God, and were ernestly bent toward the word of God, yet they did
lean to much to man's authority: but we thinck it unseemly for us to stick to
the authority of me^, to be bound to the traditions of men, to weygh what is
right and honest according to the reason and consyderatio^ of men. we have one
only author and master, namely God, and we make our account, that our life is
to be drawn after the rule of his word, and not after me^nes decrees, and
ordynaunces. A trymironia against heritikes.
O these be m^e worthy to be wondered at, and with cap and knee to be
worshipped. For they so speak as they now hadd not one jot of man his nature
in them, and as though they were not made of flesh and bone as other men be.
For they forsothe, have mortifyed all their senses with faith, they have parted
the soul from the body, neither do they only defy man his nature, but also
they dispyse all the authorities of holy men. For being losed from the lynkes
of nawghtie desires, they be flowen up in to heaven, that they may behold none
other thing but God, and that they may make none other of their counsel but
the holy ghost. If it be so, I take them in deed to be men of God, for as S.
Paul witnesses, they be the children of God, A strong proof that the
heretics of our time be not men of god as they would seem.
which be led with the spyrit of God, and they which be the children of God,
questyonles be furnyshed with godly virtues. But now Sir, if their shamfull
doings, do disprove their shameless sayings, shall we believe them, so often as
they make their vaunt that they follow only the word of God? for if in all
their doings they do according to God his word, then they follow not
covetousness, hatred, wrath, ambityon, but they be all together made perfect
with virtues which spryng out of the word of God. If they be not endued with
such heavenly virtues, then do they lie in saying, that they only and all to
gether do frame them selves to the word of God, for wyckednesses and the word
of God can not dwell together. Therefore either they dyrect not their lyffe
after the word of God, either they do not commit any abominable or shameful
syn, for if they syn shamefully, and abhominably, vndoughtedly they be not
squared to the word of God. But they commyt many hyduouse offenses and sins,
as all the world can witness, therefore it is false to say that they be
governed with God his word, and the inspiration of the holyghoste.

But let us leave this dark kind of disputyng, and demand of them some
token of this word of God, which they all ways be chatting on. Therefore you
shall give me leave (o Queen) that I may search and ransake all this matter so
far, till it appear how trymly these men do handle the Gospel. A challenge
chokyng al heritikes.
Now then, I would willinglye hear of the^, whether these many years they
have wrought any notable feate, which may enforce us to confess that they
grownde only upon the word of God. Well said, (will they say) but you
know that it is the office of God his word, A common clok which heritikes use.
(as it is written in Ieremye) before it build new, to pull down the old
buyldynges, before it grafte fruitful trees, to pluck up by the roots, those
which be barren and unprofitable. I know it well: therefore I look and stand
as it were in a mase, to behold what you pull down, and what you root up
with this your good ly attempt, that at the length I may see Christ his house
raised up, and his gardeyne bewtifully set, with the heavenly graftes of all
manner of virtues. Go to now, bestyrre you a pase, plye the matter till you
sweat, that you may be able to fynyshe a work of such excellency. Do as
much as in you lies, to overthrow the walls of Satan, to pull down pride,
to refrain anger and cursed speaking, to pick out all the brystles of
unclean and filthy desires, to pluck up by the roots all occasyon of
stryffe and debate, that so at the last you may lay the foundations of
Christian humilitye and lowlynes, and that you may plant sobriety of life, and
chastity, joined with most pure religyo^, and that you may set the graftes of
Christian love and charity. You give good council say they: but before this,
there is an other thing that we will destroy and pull down. In the name of
God. what thing is that so heynouse and detestable, that you will first
endeavor your self, to dispatche that out of the way, before you utterly
overthrow these so pestilent poisons of ma^kynd? O say they, it is a greuouse
thing, an intolerable thing, The first spoil of heretykes.
a secret myschefe, and for the abhominablenes of it, to be quyte rased out of
all remembrance. For we will rushe in to those howses, in which holy virgins
being enclosed, day and night do sing hymns to the glory of God, and pray to
Christ for the good estate of Kings and Princes, and for the sauegarde of the
whole communaltie. We will pull down the fences of shamfastnes, we will break
open the enclosures of chastity, and we will no longer suffer well favored
virgyns to be barred of their solace and pleasures, to lack the comfort and
aid of their children, and to spend their young years in sorrowful
solytarynes, and miserable vnfrutefullnes. In faith, I allow this your
charity and loving kyndnes. What will you do more? The second spoil of
heritikes.
Then we will make a law for Monks, or solitary lyuers, whose howses we will
pull down likewise, or let them out to hyer, it skilleth not to what lay men,
and charge them under pain of death, that here after, none presume for
religious sake, to wrestle co^tynually against his lecherouse lusts. For why?
It is an heynouse offense, and in no sauce to be borne withal. What do I
hear? Do thou reclame men to the streightnes of religion, Note a god ly
defense of ppetuall chastity.
which was in the primitive church, which so busily do destroy that thing
which was much to be merueyled at in the primitive church, and which
contained the image of heavenly pureness? For what is more meruailouse, the^
subduing the lusts, which withdraw the mind from contemplation of heavenly
things, to think wholly on the fayrenes of God, and to be ravished with the
love of his divinity? It is an hard matter, say you. Yea if you please, let it
be of all other most hard, so that we understand, that the harder it is, the
more it auaunceth the glory of God, which has so strengthened our feeble
nature, that for love of pureness, it is able to resyst that tickling pleasure,
with which naturally we be entangled, and being won with the swetenes of
heavenly delight, can forsake and loathe all bodyly pleasure. Therefore if any
man ravished with the love of godly life, and to the intent he may give him
self to the consyderation of heavenly things, shall keep him self from the
most troblesome cares of marryage* if any virgyn inflamed with the love of
everlasting glory and honesty, with an ernest good will, shall take that upon
her which is seldom seen and hard to perform, and shall of her own accord,
enclose her selffe in a religyouse house, that so being void of all other
cares, she may be coupled to Christ with a more straight and holy band of
professyon, and by the spyrit of Christ, to whom she has offered her selffe,
shall constantlye refrain all unclean and unchaste desires, is there any man
so far from honesty, so much an enimye to the glory of God, that he will
detest it as a greuouse and abominable offense? Surely such a man is to be
suspected. For even so (as Athanasius and other holy men do, A just cause to
suspect the new teachers of our time.
make mentyon) did the heretics of old time. With the like hatred, they did
persecute chastity: with such rage, they did disquyet the monasteries of
religyouse virgyns. And as much as lay in them, would not suffer that there
should be any, which according to the council of Christ, for the love and
desire of the heavenly kingdom, might forsake all carnal pleasure, and by
contynuall worshipping of God, might in holiness both of body and soul, here
in yearthe, follow and resemble the conversation of the saints which be in
heaven. But now, I will stay my selffe. For it is not reason that I should
bewail that which is taken away, before I see what is set up in the place of
that which is pulled down. For as yet there may be hope, that the worthynes of
the thing which shall be brought in, may make amends for the thing which is
put out. Now then, The third spoil of heritikes.
go on. What has this word which you bragg on so much overthrown, beside
all this which we have spoken of? Forsothe all the pictures of Saints, all the
signs of Christ his cross, all painted tables in the which any thing was set
out, which might put us in mind of the mercy of God, or of any notable
virtue. Neither hereafter will we in any wise suffer the image of our Savior
Christ, or symilitude of his holy Saints, to be set in any open or secret
places. And this doing, certainlye causes me to suspect, that these men mind
no less, but by little and little to pull all remembraunces of Christ out
of our minds. For seeing nothing is more convenient to quicken our memory
then signs and images, A true defense of images.
and seeing this is our especyall duty, allway to think on God, and to
remember his benefytes continually, and for so much as in this life we have so
many lettes, which make our minds to stray from so godly and necessary
cogitations, I pray you then, what offense is it to have those remembraunces
ever before our eyes, which may often styrr us up to remember the mercy and
kyndenes of God, and make our minds more sharp toward the love of Godlynes?
But we may find fault with this folly of theires, when we shall perceive that
they bring no better salve with them to remedy the weakness of man, which may
more depelye prynt the benefytes of Christ in the hearts of the unlearned
people, The fourth spoil of heretykes.
the^ this beholding (as they say) of dome images. Is there any thing else that
your fyngers itche at, till you have it down? Yea mary is there. We will make
hauock of church goods, of ceremonies, and of all the sacraments* Lo also,
this is a thing, which should make a man quake for fear. wylt thou (o
heritike) abolyshe the holy ordynaunces which Christ has ordained? which his
Apostles have appointed to be observed? which holy church has allowed? which
do rote in our minds the remembrance of Christ, A Godly defense of the
ceremonies and sacraments.
by often repeting his benefytes, with the which we have fastened our selves unto
him as it were with a true love knott, by means of the which we be cleansed
from syn, we be hartned with heavenly food, and be defended with the aid of
invincible virtue? For what other thing would the Turcke and other infydells
do? Oh it is a miserable, a greuouse, a lamentable case, and not to be borne
withal of a Chrystyan man, to be bereued of such holy comfortes, through which
he remembers that often times he has received the benefytes of God his grace,
and that which is more odyouse, to be bereued of such Christian comfortes, by
the council, study, procurement, and endeavor of Christian men. Tushe you do
but tryfle (say they) which do think that our holiness and ryghteousnes does
consist in these cerymonies, An heriticall objection.
whereas in deed, it all to gether rests in the grace and mercy of Christ. As
who should say, we knew not that: as who should say, we have readen nothing,
we have hard nothing, no heavenly bryghtnes at any time has shyned upon us,
or that this is the first time, that any such thing was told us. Believe me,
A catholic confession concerning our justification
we never doughted that all the cause of our iustificatyon, was to be imputed
to the mercy of God, and the most holy merits of Christ. Notwithstanding we
defend this, that we can not without great trespass leave those things
undone, which the same author of our salvation has ordained, as means to
make us more fyt to be partakers of his divine benefytes, and to strengthen our
weakness with all aid and assistaunce.

Moreover we affirm, that so often as we duly ministre the holy sacraments, we
do sensiblye perceive, that those holy mysteries were assigned and appointed
of him, by the which, he would often put us in mind of his great goodness, by
the which, he might in a manner lay before our eyes, the pains which he
fuffred for us. By the which, he might more ernestly styr up our faith, and to
be short, by the which, he might more plentyfully still in to our hearts the
dew of his grace. we truly which do receive great comfort of those things,
which the more we be occupied in executyng of them, the more we feel Godly
devotion to increase in us, do worthily bewail such things to be taken away
of you, unless you, as of duty you ought, do restore better things in their
place. Is there any thing else, in pulling down of the which, you may brag of
your dyligence? Yea certeynely very many. For where so ever we come, The fyft
spoil of heretykes.
we stretche all the strings of our wit to this end, that we may deface the
authority of the Prestes and Bishops, that we may deliver the people from
thraldom of the Pope, and that we may disanull all there laws and
ordinances, that there may be nothing to let a Christyan man of his liberty.
And I pray you, what other thing is this, but to rypp Christ his cote, to
break the order which he has made, to disquyet the peace of his church, 4.
notable arguments for the supremacye.
to cast innumerable bones of debate, to set men to gether by the ears? For
shall be mayntayned, which may not be nombred. For every man will inue^t a
church, according to his own fantasye. Then the which thing, what can be
imagined more confuse and out of order, more contrary to the laws and
commandments of Christ? More over lay to this that when Prestes be driven
out and thrust from who should say (say they) we shote at any other marcke,
Mark this bragg of heretical teachers concerning security.
then to pull all fear out of men's minds? For we be the patrones of perfect
liberty, and it is so far of, that we will suffer those which be our
disciples, to stand in awe of any thing, that we will quyte set them free from
fearing of God. For the which thing verily our scollers are much beholding to
us, for it was to sore an heart break day and night to fear God, and by that
means, to pyne away with co^sumyng carefullnes. Therefore we have commanded
all those which believe in Christ, to set cock on hoope, and cry care away.
For we bear them in hand, that faith is of such force, that laying once hand
of it, though he be never so mischeuouse a lym of the dyuell, yet he may
warrant himself the favor of Christ, and bliss everlasting. So that there
is nothing which should make a man a fearde, Note well this learned confutation
of security, with a strong proof that Christian men ought to stand in fear,
contrary to the Protestants common preachinges.
if he be harnessed with this faith. What is this which sowndeth in mine
ears? Wylt thou take away the fear of God? Wylt thou shake of that awe which
the judgments of God beat in to the hearts of men? I pray the, whoeuer was
such a people parasite, so serviceable to please the madness of the common
sort, that he durst be so bold as to encorage men from fearing of God? In
deed, such people pyke thanks, have often times rejected the rule of
Princes, have disanulled laws which abridged and restreyned the people of
their wanton wyshes, with promisyng them to live as they list, they wo^ne the
greatest sort unto them, that they might make a way unto their tyrannical and
usurped authority: but that they should not fear the judgment of God, none of
them all did once open his mouth, or made any proffer to persuade the people.
For they did know well inoughe, that the man which did not fear God, would
not abide to be under the rule and obedience of any man. For take away the
fear of God, how could you know a man from a beast? or that I may touch
the truth nearer the quyck, what beast is so outeragyouse and hornemad, which
is to be compared in madness to such a man, which has no fear of God before
his eyes?

But now mark, Our protestants wursse the^ the ethnikes concerning this
opinion of securite.
how great odds is between these Bible bablers, and those men which being
all together wide of true worshipping of God, in old time did ordeyne common
wealths? they, forsomuche as they did wisely consydre, that with out the
fear of God, the people could not be kept in lawful subjection, did
institute false and feyned religions: these men from true religion, have
fylched all fear, which might keep men with in the listes and bowndes of their
duty. Those other, which perhaps believed not that God had any regard to
worldly affairs, yet they did beat the fear of God in to the hearts of the
rude people: but our men, which crake that they came out of God his bosom,
and know all his secrets, do plye the box busyly, that they may seal
Christian men a Quita^ce from al fear of God* and so make them like blind
bayardes boldly to leap in to the myar of al mischefe.

now for all this, I do not yet reason how well they behave them selves, but I
declare what cause they do give men to thynk ill of them. For they seem to have
this dryft in their heads, that they may stopp all the high ways of health
and salvation, that they which be shackled with any syn, may have no saffe
passage or entrance. For if they have shaken of all fear, which of them will
syghe for his sins? who will bewail his offenses committed? who will heartily
hate and abhor his nawghtynes? who from the bothome of his heart, will long
after honesty and holiness? who falling groueling at Christ his fete, with
tears will ask forgyuenes for his mysdoynges? who will go about to take out
the stayninges of his sins with allmesse deeds, An heretical objection.
and other works of mercy? What (say they) do thou put the holiness of our
iustifycation in weping and wayling, in sobbyng and syghing at the remembrance
of our sins? Yea surely. And that I should so do, A catholic answer.
I am not led with any light authority, but with the determination of holy
scripture. And that you be not of that judgment also, I do not a lyttel
meruail. O (say they) weeping is a witness of the weakness of faith: An
heretical reply.
and as for men's works, though they be done with never so godly a zeal,
yet as a man would say, they be so rotten at the rote, and so depelye stained
with sokynge fylthynes, that they can never be scoured or made clean. We
therefore consyderyng these things wisely, by no means do acknowledge our
salvation to stand in weeping, or in deeds of charity, A catholic solution.
but in faith only. These sayings make me more to merueile the^ I did before.
For this faith, which by means of Christ his merits, makes us to have
access unto God, does follow the law of God, does cleave to his words,
and does not say nay to the commaundyment of our master Christ. Therefore for
so much as the law of God wills us to weep, so often as we slyp in to any
syn, and seeing that all the Prophets with loud voices do cry unto us, that
we should cleanse our spotted soul with sorrowing and sobbyng, with workyng
and performyng merciful deeds of charity, O Osorius if you were fellow of
Trinity college in Ca^bridge, you should lose your fellowship as I know who
did, for saing so in a disputation.
seeing the sone of God him self does say playnelye, that all they which
refuse to do penance, shall utterly peryshe, and forwarneth us, that they
which will do good works, shall enter in to everlasting life, but they which
work wickedness, shall be tormented with everlasting fyar, I conclude, that
the office and duty of faith is, to mourn, to lament, to conceive an ernest
hatred against the accoustemed sins, with a burning desire to return from
the byway of wickedness, to the high way of honest and charitable conversation.
Which all things truly faith does worthylye perform, so often as it is quick
and lively, and not faynting or ouercharged with the burden of bodylye and
carnal desires. Not that she chalengeth any thing to her self, but because
she knows by godly inspiration, that they only deserve the great mercy of
God, which repent them of their former fylthynes, and with ernest affection do
render them selves up to the following of God his law. Therefore that faith,
by persuasyon of the which, any man warranteth him self everlasting bliss,
setting a part sorrowfullnes for his sins past, leauyng of to do good
works, and has the love of charity clean quenched in him, I say that faith,
is not worthy the name of faith, but rather to be called folyshe hardynes,
hedlong hastynes, and proud presumptuousenes. Moreover, all men may see that
the profit of wholesome repentance, is taken away, that the ardent love of
charity is made key cold, when men take this for a sure staff to lean on,
that their sins be not forgyuen, for their mourning, for their Godly
sorrowing, for any holy workyng, Luthers opinion.
but rather that in so doing, they heap new sins upon their old. For they
take it to be a syn to lament for their syn, and they hold that no good work
can be done with out syn. Therefore this is a doctrine worthy to be wondered at,
which has so malypertly taken in hand to set furthe such incredible things,
and yet would have men to give them credit. Is there yet any thing else, so much
to be merueiled at? so much quoth you? Yea which will cast you in to such a
mase, as the head of Medusa seen at unawares could not more quickly turn men in
to a flynt stone. The sixth spoil committed of the heretics.
I pray you, what is that? forsothe they bynd man's reason as it were to a
post, they spoil him of lyberty to take council, they wrap his will in
fatal fetters, they bereave man all together of judgment, and all
perceauerau^ce, and they strype him so clean of all free will, that there is
no difference between him and a stone.

For of all those things, which men cast in their mind, take in hand and put
in practyse, whether they be aught or naught, they make God the causer of them,
they impute it to fatal necessytie, and say that it was predestyned that they
should so do before they were borne. Which saying if it be true, then is there
no council to be taken in affairs of this lyffe, then there is no judgment,
no praise to do well, Note here a goodlye reprofe of fatal necessity taught
of our Protestants.
no shame to syn, no use of justice, then with out a cause, any reward is
appointed for honesty, and it is against reason, that their should be ordained
any punishment for syn. For what reason is it, that I for the syn which I did
not of mine own accord (for I was co^streyned of necessytye to do it) should
suffer everlasting pains? or what right is there, that I should be rewarded
with everlasting joy for that faith which I kept only enforced and spurred
forward of God, with out any will or dyligens of my part? And that which is
horrible, and to be detested, if we will lean to these ioly fellows
authority, all the cause of iniquity is to be laid to God his charge. For so
they reason, that he without any choice or respect, only because it pleased him
so, before all worlds, has appointed who should be his, whom he would crown
with everlasting glory, and who should be cast awayes, which he would torment
with everlasting punishment. In the which their assertion, I find fault both
with their constancy, and also their wisdom.

With their constancy, because whereas they make their vaunt, This doctrine
of fatal necessity makes against the protestants them selves.
that they be the autors of liberty, they all together take away liberty.
Except they will grant that at the first, they did teach men lycentiouse
living, and not liberty, and that afterward, they did deny them liberty, but
not to live licentiously: I allow not their wisdom, because they troble them
selves very greatly, and neade not. For if before all worlds, God has
enacted, that we should receive that doctrine which they teach, to what purpose
is it, every where to beat it in to men's heads with so many books,
preachinges, disputinges, perylls, and great trauayles? Except they will also
say, that they be compelled with the selfsame necessity to labor, to
watch, to have conflyctes with many men, and that to no end, and without any
profit. There be many other things which disgraceth this word of God, under
whose banner these doughtie and polytyke souldyoures, do crake that they fight.
For it were an endless work, and nothing necessary, if I should reckon all,
seeing that which I have said, is inowghe for our purpose.

Now you see (o Queen,) of what force this Gospel is, to throw down and
ouerturne those things, which we sely sowles did not only thinck to be
nothing hurtful, but also to be so necessary proppes of religion, that in such
decay of al good things in these days, godlynes did seem to stay upon the
maintenance of them. Here England can witness whether Osorius does lie.
It has broken down the howses of holy virgins, it has put out that
wonderful example of continual chastitye, it has defaced and broken the
signs which did often renew the memory of God his good gifts bestowed upon
us, it has quyte dispatched out of the way holy ornaments, cerymonies, the
sacraments, with the which many mortal men were greatly styrred up to the
love of immortalytie. They have also removed out of the way for stumblyng, all
modestye and obedyence, by the which all Christian men did stand in awe of the
chief ruler of the church: it has made all the laws of the church of none
effect: it has wyped away the fear of God: it has chased away saddnes
conceived for syn: it has grated out the grefe which the gyltie conscience
did smite in to men's minds for their offenses: it has made men slack to
do good works: fynallye whereas it did allure all men to liberty, it has
taken away liberty. What remains now? Forsothe that we may see, what these
conyng crafts men with their diligence have restored in the place of those
things, which they have taken away. For such men of God, and mynisters of his
holy word, because they have abolysshed those things, which did some good,
displeased as they say, for that they had a smacke of superstition, of
necessitye must restore much better and more holy things, if they will stand
to their promysse.

For we seeing what that word of God which they preach, has pulled down, and
rooted up, is it not requisyte, that we should behold what it has builded and
planted in stead of it? Now what is it that they have repaired and renewed?
what is it that they have sown? what profit is there which the world does
feel by them? surely none at all. I see what is toppled over, but I see not
what is set up again. I see what is rased, but I see no good thing as yet
raised. But (will they say) do you thynk, that it is but a small matter, to
restrain the wanton manners of men, with the straight disciplyne of the
primityue church, and to restore Christian religion with great travail, to
that perfection from the which now of late for the most part it is flyded?
Surely I take that to be no small matter, but a thing of such excellency, that
if you perform it, I will believe verily, you be men of God, and angels flowne
down from heaven. Therefore let us see this. A question to put the protesta^tes
to silence.
have you taken in hand to embr^ace mekenes and humilitye with an ernest and
fervent affection? have you cast far from you the bitter gall of deadly hatred,
of railing and cursed speaking? have you crucified your fleshly desires, that
they being quenched, you may more easylye lift up your mind to thyncke of
heavenly things? have you showed any meruaylouse token of virtue and godlynes,
by the which we may perceive the ancient bryghtnes of the Gospel, and the
pattern of that most pure holiness and charity, used in old time? no, I assure
you. But the more any man does apply him self to this doctrine, How the
disciples of this doctrine profytt.
the wurser he waxes, the more he flowteth those which be plain and right
dealyng men, the more he is set on fire with hatred against common peace and
quietness, and is puffed up with most fantastycall vanities. For he takes
that wisdom upon him which never man could yet obtain. And so standing in his
own co^ceite, what so ever toy takes him in the head, that he so ernestly
does defend, as if he should allege any word coming out of God his own
mouth, with so headlong boldness he disquyeteth all things, as in deed he
should seem to covet nothing more, then to see an hochepoche made of all the
world. Therefore which way so ever they crepe in to men's bosoms, that they
may utter their Ghospel unto the unlearned people, they are so far from
mendyng men's manners, that they make all things in wurse case then they
found the^. For they banish shamfastnes, and let carnalitie raunge lose
abroad, and taking away the fear of God, without punishment they give men
leave to live so wyckedly as they list. So it comes to pass, that wylfullnes
does more vehemently burst out, that lecherouse life does more sone consume
men's riches, that boldness does more bragg, and goes about more heynouse
enterpryses. For what shall I speak, how daungerouse trauaylyng it is by the
high ways for fear of robbing? what shall I reckon the disagreinges and
furyouse fallynges out which raygne every where? what shall I set out the
conspiracyes, treasons, and murders entreprysed against Princes? But you will
say, these euells were allway in all common wealths. no man says nay to that.
But I would have those myschefes redressed with this your so wholesome and
profitable doctrine. The which thing, because it does not bring to pass, but
rather the more it increases, the greater offenses are committed, and more
unshamefastly attempted even of those which desire to be called the discyples
of such masters: it is a strong argument that they were not styrred up to
preach by the secret workyng and inspiration of the holy ghost. A notable
co^paryson between the ancient teachers, and our new startvp Ghospellers.
But consider what difference is between the old professors of the Gospel
and these which bear men in hand that they follow their foot steps. They
received of God the doctrine, with the which they gave light to the world:
these men leaning to their own wit and invention, took upon them to be doctors
and teachers. They, brydled the ryotouse manners of men with severe
punishment, gyuing also a meruailouse example of innoce^cie and chastitye:
these men with their naughty example and lycentiouse doctrine, do set men's
tethe more on edge to all kind of unhappiness. They, exhorted men to humility,
to lowlynes, mekenes and pacyence: these men for the most part do teach their
scollers, pride, cruelty, scolding and cursed speaking. They, did aswage the
out ragyouse desires of men with puttyng them in mind to fear God, and
councelled them, which had fallen into any syn, to weping, fasting, and
praying: these men inioyning no penance or penalty to them which are lode^
with syn, do harte^ and encorage the^to all unshamefastness. They, by all means
possible, did withdraw men from bodyly pleasures, that they might the more be
inflamed with the love of heavenly things: these men do surrender their
scollers fast bound to bodyly delyghtes, to the intent they may wait, and
give attendau^ce upon their lecherouse lusts: fynallye, they, seeing they were
all of one mind, for so much as they were the discyples of one master, that
is to say, of the holy ghost, so that one could not iarr from an other, did
knyt men to gether with the sure bond of peace, and did fasten the good wills
of all me^, with the glue of mutual love and frendeshyp: But these men, for so
much as every one of them according to his own fyckle fansye, does blab out
and tell for truth what so ever he does dream of, and by means of that are
dispersed in to diverse and innumerable sects, they break peace, they raise
up debates, and procure bloody battles. In old time none of those, which I
have spoken of, did minystre poisons, none wyllyngly did shake the sword
against his country men, none did take council to destroy their Princes, none
did behave him self wantonlye or vndiscretelye upon his ale benche. And
whereas they did excel in all the praises of most noble virtues, yet this
virtue was to be merueiled at in them, that they would pray to God for the
health and wealth of such as did them great wrong: being rayled on, they
did not give foul language again: when injury was done unto the^, so sone as
they were able, they did a good turn to the^ which harmed them: being cast in
to mysery* they wyshed no evil to those, which against law and conscience did
vnmercyfully handle them: servants did serve their masters with great
trustines: souldyours in battle for the saffegarde of the common wealth, did
fight manfullye, and in time of peace they did not refuse the co^maundiment of
their Princes, so far as they commanded nothing contrary to the law of God:
but rather obeyed all rulers, as the ministres of God, allthough their life
disagreed from Christian religion. Therefore they so behaved themselves, that
nether in peace, nether in war, nether when they were at leisure, nether when
they were occupied, nether in pryuate busynes, or in common affairs, they
might commyt any thing which might set the common weal out of order, or give
men occasyon to be offended through their sinful and wicked example. I let
pass to speak of the fastings, hear clothes, watchynges, with the which
they did cool the heat of their burning desires, and constreyned the body to
be obedyent to the foul. I will say nothing of the riches, which they did
bestow on the releuyng of the poor. What neade I make mentyon of their daily
prayers? What should I make report of that ernest zeal, with the which their
hole mind was set so fast upon God, that although bodyly they dwelled here
upon earth, yet spiritually they were carried up in to heaven? Who can express
those tears, which they did pore out longyng for the heavenly kingdom? Who
can utter in words those syghes, which they did often draw, from the bothome
of their heart, for that they were all together rauyshed with the love of God?
I say nothing of them which with an inuincyble courage for the honor of Christ
did suffer hangyng, burning, rackyng, and other new fownde torments.

Also I ouerpasse them which to the intent that they might better allway give
attendaunce upon Christ, and have more leisure to study heavenly things, did
withdraw them selves from men's company, and led their life in solytarye and
desert places among wild beasts, in such sharpnes, nedynes, and pynyng diet,
that they made all men astonished to see them, or here of them, whereas
notwithstanding they being comforted with the joy of heavenly things, did
easylye endure watchyng, hungre, and nakedness. I speak of the common godlynes
of those Christians which lived next after the Apostles time, in whom the
most ernest love of virtue, honestye, charity, and modestye did florishe. Let
these godly Ghospellers restore these things, How our Ghospellers might get
them credit.
let them reclayme men to these manners, let them lead us back to these rules,
for the most part left of these many years, and let them bring to pass
both that they them selves and all their followers abstain from vices, and
follow those godly virtues in which holy men of old time did greatelye
excel, and then men may believe that they be authors of the Gospel. But if
they be not able to perform any of these things, but rather they put out all
shamefastynes and religion, and that they enter no sooner in to any place, but
strayghtway contempt of laws buddeth out, wantones, wylfullnes, madness,
cruelty, and other myschefes do corrupt good manners, and raise vprores and
hurlyburlyes among men, have they such brazen faces, that they dare once open
their mouth, and speak of the Gospel? The Gospel preached in England at
this day is a wylye Gospel.
O wyly and deceitful Gospel. For outewardly it pretends our felicitye,
and priuilye it works our destruction. It puts us in hope of lybertye,
and in deed lays upon us the yoke of most miserable bondage. It allureth us
with the color of present pleasure, and afterward freteth us with many cares
and great heaviness. It promises that it will show the right way to heaven,
and in the end it tumbleth men which hope for help of it, hedlong in to hell.
For what other way is there in to heaven, but that which is opened with good
works, and with excellent innocencye of life? Therefore, he which under the
name of Godlynes, does strive against the exercise of Godlynes, and deeds of
charity, does not lead us to everlasting life, but blows the coals of the
unquenchable fyar, intendyng to make us roste meat for the dyuell. Mark I
pray you, Note here by what note you may know the true Gospel from the false.
with what words by the Prophet Jeremy God teaches us to try, which is the
true Gospel, and which is the false: Give no ear (says he) to the
Prophets, which prophecy unto you pleasant things, and in deed do deceive
you. For they tell you but the dreams of their own head, and not of the word
of God.

For thus they speak to such as do dishonor me. peace shall come unto you.
and to them which walcke after the wyckednes of their own heart, no harm or
peril does hang over your heads. What shall we say now? Could the manner of
these men be more plainly set forth? could their unshamefastness be better
discovered? For they quite them from of all fear, which be defiled with foul
sins, and they warrant all them which be at dagger drawing with Godlynes,
that all things shall chance well and luckyly unto the^. He says moreover
by the Prophet: which of them was ever of counsel with God, and has seen or
hard him speak? It is certain, that these words do mark out the Prophets
of our time, which do tyckle men's ears with such pleasant and delectable
sayings. For none of them has lived so perfectly, that by any means we may
thynk that God has made him pryuye of his council. For which of them has so
refrayned his lust, that no syn did burst out of it, to make men offended?
which of them was ever of this mind, that he thought God his wrath to be
appeased with fasting, with continual praying, and deeds of charity? which of
them to the intent he might turn away the destruction hangyng over his dear
friends, has with many tears bowed God to take mercy? Finally, which of them
did ever burn so with charity that for the lyffe of other he would offer him
self to death? and could find in his heart to suffer in his own body the
punishment due for the offenses of his whole country? For it is requisyte,
that they to whom we should believe that God has opened all his secrets, what
manner of men God makes his secretaryes.
should be men of no mean perfection, should be men not fellow like with the
common sort, but that they should be men surmounting, and far passing all
others, and for many co^syderations to be merueyled at. For neither the
Prophets, neither the Apostles, neither other most holy men, whom God did
make partakers of his counsels, have come to that degree of most high
perfection, with leading their life in such pleasure, as these deyntie tothed
and sugre sop gentlemen be delyghted with all, but rather in meruailouse and
excellent holiness of manners, in incredible sharpenes of life, in many
labors, watchynges prayers, wepynges, in such egre desire of heavenly
things, in such fervent charity, that they desired to be killed, and to be
tormented with most greouuse pains, so that other might be saved. Of the which
virtues, where as these men have not one sparckle, but live so, that it may
appear by many tokens, that they take delyght in those pleasures which the
common sort of men do covet, A lykelyhode that our protestauntes be not men
chosen of God to find out the truth not known before.
and that they be given to those entyseme^tes, and prouocations, which natural
appetyte does greatelye desire, yet they so talk, as though God had made them
of his counsel, and as though not one word escaped them, which they hard not
and learned of God him self. Therefore God in the place aforesaid, does
worthily curse such shameless children, and does threate^ them grievous
destruction. And within a littell while after, he gives us a notable mark, An
other special note to know false prophets fro^true.
how we shall know the false prophets from the true, saying thus: if they had been of my council, and had uttered my words unto the people, surely they
should have turned them from thyer sinful ways, and from their naughtye
cogitations. Therefore as it appears by this verdict, which God gives,
where true prophets take in hand to teach and instruct the people, many
suddenly change their minds, and wax every day better and better, and for the
desyr of immortal glory, do forsake bodyly pleasures, do set naught by the
delyghtes of this life, and with a certain cherefullnes do apply them selves
to the study of God his law. on the other side where so ever false prophets
tread, by and by you shall see greater license to syn, less shame to do
amiss, more abominable out ragyng in all kind of fylthynes: so that you may
easyly perceive, as the same Prophet in the same place in the person of God at
large does entreat, that their intent is to bury the study of God his law,
and his most holy relygion, in the grave of everlasting forgetfulness. And truly
this place of Ierymy is not hear alleged of me without a cause, for by it we
perceive how we may know false and forged doctrine, from holsom true and
vncounterfeyted doctrine. For if, since this new learning was brought in to
England, there was also brought in with it, shamefastnes, honesty, and upright
living, if grave manners, constancy, straight life, laudable comelynes, and
virtuous behauyoure, were brought to light, if fydelytie toward Princes, if
agreement and loueable unity, was more assuredlye planted in subjects hearts
one toward an other, if men be made more redye to practyse merciful and
charitable works, if the churches be occupied with better or more holy
relygion, if the remembrance of Christ which dyed for us upon the cross, be
more depelye printed in men's minds, so that many for the love of Christ his
cross, do lay a cross upon their own necks, to the end that they may stay
the rage of those lusts which war continuallye with the holiness of Christ,
fynallye if a new light be spronge out, if a new beauty of godly virtues
never seen before does glystre in men's eyes, then they which have followed
their whystle, seem not worthy so much to be blamed. But if so be by means
of this religion, none of all these things be brought to pass, what
merchandise this scismaticall ship has brought in to England.
but rather by occasyon of it, rashenes, unshamefastness, vncleanclines of life,
does more boldly fly round about, if intolerable pride, and arrogancye be
much more establyshed then it was before, if seditions, contentions, and
fallinges out, be more easyly styrred up, if traitors be more ventrouse to
lay violent hands upon their Kings, and to lay wait how to murdre their
Princes, if neither shame, neither fear, neither awe of God his displeasure,
can hold them from doing of mischefe, which have yielded them selves up to
this new doctrine, if all this synck or dunge hill of myschefes, or at least,
an increase and new heap of euelles, be brought in with this learning,
without doubt it is not establyshed by the word of God as they prate in
their pulpytes, but by the craft and subtylitye of our cruel enemy the devil.
For the word of God, commands shamefastnes and pureness of life. But this
learning, suffers the lusts to run at riot, and that which is next door to
it, provoke hedlong to all kind of wyckednes. The word of God, A comparison
between the true word of God and the protestants word.
do the abate all arrogancye, and especially trayneth men up in modesty: but
this puffs up men's hearts with pride, and teaches them to despise all
antiquitye, ancient religion, and holiness of old time. The word of God, does
make peace, and lyncketh men's minds in love, making them parteners of all
good things: but this learning, do the break peace, and teareth the body of
Christ his church, with inwardly consumyng and wastyng sedition. For how can
they be autors both of discord and concord, which nether agree with them
selves, nether with other, The inco^stancy of heretykes.
which wander out of the way as well as they? which disagree with themselves
most inconstantlye? which to day hold one opinion, to morrow an other, clean
contrary one to the other, and ca^ not rest long in one mind? Therefore seeing
it is the propretye of Christ (as he him self does witness) to gather in to
one place those which stray a broad, The difference between Christ his
doctrine and the dyuelles.
to join those which be of diverse minds, in an uniform consent, mutual
benevolence, and charytye, and that it is the dynells duty, to scatter and
pull a sundre, those which agree well to gether, and to break the band of all
faithful and frendely felloweshyp, and seeing the doctrine of these goodly
Ghospellers, does raise vpprores, does break peace, does spread one sect
in to innumerable sects, and causes one sect to be at defyaunce with the
other, is it not plain that their religion is not drawn by Christ his rule,
but all to gether is invented according to the crafty deuyse of subtyl Satan?
For what greater argument can we have, A great argument of false doctrine.
then their deadlye hatredes* their contentions, their scamblyng by the
ears, their tauntynges and rybauldry raylinges? Christ does not cause these
euelles, but Antichrist* For he is not the author of dissension, but of peace.
Now last of all, this is not to be passed over with silence, at what mark
these sundry fectes and licentiouse pratinges do shore. Mary, they have this
fetch, that they may quyte take away all the knowledge of God. For seeing that
no religion among them is so surely grounded, At what mark heritykes chefely
shote.
but it may easyly be overthrown with the arguments of other sectaries, for
so much as most men be carried aboure with every wind, and be diuersely
tossed with doubtful and wandryng opinions, and can stay themselves upon no
certain judgment, when at the length many perceive the fondnes and vanitye
of their opinions, which they once conceived, it comes to pass that they make
but a ieste of all religion, either that they think, there is no God, or else,
that he has no regard what men do here upon earth: then the which thing
what ca^ be said or thought more beastelye, that they which once had bequethed
and offered them selves up to Christ, and were taught to know God, even by the
very sone of God, after they had gone out of the only true and right way,
should so far leap over the lines of all godlynes, that they should not only
hate the cross of Christ, and in stead of God worship their own lusts and
wyckednes, but also believe that the Lord and Creator of all things, whose
power and right judgments, even the dyuelles in hell and damned sowles do
fear, either not to be at all, or else not to rule and govern the whole
world? But you will peradnenture ask, who is so beastely and past all grace,
that can conceive in his mind so strange and abominable blasphemy? Surely,
if you will mark well, you shall find, Secres be the steps to atheism*
that is, of denying that there is any god.
that there has been many which clymyng up by these sects, as by certain
steps and degrees, have at last ascended to the top of this unspeakable
abomination. For as in other arts, no man can suddenly attain to that
perfection, for the which he myndeth to take pains, but necessaryly he must
begin with his principles, and so ordrelye go one by little and little, and at
last grow to a rypenes, so in learning of naughtines, there be certain
begynninges, (and not Christ cross) but Christ curse rewes, which if they be
suffered to crepe forward, they will induce men as far as is possible, to the
full knowledge of that unspeakable myschefe. But who they be, Our heritykes be
gyltie of atheism.
which be gyltie of this greueous syn, they them selves do witness well
inoughe by their works. For if they thought, that God did forsee and regard
all things, and sharply punyshe sins upon earth, they would never have
wrought such wylye ways, to seduce the people: But alas, they are so far
gone in madness, and tumbled hedlong in to all folly, that so often as it takes
them in the head, with wicked words, they scoff and mock those things,
which be written of God his judgments, as though they were but Caunterbury
tales and grym vysardes only devised to fray young children. But I have been
longer then I purposed. Yet for so much as mine intent was to show you mine
advise, how to provide for those helps, with the which you being assysted,
you may more stronglye establyshe your kingdom, and that I might declare unto
you that the chiefest stay, and furnyture of your Realm, consysted in the
aduau^cement and mayntenau^ce of religion, and that I might prove, that there
is no presenter poison to the common weal, then cou^rerfeyted religion and
hypocrytycall holiness, I thought nothing to be more agreeable to my purpose,
then to show certain euydent tokens, how you might discover the secret
deceptes, which lurcke under the happ harlottes cloak of forged religion. For
if you have in remembrance those fruits of religion, A recapitulation of the
fruits of true religion and falfe.
which before I have rehearsed, you shall easyly perceive, which is false
religion. For if true religion do bear down arrogancye, overcome anger,
bridle filthy defyres, restrain intemperaunce, scrape out the spots of the
mind, preserve shamefastnes and modestye; bread the fear of God, make
subjects faithful to their Princes, establyshe peace, fasten men's minds in
amyty, and inflame them with the desire of heaven, then certaynely that
religion which causes pride, provoke anger, lets the lusts lose,
defyleth the soul with syn, takes away shame fastnes, remoueth the fear of
God, works treason against Kings, trobleth common peace, blows the cole of
hatred, thrusts our minds down to the earth ward, and drowneth them in
the seas of worldly trobles, is no true religion, but false, pestilent, and
damnable. Furthermore, I have proved, that this sect, (if so be, we may call it
one sect, which is not only doubtful, slyppery, but also diverse, manyfolde,
and contaynyng in it innumerable other sects) is all to gether popular, and
for the peoples pleasure. For alluryng the people with a ioly show of to much
liberty, it armeth them against Officers, against their Kings authority and
regiment, and hardneth the hearts of the multitude with a false persuasyon of
religion. And if it did only procure destruction of Kings, so that it brought
no danger and damnation to the soul, and by all means did not overthrow the
law of God, it were somethyng to be borne with all. But this is greatly to be
lamented, that it puts out the love of virtue, the bryghtnes of honesty,
the light of most true religion and devotion, defyleth all commendable comlynes
with vnpure living, and utterly stops us for entryng in in to everlasting
glory. Therefore what is it that may now deceive us? Is it the authority of
these teachers? But I have plainly declared, The authority of the protestants
should not move us to credyte them.
how far the professors of this learning be from true virtue, grauitye, and
constancy of lyffe, and the perfection of most pure religion. What then? Is
it the lose lybertye of the people? But there is no more sworn enymye to
Princes, the liberty of the people should disuade us to believe these new
teachers.
then that is: beside that, it does undo the people which which covet it,
and spoyleth them of al lyberty. For all things truly, be preserved with
keeping a mean, and are destroyed with superfluitye and excess. For as a King,
which not contentyng himself with his lawful kingdom, desires to be lord
over all the world, and does not only think to rule the roste in worldly
matters, but also casts to have things pertaynyng to God, obedyent at his
beck and commaundyment, can not long enjoy his leyngdome, for so much as he
shall both turn away from him me^nes hearts, by reason of doing them many
iniuryes, and also shall get God his most heavy displeasure, even so the
people, which is not contented with the liberty which the law gives them, and
for that cause breaks all good order, moves sedicyon, and waxes wood, of
necessyty at longthe, loses that liberty which it might have still enjoyed,
with many other commodities and benefytes.

Therefore what now? Shall we follow this lore, because it leads us to
everlasting life? But I have plainly proved, that by means of this religion,
The protestants promising us everlasting life ought not to win us.
men be intysed to wantones, tovnshamefastnes, to unlawful lusts, that
troblesome tumultes and dissentions be styrred up, that many naughtye
entrepryses be taken in hand, that inumerable myschefes be forged, and last of
all, that the remembrance of godlynes is quyte blotted out. The which things
truly, do not conducte us to heaven, but pytch us hedlong in to the place of
continual mysery and wretchedness. In the which thing truly it appears, how
faithfully these Evangelical teachers have performed their promise. For this
they professed, this they proclaimed, The protestants promise not performed.
this they promised to bring fullye to pass, that they would call back
corrupted manners to the straight rule of the Gospel, and that they would
restore that perfection and pureness of life which was in the primityue church.

Now you understand, o Queen* how well they have kept touch. For they have
not only left the Christian common weal unhealed, but also wheresoever they
came, they have bestowed their travail to this end, (that if there were any
health in it) to take it away, and to infect all the members of Christ his
church with most incurable diseases and maladyes. Therefore, how could any man
farther over shote him self, A great our shote in them which were seduced by
these new doctoures.
then to be persuaded by these men's authority, to go from the most ancient
and holy religion, which was hallowed with Christ his blood, sealed with the
torments of martyrs, advanced with the divine works of godly wryghters,
standing allway invincible against the wicked attemptes of heritikes, and
assaults of cruel tyrauntes, has remained in the same state even unto these
our days, to embrace a religion which is to be suspected for the newenes,
which is defamed with the wicked living of the autors and teachers of it, which
is lamentable for the destruction of all holy things, which is detestable for
the horrible end which is shoots at? The which religion truly, as it can be
taken in hand of no man, The greatest plague for herisie, shall light upon
kings.
without miserable destruction, so kings which suffer them selves to be
abused and corrupted with it, shall be more greuousely plaged for it. For they
do not only put their imperial majesty, the saffegarde of the common wealth,
their life and their honowre in great hazard, but that which is much more
miserable, and harmefull, they shall provoke the greuouse displeasure of God
toward them, and shall suffer much more paynefull punyshement world without
end. For the mo which following their evil example fall in to the like
damnation, whom they ought to have healed and preserved, the more greuouse and
painful shall their torments be in hell fire. A notable and terrible
amplification of S. Paul's words.
It is an horrible thing, says saint Paul, to fall in to the hands of
thelyuyng God. For to whom shall we run for succoure, if God him self be our
enymye, in whose mercy all our might and trust is? whose healpe we defyre in
all aduersyty, and dystresse? on whom only we fasten our eye, lokyng to be
rescued, when we be assaulted on every side? under whose buckler shall we stand
to anoyde his blow? in what de^nes or darcke dungeons shall we hyde our
heads, that we may not behold his angry and displeased countenance? with the
least: blaste of his breathe the whole earth is shaken, the hills smoke
being swyndged with the fire of his terrible lyghtnynge, the heaven with great
thundre clappes sendyng out flying flames, ouershadowing the yearthe with
darcknes, showing many other fearful and terrible syghtes, discomforteth,
amaseth, and astonisheth mortal men.

Therefore seeing he has thus stronglely weaponed nature to smite fear in to
us, and to fray men from doing of naughtynes, what shall we think, he will
do, when he him self shall come with all the hosts of heaven, and shall
appear in the clouds, gyrded with just seueritye and indignacyon, coming to
take veng eaunce of the enymyes of his most holy religion? when with his
judgment he shall tread under foot all pride, and worldly pomp, when he
shall thruste out of his presence those, which have been obstynate sinners,
to be tormented with fire, and most cruel punyshementes, which never shall
cease. He faith the Scripture is the God of Gods, the Lord of Lords,
strong, mighty, and terryble, whose judgment nether with favor can be
bowed, nether with rewards or brybes be corrupted. Shall we not therefore
fear his judgments? shall we not quake at his look? shall we not for awe of
him shake of all syn and inyquitye? More over, what if long before we be warned
of him with many signs, Many signs showed us to repent
of the myseries which for wicked life and heynouse offenses* hang over all
our heads? shall we yet for all that not regard God his warnyng tokens, and
as a man would say his watch words? notwithstanding these, shall we wallowe
still in our myary manners? Truly, God gives (as David records) many
signs, the which also we see to happen in our days, being admonished with
the which, we may by chaungyng our eonuersation, avoid the shot of his bow,
which he has bent against the enimyes of his religion, and by true and sincere
worshyppyng of him, turn aside his deadely arrows. The which his so great
mercy, if we shall with more boldenes and unshamefastness, abuse in contynuyng
in our naughtynes, we shall as S. Paul says, heap up the riches of God his
anger, and bring carte lodes of syn to increase our everlasting punysheme^tes.
Sweet Jesus forbid this pytyfull destruction from his Chrystyan flock, A Godly
prayer.
and comfort his church so greuousely disquyeted with controversies, and at
last join them with it in unity of mind, which be carried from it with
contrary opinions: and I beseech him, that he will not suffer such an occasyon
of reioysyng, to the mortal enymyes of his name, with the loss and castyng
away of so many sowles. For my part truly, I thynk it my duty, all way to
pray for the saffegard of all Christendom, which only consists in the
imbracyng of one religion, in mutual love and agreement, in the felloweshyp
and partaking of all God his graces and holy blessings. and whereas I am very
sorye for other countries, which have divided them selves from the church, yet
I am so trobled in mind for the danger which hangs over this Realm of
England, Alas that England should be in such a case, that forenners should so
pytye it.
that I can not in words utter the care and thought, which I take in the
behalf of it. For I take it very heauyly, yea it nyppeth me at the heart, that
so floryshyng a country, furnyshed and replenyshed with all things, more over
(if that make any thing to the purpose) knit very fast to this our kingdom of
Spain, both in nyghe kynred and also confederacy of long continuance, which
has given so many profes of godlynes, and in old time has not showed more
notable feats of arms in battle, then it has set forth examples of
religion and holiness, worthy to be followed of the posterity, in these days
seduced with the deceptes and subtle suggestions of desperate doctors is in
diverse points fallen in to folyshe and so dyuellyshe opinions.

But in so great vexation of mind, a certain hope does refreshe me, which I
have conceived of your syngular wit and especial graciousnes. For it is the
point of a notable wit, to take heed before hand of eueles which may ensue,
There is cause of good ce^forte in our sovereign Queen.
to forsake the wrong opinion, when the falsehode is discovered, wyllyngly to
receive the truth, when it is once known and tried out, and to thynk no
honowre to consist in styff standing in wrong opinions, but to believe that it
is most honorable, easyly to bend and yield to wholesome counsel. Also it is
the duty of excellent graciousnes, to have a care for the hole country, and
if neade require, with ventryng the lyffe, to deliver it from all pernitiouse
erroures. All the health of your country stands in your hands. If you
will take upon you to revenge religions quarrel, if you will join your self
to the consent of the Catholyke church, if you will maintain and cherishe
ancient manners and good ordres, and banyshyng naughtye men out of your
court, How our gratiouse Queen may make an happy England.
and council, shall intertayne good and godly men to assist you, no doubt by
the healpe and furtheraunce of Christ, but you shall set your common wealth in
a good order, and restore health, wealth, and happy life to all your
subjects. But if you will have no regard to underset those things which fall
down and go to decay, I am a fearde
to tell you what will become of you, and all youres. Also I would wyshe you to
record this with your self, that he which prefers his own honowre,
before the honowre of Christ, and refuses to employ all his endeavor, Marck
this and praise God for such wholesome council.
to advance Christ his glory, for fear of indaungeryng him self, does often
fall in to that myserye, which he intended to escape, by wynckyng at wicked men,
which robb and spoil Christ of his honowre and glory. For it is the right
judgment of God, that he which makes more account of his own glory then of
the glory of Christ, should end his life in great shame and dishonowre.
Contrarywyse, he which in respect of Christ his glory, sets naught by his
own riches and estimation, attayneth to great weathe adourned with all
worshipful preferment and promotion. For such a man gets allmightye God to
be his patron and defendour, who never yet did forsake his servants, so that
he makes his riches and his honowre in more assurance, the^ if he were guarded
or waited on with a mighty and strong army. Therefore if you have an ernest
zeal to defend and preserve your kingdom, if you desire to enjoy immortal
glory, hercken not so much what men tyckle you in the ear to be expedyent to
strengthen and assure you, as what the law of God, the cause and consideration
of his most holy relygyon does require of you. Call to remembrance with what
a goodlye wit, God has endued you, consydre with what learning and knowledge
you be decked, in what room you be placed, what an office and charge you have
taken upon you, and you shall understand that all those gracious gifts, God
has bestowed so many gifts of grace upon our excellent Queen, to set out his
glory.
which you have received of God, you ought to use and bestow to the setting
forth of his glory. For he which has blessed you with such benefytes, if
you will wholly yield up your self to him, will assyste you with his grace, and
will ever be ready at your ellbowe to help you. For allthoughe you alone, Our
mighty Princes, able a lone to reform England.
should take in hand such a great entrepryse, to reclayme England to the
ancient faith, what were not you able to bring to pass, having God before
you, at your
back, and on each side of you? Add here unto, that there be in this your
realm, mo which favor the Catholyke religion, and which be ready to suffer
extreme punyshement, in the holy quarrel of it, then there be which inclyne to
these new found learnynges, and late up starte opynions. Therefore there is
no doubt, but what so ever you would have done in this behalffe, you shall have
both God and man ready to further you. Weygh also with your selffe how much
it shall redounde to your honor, that this your realm set out of order
and for the most part torn a sundre by the means of a few myscheuous
persons, should by your dylygence, return to the ancient bewtye, what an
honorable thing it we re to our puyssant Queen to rearesse religion in England.
and recover the ornaments of godly conversation, with the which in old time
it was trymly set forth and decked. For all good men will speak and wryght
good of you, your acts shall be cronycled and regestred up for ever, they
which be not yet borne shall talk of you, and no age shall seace to sing
songs in praise and commendation of you. For what victoryes are to be compared
with so notable a deed?

what is able to purchase greater praise and renown? what more notable
monumentes can be left to make your name allway to be remembered? for it is not
praise worthy to kill many thowsandes of men, but to put wyckednes to flight,
utterly to race out and deface syn, that is to be praised, that is to be
exalted: not to work men myschefe and destruction, but to save and deliver
them, is the high way to immortal glory: not to overthrow with force of
arms many Cities of forenenymyes, but to preserve the natyue country for
being overflowed with feaes of syn, or ouerrun with the runnyng camp of
ungodliness, does win the golden spurs of glory and renown. For all other
victories though they be in God his appoyntement, yet they be gotten with the
dent of the sword and help of man: but this of all other most notable, is
obtained with godly and spiritual weapons: and those other victoryes are not
gotten without bloodeshed, and a certain lyce^ce or warrant to syn, but this
which I speak of, is gotten with the destroyinge of syn, and the saving of
men: wherefore of necessytye this passes in worthynes all other, which be
won with worldely weapons, shrightyng of souldyoures, and force of men, so
far as heavenly things excel things upon earth. Which thing truly shall
cause men so much more to marvel, as it is an harder matter for the Princes
of darkness, and everlasting enymyes of mankind, to be vancquyshed of one
woman, then one man to be conquered of an other. Therefore so notable praise,
shall not only allway be fresh in men's memories, but also it shall be set
forth and magnifyed of the blessed saints in heaven. Wherefore (o most noble
Queen) even for the bledyng wou^des of our Redemer Jesus Christ, A most vehement
and Godly exhortation to our redoubted Queen.
for his blood shed for us upon the cross, for his death and bitter passion,
by his most glorious victory, with the which he tryumphed upon death,
destroying it and puttyng it to death, for that contynuall fyar, which he has
enclosed in the center of theyearth, and with the which he has stirred the
hearts of his servants to the love of virtue and hatred of syn, for that
most ryghtwyse judgment with the which he shall take vengeance of syn, and
recompense with everlasting rewards, those which have held a sound faith and
undefiled religion, finally for the love of all holy things in the world, I
pray and beseech you, seeing you have so many helps and furtheraunces to
immortal glory, that no let or hyndraunce may be found in you. Fasten your
eyes upon Christ mangled with wounds for your sake, throw your self flat
before his fete, embrace his cross in your arms, and banyshe out of your
country, this hatred against his cross, Enemies of the cross to be banished.
which this new fangled fraternitye does openly maintain.

Follow the foot steps of holy men, and persuade your self that to be the
right way, which Godly men endued with excellent virtue continency, and
purenenes, what foreru^ners our most clear Princes should follow and eschew.
being hyghly in the favor of God, inspyred and taught with the holy ghost,
have trodden before you: not that which men blinded with self love, leanyng
only to their own wit, hedlong in folysh hardines, over whelmed with
wyckednes, and dyuyded from the unity of Catholyke church do persuade you to
follow. The which thing if you will do, you shall uphold and increase the
riches of your Realm, and that which is much more worth, you shall with
great glory ascend in to the Kingdom of heaven. JESUS CHRIST the fountain of
all goodness, the Lord of all might, long preserve your grace in health, with
increase of all honor and Princelye advancement.

FINIS.
Ex testimonio doctissimi cuiusdam viri Anglice periti, credimus praedictam
epistolam and esse catholicam, and been versam.

Ita esse testor Cornelius Iansenius
S. Theologiae Louanij professor.
To M. Doctor Haddon.
VAlens the Emperor, as Nazianzenas does witness, being poisoned with Arrius
heresy, after he had written with his own hand many words concerning the
banishment of saint Basil, yet could not fynishe those wrytynges, for so
much as the pen did three times refuse to yield yncke. Not withstanding, he
being obstinae in his proposed malice, did not leave of to write that wicked
Decree, and to subscribe unto it when it was written, till a great cramp or
palsye did come in to his hand, which did smite such a fear and terroure in to
his heart, that with his own hand he did tear that, which he had once put in
writing. O terrible, o fearful example. For the love of God remember this
history M. Doctor Haddon. And whereas it did not fear you to write against
Osorius at the first, because peradventure either you knew it not, or else did
forget it, now seeing you do know it, and have it fresh in memory, despise
it not. But let it be a warnyng to you, whether you be moved of your own
head, or pricked forward with the suggestion of other, whether you be in your
private parler, or publyke parliament house, that you say nothing, write
nothing, subscribe to nothing, pertaining to the defacyng of the truth, lest
such a cramp take you in the hand, when you should write, such a palsye come
in to your tongue when you should speak, that you be a spectacle to all them
which see you or hear you. Enter in to an humble confession of your own
imperfection, that although in humanity you can do very commendably, yet when
you come to declame in diuinitye, against the verity, you can no more bestirre
your self, then young David could in Saules heavy helmet, and boysterouse
armoure, 1. Re. 17.
with the which he was never accustomed. VVherfor I pray you, use that, of
which you have some skyll, refuse that, whereof you be all together ignorant.
If you will not cease, I assure you, you shall stir up so many adversaries
against you, that whereas you be M. of the Requests, and for that cause, ought
allway to be at leisure to hear petitions, when sueters come to you, you shall
be feign to make them answer: I pray you, troble me not, I must go answer
Osorius of Portugal, I must answer Hosius in Polonia, such a man in such a
country. etc. And if you will not make them such an answer, yet your brain
shall be busyed with so many books and letters, from so many places of your
betters, that your mind shall not be upon your charge. So that either you
shall be put out of your office for negligence, or else sent from the Court
to Cambridge for pitye, that you may have more leisure to answer your
adversaries. Which change I thinck you would not willyngly chose: wherefore I
pray you, follow my former council. Stay your self, recompense your
troblesome eloquence, with charitable and quiet silence. But if you think,
that I have done you injury by tra^slatyng O forius, you may easily revenge me
by translating your answer, if you thynk it to be truer. Whether you do
translate it or no, because you be M. of the requests, I pray you, grant me
this request: Increase not I pray you your old fault with a new offense, make
no new resistau^ce against the ancient verity. And that you may be the more a
feared hereafter to abuse your hand in writing against Osorius, or any other
Catholyke, turn the book named Symbola heroica, heroical deuyses, where in
among many pictures, you shall find a shaking hand, with a pen leapyng out of
it, and this posye written over it. Vlterius ne tend odiis. Let this be in
painted tables ever before your eyes, let this be your heroical deuyse, and I
trust it shall fear you from the like vice. Which, I pray God, you never
commit again, whose grace I wyshe you, that you may worthily repent for that
which you have done all ready. Amen.

Fare you well. From Antwerp the.27. of March.
Faults escaped in some Copyes.
man's his arroganyce will what malypertnes Read man his. arrogancye. with what
malypert.


