THE Eighth Book of the Myrror of Knighthood.

Being the third of the third Part.

Englished out of the Spanish tongue.

-- Pictoribus atque poetis
Quidlicet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
VIRESSIT VULNERE VERITAS

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Cuthbert Burbey, and are to be sold at
his shop near the Royal Exchange. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, MAGNIFICENT, and ever honored, Sir Edward wootton Knight.
THe grateful remembrance (right Noble Sir,) of your many favors extended
toward my deceased uncle, and nothing extenuated toward my living Aunte,
craving a supreme command over my oblyged thoghts, inforceth (where
satisfaction cannot equally balance those deserts) an acknowledgement of an
everlasting thankful mind. If therefore the hopes of an untried servant, may
by future merits deserve any liking, or the merits of your own Heroicke worths
(whose sole shadow inables my weakness) may add courage to a discoraged
spirit, thus to pass the limits of welbecomming duty: Oh then pardon the
presumption, that dares choose this means to express his true zeal unto your
service. For though the matter nor the method, befits neither your wisdom,
nor authority, yet let the innocence of my unstained soul, be made happy by
your acceptance of these few sheets of blotted paper. And if my audacitie
(which I confess) have offended, impute it to proceed by motive from the
praises of your immortal virtues, whose excellencies the shril voice of fame
having borrowed the mouths of those, that they, with adamantiue power have
attracted to your affection, has amply propagated through the worlds wide
co^tinent. Or if the matter be impleasing, be that fault attributed mine, in
selecting so fabulous a subject, to be protected by so great a Patron. But yet
(Magnanimous sir) suffer the pleasing invention for the original language sake,
excusing that error, drown the memory of the offense, in the black center of
oblivion. But for the rude style, and harsh vnpollisht phrase, oh there is no
comfort can expel that disco^solated fear, unless the ever memorable noblenes of
your grace (thinking me to be what I am not) shall (lightning my darkness)
make me seem gracious in your all-gracing sight, omitting, and remitting what
ever deserves blame, and by smiling on so small a talent, not utterly condemn
my immaculate sincerity, to your neuer-dying worthiness. Whose perpetuity,
together with all your most happy desires, may the omnipotent powers of that
almighty majesty, whose breath commands both heaven, earth and seas,
effectuate with eternal felicity.

Evermore devoted to your Worships service, L. A.

TO THE COVRTEous Reader.
BY confessing my own many faults, judge me (kind Gentlemen) worthy less
blame. But believe me, by reposing too much confidence on the Press, has not
only aggrauated, but most grosely added to my errors, making me hault down
right before your presence, like an abortiue child, thrust into the world
before his time. Where you dislike, utterly despise not, but think I would
be what I am not, and so for your sakes, wish I were twenty times far
better.

Nevertheless, let not my offenses stain the deserved praises which the
sweet Poetical inventions of a special, and my most dear friend, has
intermixed with my rude prose, does merit. For his sake my hopes are the
stronger, which entreat your gentle censures on my well-meaning intent,
amending, where there is no cause of commending, so shall I still remain
debtor for your courtesies, until with larger satisfaction, I may in part
manifest my due thankfulness.

L. A.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE THIRD PART OF THE Myrror of Knighthood: Containing the
high and mighty deeds of the sons and Nephews of the Emperor Trebatio, with
the valiant acts of other Princes and Knights. Together with the excellent
deeds of warlike Ladies, with the end and dissolution of the three most famous
Inchauntments of Lyriana, Roselia of Rome, and the Celebrated bewteous Linda,
Brydes, Princess of the Scythians.
CHAP. I. Who Brauorant was, and why he left the Serpentarian Isle, to pass
into Grecia.
WHen the dreadful report of cruel Arms and War (mentioned in the third
Book of the first part of this History) was noysed through all the Pagan
Nations, assembling, and in one uniting their several puissant Hosts, under
the conduct and command of Alicandro, mighty Emperor of ye Sythians,
marching under his Ensigns against the Grecians, with intent of mortal
revenge, utterly to subvert that Monarchy, leuelling Constantinople the seat
of their Empire with the earth, with perpetual desolation.

Thither then to these ever memorable Wars, accompanied this Scythian
Monarche, one that for strength, valor and high deeds, held over all Pagan
Knights and mighty Giants, chief sovereignty, in all military actions, as
being of the fearcest, sole supreme Lord, called the Gran Bradamante Campeon:
who procuring to eternize the memory of his lineage, desired to have a son so
absolute in all accomplishments, that joyfully he might pass this life, with
assurance that none but he should imperate all those Orient Isles, in whose
Conquest he had shead so much humane blood.

To effect which desire, he begot the most mighty Bramarant, of himself the
only homecide: as Lirgandeo in the first Book of the second part has
recorded.

With like intent as the Father, departed the son, for ere he left his
Country, he procured it, being in love with a Gyantesse, whose fame for
valor, did penetrate the vaultie skies. With this went he wondrous gladly to
spill so much Grecian blood, where both Father and Son found their
Sepulchers in the Greek fields.

Now then does Galtener record, that composed these two Parts, how the
Gyantesse conceived by the Famous Bramarante, and at the expiration of her time
of travel, was delivered of a child, for strength most admirable, if not
unmatchable expectation. For nourishing and bringing him up as the proud father
was, not with humane milk, but of Ounces, Tigers, and Lyonesses, whereof that
Island yeeldes infinite. At twelve years of age, he was as big and great as
any Knight of highest stature. No wild beast could outrunne him, how swifte
soever he were: For so admirable was the lightness of the sturdie youth, that
he would overtake them in their course, and with his hands disioynt them,
piece by piece, on whose flesh he fed. Being of fourteen years, he
caused an Armor to be made of scales of Fish, bredde in the Arthlanticke Sea,
whose strength equalled the finest Diamonde: they were somewhat dark of
color, but he garnisht them with Pearls and other rich stones, so
excellently, that they seemed naturally to have grown there. He was not of
body disproportioned as other Giants, but composed of such orderly well knit
members, that only in strength he was accounted Gyantiue.

The news of his father and Grandsires death, he received ere he received the
order of knighthood, which he himself of himself did take, saying: None
merited the honor to give him that dignity, and so became both agent and
patient to advance his pride unto the end of his desire, which was so great,
that it amazed the world, having far greater forces then his father
Bramarante.

So when he saw himself with arms, and knew the Greeks had slain his
Grandfather, he solemnly protested on the hilts of his sword, to hold
perpetual enmity with them. Although presently arrived other sorrowful news
of his fathers death, and how the Greek Princes with their own hands intombde
him, vowing to defend his armor against any that would presume to take them.

This somewhat pacified his rage, yet not to esteem them his friends. It
grieved his very soul to hear that the king of Mauritania had dared to take
away the armor of his dear father: that he would stay no longer, thinking
he wronged his honor in the deferring of his just revenge.

This (above all the valiantest) he had, that he was courteous and gentle,
and without sufficient cause would never undertake, nor of any ever demand
the combatte. Arriving in Grecia he became more milder, not by meeting any
that ouermatcht or equalled him in fight, but with the sole sight of the
Greekish Ladies gallantnesse.

He was prone to love, and in pursuit thereof performed no mean adventures.
Finally between him and the furious Bembo, was all the strength of Paganism
divided. He took his leave of his subjects, (for then he, none was evermore
beloved of any) with whom he left commandment, that straight upon report of
war against Greece, they should with the greatest power they could assemble,
seek him there, who only with the son of the Governor of his kingdom,
called Artanio, left the confines of Scythia, where he reigned, purposing to
employ himself in nothing till he met the Mauritanian Brufaldoro, and to take
from him the arms of his so dear and valiant father, calling himself
vnfortunafe, in that he had not known him. His ship being rigged, and of all
munition and tackling well provided, within one month he entered the vaste
Greek Ocean, which not a little gladded him to be in his enemies country.

On the fourth day of his Navigations (having thitherto met with no adventure
worthy a History) he descried making toward him a ship, whereat he
rejoiced exceedingly, hoping to know news of his demand. The ships in
their meeting came so near, that Brauorant might well discern upon the
hatches of this strangers ship, two knights of gallant disposition, clad in
rich and strong Armor, with whose sight he rested highly contented, for in all
his life he had not seen better accomplished Gentlemen. They wore their Helmets
off to take the freshness of the air, and seeing he joined his to their
ship, they put them on. And he approaching said.

Sir Knights, I shall be highly favored to know near what land we are, and how
far we be from the nighest? Elevated in contemplation were the two, seeing so
stout a youth, for having his vyzor raised, they saw his beard did not as then
spring forth. The one replied, you now do nauigate sir knight in the Greekish
sea, and are not above three days sailing from Constantinople, for so many is
it since we thence departed. In courtesy then tell me (required the sturdie
youth) whether he that slew the Gran Campeon Bradaman, be now in that City,
for it greatly concerns me to meet with him? And I cannot believe, nor is it
possible, that only one to one he should overcome him, whom all the Oriental
Regions feared. The other answered, That Prince is in Greece (Knight) and if
you prove your self with him, you shall find that was nothing he then did, so
great is his valiantness and unmatched strength, whereto the heavens joined
all their influences to make it incomparable.

To hear the Greek so praised, did exceedingly vex the youth. So the Pagan
replied saying. Surely if all in Greece be as valiant in fight, as they are
singular in their Princes praises, they cannot be less esteemed then for the
wonders of Chiualry, and in the world soly excellent for deeds in arms.

So are they indeed (replied the knight) and he that dares gain say it, I here
defy him to mortal battle. Defy me (answered he) Oh heavens! is this
tolerable I hear? that before I see the country of my enemies, there should
be any to dare me and challenge me? therefore no longer would the enraged
Pagan stay, but commanding his bark to be grappled close with his
adversaries, he drew forth his furious blade.

Against Mars would not the other refuse the combat, but in this gets he
little: for being with trial assured of the Pagans strength, he straight
imagined what small honor he should get in that attempt. For the raging
Scythian raising his Merculean arm, and as that was the first blow, so would
he make it notable, which indeed was such a one, that lighting on the top of
his helm, he slised away the one half, with part of the neck-peece, and
descended on his shoulder with such weight, that he thought a Tower had fallen
thereon: which made him fall unto the ground upon his hands, loosing a piece
of his vanbrace. Another seconded the new Mars, lessening the former with the
fury of the latter, lighting on him as he rose in the middle of his strong
shield, which as if it had been made of a thin plate, was clean cut from the
one to the other end, and the blow fearcely falling on his sight, astonished,
felled him al along upon the bark, voyding much blood through his nose and
mouth.

An Eagle in lightness was the Pagan, so would he follow leaping after him:
but the supreme guider of the Orbs did otherwise appoint it, moving his
companion to succor him with incredible seleritie, making the Scythians of
none effect, by giving him a venturous thrust on the sturdie breast, making him
recoyle backewards: for had he lept into their ship, both had left their
lives in the hands of the angry Pagan, who like a furious Basseliske offered
again the dangerous leap, but to prohibit him, stood the amorous Florisarte,
for it was he and his father, with the disguised Princesses that were there,
who departing from Greece, were brought to that pass, that they accounted
themselves surely vanquished, so fierce seemed the Scythian. By this was the
father risen, rejoicing at the good aid his son had given him. Again
reioyned the two barks, and their being both together, increased their hopes
of victory.

The haughty youth refused them not, but rather ioyed thereat, judging them
Knights of estimation, and since so valiant tokens they showed thereof, he
thought that vanquishing them, some honor he might atchieue by the conquest.
He was enraged against the some for disturbing him from winning the entrance
of their ship: and so suffering a mighty blow, that had he not been Brauorant
that received it, no other could have the heart to endure the second.

At his pleasure did he reach the beloved Florisarte on the one side of his
shield. Far did not the sword enter, for the Scythian stayed his arm, but all
that it reached, which was the shield it snatched from his hands, making him
turn twice or thrice about, like with staggering to fall: he stepped nigher to
the edge, to discharge another, which happened as he would: for taking him
about the shoulders, the blade bounded upwards, else it had struck away his
head: but so puissant was the furious stroke, that it disarmed all that side,
and fell with such huge heavy strength, that it struck him down in the
middle of the bark.

Like a swelling serpent became the father, seeing his son so handled, that
with the utmost of his strength he discharged his rage upon the Gygantine
youth, who not respecting it, would not ward it (but to be given by the hands
of the valiant Tharcian) it was too much proud confidence to respect it: which
made him see more stars then the lofty Firmament contained. He staggered too
unseemly steps backwards, almost falling, but recovering himself, he fomed
through the Vyzor like a hunted Boore: blaspheming irreligiously against his
goddess.

By this time came the son, and knowing that one only knight handled them in
that manner, with both his hands he laid upon his Helm, which sounded like a
bell. In all his life he had not received the like: for it made him bend his
head with no little pain: and with more speed then he would, even to his breast.
Scarcely had the son executed his, when the father discharged an other in the
same place. They forced him to set his hands on the ground: It was to their
will, for returning more furious then a hunted Lion in his greatest rage, as he
rose, with a counterbuffe he tumbled the father on the midst of his back, so
sore bruised with the blow, that almost he could not after stand on his feet.
The son maintained the fight, procuring rather to defend himself from the
Pagans fierce blows, then to offend.

But what avails it? for the father being arrived in his help, their
adversary never fully reached them any blow, but he lanched forth their blood,
wherewith they both were withal covered, and although they had somewat wearied
and more enraged him, yet was his Armor neither cut nor rased, and had the
battle been made on land, it had ere this been ended, either with death or
vanquishment of both. For the haughty youth was borne to fight, finding ease
therein: and so had he in the end of three hour, so tired and wounded them,
that longer they could scarce hold out: Yet for all this, did not the Knights
loose any part of their courage, which was such, that they forced the son of
Bramarant to increase in forces, bellowing like a bayted Bull: and yet highly
esteeming them, in respect of their shown valor.

Long had he desired to win their ship, and so now to acccomplish the
same: with a thrust, he drove the Argentarian Prince to the farthest side of
it, and after him would he have leapt, if that a sudden whirle-winde that
happened, had not parted far asunder both ships, following after it, so
great a misty thick fogge, with so much thundering and lightning, that the
prowdest heart was daunted with fear.

Which being past, they saw themselves so sundred, that straight either lost
the sight of the other, and in the Princes Ship, immeasurable was their
grief for the two Pages loss, that in that tempest were conveyed away:
insomuch, that the amorous Florisart was like to run mad with sorrow: and
it was not much, for none (living) was ever better entertained.

Here their friend Nabato would not leave them with such pain, so he
appeared to them in their Bark, saying.

Valiant Princes, there is no cause why you should grieve at the heavens decree,
and what is directed according to their will: and think it not little that you
have sustained your selves so long against that Pagan: for there be few on the
earth so valiant as he: and let this be no strangeness to aggrauate your
minds, for it will always redound to to the honor of Greece. Touching the
Pages, it was time they should return to whom sent them: and therefore sorrow
not, for they are in place where they shall be entreated as their persons do
deserve.

And you gallant Florisart, that have most reason of greef, take courage: for
only it must most advance your immortal honor. And one day when least you
think of your glory, you shall be challenged to observe and perform your
promise given to Artimio, accounting (through the great content you then shall
receive) all the troubles and tormenting passions you shall henceforth
thitherto endure (which will not be few) to be but the passage of so many
pleasures: but against many others that may befall you, your valor and
fortitude is very sufficient.

So soon as you be arrived at Argentaria (for so it behooves the ease and
quietness of Rosabell) with the greatest Fleet of ships and gallyes
(detracting no time) that you may make ready, take your course toward the
Chapel of Saint George. For in despite of our mortal and great enemy
Lupercio, I Will place a signal on Lyrianas inchauntment, that thereby you may
repair thither, seeing it a very far off: and let there be no negligent
forgetfulness herein, for it touches no less then the Ladies liberty, to be
done by Greeks and their friends, by the happy coming of the unknown Lion.

And hereupon he took his leave, ending his speech, and departed from them.
Who no sooner landed in their dominions, and being received with the love that
Flora did bear them, they gave order for all what the wiseman had told them,
gathering together of both kingdoms three hundred royal galleys, well provided
with most warlike men, and all manner of other necessary munition. What they
did, shall be related.

For three miles from Rome appeared a most strange inchauntment, making at the
fixing so mighty a noise, that all the Valleys thereabout did resound, and
that famous City trembled with the sound. The Emperor was amazed, not knowing
the cause of that sudden earthquake: But after a while there came a Knight
that told him, how in the Forest there was to be seen a great and woondrous
Castle of marvelous and seldom seen work: and that having read certain
letters written on a Pillar, he perceived it to be the inchauntme^t of the
Princess Roselia. Great contentment received her father and mother, to know
news of their dear daughter, having thitherto supposed her dead: hoping now
assuredly to see her, since she was brought to such a place. Nabato did comfort
them, saying: The time would come, they should see her, receiving more joy then
at that instant they had.

So he departed from them, procuring the disinchaunting of Lyriana, (and see if
thereby the great wars might be appeased, which he imagined would about her
happen) to espouse her to Rosabel, and as he thought, he presently put it in
execution, setting in despite of Lupercio, (having greater skill then he) on
the top of the marvelous Tower, a burning Cloud, flaming so mightily, that it
seemed continually to cast upwards flames of inextinguable fire. It was seen
far off, and therefore there were few upon the seas but repaired thither,
although without it, there had not failed to come the famous Bembo, with the
Souldan of Egypt, which was a brother to him slain, yet far more stronger.
Neither at his due time wanted the great Lord of Nyquea himself, with a
mighty Fleet. For Lupercio found that Greek Prince should end the adventure,
and maugre all the world, bear away Lyriana: and to forbid that no other
Knight might approach to prove the adventure, he stirred up and moved the
valiantest Knights in the whole universe against the Greeks, as hereafter
shall at large be expressed. And yet by the sign, the great Magician Nabato set,
all the flower of Grecia united, was there assembled. The mighty Brauorant
could not but see it, for parting from the two famous Princes, his Galley so
nauigated the Mediterranean Ocean, that he saw the fearful flames that
issued from the Sea. Desirous to see such strange adventures, was the stout
and fierce Pagan, and to prove himself therein, ioying to have left his
Country, to participate of his begun sights, imagining that his strong and
valiant arm was sufficient to terminate such a deed, he commanded thither to
be directed, where quickly he arrived, amazed to see the Tower and the
marvelous workmanship thereof, unable to conceive who could frame so
admirable a thing. He read ye superscriptions, and not regarding what Arms
were required for that attempt, he flung (as Bembo had done) at one of the
Pillars whereon the Tower was built: but at that instant, there arose so much
fire, that all his fury and strength nothing auailing him, with want enough
thereof he gave over, where his Armor stood him in no small steed, for being
made of those bones that are most cold, they were able to defend some part of
the heat of that fire, and blaspheming on his Gods, he stood looking if he
could find any other entrance: and seeing none, he thought it best to depart,
vowing to return thither, and defend that none other should try it, since he
had not ended it, it cost many lives: and to perform it, he commanded his
Pylot to make toward Mauritania, for he desired to be there, to demand his
fathers Arms of Brufaldoro, or loose his life in their pursuit. The weather
was fair, calm, and prosperous, favoring his voyage, for in eight days he
landed there: he was glad thereof, and so took forth a mighty roane Courser,
the best that all his Country did afford, of such force, as it easily might
bear the sturdie youth. On another mounted his Squier Artanio, and taking the
largest path, he began to pace forth in haste, to learn of some one, if the
king of that land were there to seek him. Straight was he assured there of,
rejoicing greatly thereat, being persuaded none could disturb him from winning
the Armor that once belonged to his dear father. But to rest himself, he
entered through a fair Forest, passing that day there, til it was time to
sleep, which was but little, by reason of that which befell him.

CHAP. II. What happened unto the mighty Brauorant, with a strange knight, and
who he was.
SCarce was the middle hour of that same season past, when rest in silent
quietness surpriseth the waking eyes of every one, to make them cease their
laborious daily toil, suffering the wandering passengers of gloomy darkness,
with night tripping Fairies to progress through those walks, that the absence
of their exilde light does limit them, in black obscurity: when a sudden
new alteration enforced the haughty Pagan from his accustomed vncontrowled
sleep. For the heard not far from him, the complaints of some one, whose
necessity urged him to lament. He was as is said, in nature contrary to all
others of his kind, and like his Father only in strength. For he pitied those
distressed, offering his person in their required aid: he rose, and closing
his Beauer, went to the place from whence he heard the plaintes, and by the
pale shine of Cynthias watery beams, he saw sitting at the foot of a knottie
Oak, a well proportioned knight, apparrelled in most rich Armor, complaining
of love. The Pagan knew not what it meant, and therefore to see his effects, he
got behind another Tree very near unto the knight: who had not all that
night slept, bewayling his chance, neither would he do it, but to participate
his grief to those that felt it not. So not regarding, because not seeing the
Pagan, he began with a thousand sighs, witnesses of his souls sorrow, to
utter the grieved burden it sustained: and with such grace, that Brauorant
rested amazed, iuding him some celestial creature, respecting the sweet
harmony of his voices, he did with all attention listen, and ouerheard the
Lover in this manner sing against Fortune, these verses following.

FOrtune is blind, she looks on no man's need,
And deaf, she hearkens unto no man's call:
And cruel, she respects not who does bleed,
And envious, she rejoices at ones fall.
No Beauty can unmask her hood-winck't eyes,
No Force can drive attention to her ears:
No Grief make her dead-sleeping pity rise,
Nor is her Envy thawed with Virtues tears.
She at adventures lets her Favors fly,
Without proportion, without due regards:
The base unworthy, now she mounts on hie,
And fatteth dunghils with her best rewards.
Anon they tumble to their first estate,
And other on the tottering wheel are set:
Who never find repentance, till too late,
And then they find it in sad sorrows net.
Such fortune is, and oh what hap have I
To serve a Goddess lighter then the wind:
Constant in nothing, but inconstancy,
As also envious, cruel, deaf and blind.
Fortune is blind, Oh what can me betide?
But blind mishap, that serve so blind a guide.
With a breathless heart breaking (hay me) ended the Lover, principiating her
oppressed souls discharge thus. What auailed it, Oh what auailed it me
(heroycke warrior) so to my honors cost, and reputations wrack, to reveal unto
thee the tenure of my Loves secrets, whose tribute is only due to thy
incomparable merits? It was more then became me, violating those immaculate
rytes of ours, which are first to be entreated, and then upon sufficient
proof, to like. I know not on whom to complain? not of my self, for never
was any better employed, nor yet their thoughts higher sublimated? No, I
complain of my hard fortune, for that the sacrifice of my will offered in his
hands, could be no means to confirm in part, the hope he gave me on the
sands of the Greek sea coast, to be soly mine. For if I so now understood it,
who would be so weak, and so mistrustfull a Lover, as with so many sorrows to
seek the thing loved, and with a number of infinite sighs, that unsought for,
would meet me, since I would not refuse what he admitted, nor could my Love
fancy but what he desired, loving? But O grief, I cannot believe, but that
misfortune and my self, were both borne Twins at one self same birth. O
haughty Tynacrian, think not but it is a blot to thy immortal fame, to show
thy self cruel and unkind, against him whom has yielded soul and thoughts to
thee. It is a tyranny altogether unbeseeming whom thou art, and what thou
did protest at our departure. The stern fierce Pagan would not interrupt
him, but astonished to hear what he said, hearkened, unable to resolve whether
man or woman he was. All the night past they away, one in his laments, and the
other in his new doubts, until the appearing of Auroras shine began to give
warning of the morning Suns vprise. And then leaving his stand, went toward
the Knight, that seeing it was day, had laced on his helm, fearing to be
known.

The knightly Giant seeing him, with exceeding courtesy, that most adorned
him, he began to speak. You have enforced me (sir Knight) to pass this
night so disquietted, by hearing you publish your grief, that in recompense
thereof, I entreat you I may know the cause, and if the hazarding of my
person to work your content, may be a service accepted, I shall rest happy
to be so employed.

The Lady well noted him, thinking she had never seen a brauer nor better
armed knight, and his civil demenour, bound her to a mild answer, but she
was in such an amorous rage, that not considering the end, replied. Why then,
worse will the day be to me, then was the night to you, knowing that you have
heard what the very soul dares not trust it self withal, and I know not
what law of arms admits it. Your favor I refuse, for having committed such
an offense, as to require the knowledge of a strangers dear hearts secret,
against his will that loves, which if I declare, how should I think it could
be conceald by you? So may you return, for the grief that me torments, is
pleasant only in concealment.

I had not thought (replied the Pagan) that through entreating thee, with what
amongst good knights is used, should have put thee in that arrogant confidence,
as to need none others aid, being a thing so contrary to reason. If thou
knew the law of Love (replied the Knight) thou should know there is no
happiness therein, but to love with secrecy, for that is it that assures any
doubtful hope. But to recount my cares to one that cannot redress them, with
more then a doleful (I am sorry) we sigh more in having a strangers
company, then for discret circumspectnesse.

It cannot be expressed what rage the Pagan conceived, for being insolently
bold, he was only noted of immoderate rashness, and so answered. Then, that
thou may know that to have told it me was thy advantage, I engage thee to
the battle, that by taking away thy puling life, the pains whereof thou do
complain, may also end. Mars was not more fierce then the Lover, being
angered, and so without longer stay, drew forth one of the worlds best blades.
Mighty he was: but he met with that strength whereto Mylos forces never
reached, through conceived rage he was quicker in executing his blow,
discharging it on the shield, of which to the ground he threw a piece,
beating the rest so heavily on his head, that it almost astonished him. He
stepped in with his right foot, and with a steddie strong thrust he forced him
with staggering paces backwards: he would not yet leave the chase for turning
his sword underhand, let it fly at his right thigh, making his adversaries
flesh feel the cutting of his sharp blade.

Never was Serpent in the desert Libia more rigorous then the Pagan now did
return upon the knight, and where he thought his blow would be of more effect,
thither he struck: the other raised his shield, but it was of no defense, for
although he did not cut it, through the finesse of the temper, yet it so
charged him, that he set his hands on the ground, and ere he rose, he felt
another, which made him think he saw the starrie firmament.

The blood congealed in his mouth, and freezed in his body, seeing the
fierceness of the Pagan, which he thought far to exceed the Greek
Princes. He rose up, for he was courageous, minding to use his nimblenesse,
but as therein the Scythian exceeded the swiftness of any Heart, it auaild him
not from receiving most cruel blows, kissing the earth sometimes with his
knees, and sometimes with his hands. Never felt he himself so persecuted, nor
at the point to loose the fame he had obtained for valor, and therefore did
he redouble his blows so strong and thick, that the Pagan was forced to
devise new defensive wards. Exceedingly he rejoiced to see what brave knights
he met in his journey toward the parts of Grecia, deeming him of that
country, where the Authors of his life were intombde.

This remembrance so vexed him, that he supposed it cowardice to continue in
single combat so long: so letting a blow fly aloft, he discharged the
second with such mighty strength on his adversaries helm, that it rezounded
like a bell: and not able to penetrate it, so heavily it waighed on one side,
that breaking all the laces, buckles, and riuets, it struck it from his head,
making the knight uphold himself with his hands: but at his rising Apollos
beauty seemed not so fair that day, as Floralizas great Alicandros Niece,
that wandering through strange lands in search of her Poliphebo, had arrived
there. In all his life did not the Pagan receive such a blow (as with her
sight) for in all the same, he forgot not the memory of that day: he stayed
his sword, and stepping forth, unlaced his helm, setting to view his sturdie
visage, more fair then swartie, yet with many wrinkled checkes, and one great
mole on his front, approved tokens of his excessive strength, his shield he
cast away, and taking his sword by the point, (through the new tuch of love)
he spoke with more civility then the most amorous.

Admired Goddess, I beseech you pardon my mad presumption, although I feel
already the punishment thereof, for the not knowing you, forced me to it, yet
I repute it well, if it redownde not to your farther displeasure, which will be
to me a more vnhappier death, in that I have seen the excellency of beauty
and valor: and so entreat you, as deseruer of far more honor, you will
accept my sword in sign of victory, and I Will defend that all the world does
owe it you. It greatly delighted the Lady to see the knights courtesy, and
imagining he was of esteem, replied. I will not (sir knight) have you in all
things take the better of the fight, for the victory is yours, leaving not
thereby indebted to your content. Her hands to kiss then required the new
Mars, thinking no greater good might be expected then the present. She drew
them from him, demanding who he was? So yoaked was the Pagan, that he could not
deny it, nor through contemplation say any thing, yet thus he spoke.

There was no reason (divine Goddess) to entreat, what by commanding makes
me happy in obedience. I am called Brauorant, son to that famous Bramarant,
which in Greece was deaths man to himself, and Nephewe to that Campeon, which
lost his life by the hands of a Greek Prince (although I cannot believe it)
and therefore have I left my country, of purpose to be revenged on the Greeks
and the Mauritanian king, whose land we now tread, because he took away my
fathers armor: and also I come to know the Prince Meridian, whose vassaile I
am, and greatest friend in respect of the love that he and the mighty Midinaro
his Grandfather did bear unto my kindred. And this is all I can say, praying
the like, not in regard of my relation, but that I may know my Sovereign.
Bound thereto was the Lady, replying thus.

I greatly desire to know my stock, and whom I am, that I might therein
satisfy your content (brave Brauorant:) and I assure you, that the most I
know, is, that I know not whom I am, more then that a brother of mine and my
self, were brought up together in a wood, without other conversation then of
a wise man, that did instruct us in all virtues, whom we reputed our father,
till he assured us the contrary, and through the accidents befallen, some
have told us we are the children of that so loved Prince Meridian. More I
know not.

I believe no less, but that those which are the earths chief lights
(answered the amorous Scythian) derive their divine descent from the heavens,
whence your sacred Grandfather proceeds. As they were in this conversation,
they saw him coming whom they soght, mounted on a mighty Courser, he wore
not then the armor of that Mars and mighty Bramarant, keeping them only to
wear in Grecia, the more to despite her Princes.

The Lady knew him, and told it the fierce Pagan, that cried out for joy,
saying. This adventure (excellent Lady) admits comparison solely with that of
your knowledge. Now am I certain of all good fortune, since the heavens have
set before mine eyes with so small toil the thing I most desired.

He arose with angry paces, and called for his fierce horse. The like did the
Lady, lightly vawting into the saddle. The Scythian was nothing envious
thereat, for in lightness the Oriental nations affoorded not his peer, and
brandishing his lance, made against the Mauritanian: but what happens
describes the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. What befell unto the mighty Bramorant, with the warrelike
Brufaldoro, the most cruel battle between them, and how they were parted by
Floraliza.
SOme content may the angry aspect of the two warrtours move, that
representing Mars, either to the other approached. The Mauritanian with his
accustomed pride spoke first saying. What unexpected motion of sudden
alteration (knights) has my coming sturde in ye? If you stand in any need
speak, for in the uttering consists the remiede.

Of nothing have we need (replied Campeons fierce Nephew, for if any had
wronged us, we have hands not to remit our remedy to others. That which has
moved this knight and my self with hasty paces to meet you, is only to
know what cause the Mauritanian king had, to take away the arms of that
glorious Bramarant, knowing how thereby he angered the Greek Princes, yet no
matter for this (I seek not their contents) but thou should imagine, that a
senne, of his living, greater was the wrong to take them, since they were his
right, guiding thy self thereto more by insolency, then the duty of a knight.

Never did the barbarous Sarazin nation know a more prouder Pagan then the king
of Mauritania, and supposing him like to others he had tried, with a fearful
voice he replied. What, cowarde knight, think thou that meeting with those
arms, I would through fear leave them, although I did incense the heavens,
and anger every one the earth contained? Oh, I wish I had them here to wear
them in triumph of my valors victory, making the powers of heaven know to
thy cost, no terrene merits better deserves to wear them then Brufaldoro.
Mild in the beginning was the Scythian, but being moved to rage, no
Basseliske is like to him, so roaring like a bull, and turning his horse,
casting his eyes up to the sky, said. Is it possible that I living sole son
to Bramarant should suffer this? and that any other but he should threaten me,
permitting, since thou haste his armor, and detaines them, not to procure
them, or loose my life in the enterprise? So great was their rage, that the one
could neither prosecute his speech, nor the other make reply, leaving to their
hands what their tongues could not utter.

Now would I here (but I know not how I may) again implore your sacred helps
(admired Ladies of unspotted purities) but ye importunate tongue evermore tuned
with this one vocal note, dashed my thoghts in their expected hopes. I dare, oh
I dare not presume, least I should waken your slumbering displeasures, (they
are worse then then thousand wo-languishing deaths) to pray the comfort of a
smile, the souls nourishment and hearts incourager, to tread the difficulty
of Dedalus inextricable laborinth, or as Hercules to undergo so many labors.
But being repulst in self conceit, shall I fly to those chaste divine Nimphs
of that euerflowing fountain of tongue inspiring music, that some one (not
busied in the lays of love) would inchaunt my rusticke pen with a delicious
method, according to the two mighty warriors deserts?

They did refuse my plaints, referring my Orizons to your desiding doom,
submitting their wills to your greater commanding powers, whose favors in my
behalf they promised to solicit. With trembling fear do I once again awaite
your censures: Oh, in regard of their immaculate triple trinity grant it, be
it but under the covert of a fained smile: whose obtained imagination swifter
then the wind, brought the stern combattants to encounter with more noise,
then Vulcans thunderboltes do rent the clowdie air amidst their furious
passage, or fiercer then the tempesteous waves raised by the unbridled rage of
a sea-oreturning whirlewinde, beat on the flintie rocks: yet was it nothing
in respect of the horror that these two rare in arms committed with their
lances. Of knottie Oak were they, but arriving at the breast, brake as they
were of weak cane or small reeds: either past by the other without motion,
although the Moore at his turning about, through the astonishment of the shocke
lost his right stirrope. Aloft with their swords raised together, they
discharged them on their helms with more force, then does a waterie current
descending from a steepie hill break through a rivers lock.

Venturous was the Mauritanians blow, for it lighted on the top of his
plumed crest, striking away all the steeled circuit, with part of the maled
gorget, and on his shoulder praide the furious sword, falling so heavily, that
he bowed below his horse neck. On the shield did the fierce youth strike the
Mauritanian, it is no defense against the rigorous arm, for the half it took
away, making him shake like an Aspen leaf. They were both most skillful, so
turned they to second others, and the Affricanian let fly a point, which the
youth surely felt, who reached him ere he could fetch home his arm, with a
cross counterbuffe on the side of his helm, that all that part he left
disarmed, ouerturning him more then he willingly would on his left stirrope:
it was no occasion to be lost, so assalting with his sword inwards before he
could ward it, did give another no less dangerous on his sight, so mighty,
that the blood gusht from his nose.

Never was trodden Serpent more rigorous then now the Affrican returned, that
seeing himself so handled, crushing one tooth with another, with his blade
mounted on high, executed on his helm such a blow, that it almost struck him
senseless. He well perceived his alteration, so took he the advantage
entering with a cruel thrust, had not his arms been as they were, there had
the battle ended: but they were so strong, that the sword could not enter
them, so sliding thence, it lighted twixt the buckles of his breast, cutting
down his strong male, and he was happy to shrink his body to himself, else
he had been mortally wounded. He past his carrier so swiftly, that the
Scythian could not strike him when he would. With such nimblenes returned the
haughty Affrican, that his courage amazed the invincible youth. But now was
he at the utmost of his rage, and willing to make it known, casting his shield
at his back, let drive at him a most mighty blow. Ward it with his sword and
the remnant of his shield would the Affrican: it was of no defense, for from
one to the other end it was clean divided in two, and meeting with his sword,
both made so cruel a stroke on his helm, that though it contained two fingers
in thickness, he gave him a perilous wound on his left side.

The Mauritanian would not deserre his payment, for closing his sword firmly,
and seeing him without shield, discharged the puissance of his arms on his
sure helm, it was it saved his life, and his head from cleaving: nevertheless
it was so heavy, that it struck him along upon his coursers back, redoubling
another upon his broad breast, that it almost stopped the passage of his breath.
Admirable was the sight of the more then cruel fight: for Apollo having made
his course unto the midst of the vaultie heavens, there stayed to gaze upon
their war, glad to see the warriors, that without sign of advantage, had
four hours maintained their fierce combat. Yet something better sped the
Scythian, by reason of his inpenitrable arms that kept his body from cutting.
Which was not so with the Mauritanian, for in some places was he sore hurt, but
yet was no cause to make him show any faintness, and it rather increased his
courage to see his blood inamell the earth. Amazed stood the gallant Lady to
view the Pagans battle, judging the worlds whole strength was twixt these two
reparted. Greatly she desired to give order in parting them, imagining yt with
the death of any Greece, she lost one of the valiantest and greatest enemies
she had. This touched her very soul: yet would she not seem to disgrace the
mighty Brauorant: so she again regazed on the fight, thinking in the end he
would get the better, seeming most Master thereof. He gave the other a blow
ere she could terminate her presumption, upon his helm, that in a trance he
struck him on his horse crupper. A while was he carried so about the field,
yet not so long, that he might second another ere he recovered himself.

Who like a Hercanian Tiger, with his sword twixt both hands, executed his
rage upon his shield: so mightily did it join with his head, that it astonished
him, and with another almost ouerthrewe him. The raging mountain Lioness
wanting her whelps, is like a mild lamb, compared with the puissant
matchless Scythian, that renouncing his Gods with execrable blasphemies, spurd
against the Moore, and so eager was he in his carrier, that he closed so near
he could not execute his blow, more then cast his arms about him with such
power, that he snatched him from his saddle, whose weight forest him to leave
his stirropes and leap after him, falling both on the hard ground, with more
strength they embraced then does the tender Iuie incompasse about the sturdie
Oak.

A good while tumbled they up and down the earth, till seeing neither could so
vanquish his adversary, at once they parted, repairing to their weapons, whose
sight once more might satisfy any mind of the like desire: for if the
Mauritanian be nimble, the Scythian is a Roe in swiftness.

Here might Mars himself learn as in a school, and with military principles
gorge his sight. For being a foot on ground, it was admirable, to note the
dexterity wherewith they assaulted, and skilful manner of retires. More noise
made they then Vulcans Cyclopean workmen. Three hours of the afternoon were
past, and they without fear of any loss, redoubled their blows as in the
beginning. More used to arms was the Moore: but the youth was borne with his
steeled coat, finding ease amiddest the greatest war: so began he to
vaunt of his advantage to the Mauritanians cost, that being wounded, began
to faint, yet not so plainly, but would diverse times put his battle in hazard.

By this would Tytans shining beams obscure his splendour, drenching it in the
Spanish Ocean, when the Lady apparently saw the advantage on Brauorants
party, and judged him sufficiently honored therewith, leapt from her horse,
and stepping between them, said. Apart, apart, brave warriors, for it is no
reason about a trifle of so small importance, you should make the world Orphant
of your persons. Captiuated was the Pagan in the gives of his Ladies
gallantnesse, that he replied thus.

Heroicke Knight, though in some respect I be herein wronged, I will not work
your discontent, and do leave the battle in this estate. I take upon me valiant
knight (said he) the wrong offered you (if it be any to leave the fight) and I
doubt not but this knight will take it well to cease it at this time.

Well perceived the Mauritanian he might be fully persuaded now to have the
worst, so he answered, he was content, and they should not want another time to
end it. Thankful unto him for it was Floraliza, and offering him her
friendship, the Moore departed, bearing with him enough to talk off in his
City, of the Scythians courage. They sat them down, and the youth took off
his helm: the like did the Lady, discoursing of Brufaldoros bravery. This
virtue among the rest, greatly adorned Brauorant, that he never took from any
the merits that he thought him worthy of. So was he first in giving a
beginning to Brufaldoros praises. No better medicine could come to the lusty
youth, then the sight of that humane Goddess, whose beauty had so inchaunted
his senses, that he judged her all divine.

He was not constant, for seeing the Greek Ladies, he straight forgot
Floraliza, only the supremacy of beauty, making change in him. Most part of the
night past they with different thoughts: for the Pagan was soly overwhelmed in
Contemplation of the Ladies graces, not daring to manifest his glory, for yet
he was not sufficiently touched with loves fiery evil.

The Lady though she was glad to have such company, were it but because he was
an enemy to the Greeks, answered with her tongue what her heart felt not, which
she had left in the possession of the Tynacrian, whose absence was able to
distract her, thinking she should not see him any more. It is easy for the
soul to believe the evil it is addicted too, for as it lives fearful and in
doubt of the desired good, any contrary accident that happens, takes firm
possession of the Lover.

In this conversation were the vncontrowled Brauorant and the Lady, when they
heard a great noise like the fighting of many knights, they took their way
toward it, never finding out where it was. For the Magitian Lupercio, had
devised it to conduct the Pagan to the keeping of the marvelous Tower. So lost
he the Lady which so extremely grieved him, that he had almost lost his wits:
wandering three days up and down those woods calling for her, yet could hear
no tidings, till thinking she was shipped to sea, he with his Page Artanio did
the like. He arrived at the Tower, where he made his abode to the cost of many
Fames, sending those that went with him in the ship, to the land for his
necessary provision. Where for this time we leave him, till other occasion that
will minister matter enough of his valiantness, and the Lady in search of
Polliphebo, returning to Esclauonia, for in so long delaie, we mightily have
wronged the Princess Venus.

CHAP. IIII. How the Prince Claridiano returned to prison, first discovering
him self to Don Eleno, and what else happened.
FRom the famous City of Xantho, went the two all-admired warriors (most
fair Ladies) either envious of the other, to have seen the haughty
Chiualries by their invincible arms. With joy they met the Page and Dwarffe,
that expected them in the Forest, discoursing of the Fortitude wherewith they
proceeded in the battle, leaving their names in Xantho, consecrated to
eternity.

Of great esteem (said the Dwarffe) should those knights prisoners be of,
having obtained such defense.

Thou say well (answered the Greek) for in the end according to their
necessity, they were succored with the valor of this knight, to whom the
palm of the victory is due. I will not agree thereto Sir knight (said ye
Dacian), since the experience you have this day shown of your unconquered
arm, witnesses against any that on my behalf may be alleged. But leaving
this (already alighted from their horses) it will glad my very soul, to know
who has this day inacted so many wonders.

In comparison of yours (said the Greek) warlike Prince of Dacia, mine are of
so small name, that they may boast of nothing more, then to be atchiued by the
favors of your presence, whose imagination, and ye knowledge that Don Eleno of
Dacia went in my defense, made me draw strength from my weakness, to show, yt
at least in something I may resemble to be your kinsman.

And thereupon he did put off his helm, proceeding. I should wrong the Darian
Lord, not to tell him who has this day received such happy aid. His uncle
did straight know him, and with a joyful voice embracing him, said. Until
the death shall I complain me of this wrong (most excellent Prince of
Greecia) in so long delaying the content I should receive by knowing you. For
had I been witting of such dear company, I had still conceived more assurance
of the victory.

My self being armed with that assurance, Heroicke Prince (replied the Greek)
made me reserve till now my discovery, purposing still from the beginning to
do it til the battle ended, of whose good success I nothing doubted seeing
you therein: and that you may be assured by what means you have bound me to
your observance, know, that the combat was made for my liberty, being called
in this country the Dpairing Knight, whose Princess taking pity of my wrong
imprisonment, procured means to liberate me, and found one difficult enough,
which was, to let me out through her garden, and gave me this armor, that I
disguised, might for my self demand the battle: and since it has so
happened to our content, let us procure it for that Lady, by again presenting
my self in her hands, your self being witness thereof, for in nothing
wronging the beauteous Rosamonde, little is adventured therein. It is just
(replied the Dacian) brave Claridiano, that herein all our friends and
kinsfolks aid us: and let us go, for whosoever stays, any delay is hurtful.
Let us away (said the Greek) for more then is done rests to be executed,
and in affairs wherein our hands must be inured. For know, that this Lady (one
of the worlds beauties) is inamored of the suspicious knight, who is the Prince
of Croatia, that is prisoner, whose amity made me promise a thing inhumane,
reason almost impossible, that maugre all the kingdom, I would set her in his
hands, but now I see fortune has brought it to more facility, conducting you
hither: and I assure you, that his nobleness and friendship deserves any
kindness: whereto the Dacian spoke. It is enough to effect it (Heroicke Prince)
if you have promised it, for I by loosing my life, do accomplish what I am
bound to.

With these animating reasons they arrived to the door where the Lady
expected them, with so great fear seeing they stayed so long, that she was a
thousand times about to go away.

The two haughty warriors alighted, and the Prince giving his watchword, the
joyful Lady opened the door and said: I promise you dispairing knight, you
behave your self so like an ill prisoner, that another time there will be no
license to walk forth, having made this so long.

He replied, I am so pleasant (excellent Princess) with this imprisonment,
that I would ere I returned bring company with me, that the might participate of
the joy here enjoyed. A greater offense then the committed, deserves pardon
with so good excuse. Conditionally (answered she) that I know who he is, for
seeing with what courage he helped the Greek Prince, makes me suspect he is of
that happy Country. Claridiano replied. So great is the desire I have toward
your service (sovereign Venus,) that it was able to bring in my aid, and your
service no less then my dear Lord and Uncle Don Eleno, Prince of Dacia. Who
had already put off his Helm, discovering his excellent complexion,
entreating the kissing of her white hand. He that has them so good (said she)
is wronged, in not commanding that honor of all the Orb. Now may I live
content, knowing that the protectors of all necessities abides in my Court: And
since in handling my affairs, you make me your everlasting friend, I know not
why I should not openly reveal my secrets to you, though to my cost, for it
will not discontent him who has placed all felicity so faithfully to love. And
to this end, it will be good the Prince of Dacia should go to the suspicious
knights lodging, that he may at large know, what hereaway has happened. To
morrow I will send him one of my Damzels, to show it him. For it behoues the
Greek Prince to return to prison, least he be mist.

Whereto the Dacian answered. With whatsoever your sovereign beauty shall
command, will I rest most contented. For here now we only will procure yours,
although therein I hazard my life. I hoped no less of such a knight (said she)
for such as you in defending I receive no wrong, ought to show they be
knights. And hereupon they departed, appointing that with his Page and Dwarffe,
he should go to the grove of Lovers, whither they would advise him by Fausta
the next day what shall be done, and surely making the door fast, she took
the Greek Prince by the hand, saying.

I am sorry renowned Prince to have put you in so many dangers in my behalf.
but I trust in the divine powers, I shall one day show my self not
ungrateful: he answered. Small is not the wrong I receive by those words, your
sovereign beauty being assured that if I have, or shall have any content, it
is only to procure yours, and believe me, of little desert is the hazard of my
life in so necessary danger, and so much the more, knowing that in Venus
service, any peril is a pastime.

I Will suffer my self to be flattered herein (said she) and that my beauty has
obtained so good credit. And because I think it is reason you return to the
Tower, here put off your armor, for these will I keep with me, to put me in
remembrance how much I am indebted to their Master. With such grace she
disarmed him, that she disgraced Cynthia in her pride, though then she seemed
more fair, then when she visited Endymion.

He took his leave of the Lady, and going through the Cave, they mounted the
stairs, where in his chamber he found his trusty Polisandro, with the
discreet Fausta; that expected him with some fear of his long tarrying,
although they had not grieved had he a little longer stayed, for the damzels
witty chat had attracted the Pages affection, and were they wise, they had not
deferde the execution of their desires, since so good opportunity the Greek
had given them with his absence.

Galtenor does not express it only, says: that when the Prince of Croacia
went to aid Greece, and carried Venus and Fausta with him, that she seeing
Polisandro there knighted, was contented to be made a Lady, a manifest token
for any suspected mind to think they had contracted it. From thence went the
damzell accompanied with Polisandro to Venus chamber, and returned to the
Prince, closed the Cave after him, of whom he understood the Dacian was the
knight that helped him.

Who being out of the garden, mounted on his swift Tirio, and alighted in the
Forest he was appointed, whither he was directed (as one that well knew it) by
the dwarffe, that with him and his Page in pleasant chat past away most part of
the night, glad to have occasion wherein he might help his cousin. So the time
to take some rest being come, he stepped aside from them, and lying along the
green grass with his head on his helm, he slept the greatest part of the
night, and taking his shield, straight went toward that place, and coming to
a spacious plain, at the farther end thereof, he could discern some
shepherds that attended their flocks. They were talking of their
commonwealth affairs, entermingling them with matters of Love. The haughty
Dacian arrived, and assuring them from the fear they conceived by his coming,
said. Fear not gentle shepherds, for my coming is not to discontent you,
save only thoroughly to hear your discourses of amorous cares.

One of them that seemed to command the rest, answered. We very much esteem
(sir Knight) of the good opinion you have of the Esclauonian shepherds, and
believe me, there is no reason to conceive the contrary, especially of those
that feed their flocks in the grove of Lovers, for here with most efficacy
does Love manifest his power unto us, because true love should never be
wanting, from among these spreading mirtles, on whose leaves and growing
barks, is the life of those Lovers written, to encourage him that languisheth,
seeing what they suffered, whose deaths with their names, named this Grove.

Great occasion gallant shepherds, has the hearing of this Grove been
(replied the Dacian) to bring me hither from my far remoted country, to
know the adventure thereof. The shepherds did rest affected to him, seeing
his behavior: and some more precisely noting him, (having that day been in
the City) knew him to be one of the Knights that had with such honor ended
the battle, so made answer. To no place (sir knight) could you have come, to
have more truer information of the thing you desire, then this, for being so
long since we have kept our flocks herein, we have learned of our elders why
this valley is called of the Lovers. Whereto the Dacian said: Why then should
I impute it a favor (if it be no trouble) to relate it me, wherein you shall
perpetually bind me? In much more then this (replied the discreet shepherd)
desire we to content yon, for your deeds this day done in Alantho, deserve
far much more. So sat he down among them, where the shepherd began his
story in this manner. When here arrived the Author and builder of this great
City, and first King of this country, there inhabited on the highest top
of this mountain, a people whose quiet and pleasing dwelling through their
excellent government and care, brought it to be the gallantest and most
pleasantest Town in althis kingdom. Lord of this soil was a knight, Celio by
name, the valiantest and of rarest constitution, then known in all the
universe, insomuch that he was called the Oracle of his age. He had two
brothers, the second named Alcyno, and the third Larsinio, they had a sister
younger then themselves, but elder in beauty, which was such, that from many
places strangers came only to see her perfeeeions, on whom some lost their
lives at the very first sight. This Lady called Laissa, their Parents did
consecrate to this Grove, dedicated to Diana, to administer to her rites in
company of her other vowesses, they brought her there so young, and she so
much delighted in that solitude, giving her self solely to hunt, that she
became so exceedingly obliuious of her Parents and kindred, that she procured
by all means possible to occult her self from them, and all humane creatures:
it was easy to be done by reason of the thickness and intricate passages of
the same, which was no little joy to her, thinking she lived never more to be
seen of any. This life did she lead till the age of fourteen years: for
then did her beauty stain the suns in his mid-daies pride, whose fame the
other Nymphs of the Temple published abroad throughout the spacious world. One
day among the rest, as Prince Celio accustomed to recreate himself, descending
this way on hunting, he chansed to find her near a clear fountain that lies
behind this little hill, called the Unfortunate, by reason of that which
happened thereat. Where Celio seeing her, and of such admirable beauty, blame
him not if he yielded a thousand souls, (so many if he had) for much more
deserved her excellencies and most gracious bravery. He went toward her,
showing by his alteration what he went for, and how estranged from himself he
should depart, at the drawing of his attracted eyes from her sight. From her
being, rose the solitary Goddess discontented, to have met with that knight,
who seeing her, disdaining coyness, followed to overtake her, stayning her
with sighs that proceeded from the midst of his perplexed heart: but the
free Lady careless of his cares, declared hers, in only hasting her swift
running steps, turning her face, from whom acknowledged her for his Goddess.
She could not so far outrunne him, but he at last ouertooke her, and catching
hold by her thin sleeue, falling on his knees, began thus. Oh sacred Lady,
why should you show such cruelty against him that must live only to love you,
hoping for no longer life then you shall grant, admitting his devotion? but oh,
if you shall joy to prosecute your strangeness, let me not prorogue your
vengeance on my self.

While this dagger is ready to execute your sharp decree, for so you do
remain without displeasure, it will be my pleasure to satisfy your doom with
my death.

The cruelty (sir knight) you speak of, should I use toward my self?
(replied the disdainful Laissa) should I regard your prayers, knowing how
Capital the offense is against the chaste Diana, whose Nymphs (of whom I
being one) are first before all other things sworn to the purity of a single
life? and so my self ioying in the sweetness of so choice a living as that
led in solitude, should not then cruelly tyrannize over my coontent, procuring
your ease, to loose my liberty? With many currents of pearled tears
distilling from his eyes, the amourous Celio answered.

Never (sacred Goddess) did my imagination so much as think by loving to
work my content, in any thing to abridge yours: only I beseech (and this is
not to offend you) that though my merits deserve not your sight, nor my self
be worthy to adore you, I may to nourish my else dying life, make you solely
to my self, the sole commandresse of my oppressed soul, and that I may
repair to your glorious name, with the tributarie duties of my poor hearts
spoils. Somewhat milder grew the sister of amorous Celio, for there is no
Lady so cruel and unthankful, but reioyces to be beloved, for such virtue
does love set in the Lady loved, that only to deserve the gift to be beloved,
she will love.

She would have answered, but the coming of Alcyno the second brother
interrupted her, who almost before he saw her, rendered his soul unto her, as
a pledge of his true love. The like sacrifice did the third make of hs, that
then arrived, which two last seeing their brother, and with that Lady, ere
they knew how to love, expressed approved tokens to be jealous. To break their
silence, the third brother said. What good fortune is this, (good brother) to
meet with so gallant a Lady in so solitary a place? So have the heavens
appointed it my dear brother (replied Celio.) And being nothing jealous of
them, to fear to say his mind, added: that the power of my thoughts being
employed on her, my soul may triumph in content to have found such a
Sovereign. Most worthy is her beauty (said the second) of the offer of my
noble thought, whose relics may solemnize her bravery: neither is
unoccupied, for Love does occupy them all.

And whilst Alcino speaks, Larsinio gluts himself with gazing. And if by
chance all three be silent, she by moving the Organs of her speech, kindles the
fire that vnconsumingly does burn them. Celio loves, and the mollified Lady
looking on him, by the motions of her eye-resplending suns, with infinite
signs of hopes, does encourage him to persist in his moved suit: and for his
sake, she affects the other two, knowing they were his brethren. She expressed
it by her kind words, in answering them.

Such is the condition of love (most bewteous Ladies, credit me, it is known
by experience) that any amorous motion how fained soever, is accepted of the
Lover, as a manifest token, that only he, is he, soly beloved.

In like manner fell it out with the brothers. For as the Lady without
strangeness kindly spoke to them, the more to win Celio to her self,
either of the others accounted themselves to be especially beloved. The
greatest part of the day continued they in pleasing that, intangling themselves
in the snares of that deceiving net, that there with thousand childish toys
did leap from bow to bow to ensnare these poor Lovers in their own
unhappy conceits, until the withdrawing time of the recluse Goddess called
her away, which forced the three brothers to return unto their home, purposing
every day to come thither, in quest of whom they loved, yet minding to take
their several way. For nothing was sufficient to dissuade the two brothers
that they were not beloved, to desist the prosecuting of their intented loves.
Sometimes after they spoke with the Lady, not knowing nor remembering she was
their sister: but she by all exterior means, told the two younger, she could
admit none save the elder. Nevertheless, so possessed was love of the two
brothers souls, that in such sort it blinded them, that they would never
believe it was as she said, and their own eyes saw to be most true: for the
perfect sincere love which nourish them, caused them to devise the expedients
means to end their passionated labors. They found it, and to their lives cost:
for passing some months in this entertainment, one day, dismal and black to
this Country (since so much calamity fell on it) Larsinio the younger brother
hastened his coming to seek his sister, clad all in rich shining armor. He
met with her at the unhappy Fountain (through their lucklesse events so
called) in whose bubbling Current she was washing her fair white Alabaster
hands. His Beuer lifted up the Lover, and nimbly leaping from his horse, went
straight toward the Founte. To receive him ranue the Lady, guerdoning his
coming with a loving embrace, not as to her brother or Lover, but so near in
ally to him whom with heart she tendered, which the Prince attributed not to
Celio in favor, nor his consanguinitie to Laissa, save to his own pure love,
which was so great, that he judged himself in respect of deseruer of that
courtesy.

But Fortune now already weary, and angry the earth should longer contain
them, ordained Alcino should see the imbracement, who not knowing his brother
by reason he was armed, set spurs to his horse being also in arms. The Lover
closed his Vizor seeing the other come in that manner, and mounting on his
horse, stepped to him, saying. What seek you in such haste sir knight?

Only (replied the second brother) to let you know the little reason you had
to offer violence unto that Lady.

Enraged, as well indeed he might, became the unwary youth, and not supposing
he was his brother, turned about his Courser, and said. Why then stay bold
knight, for this shall chastise thy rude rash intention. Alcino cowched his
Lance, making their incounters with as much noise, as if two ships had met.
Of mighty forces were the youths, and so they prosecuted their battle with as
much strength as cruelty, that the Lady which beheld them, could not but
pity the blows which Larsinio received with some tears: for the love she
bore his brother, forced her to shead them.

The second brother closed with Larsinio, striking away at one stroke the half
of his shield, wounding him sorely on the arm, which was occasion they cast
eithers arms about the other, with such power, that both fell from their
Saddles to the ground. Striving, up and down they tumbled on the grass,
bespringling the earth with their blood.

When the haughty Celio arrived, who seeing the battle, not perceiving the
Lady there, lept from his horse, and drawing forth his sword, went toward
them and said. In courtesy sir knights, cease a while your fights, which
causeless seems to be so fierce. Either was so flesht against the other,
thinking the Lady offended by eithers action, that unwilling to obey their
elder brother, (that being also in rich abillements of war was not known)
Alcino made reply.

Do not you sir knight seek to part our Combat, whose cause we have adjudged
too sufficient.

Notwithstanding (said Celio) for my sake and entreaty, I hope you will leave
it. It will be then (answered the youngest) to make you confess you are
discourteous, in wishing peace where none is desired. And so he being got
between them, and they both angered together, they discharged two such blows
upon him, that he repented to have undertaken that demand: but being of
incomparable strength, quickly settled himself among them, beginning one of the
fiercest fights in the world. Above two hours they continued hacking, and
without pity cruelly cutting their arms and flesh, that every one had above
eight wounds.

The Lady feared some unhappy chance, whose heart was so deliberated with
fear to see Larsinio so wounded (for the others she knew not) that she could
not rise, nor with her voice give notice she was there: so we gave occasion
unto the lamentablest and most unlucky act that ever was acted. For Celio
weary of so long delay, defending himself of the second brother, with a cruel
thrust to his thinking bereaft poor Larsinio of his life, whose death so
extremely grieved Alcino, (as if he had known him) that dispairing of life,
did cast his shield to the ground, and closed with his brother, who doing the
like, so long wrasled, that both fell to the earth, where drawing forth their
daggers, with equal blows either stabbed in the others body together at
once, loosing their vital breathing, to the Ladies so great sorrow, that she
thought to burst.

She rose, bewayling that accursed hap, and went to Larsinio, took off his
Helm, and seeing him like one dead, she became more then dead. Needs would
she know the others, which was cause of greater evil, for their Helmes being
off and known who they were, a thousand lamentations did she breathe into
the air, banning her misfortune.

She fell in a trance, and twice or thrice lost the motion of her moving
powers, and at length recovering her self, and seeing the three Princes, for
her sake with such remorselesse sauadgenesse slain, tearing the golden tramels
of her amber hair, whose beauty eclipsed Apollos light, thus she began her
lament.

Oh cruel heavens, wherein have I deserved this mortal plague? Or how have I
offended, you should so much malign my hopes, to oppose your happy influences
with such dire event, against the springing of my joys? Had you suffered me to
keep my life within the limits of my solitary walks, these Princes had not
seen me, and so not viewing my ill bestowed beauty, they had not desired what
soly was due to one. Oh dear Princes, you should have been contented to see
your brother beloved, and your selves for his sake affected, to desist the
procurement of your pleasure, with his, and your own deaths. Oh chaste
Goddess, why did thou suffer so execrable a fact, hateful, abhorred and
detestable were my life unto the world, should I desire to live, that saw the
timelesse end of your unripe years. For this, oh this vain momentary fading
beauty! How, oh how may she (valiant Princes) recompense this deed, this dear
and amorous deed, but to immitate you in death, that did Idolatrize me in life?
Reason had Tysbe to suffer for her Lover, and Hero, rather to taste of the
bitter waters of death, then of the active fire of love, that in her entrails
burned. None had such reason to die as I: and in speaking it, to prolong my
despised life, I do offend: which though I might, I will not enjoy, in absence
of those three that did so dearly love me. Three lives would I have heroike
Princes, to bestow on either one, being debtor unto you for three, but since I
cannot, to thee sweet Celio, my soul and heart I do bequeath: my good will
and affection to Alcyno and Larsinio, and my poor chaste life, with my
immaculate and unspotted thoughts, to thee most sacred Goddess do I I
sacrifice, in extenuation of my fault. Whereupon with mortal fury she drew
Celios sword, and setting her breast to the sharp point, she offered her life
to deaths tryumphing spoils. Which no sooner was effected, but the blew
heavens with thick fogs and mysts was clowded, with thundering and lightning,
and innumerable horrible voices, that struck deadly terror in the harmless
people, who with their flocks and herds of cattle, perished. Their bodies
were never found, nor if is not known what is become of them, more then that
their lives and deaths, with the manner and occasion, was found carved in
carrecters upon some Oaks there adjoining, where some shepherds have often
seen a Cave, from whence issues such flames and smoke, that it consumed the
Trees near to it, and it is many years, since none dares through fear let
their flocks feed thereabouts.

This is (sir knight) what you have demanded, and of so many reports the
truest: where the shepherd ended. Naturally was the Prince courageous and
desirous of such adventures, and so very earnest did he inquire for the Cave,
determining to enter and see what it contained.

The shepherds showed it him more to content him, then to think he would
adventure to descend thither. But being hard by it, with invincible courage (in
the end like Don Eleno) he told them his will. They sorrowed thereat, and
with no few tears they sought to dissuade him from it, yet nothing could put
him from his purpose, respecting neither theirs, Fabios, nor his dwarffes
entreaties: but drawing forth his sword, and taking his inchaunted shield,
he recommanded himself to his heavenly Protector, and them to expect his
return, and so directed his steps toward the infernell Cave, where what
happened him, the next recounteth.

CHAP. V. How Don Eleno proved the adventure of the Lovers, and what end he
gave it. And how in Xantho he made a challenge about the two Princes liberties.
WIth Brutus sword in hand, and his new enchanted shield, with maiestick steps
marching toward the timorous cave, (most kind Lady) left we the Dacian
Prince, with whom neither the entreaties of his Pages nor shepheardes,
prevailed to give over his commenced enterprise: neither the necessity wherein
he knew he had left his dear Cousin Claridiano, and the beauteous Venus, with
the Prince of Croacia, for his desire to know what that fearful cave
contained, made him dispense with all these, and drown the memory of his own
affairs in the center of oblivion.

So with Herculian courage committing his safety to the powers divine, he
began to enter the terror-breeding Cave, that rather seemed an infernal
descent unto the hellish vawtes, so much, and so furious was the fire that
thither welcomed him: from utter burning by those consuming flames did
dispairing Brutus inchaunted armor defend him: yet nevertheless felt he the
greatest pain in all his life: for besides innumerable number of horrible
voices that sounded within that hollownesse, many thousand hideous deformed
shapes and apparitions opposed themselves against him, with steeled mases
hammering on his body, with such seleritie, that sometimes his hands, then
his knees, and sometimes both, he was forced to sit on the ground: insomuch
that his own blows wherewith he struck the empty air, served to no other
purpose, but with the fruitless exercise to weary his arm, that he could not
feel it.

In this uneven war labored he about an hour, minding many times to return
back, so erterne hot was the fire, but surprised with consideration of whom
he was, and what ignominious infamy awaighted such an act, with much striving
he obtained the end of the burning Cave, where he met with a great Pillar,
which nothing displeased him, that by getting behind it, might defend him from
his pursuers. But here was he in the greatest danger of all his life time, for
the Pillar he embraced, became a most fearful Giant, who so strongly pressed
him, that he thrust his armor within his flesh, and the flames being no less,
that from him proceeded, then those he endured thitherward.

He strongly stayed himself, remembering whom he had to do with, and casting
his mighty arms about him, turned him up and down as if he had been some
common Knight, till angered that so long that wrasts had lasted, he hoysed him
from the ground, and with the utmost of his strength ran him against the
wall, that terminated the Cave. Scarce had he done it, when vanishing, in his
place he loft a door, through which with vncontrowled mind he entered, coming
into a fresh delightsome green, with such different variety of trees in such
artificial order set, that the sight eased him of his past toil. At one end
thereof he saw a sumptuous building, seeming not by humane hands erected, for
the top raised like to a Pyramide, seemed to check the clouds in height, and
as the same reuerberated on the glittering stones, the great splendour thereof
dazeled the beholders eyes. At the entrance thereof stood three pines, to
support so many Arches, under which lay three Knights, which seemed to defend
the entry. The one and biggest in constitution of body, was cladde in Indian
color armor, with many Lillies graven there upon. And on his shield, that
hung at the tree, was figured the portrature of Faith, with this word.

On earth if any honor be,
All tried honor comes by me.
The other two were alike in sky color arms, full of strawberies, and on
their shields Envy pictured with many eyes, as the Assirians used to paint
her, the inscription thus.

Enuies servants thousands are,
All which mischiefs do devise:
Then to look on each ones care,
Envy must have many eyes.
All three showed themselves to be of valor, which made the Dacian Lord
imagine (as indeed they were). Laissas brothers. Before the Arches there was
made a horse race, at the beginning whereof, hung a Table with these words,
whose meaning Don Eleno read thus.

In the time to come, when the most happiest in Love, and with whom Fortune
has showed her self most favorable, shall here arrive, then this adventure
of the Lovers shall have end: and also the torments that Laissa suffers: for
so has Nycosiano the great Magician of the Green valley ordered. Plainly did
the Dacian perceive, that the Table spoke by him, since through so many
misfortunes he had arrived to so happy a Haven, as the inioying of his
beauteous Rosamonde. With gallant Majesty he entered the race, being confronted
by the younger of the three brothers. The rest seeing the war offered them,
mounted on their Coursers preparing for it, as they which had no more
judgment, but for that, Judge of the battle needs would Cupid be, the mighty
K. of Sowles and Hearts, sitting in all royalty on a Imperial throne, for
workmanship stupendous, showing himself (his eyes not blinded) with irefull
aspect. At his feet lay prostrated all those that had rebelled against his
decree.

But they which had maintained his statutes, and observed his laws, and with
vain Idolatry adored his rights, sat round about in royal chaires, every
one in his degree, according to the supremacy of his deserts: and with most
care of obedience acknowledging his feoltie, repairing to him with the due
tribute of his soul, as to their true sworn Prince.

The signal of the fight was given with so many thousands of military
instruments, as if heaven and earth should meet. Whereat swifter then an ayrie
thought, the warrelike warrior pricked against Larsinio, incountring him with
such strength, that he forced him loose his stirropes and bridle, and had
almost ouerthrown him from his saddle. With brave gallantnesse past the Dacian
forwards, turning upon his adversary with his naked sword in his hand, but
scant had he done so, when quicker then the wind, the second brother spurde
against him, running at his back with such force, that had he not held by his
horse neck, he had kissed the ground.

He had not done executing this blow, when like a thunderbolte the mighty
Celio departed to him, meeting him (after the breaking of his lance) so
forcibly with his horses breast, that both tumbled to the ground. On his feet
fell the Dacian, amazed at the knights devise: who gave him no longer time for
this consideration, for the two that on horseback remained, returned to
overthrow him. He could not defend himself, for the course was short, and so
headlong they ouerturned him. Ere he could rise, Celio stepped to him, with the
greatest blow he had in all his life received, for it had almost struck him
senseless, laying him all along upon the earth.

All this was no means to put the Dacian from his skillful proceeding, for ere
he could second another, like a furious Lion he rose on his feet, resolved to
expect them. He saw himself in danger of death, for the two that remained
on horseback, (with quick and sudden carriers) so oppressed him, as he lost
his hope, with honor to issue out of that enterprise.

Among the horses he settled himself strongly. A thing worthy his valor he
did, for his shield forwards, he expected Larsinio, that to encounter him had
advanced himself, but no more he moved him, then if he had run against a
rock, whom with his horse staggering back, the Dacian forced to fall, whereat
the Prince was glad, knowing that on foot he could better deal with them. So
he stepped aside, letting Alcino pass, and as he went, gave him such a thrust,
which was it that assured him the victory, making him therewith, maugre his
strength, to leave his saddle. For all this he had no cause to boast of the
blow: for the enraged Celio ran to him with both hands laying on his rich
helm, the temper gave him his life, else had his head down to his neck been
divided, yet made he the blood in great abundance gush through his nose.

By this were the other two up with their swords in hand. It was a combat most
worthy Cupids sight, for the three are mighty, and the Dacian the same he was
wont, and a foot stronger then Mars, he showed himself like a cunning
fencer, setting forth at length his shield and sword, to entice them to make
offer. Herein he prevailed, for most blows he received on his shield, which
being inpenetrable, they did not so much as race it.

In this manner a while he behaved himself, but he judged it cowardice so to
end the battle: wherefore bravely he rusht among them, well covering himself
with his shield, and as he past, he gave the second brother such a
counterbuffe on the helm, striking away a great part of his vizor that it was
adventure he had not done so by his head.

Down along the breast descended the sword, making there a long dangerous
wound, with another he would have ended that battle, had the other two let
him. But the haughty Celio with impoysoned rage entered so much inwards, that
at his pleasure he could discharge his fury on the top of the inchaunted
shield, not able to cut it, yet so weighty was the blow, that three or four
steps staggering backwards, it forced him.

Larsinio was not idle, for with a strong point he thrust at his breast. He felt
the blow, for it deprived him of his breaths passage. The two brothers had not
discharged their blows, when the wounded Alcyno returned, and with both hands
gave him a most mighty stroke. Rezound with Echo did the green fields, by
the warriors stern stupendous blows. And the angry Judge was astonished to
see with what cruelty they assailed each other.

Advantage had the warrelike Dacian in his armor, for though he was tired, yet
they had no scarre. Otherwise was it with the brothers, for the field was
besprinkled with their blood. Don Elenos celeritie much auailed him, else he
had not got the victory so cheap, but it and the surenesse of his arms,
makes it certain. Three hours have they fought, making no show of fainting,
in the end of which, was the Dacian already at the extremest of his rage,
thinking he had ye worst of the fight, so casting his shield at his back, and
with his sword twixt both hands, began to brandish it among them, quicker then
the Cyclopian Smithes do their crooked hammers, and as he could not miss
them, he gave no blow but fetched blood. In the self same Coin do they pay
him: for the three more fiercer then Alcydes, assailed him so bravely, that if
he gives, he receives, and in greater quantity, with equal quallitie. Now
skill and dexterity preuailes not with him, all he remits to blows, wherewith
he rents, cuts, and in pieces shiuers their armor, privy coats and shields.

He would first dispatch Celio which most troubled him, so getting from the
two, entered to him, and in his assault, with a downright blow he cut away his
shield, with all his vanbrace, and a great piece of his shoulder. Scarce had he
done it, when with a point he turned against the second, thrusting three parts
of his sword under his arm pit, where had he put forth his arm as he might,
for ever had he there lain.

Upon Larsinos waste he discharged his fury so fiercely, that it was a wonder
he had not in two divided him. The heavens preserved him to pay his jealousy,
although against the Dacian Prince he lost thereby. In his very soul was Celio
vexed, to see with what rygor that one knight handled them, that taking his
sword strongly in his fist, aimed aloft, giving Alcyno time to give him a
dangerous blow on the thigh: for falling between a joint, it made him a wound
outward: so great was the pain, as he could not stand on that leg, which
the brothers perceiving, and assuring themselves the victory, began to oppress
him so vehemently, as they deprived him of breathing. Eager herein seemed the
third brother, and would make some show of his valor, but it rezulted to his
dear cost. For Don Eleno noting his intent, gave back, as fearing the rest,
and so let ye third enter: who being within his reach, with incredible force
laid him on the head, he cut away most of his Helm, with a great piece of his
head, tumbling him at his feet, helping him thereto, with another no less
strong.

The other two closed with him, lamenting the success. He could not refuse the
wrasle. He entered thereto advisedly, first drawing forth his dagger, quickly
they fell on the ground, where they tumbled a good while. It was advantage for
the Dacian to be so, for stretching forth his arm in that place where before
Alcyno was wounded on ye front, there again Don Eleno struck him, making him
loose his hold, with the pangs of death. Then he turned on the first, whom for
his valor he had affected, but at that instant forgetting it, let fly at his
breast a most cruel stabbe, wherewith he ended the brauest adventure ever in
that kingdom known. The noise which the haughty edefice made, vanishing
away, was heard through all the City of Xantho. To Cupids Throne was the Lady
conveyed, in that manner, as she witnessed her brothers deaths: whom the God of
love thanked for her amorous act, in giving her self the mortal stroke of
death, only moved through zealous love, for which he promised her felicity
in her amors.

Against the two brothers that were causers of that unhappy event, was the
sentence read to this effect. To the purgatory of Jealousy and Envy let them
be carried, where they may purge the pain that their rash unadvised
proceedings did put the famous Celio in. Whom the mighty Judge commanded to
be sent unto the house of Hope, where he might live in joy, and sure he should
obtain a glorious and amorous end, deserved by his faith, and that the
remembrance of loving his sister, should not annoy him.

This being done in presence of the Dacian, who unable to stir, with many
flashes of lightning, the heavens were somewhat darkened, till all was past, he
found himself in the open field, hard by the bewteous Layssa, and before them
a Pillar of fire, with these words which Don Eleno did read in this manner.

The Purgatory of Enuiers shall here remain, justly punishing the two Lovers:
til the son of the cruel Lioness shall give them liberty: Discovering also
the Castle of Hope: whose wonders shall not be by any seen, till the four
most fiercest Lyonesses shall meet at this Fount.

So greatly desired the Prince to see the scrole, that he saw not the Lady,
till turning about, he spyed her come toward him a pace, already assured of
the true manner of this success, and how she was sister to the dead: yet
knowing they remained but inchaunted, joyfully going near him, said. I know
not (most sovereign knight) how I may satisfy the duty you have bound me
too, in hazarding your life for me in so manifest a peril: although so brave a
deed as this, brings with it his due recompense.

It is sufficient (excellent Lady) answered the Prince, that it be known, I
did you therein some service, which bound all the world (seeing what wrong you
endured, being kept here) to procure the remedy. The coming of the
shepherds, Squire and Dwarffe, intercepted their farther speech. Every one
did their duty to the Prince and Lady. Whom Don Eleno received, as if he had
not in a long time seen them.

At this time entered the same an infinite number of knights, accompanying the
king and the Prince Lindauro, that galloped amain to know the news. The
shepherds advanced themselves, for reward of the news, saying: that the
russet knight which had ended the battle in the City, had terminated the
Louers-aduenture. It greatly gladded every one for Laissas disinchauntment:
though being done by Don Eleno, it nothing pleased the king, that in his heart
did hate him. By this approached the Dacian on his mighty Tyrio, bringing the
Lady behind him, so fair, that she affected every one, and had not Lindauro
borne so great good will toward Venus, doubtless he had elected her his
Goddess.

The King entertained him with better exterior show, then inward mind,
thanking him for the good he had done in his kingdom. The Dacian would not
(after he had replied with his becoming duty) treat of any thing touching
the prisoners liberties, but rather devised other matter of discourse, till
they all fixed their eyes on a gallant Knight, that descended down the valley
so well armed, that it delighted every one. None there but gazed on him, and
the Lady with somewhat more earnestness: and with affection began to
commend his bravery. He was mounted on a mighty Rone Courser, his armor of a
Tawnie, garnished with many green flowers, which bravely became him. His
shield about his arm, in midst whereof was a knight lying along, laying
forth his breasts to Cupid, that with a dart angerly seemed to threaten him
with this Motto.

Strike home, the Gods will sure his worth commend,
Who spoils a wretch, that wants means to defend.
His lance he carried in his hand, and with such heroicke grace, that
excepting the knights which ended the battle, they had not seen any of better
disposition. Approaching and doing his duty to the king, he straight knew Don
Eleno by his devise, which not a little pleased him to meet him in those
parts, for he himself was the mighty Bransmiano, Prince of Babylon, Florions
Nephew, and son to Brandizel, and he that in Grecia was chosen for the third
chalenger of the Imperial Iousts, and going with his father to Babylon, was
separated from him by a tempest. The youth was not in love, but came in the
last condition of being, for turning about and looking on that Lady, in
recompense of his sight, he gave her both heart and soul, and yet complained
of himself to have given her no more, judging her beauty to deserve far
more.

The king demanded who he was, ioying that such a knight should arrive at his
Court. But he excused himself the best he could, imagining that his
discovery might displease the Dacian. The king would not seem to importune
him over much therein, so turning about, returned with all his train to the
City. It was already known in every place what had happened, and Venus had
advertised the Greek thereof, who was exceeding glad of his Uncles adventure.
All the popularitie entertained the Dacian with loud salutations of immortal
praises, saying: Long live the knight that has so honored our land. It so
vexed Lindauro, that a thousand times he was about to command them to silence,
but he dissembled it to conceal his evil intent. So near went the new
Persian Lover to Laissa, that all full of affection, he took occasion to
speak thus. With reason may your sovereign beauty complain of all knights,
for being so remiss in procuring your liberty, that they might loose theirs.
The Lady well understood him, for she was skillful in the Art of Love, and
now again beginning therein, plainly coniectured the end, so replying to the
purpose, said. Of my self may I most lament (sir knight) to be borne with
such lack of fortune, that I rather attribute my long imprisonment to it, then
to the fault of stranger knight, for being ended by this knight, that was the
first which proved it, it might have happened so to any other, wherefore I am
solely grieved with mine own misfortune: and sorry would I be, that my
liberty should cause such loss as you speak of, for I would have none
complain of wrong by me. They arrived at the Palace, where the beauteous
Laissa lighted in the arms of the Prince of Babylon, being led by the aids of
Don Eleno and Bransiniano, which content not a little increased her beauty.
More fairer then the sun in May Venus expected her coming. They embraced one
another with that kindness that befitted their estates, whereupon the
Princess said.

I know not sovereign Lady, to whom this Court shall be hereafter most bound
unto, whether to this knight, that with his valor has so honored it,
liberating you from so iniust prison, or to your excellency, that so has
beautified it. The Dacian replying said. Most beauteous Princess, be assured
that whilst you live, there will want none that shall be in your debt, less
then with his life, since you attribute to me, what only is due with such
right to this Ladies beauty, in whose deliverance the ending of this adventure
was nothing. Ready to burst with anger stood Lindauro, seeing with what
kindness Venus spoke to that knight, which made him suspect his ending the
adventure, and what he had done in the place, had moved her to affection. He
could no longer endure it, but called him, saying. Come (sir Knight) and relate
unto the King what befell you with the Lovers, for we shall all rejoice to
hear it.

From the Ladies he went, leaving the Persian with them, between whom they
admitted him: for which place, Phoebus had exchanged his throne celestial.
Venus while Don Eleno discoursed with the kings, demanded of him in this
manner.

Sir knight, quietly and without grudge, if you will enjoy so great a favor as
this, you must tell us your name, raising your beauer, and this small
satisfaction shall satisfy so high a benefit? The Persian replied. I had ere
this done it (sacred Princess) without demand, but I feared to displease
thereby the knight in russet: for although he has not known me, I could not
have met with better hap then him in this country, and if he be here known,
I will declare my name, else I beseech your excellency, do not command it me.
I only am she (of all this kingdom contains, said Venus) that knows him,
and he not a little ioyed, discovered himself to me: and so without fear may
you tell me yours, for this Lady and my self excepted, none shall ever know
it.

To satisfy your content (excellent Lady answered he) I Will no longer conceal
it, I am Bransiniano, Prince of Babylon and Persia, the greatest friend the
Greeks have, by reason my father was brought up in company of the Emperor
Alphebo, and I in Claridianos, in whose demand I wander, and as this knight is
his so near kinsman, I cannot but affect him: and had I not this reason, yet
his valor binds me to his love: and raising his vizor, showed his fair face,
saying. Because you shall be assured (divine Ladies) how much I desire your
service, I have discovered all that of my self I can.

I do highly esteem (brave Prince replied Venus) the account you have given me
of your stock, and because I will not long be your debtor for the same, I will
give you news of that Greek you seek, who in this Palace is prisoner,
unknown to any what he is, save to the Prince of Dacia and me, who shall at
large acquaint you with the cause, which is not lawful any other should know:
and so I entreat your sovereign beauty, my dear Laissa, to conceal it. So
elevated in contemplations of her new amorous thoghts, was the Lady, that
neither it, nor what else was talked of, did she mark, for of none did ever
love with more power take possession, willingly making her submit, seeing how
great a Prince he was.

She replied not to the purpose, saying. I greatly desire (excellent Princess)
that since your knight has recounted to them their demaundes, he do it here
to us. Venus knew not to what end she so replied, but being witty, quickly
conceived what might be the reason, so dissembling it, said. There is no reason
but we should be satisfied herein. So calling their Damzell Fausta, sent her
in their behalf to Don Eleno. But they could not end to give her her charge,
by reason of a sudden tumult that arose where the king was. The Persian
hearing it, stood up, and closing his beuer, taking leave of the Ladies, went
toward the Dacian, at what time somewhat moved, he thus began.

Gladly (most mighty king of Esclauonia) would I have deferde until some
other occasion, what I will now say, because I would not disturb this present
joy. But so great is the necessity I have to depart, that it forces me to
beseech thee, in respect of the justice thou haste always maintained, thou
would be pleased to give me the prisoners, whose liberty cost me so much
blood, and my companion much more, whose words have not suffered him to come
with me, although he requested me I should on his behalf, entreat so much of
his Majesty, since as it seemed you rested content, we should about their
discharge undertake the battle. Consider it well, and answer me straight, for
I will immediately depart, publishing the injustice I have in thy Court
received, through all the world. Here he ended, doing his duty. Well (said the
king) he had reason, but he was so subborned by the Prince Lindauro, that to
please him, he chose rather to reject it, answering: I know (brave knight) you
have reason to demand these prisoners, but seeing they slew such great
Princes, whose kindred crying out for justice, forces me to detain them. To
this said Lindaura, your Majesty does wrong your royal Crown and seat, by
so many ways, and in so many respects, to give this knight so many
satisfactions of what with great right and justice is done. These words so
enraged the Dacian, that he was almost resolved to strike him, but he stayed
himself, not willing to raise the whole Hall upon him, so he replied.

It better would beseem thee Prince of Siconia to make known thy valor,
defending thy own justice with thy proper person, by honorable means, and
not by so infamous a manner. And that thou may know what wrong is done me, I
here alone challenge the fight against two knights, whom thou shall appoint
about this matter, or if thou will like a good knight accept my gage, I defy
thee, person to person, giving thee advantage for the combat, (that thou may
see and know my justice) I will combat on foot in armor, without weapons, as
sword, dagger, and lance, and thou shall take the field, and have thy choice
in arms.

So great was the advantage, that it was able to turn a tender Lamb unto a
fierce Lion, and not regarding his honor, he did accept it presently, from
which the king could not dissuade him. None in the Hall, except the Babylonian
Prince, but judged the knights challenge to proceed of mere madness.

Don Eleno as he had done nothing, demanded the battle to be straight, first
requiring the prisoners to be brought in field. Who were straight advertised
thereof. The Greek was nothing astonished thereat, well knowing the fury of
his uncle. The prisoners surely guarded, were conducted to a Scaffold of
purpose made for such matters. They greeted one another as their affection did
deserve, with joy, hoping for the good success of the battle. For Pollidolpho
knowing the Challenger, doubted not of victory. On foot did the Dacian enter
the field without any weapon: which the Prince of Persia carried, and his page
led his horse to give it. The Combat ended, with a leap did the furious
gallant take the Lists, compassing it about with such quick paces, as he were
mounted. Then stood he still, gladly gazing how the City did unpeople it self
to see the Combat.

The Ladies with their bewties made that place a Paradise, although Venus and
Layssa feared, seeing the Prince in so doubtful a fight. Without any such
thought expected he the coming of his enemies, whose entrance, the next
capitulateth.

CHAP. VI. The battle that past between the two Princes, with the end thereof.
The Prisoners liberties, and what happened.
IF at any time (sweet Ladies, wonders of this times beauty) my Prince and Don
Eleno, had need of your favors, this it is, for I without shall be forced
abruptly here to stop, and he thinking that it fails him, no marvel if he
fear his adversary, that at one end of the place appeared, as well furnished
with arms and weapons, as with pride, mounted on a mighty white Courser, his
Armor was green, with many hearts all encompassed with flames of fire. In midst
of his shield were two Hearts enchayned, with this word.

Both are due to her varitie,
For modest grace, and chiefest beauty.
Of gallant co^stitution seemed the Pagan, with the great companies that
accompanied him, every one assured of his conquest, seeing him with such
advantage: besides, reputing him of forces invincible. They equalled the sun
between them, an ancient martial custom in wars of that quality. Oh Don
Eleno, who might see thee on foot without weapons, fearelesse awaight the
coming of thy valiant adversary, who at the fearful trumpets sound pricked
forth, making the earth with hoarse noise echo the trampling of his horses
hoofes. The Dacian stayed for him courageously, only fearing the encounter in
the closing of the horse. Leaping aside, he made him loose the blow, and with
such fury pass forth his carrier, that his shield had almost leapt out of
the lists. Twice was he so served, but the third he changed of purpose, for
brandishing with mighty force the lance with such seleritie, he cast it at
him, that his was not sufficient to make him shun the receiving it upon his
amorous breast, it could not pearce it, for that only Love had done, so making
him a little stagger back, while it rebounded back. Oh admirable act, in the
end worthy the Dacian Lord: for with more fury takes not the towering Eagle
her flight after her pray, then does Don Eleno follow the retorted lance, he
took it in the air, and turned merely upon the Pagan, at him he let it fly
with more horror, then had it been sent through a cannons mouth. Against his
strength there is no defense, for it plainly pierced his shield, and wounding
him very dangerously below the navel, with a mighty fall he made him measure
his length on the earth, with such astonishment of the beholders, that they
knew not what means to find to praise the knights valor. The lance was
broken in two, which did not a little content the Prince, he took it up
quicker then the ravenous kite snatcheth the tender chicke. By this came
Lindauro, with his shield and sword in hand, thinking quickly to end the
fight, and with a flourish would have struck the Dacian, entering with a thrust:
As sure of his arms as of his strength was the Prince, so standing fast on his
feet, suffered him to enter. Great was the blow he received, but he with the
trunchion in hand gave him one, that set all former ones in obliuiou, for
bringing the lances piece right over his head upon the helm, discharged it so
puissantly, that voyding infinite blood through his nostrels and mouth, he
tumbled him headlong to the ground. Suddenly he arose, for it was no time of
delays.

But he was met wit an other, that almost had again feld him. Nevertheless
would not the Pagan doubt the victory, and drawing strength from weakness,
let fly at the top of the Dacians helm, it turned his an one side more then
he wished. Enter he would with another, but ere he could sway his sword about,
the Prince made him feel the forcible weight of his trunchion, therewith
making his shield and head meet, that it stopped the passage of his breath.
Close he would with him, but the Pagan bravely set his sword in the middle,
with the point against him, and thrust him away so strongly, that he was forced
back three or four steps.

He followed him with a blow on the helm, which put the Dacian to some pain,
but all redowned to the Pagans harm, for Don Eleno being now extremely
incensed, avoided another, and closed with him, casting his strong arm about
his neck. A while continued they wrasling, but in the end, with a groan the
Dacian laid him on the ground upon his back. On his breast he set his knees,
saying. Dead art thou Prince Lindauro, unless thou do unsay what thou haste
said, commanding the prisoners to be brought hither and set at liberty, with
their horses, arms, and weapons, since against all law and justice they have
been so long detained. All is ended with my vanquishment (replied the afflicted
Saracin.)

The Dacian entreated the Judges to come and take the Pagans confession, who
sent unto the King to liberate the knights, with all that was theirs, since his
fortune was so adverse against him. Their horses and arms being brought in
presence of them all, they were armed. Where with great kindness the Persian
offered his love to the Greek, for as great amity grew between them, as ever
was among their fathers.

Claridiano received him, saying. I was assured (gallant Prince) I could nor I
should not receive any good without your presence: my good will deserves it,
for in all things it shall procure your content. Whereto he answered. Great is
that I receive (heroicke Prince) to have found the time wherein I might enjoy
your sight, and far greater should I have conceived, had I taken part of the
troubles I was told you endured: although where this happy Prince has
employed his power, my little endeavor were but needless.

I acknowledge my self so bound unto you al (replied Claridiano) that I will
protest no more, save that you in desire, and this Prince in doing, have
accomplished the duty of your valors, and fulfilled my expectation.

But let us now go to take our leaves of this perverse malicious people, on
whom I vow ere I depart from Esclauonia, to be fully revenged at my pleasure,
and their damage. All four that were the flower of arms, went together to
the window, where the king was, to whom that every one might hear, the
suspicious knight, spoke thus. I am very sorry (king of Esclauonia) in thy
Court to have seen so many tumultuous brawles, where had you observed and
vnwronged kept every ones justice, according to the fame that for so just a
king does so blazon you, to be throughout the spacious territories of the
worlds wide regions, they had not proceeded so far forth, although these
knights and my self may truly say, that if we displeased thee, thou haste at
pleasure satisfied thy self, to the dear cost of our quiet, putting in
danger the lives of such knights, a thing that the very hearing does offend,
how much the more having taken so unjust revenge, guiding thy self thereto by
a blind self voluntary passion, and not by royal, wise, and discreet reason.

And least thou should hereafter pretend ignorance, know thou haste
iniuried such Princes, that will straightly call thee to strickt account of all
these wrongs. Of whence, or what you be, and of your pride and insolency, we
need not care to know, (said the king) for it manifestly appears in your last
committed faults. And that you may see how little I respect your haughty
menaces, I command you on pain of death, to depart my kingdom within these
four days, if not, I Will seek, and till the death pursue you with an host of
armed men. Before this had we determined our departure (replied Pollidolpho)
abhorring longer to abide in Court, whose king so little does respect true
justice: and so do I hope to see the time thou shall thy self confess the
evil committed, to be ruled by the opinion of self passionate men, whom fortune
has rewarded according to their malicious intent. Plainly understood Lindaura
it was meant by him, but urgent necessity was between them, that he durst not
speak.

They departed from the king, leaving him ready to burst with rage, and
Lindaura in the same manner, that had no other comfort, but to think his
estate sufficient to war against the whole world. He required since all
matters were quietted, to be married to the Princess Venus.

The Father could not deny it, being pleased therewith, nor the Lady might not
recall her word given to obey him, although she deferred the day, alleging
she and her damzels were working certain things against that time, which
forced her to defer it eight or ten days, for seeing they were assured of
her grant, that term was little. Her father rejoiced, and much more the
dishonored Lover of Liconia, to see that for all his troubles and unhappy
chances, he obtained his Venus. Who altogether of a contrary desire, sought
means how to advertise the Prince, and to confer with them of her
resolution. The Greek well knew it, who being without the City, taking some
rest at the fountain, although it was some to be at liberty, and in the
company of such friends as those, on whom for their valors a greater matter
then that, and difficulter might be reposed: He expressed his determination
thus.

So great is my souls joy (mighty Princes of Dacia and Babylon) that my
tongue cannot express it, in that it pleased the reuoluing Mistress of
unconstant time, to order your commings hither, for otherwise what the Prince
of Grecia promised, without your hands had been impossible for him to
atchiue. Before the king imprisoned me, my help was craved by his daughter,
against the force her father would commit, to match her with a husband she
disliked, to whom I offered my person, so did this warlike Prince of Croatia,
loving (as her beauty does deserve no less) the fair Venus, and of himself
he made her sole Empress. I well perceieud it, presuming more then my strength
could bear, promising to set her in his hands, in despite of the Syconian
Sophy, to whom she is assured by the king, because he is so great a Lord. In
prison talking with her, and telling her my opinion, she altogether yielded
thereto, and that she would in nothing contradict me. So must I now go to her
presence, and resolve her of my intent, that according to our time limited,
we may use the most conuenientest remedy. I do therefore entreat your advise
and counsel in these weighty affairs: The Dacian thus replied. I know none
here (excellent Prince, that will deny his aid unto so mighty a Lord, as the
Prince of Croatia, and therefore there is no reason, but we all hazard our
lives to work his content, and moreover it behooues me to take from hence the
bewteous Laissa, for having bought her liberty at so bear a rate, I will not
leave her in a strangers power: for I intend to entreat the Prince of Persia
to carry her unto his Empire, til I otherwise do purpose: and the company of
so brave a Lady will be grievous to none. And since we be here together, I I
am of opinion that the Prince of Greece go to night to know the Ladies
resolution, and against when they will be ready to depart thence. Whereto the
Croatian Lord thus said.

I cannot most excellent Warriors, and sovereign Princes, protest, nor bind
my self to more then I have already, only this, I can within two days, have
here twelve thousand men that expect my coming to the sea, that til I
command them the contrary will not depart from thence. And within the City I
have fifty knights and two Giants to help us if we shall need their aid.
And we may safely unseen go to our lodging in the City, and there order our
business.

Every one was glad that the Prince was so well provided, and lest longer
delaie should prove more harmefull, they straight mounted, and took their way
back toward the City. They entered unto their lodging unseen of any, through
the obscurity of the night. From thence they sent two of the chiefest of the
fifty knights, to post to the Sea side, to command the Captains and Leaders
of the soldiers, that every Commander should lead the most and best of their
charge unto the Valley of the Lovers, and that the rest should be in vigilant
readiness, guarding the Galleys. The knights obeyed most willingly, as they
that entirely loved their Prince, being also of his subjects so affected.

The Greek Prince leaving them, only with his sword and the strong privy
Coat that Venus gave him, he left his Chamber, taking the next way to the
Garden, which was the place he thought to meet the Lady at, which indeed was
so. For accompanied with Fausta and Laissa, whom she had made partaker of her
Loves, and also how she esteemed the Persian Prince, were both determined to go
with them, being assured what great Princes they were, if that means might
debar that unjust marriage. Claridiano coming to the door, gave his
signal, which Fausta knowing, opened, saying.

In faith sir knight, I now see you cannot but be happy in your own Loves,
being so careful of another. The Prince thereto answered.

This is my unhappiness, to see by experience another faith well guerdoned,
and live my self in the greatest despair that ever knight in the world did.
It may be (answered said she) you are only evil conditioned: for by all your
other parts, you deserve the wide worlds admiration. That is not so much (said
the gallant Prince) as my misfortune is great that guides it this way. Well
leave we this (replied she) and go we where my Lady and the fair Laissa do
expect you: and have patience, for this is but the touchstone, whereon the
Lady by true proof makes trial of the Lover.

By this came the two Ladies fairer then Apollo, and Venus stepping forth,
said. I did so greatly fear, dispairing knight, that seeing your self at
liberty, you would easily forget whom you left in prison, that I thought best
to get company to seek you abroad, if you ouerlong should tarry, and with my
own hands take my revenge, which should not be little rigorous. Had I been
happy divine Ladies (said the Prince) as to have known this resolution, to
feel the pleasure that wounds given by those your sacred hands do yield, I
would not have so soon returned. But yet knowing the falling into any
forgetfulness in you service, how little soever, was pain intolerable,
enforced me so soon to hasten my coming, to be resolved of your will, the
which those Princes nor my self will in nothing contradict. I love so truly to
keep my word inuiolate heroicke Prince of Grecia (answered the Lady) that I
know not what more to say: saving this, I do altogether submit my fortunes to
your order, which during life I will observe, assured that such a knight will
respect my poor immaculated honor, the which although in some respect I do
repugne, yet to frustrate my intended marriage, I will venture my person in any
peril you shall undergo: therefore in this, there is no more to do but plot it
as you think best, for that is our determination. And since the Gods have in
all things made you so absolute, do not grieve if I take this Lady in my
company: For she will in no case remain any longer in my Fathers Court,
whilst I absent my self.

In charge had I that you last spoke of (said the Prince) from my Lord and
Uncle the Prince of Dacia: but seeing she is pleased with what we al desired,
let us no longer procrastinate our journey, making all things ready for the
same two days hence, in which time you may send to our lodging those things
you shall be best pleased to take with you. Be it as you have said (sovereign
Prince, said Venus) for having in our defense the mighty Alphebos son, it is
nothing we have undertaken, were it far harder.

Occasion they had to demand for the Persian, which being not omitted, things
passed so plainly, that the Greek rejoiced to see his friend so well employed.
Any ones good would glad him, though he himself did want it. He took his
leave of the Ladies with a thousand imbracements, that had not Archisilora
governed his soul, and the reason of his thoughts, it were no wonder had he
stood a while ponderating the content thereof: but he with one ordinary
courtesy in liew of so many favors, left them, of themselves jealous with
fear of that they should do, although their comfort was, that such Princes had
undertook their safety.

They straight began to order the preparations for their journey from Xantho.
While the valourous Greek returned to the Princes, that received him with
exceeding joy, relating to them all their conference, with the Ladies
resolution, which not a little contented them, and moreover said. And I have
new commends to the haughty Bransiniano, Prince of Persia, for the Ladies
demanded for none but him, and I am glad in my heart to know how matters
pass, and in faith I had not thought the Dacian Lord to be so wary. Valiant
Greek (said Don Eleno) know, that in matters of Love, the greatest
concealment is greatest fire, for nothing contents Cupid more, then to see how
by the sole motion of the eyes two agres, concluding more with the sight, then
others in an age, in present daily continual discourses. For nothing better
blazoneth the souls news, then the eyes, and if they so could, no marvel
they be agreed, and greater matters can Love so effect.

So with great content did they all expect the second day, to take the Ladies
from the Palace: for the men they sent for, were by that come to the place
appointed.

The next day Fausta sent three or four of the Ladies chests, and the one and
the others, awaited the darkness of the approaching night, wherein befell them
what the next following Chapter does resite.

CHAP. VII. How the Princes conveyed the Ladies out of the Palace. The battle
they had about them with the Kings Knights: and what more happened.
Already had the starrie canabey of heaven darkened the earth with clowdie
black obscurity, when the four mighty valiant warriors clad all in rich
and strong abilements of war, accompanied with the two fierce giants and
twenty knights, (leaving the rest to guard the Ladies Coffers, and to
advertise the army of their approach) arrived closely at the Garden gate, and
making the accustomed sign, Fausta with more courage opened, where they found
the Ladies so amazed with fear, that they had no power to utter one word.

It was no time for ceremonies, so Claridiano taking Venus in his arms,
carried her out of the garden, and delivering her to the Prince of Croatia,
said. Receive this gift (sir knight) for by doing it, I can-cel the bonds of my
engaged word. He could not answer, being ouercloied with joy, nor yet could she
do otherwise. He returned like the wind for Laissa, (that more courage had
then the other) having endured many perils, and gave her to the Prince of
Persia, whose gladness did exceed the greatest in the world.

He forgot not Palisandro, for almost he plainly conceived what happened in the
Tower, so delivering Fausta unto him, spoke. Since thou can so well
dissemble, thou deseruest to have her in keeping. The Damzell was witty and so
replied. I would not (sir knight) that after you have played your own parts,
you should thus ill reward me.

The want of power to care for so many (kind Fausta) has forced me to commit
you to his guarding, that knows what torments do possess me. Therevppon Don
Elenos Dwarffe stepped in with these words. I faith Prince of Grecia, if you use
to pay all your Squires in this manner, it will make me rebel against Don
Eleno my Lord, for he living secure, remembers not us that be so destitute of
favors. The Dacian made answer. The not knowing thy mind (friend Lesbio) was
cause I procured not thy remedy, but now I know thy will, I will ere long
satisfy thy content. With many iestes at length they arrived at their army,
where after they rested, the Greek would discharge his soul of part of her
cares, wedding the beauteous Venus to the gallant Pollidolpho, with such
content of all the host, that feared they not to be heard, had expressed it with
applauding shouts. Here me thinks (said Eleno) all the world flies from
farther toil, which being so, I will also do it, by leaving the protection of
this sovereign Lady, so bestowing her to the Persian, he said. To you (sir
Knight) must I deliver her, being destitute of strength to guard her.

So well did Venus plead, knowing how the Persian was affected, that forthwith
they were both espowsed, to their admirable joy. Content in pleasant chat, were
these Princes, and also being night, it was not much if they enjoyed any
secret joys, I know not, but to increase their pleasure, the senseless trees
were silent.

While they were in their iollitie, no little hurleburley had ouerturned the
King and Princes quiet supposed rest of troubles in the Palace, for going to
supper, the Ladies were mist: they entered their chamber, where they found
nothing but a letter, whose tenor was. That Venus was departed, wedded to
Pollidolpho Prince of Croatia, a Knight that for merits of person and state,
deserved no less then Venus: and Laissa under the Protect of Bransiniano
Prince of Persia, backed and defended by the Prince of Grecia and Tribizound,
together with the valiant Lord of Dacia. The King was not a little daunted
hearing those names, seeing how hard it was for him to be revenged, they being
such mighty Princes: nevertheless he commanded forty thousand knights to be
presently armed, and being divided in two squadrons, to follow in fearch of
them, for imagining they were alone, thought that meeting them, they would be
easily fetched back.

One of the Squadrons the furious Lindauro did lead with the Kings coosin. The
Saracin was pollitique, and so supposing they might be in the Lovers Wood,
which made him with swift steps enter into the same, although the Princes
had taken some other way.

All that night he lost himself, until the next morning that he met with
some sheepheards, of whom he demanded for them: they gave him good tokens to
have seen them: telling him also that they were marched toward the sea. He
turned about in all haste with his men in their pursuit, not demanding
whether they had any company or no: but so fast hyed the Princes, that ere they
were overtaken, Phoebus was past the midst of his dyurnall course, and were
so near the sea, that from the Galleys they might behold them.

The Princes (seeing they were but few more in number then they) judged it
cowardice, not to let them know, how they were incenst against them. So agreed
to stay, committed the ladies to 100. knights, to convey them to their ships,
and divided their battle into two parts. The ore was commanded by Don Eleno
and Bransiniano: and the other, guided the mighty Greek, with the new
Bridegroom, who was one of the skilfullest in the world, to dispose and order
a battle.

In Figure of a half Moon, they awaighted their enemies, that seeing them not
to be so many as themselves, courageously prepared to assail them, hoping the
rest would also arrive to them: and with more ease to get the conquest, they
approached with the noise of innumerable instruments, and in good order: for
the Kings Coozen was a polliticke Knight. Worthy of seeing was their
encountering: for though it was of no puissant hosts, yet so great was the
horror, as if one hundred thousand men had met. Four did dispayring Lindauro
overthrow before he brake his Lance: for the grief to see his Lady in an
others power, did encourage him: he drew forth his sword, and with it, in
company of Tarsides (so was the kings coosen named) began to perform wonders,
only they maintaining the heat of the fight. But that way the four Heroycke
Princes entered, no tongue can express their deeds, for they seemed no other
then the reapers in the month of July among the rypened corn: for their
remorcelesse blows found no resist, that shields, helmes, armor, heads,
bodies, and sometimes horses and all were sundred in the midst.

No less damage did the Giants in their furious passage with their battle-axe.

Admirable was the battle at this time, to hear the pitteous claimours of the
wounded, the clashing of armor and weapons, with the resounding noise of
cutting strokes, and the running about the field of horses maisterlesse. So ill
did not the Esclauonians behave themselves, but they killed being killed, not so
much procuring the defense of their own lives, as their enemies deaths. Three
hours endured the fight, without vantage known on either side: for the
inhabitants would rather die, then suffer their Princess violently by
strangers to be carried away: but in the end of that term, the Princes being
heated in collor, the field had few to resist their mortal wounds, for every
blow was the death of a knight.

By this Pollidolpho and Lindauro met, either by their devises knew the other.
Glad was the Croatian of the encounter, greatly desiring it, so said. Now is
the time proud Prince, to show your deeds in fields, to be otherwise then
words in the Palace. Without admitting any answer, he did let fly at his
Helm, on the outward side, all the Plumes and the crooked top he struck away,
making him shamefully bend in the saddle, and with another stroke laid him
senseless along his horse. There he had slain him, had not Tarsides arrived,
staying him with a furious thrust, and giving Lindauro time to recover himself
both at once, not respecting the laws of knighthood, charged the Croatian. But
the venturous Lover bravely withstood them, giving and receiving mighty blows.

Altogether apparently did the Esclauonians loose the field. For wanting most
of their best Leaders, most pitiful was the bloody massacre made of them.
Not far off was their remedy, for at the Suns declining from the fourth
hour, on the top of an hillocke, there appeared the Kings standard, with the
other twenty thousand men. Who seeing the battle in those terms, pricked
forth in all haste, to succor their friends that were utterly discomfited.
Great hurt did they upon the Crotians, which also feared some unlucky hap, so
fierce was their assault.

Four more magnanimious knights then the Princes, were never seen: for though
their enemies be treble three to one, their valor does supply their want of
multitude. Order was given none should harm or touch the king for Venus sake.
Who waighing the doubtfulnesse of the fight, commanded the half of four
thousand men that kept the Galleys, should stand to aid their Lords. It was to
no small effect. For arming themselves, presently they obeyed, taking their way
toward the hottest of the fight. As they went, two knights of admirable
disposition, and in rich arms met them, and learning the cause of that
conflict, determined to aid the Lady. Good was their help, being the two
strong Princes, Don Argante of Phenicia, and Thorisiano, that together wandered
to seek their adventures. They entered crying Croatia, when they began to
drive back. But these new succors was a mean to regaine their lost
advantage, and set their adversaries hope in danger. Sundred were Tarsides and
Lindauro, and unhappily did Tarsides fall into Don Elenos hands, whom he had
incensed.

This occasion would not he loose, for with both hands he discharged Brutus
sword upon his shield, it yields no defense, for in two it was parted, and with
the swords point did wound him daungerously on his head. He closed with him,
and for Venus sake would not kill him. But casting his strong arms about him,
spurred his Tyrio, and snatched him from his saddle, that being altogether
breathless, he delivered him to four knights, to convey him to the Princess
Venus. The battle was cruelly renewed, and dead bodies lamentably falling on
both sides: but the Princes being invincible, where ere they went, were assured
of the victory. Clearly had they obtained it, if Phoebus hastening his
Western downfall, had not hid his light in Thetis watrie lap, leaving almost
half of the Esclauonians dead, with four thousand Croatians, besides the
wounded.

On either side retrait was sounded, for fear of the nights approach.
Pollidelpho being in war most polliticke, commanded many fires to be
lighted, that his enemies might think they would stay til the morrow: which he
nothing less minded, judging it mere folly, because the king had his succors
so near, and they theirs so far off, marched away to the sea side, causing all
manner of lights in the Galleyes to be fired, that the soldiers might imbarke
themselves. They did so, leaving never a man on land, except the two Princes,
whom another adventure expected.

The next morrow, the Pagans thinking their enemies had stayed, scarce had
Aurora welcomed Apollo the East, when they began in ranks and files orderly
to draw their men in field. No grief is comparable to that which the king and
Lindauro conceived, being advertised by their spies what happened. So soon as
it was known they followed toward the shore, thinking to overtake them: but
being thither come, were assured of their departure, which made the King and
Prince most woefully, with bitter laments to exclaim: and more, missing their
kinsman Tarsides, they wanted present means to follow them, which forced their
return to Xantho: where they gave order to prepare all the shipping in the
land. The like did the Sophi, knowing how his son was mocked. They gathered
600. sails, which was the most famous Fleet that ever came on those seas.
They wasted 200. thousand men, and 400. Giants, of the fiercest in the world:
with so great and puissant armies, he thought he might make war upon the
greatest Potentate thereof. Lindauro was appointed General by sea and land:
that had he not been troubled with fantastic vain imaginary boastes, he had
discharged the office with immortal Fame. Some time was spent in the
preparation and assembling of this mighty army, in which season, the Princes
with their sails spread in the wind, fearelesse of any thing, with their
Ladies ioying in their company, within eight days landed at Geua, the chiefest
haven in all Croatia. The inhabitants received the Princes with such joy and
costly triumphs, that to shun prolixitie, we ouerpast day by day, the rumor
still increast of Lindauros coming: For which cause, as also for the ladies yt
were with child, they entreated the princes to abide with them til they were in
peace, or with assurance of agreement with Venus father: who knowing the
imprisonment of her Coozen Tarfides, procured his liberty, with such
entertainment as his merits deserved. It did so win him, as also seeing how
well beflowed his Coozen was, that he determined to pacify the proclaimed
wars. Thereupon he writ to the king of Esclauonia, alleging what honor and
greater disadvantage he incurred to persecute his daughter, since she had
chosen for her husband, the Prince Pollidolpho, rather then any other. And if
she gave her promise of marriage to Lindauro, it was only to please his honor,
and not to satisfy her own will, having before made it obedient to an others
command. This letter a thousand times made him so recant his intent, as he was
about so often to have shown it the Prince, yet he could not so close keep it,
but he discerned it. Who dissembling, seemed to take no notice of it, so that
for all that, they set their fortunes on the feas, purposing to land in
Croatia. They had done it, and it had been one of the cruellest war in the
world, if the wise Nabato (considering his Don Eleno was there detained
thereby) had not succored them, by crossing the huge King with storms and
tempests, that the third part of the Fleet was overwhelmed in the devouring
waters. They returned to Esclauonia, where taking counsel, Lindauro knowing
that the Sultan of Nyquea, with the greatest part of Asia and Africa, did
assemble themselves together against Grecia, resolved to join with them, that
with so many multitudes, his revenge might be the more easier. As it was
determined, he put it in execution, and repairing his tempest beaten ships,
directed his voyage toward S. Georges promontory, where it was reported all
the general forces met. Thus far (admired Ladies) proceeded the sole spoil of
the joys it procured, that by so many means sought the easy passage for his
revenge, upon the robbers of his contents: who without remembrance of what he
(poor soul) endured, past the time in sports and revels, till the season of
the Ladies delivery was come, both who brought forth two Girls, whose beauties
being in their prime, darkened Apollos clearest light. The children were borne
with several tokens: for the Persians had on their breasts Loves bow and
quiver of arrows. Venus daughter had also in the breast, a hand whiter then
the snow, that twixt the fingers held a heart as red as blood. Much adoo there
was to name them, in the end it was remitted to Claridiana, who therein showed
the sharpness of his wit, for considering they had got the mothers by force of
arms, named the Babylonian Helena: he did not so amiss, because for her sake
there were no less cruelwars, the^ Troy sustained about the first, as it is
in the fourth part of this History. Venus girl was called Pollixena, in
remembrance of her whose love so dearly Greek Archilles did abide. Every one
praised the witty naming of the Ladies by the Prince, who expressed his joy
and love in the performance of a famous iouster. He craved leave of the Ladies
to depart, thinking he wronged his own, to live so long in those pleasures,
which he obtained with great difficulty. The day before ye two Princes would
depart, Pollidolpho thus spoke. It is so manifest (most mighty Prince) yt many
and infinite recou^tlesse favors and benefits I have at your hands received,
which soring to so high prized valor, my life is insufficie^t to satisfy ye
least degree of gratitude: but nevertheless that you may know the zeal of my
thankful mind, and how I account my sole felicity in your dear amity, I am
determined to become a Christian, for all my land will have it so: by which act
I do eternally propagate my love, with such excellent warlike Princes: and
therefore I will receive the Baptism at your hands, together with my wife and
daughter. The Princes conceived exceeding joy with Pollidelphos deed: whereto
Don Eleno thus replied.

We cannot but credibly believe (most noble Prince) so illustrious a deed has
long since been prophesied, with more divine inspirations, then humane
determination: to corroborate our friendship, there was no cause to intimate
this: for to observe the laws of honorable true Love, the least ground with
so costly experience, were enough. Happy be this amity, and confirmed with
such bounds of faith, we cannot fear that the alterations of time reuoluing
chances, may any way prevail against us.

I know not whether I may call most happy, you or your subjects, for if they
have Pollidelpho for their Lord, you have a people that amongst neighbors of
most worth, had got the honor of themselves by so glorious a deed: the which
may he that has begun it, bless, and to eternal posterities so propagate
as we desire. Whereupon they embraced, as they had but then seen one another,
doing the like by the beauteous Venus, confirming her daughters name. And
Laissa seeing her husband a Christian, would not longer continue Pagan. For
eight days during the feasts of those solemnities, the Princes delayed their
going, in the end whereof, the Greek Prince, with only his Squire
Pallisandro, departed from his friends. His company required the Dacian, but
Lesbio his Dwarffe would not: saying it behooued Claridiano to go alone: where
forrowing the waued boosome of Neptunes region, we leave them a while, to
relate what else happened in Constantinople.

CHAP. VIII. The preparations the mighty Emperor Trebatio made, knowing all
Asia and Africa did rise in arms against him. And how Archysibora departed
from the Court.
SO many and so certain were she news that every day were brought of the
Nyquean Soldans mighty preparations, and of the aids and helps he demanded
of his bordering neighbor kings, that although it were not given out, against
whom such hostile assemblies of Pagan Infidelles were pressed, yet would not
the careful Christian Emperor seem careless of his necessary affairs: but
rather commanded Oristides the new Thessalian king, with all expedition to
unite, and with new supplies to stre^gthen al his scattered troops, and with
them to march away along the nearest of their enemies neighboring holds, that
their diligence might stay their haste. He obeyed, accompanied with his
Sarmatia, and executed his office so well, that in few days he reparted on
three frontiers, to the number of two thousand men. And leaving the Empire sure
that way, he withdrew himself with forty thousand men toward Nyquea, to see
if the enemy would assault any place on the sudden. He performed it all with
such happy speed, that his good diligence was to no small effect, for that is
it which ouercomes the most labourous toil. The Troyans quick expedition was
no means to make the Emperor be idle, but rather to show his great care. For
of Macedonians and Greecians, he gathered a well furnished army, wherewith he
accounted himself secure. Of ye last, nor of those that seemed remiss in these
broils, was Torismundo none, but being advertised of the affairs, he shipped
himself toward Spain, where he provided all the galleys of Naples and
Sicely, with those of Portugal, whose direction Don Siluerio commanded them
to obey. On the seas was not a more discreeter knight seen, better to order
and reprehend a battle. With five hundredth sails he began to plough the
Western Ocean, which contained the powers of Spain, France, and Portugal,
whereof sixty hundred thousand were Spaniards, with whose valor he doubted not
to confront the proudest enemy. Of Portugalles 40. thousand: whose skill on
the sea, excelled the skilfullest. The French king with consent of the Prince
Clauerindo, sent under the Spanish Ensigns 90. thousand well armed knights. Of
all these men, he had made his Lieftenant General, his valiant son Corselio.
About the end of April with all these powers, the furious Torismundo found
himself on ye utmost confines of his land, in sight of Lauering, where
ouerviewing all his Fleet, from the hatches of his Gallie, all in sanguine
armor raising his Beuer, and on a bloody Lance, he thus spoke.

I shall not need most valiant knights to explicate in words, what great
rewards a well fought battle does yield: nor what never dying honor is thereby
obtained, where rather a man must be found dead, holding his sword within his
hand, then for fear to have it said, he did force it. But since we wade within
such danger of our lives, I will no more remember save the ancient blood from
whence we do descend: since it was never said of a French man, yt killing he
did fly. I will not particularize the deeds of Spain, where Fame these waste
seas can memorise more then what is reported, that her ordinance in millitarie
discipline is able to attempt the hardiest enterprise. The which since we have
sufficient, conjoined with such strength, let us employ it all, for with so
mighty forces, it were an easy matter to ruinate the whole world. The which,
that it may be done with more courage, I do denou^ce this war with fire and
sword, to be executed, yet entreating, that none to show himself valiant,
become barbarously cruel: for nothing so much as it does blemish the deserved
reputation of a soldier. Where ending, the Admiral discharged three pieces of
ordinance, as a sign that every one should be ready against the mornings Sun
vprise, with outspread sails, to recommend their Fortunes to the favors of
the winds and waves. A great encouragement to all the men were the Generalles
animating words, whereat to express how fervently they were addicted to the
wars, they all unsheathed their swords, proclaiming the obedient faith due to
their Prince, who with a merry gale of wind set toward Grecia, aduertising
the Emperor of his coming, who was not a little glad of his aid.

He entered the wide Haven of Constaninople, discharging all his gross
Artillery, with such noise, that heaven and earth seemed to meet, all the
Castles answered them with the like.

There was none but came to the shore, to see the entrance of the Spanish
Fleet. No less gallant on land then a good soldier on Sea, would he show
himself, landing all the Spaniards in good order, bravely attired, and every
one with a green scarf a cross his breast, to distinguish them from the
Frenchmen, that wore theirs read, and the Portugals russet. In this manner he
landed 50000. Spaniards, 30. thousand Portugals, and fifty thousand French,
leaving the rest to guard and defend his Galleys. It exceedingly gladded the
Emperor to see so well furnished men, and chiefly with father and son, whom
having never before seen, in his very soul he rejoiced to see their excellent
disposition. By land was already arrived his dear Grisanda, whose company
was most welcome to the Greek Ladies. The immeasurable joy cannot be
expressed, which the Spaniards conceived seeing the Dames of Greece, and as in
war no amorous thoughts were ever troublesome to a soldier, so the dread
command of angry Mars, could not hinder them from the procurement of some
sweet sure rest, in whose name they might employ the valor of their persons.

This pleasing life did little last, for the Emperor having true notice that
his friends were coming to succor him, resolved to go and seek his enemies,
and know against who^ such inumerable powers were assembled. On the other side,
the absence of his dear sons much troubled him, for he had only with him
his son Rosuler, that at Oliuas entreaties did stay. Also the furious
Brandafidel was with him, on whose strength he reposed much hope.

The Greek Alphebo had no need of advertisement, for the generallitie of the
wars was come unto his ears, and so with the greatest power he could unite,
withdrew himself to Tribizound, accompanied with Braminoro and Tefereo: who
most grieved at the Princes absence, was the beauteous Archisilora, attributing
the lack of Claridianos presence to her own strangeness: her sorrow was
easily discerned by her outward semblance. No less was Rosamondes to see her
so: knowing the cause, it so tormented her, that for fear it should be
perceived, she resolved to absent her self, for commanding the Governors of
her kingdom, should with all convenient speed, conduct the greatest power of
well provided men they could select ^ut of her Kingdom to Constantinople, and
there to rest under the Emperors government.

They accomplished their Queens beheft (for then she, no Princess was more with
love respected of subjects) sending when time served, fifty thousand of well
armed men. The day before her departure, she took her leave of Rosamond with
no few tears, for never between two Ladies was such simpathie of true
amity. Very importunately she offered her company, but as any good society
would but aggrauate the Queens evil, she would not admit it: saying she
might not leave Greece and the Emperor in such necessity. Then her arms
(being the best the world contained) she presented her. Them she also refused,
for Lirgandeo had provided her with such as were requisite for safeguard of her
person: which were of the same color as Claridianos, saving that the sable
bars were filled with flames of fire: on her shield was a gallant devise, for
out of a field full of odoriferous flowers, a Lady seemed to go in search of a
knight, after whom she in great haste ascended up a craggie rock, from whence
she looked after the content she lost: and the Motto between them, thus.

Little hope of joys abide,
That leave known joys, for joys untried.
Alone would the warlike warrior needs go, thinking her grief a sufficient
company: all the Court sorrowed for her absence: but Lirgandeo assuring them of
her safety, their discontent was lessened, mounted on a lusty Courser, she
crossed the woods of Greecia, thinking on her Lord, calling her self a thousand
times most cruel, for that in being so, she had lost him: and by the loss,
obtained so great torments. She shipped her self in a bark bound for
Alexandria, resolute to travel the whole world, in penance of her folly. One
night among the rest, while the warriors slept, she walked (as she used) on
the hatches, with her lame^ts, to make the watrie dwellers partakers of her
greefes: at such time that another bark sailed by hers, from whence might be
heard some entermingled groans with sighs. She could not know what it was, so
swift it went away. After it with all possible speed, with ores and sails,
she commanded hers should follow: it was done with such diligence, till she
ouertooke the bark, wherein she saw a Knight complain of Love and Fortune
thus.

Ay me unfortunate Prince (said the knight) is it possible there should be no
evil, but the extremest sower it contains, my perplexed soul should feel?
Why should I hope for any good, when with mine eyes I see it fly from me?
There is no inconvenience but haunts me, except death, with whom I cannot be
acquainted. Oh Greekish Prince, how happily may thou call thy self happy,
by being in thy infancy brought up with the sovereign of my life, and hearts
direction, since that was an occasion for the obtaining of those rights solely
due to to me. Oh Liriano, (thy name being sufficient to assuage the grief that
me torments) who might by sacrificing my life into thy hands, assure thee in
faith thy Lover deserve not comparison with me. To you, to you, Sea-Gods do I
complain: Oh you I pray, that seeing her celestial habitation is in your
vaste confused watrie kingdom, a little entreat her for the unhappy Bembo.
Oh Love, how rigorously have thou in all things shown thy cruelty against me?
Wherein have I offended thee? when disobeyd I thy commands? when violated I thy
laws? abolished thy rights? or when did my painful thoughts harbor or
conceive the least imagination against thy honor or deity? If this be so, and
not unknown to thee, why do thou wound him with tyranny, that is orborne
with weakness, and thy disastrous chances? Oh how many any (pardon me fair
Ladies) be hereafter confident on your perfections, your cruelty being as
great as your beauties are incomparable, if you reward him that can love, like
him that only lives to hate?

No more could the Lady hear, for the bark was guided by Lupertio, but what
she heard was enough to increase her pain, and raise some doubt, that the
named Prince was he whom she loved. Oh general plague (said the grieved Lady)
none can thou forgive, showing thy care in most tormenting them, that are
most careless of thee.

A shower of infinite tears rained the Queen down her pearled theekes,
proceeding from the extremity of love: having so done, seeing her self
comfortless, and not knowing whom to ask for, having no notice of the Greeks
devise, she began to give vent unto her swelling thoughts, singing these verses.

My heart will burst except it be discharged,
Of his huge load, that does oppress it so:
Streams stopped, oreflow the banks, if not enlarged,
And fire suppressed, does much more fiercer grow.
Great woes ripped up, but half the woe remains:
But pains concealde, does aggrauate the pains.
Sing then my soul the story of my loss,
Form in sweet words the anguish of my mind:
Yet do not: singing ill becomes a cross,
Rather sigh out, how hard Loves yoke I find.
Love is a sickness, singing a joy:
And pleasure is no pack horse for annoy.
And must I then, knowing Love a disease,
That fills our souls with strange calamities:
Spite of my heart enforced my self to please,
And in mine own arms hug my miseries?
And seeing still my state wax worse and worse,
Must I of force embrace and kiss my curse.
I must, I must, Cupid has sworn I must,
And it is in vain and bootlesse to resist:
Then be not (Love) oh be not too unjust,
I yield me to thy rule, rule how thou list.
For my reclaimed rebellion shall bring forth,
A treble duty to thy glorious worth.
Oh Love, sweet Love, oh high and heavenly Love,
The Court of pleasure, Paradise of rest:
Without whose circuit all things bitter prove,
Within whose centure every wretch is blessed.
Oh grant me pardon sacred deity,
I do recant my former heresy.
And thou the gearest Idol of my thought,
Whom love I did, and do, and always will:
Oh pardon what my coy disdain has wrought,
My coy disdain, the author of this ill.
And for the pride that I have showed before:
(By Love I swear) I Will love thee ten times more.
Have thou shed tears? those tears will I repay,
Ten tears for one, a hundredth tears for ten.
Has my proud rigor hunted thee astray?
I Will loose my life, or bring thee back again.
Each sigh I Will quittance with a thousand groans,
And each complaint with a whole age of mones.
And when I find thee, as I find the will,
Or loose my self in seeking what I love:
Then will I try with all true humble skill,
Thy pity on my great offense to move.
Till when, my griefs are more then tongue can tell,
My days are nights, and every place is hell.
With a heavy sigh she ended: but as if singing had but in part discharged
her sorrows, she began with saying to prosecute them as follows. Ay me!
Queen of Lyra, (said the Lady) that having no cause to complain, do suffer
thus deservedly, a just pay for such deserts. Of whom else might I hope to be
loved, being by the Greek Prince adored? On the earth, of whom could thou
expect any good, if not from thy Greek? Oh woe is me, that the trust of my
small consideration should bring me to this pass, that I must make the winds
witness of my pains: and that to my unblemished honors cost, I must hue and
wander by sea and land, demanding for him Archysiloras love: when I might
have lived with joy, with pleasure, and in quiet, by giving him a little sign
of that happiness, I my self received by being his: but seeing it is thus
brought about, love I will, and patiently embrace this just imposed toil.

Here was her languishment renewed, seeing a knight come directly toward her
ship, lying a long the hatches of another, exclaiming against Cupids
ordinances. Who ever suffered (said he) his heart to follow and seek his own
dishonor? What law allows the soul to disclose that, whose secrecy
preserves no less then life? Accidents be these only incident in love, for
he as the King of extremes enforces me, not regarding my fame, to procure
another consent. Oh (most valiant Knight) who shall believe thou should
with me violate thy word?

Thou know I love thee, and also ye I follow thee, but I know to aggrauate my
woe, thou fliest my presence? What is become of those sweet words at our
parting thou spakest? where is the faith wherwithon my hands thou vowedst
loyalty, protesting, if any pleasure thou should have, it would proceed
only from thinking thou art mine? Thou do ill guerdon the bounty wherewith
I laid open unto thee the secrets of my soul, making my self tributary
unknown to whom. I did it when thou iudgedst it new life, new joy, new
ease, and new content: But now altogether forgetful, thou fliest from me,
that live to love thee.

So overwhelmed in her own thoughts was the bewteous Floralizar, who departing
from the furious Brauorant, followed the search of the Tinacrian, whom she so
intierly affected, that she regarded not whether any heard her. By the
complaints did Archisilora know her to be a Lady, and pitying her, caused
her Bark to be grappled with the other, and said. No marvel (heroicke Lady)
that since the land has already been acquainted with your constancy, you
now participate your faith unto these inhospitable waters. Be of good courage,
for you have company in your woes: and such as will neglect his own to remedy
yours. At the voice rose Floralindas daughter, and replied.

Who are you (Sir Knight) that so kindly do commiserate my pain, which is the
greatest that ever was enclosed in any humane breast? I am he, (said
Archisilora) who with my soul (valiant Lady) will procure your quiet: and
therefore pray you, accept such service as my Bark will yield: for it may be,
the recital of your griefs to me, and I mine to you, will be a mittigation of
some sorrow. I Will not forgo the enjoying of so good company as that you offer
me (Sir knight) said Floraliza, entreating I may know who you be that already
knows my greefs? The Ladies gallant behauior had attracted the Lirian Matrons
affection, who replied. In more then this do I desire to satisfy you
sovereign Lady, but first step into my ship, where I will do it at full. To
know your name (answered Floraliza) a harder enterprise would I attempt. So
leapt she into the Queens Bark, saying. Advantage has my Bark got (sir
knight) with my absence, to which being alone, the winds and waters may now be
more favorable, then when I was in it, and since we have this opportunity,
dear sir, defer not my desire. With never a word the haughty Queen unlaced
her Helm, resting more fair then was Latonas son, when only for love he
kept Admetus sheep. Floralizas was also of, whose beauty was equalled by
few, and that want was with valor supplied.

Let it not grieve you Sovereign Lady said the Queen, that I know she cause
of your mones, for mine are no less: which I suffer seeking for him, that
ought to dye loving, but since I am the cause thereof, it is reason I endure the
extremity of grief: and seeing love has equalled us therein, I Will no longer
keep from you who I am. So she related unto her every thing she could, not
naming Claridiano. Why now (said Alicandros Niece) I do account my pain a
pleasure, being pitied by you, and have assured hope we shall quickly find
redress: whereto the Queen answered.

Gladly would I know who he is to labor your content. Any certain thing I know
not (replied she) more then that I am an others: for a brother of mine called
Celindo, and my self, were brought up without knowledge of father, though
since we received the order of arms, we have met with certain tokens to be
children unto the prince Meridian.

Exceeding joy conceived the Queen, of the Ladies company, resolving to enjoy
it so long as she would. They vowed firm amity, which toward the peace was
of no small effect: for this Lady was of highest estimation among the Pagans,
in the Grecian wars. By little and little being tender of years, and knowing
that the manifesting of their loves, was some ease to their borthering cares,
either understood who was the Lover to the other. Upon which occasion
Floraliza thus said.

So that our fortune does permit (most Peerless Princess) the Greek Princes
to triumph over our hearts. Seeing the heavens will have it so (excellent Lady
answered the Queen) and so have favored them from their birthes, we cannot
but acknowledge their Sovereignty, specially the Tynacrian Prince, knowing how
great his gains are, thus being loved. To which Floraliza made answer.

Stay my good Queen: how well (by knowing your self to be loved) do you
judge a strangers distress? who would not live contented in midst of the
greatest evil, were we certain of that assurance? What pain would not then
be a pleasure? or what could make me a stranger to my self, only seeking the
company of my woes? But I fear illustrious Lady, that as the heavens have
made them absolute happy, so some one of them will place his felicity in
scorning her shall most intierly love him: And if any there be that will most
truly verify my doubt, it will be the son of that most cruel Garrofilea: For
what could proceed from so cruel a mother, but so cruel a son, to reject the
constantest faith that any age ere knew. Let it not so grieve you bewteous
Floraliza (said the Queen) that the knight of the Branch do wander in
absence of your presence, so we distrust not of his love: And you do not well
to condemn him of ingratitude: for i will pawn my word unto you, vowing by my
high thoughts, to procure with all my power your cheifest joy: for it were
injustice, another should call him hers, you being alone in the world that
deserve him.

This liberal promise was some comfort to Floraliza, as thinking that in her
company she should not meet with any inconvenience, although she persuaded her
self she should not hope ever to be by him beloved. In pleasant discourses of
Love and Arms, they past away, their else over tedious voyage, until the
fifteen day of their Navigations, that they arrived at the fruitful land of
Tinacria, where what adventures there befell them, another Chapter shall relate.

CHAP. IX. The adventures that happened unto the two Ladies in Tynacria, with
certain Giants that had by stealth imprisoned the Queen Garrofilia, and her
bewteous daughter Rosaluyra.
GLad in their glittering rich abillements of war, landed the two warrelike
Ladies, bringing on shore the Queens Horse: which she offered to Floraliza,
that would not take it, but would go a foot, which made Archifilora do the
like, with maiesticke pace leading her Courser by the bridle. Along a broad
and beaten pathe traveled both these Princes of beauty, and Bellonas in valor.

They had not gone scarce a mile, when they espied three knights of gallant
disposition: and well mounted, coming the same way: a cross the same lane
issued an other: then whom the Ladies had not seen many of more liberal and
brauer carriage: his device and arms were discribed at the Tryumphes in
Constantinople, for this was Don Clarisel of Assyria, Floralizas great Lover.
Well did the Lady know him, and although the faith he showed her, could no whit
withdraw her affection from the Tynacrian: Nevertheless, it pleased her to
give him that content that Ladies use to yield in pleasant chat, reserving the
best for their souls beloved. She told the Queen, how she knew that
Knight, but it behooued her to be then concealed, for that she told her.

At length they all met, and none of them but incessantly gazed on both the
Ladies. None of the three Knights were so courteous as the Assyrian Prince, and
so the one said. It were some case (Sir knights) for one to ride while the
other went on foot, and so by turns to use your horse. Because we will not
trouble our selves (answered Floraliza) to mount and dismount so often, we have
chosen thus to travel together, until by some good chance we get an other
horse. This country does yield so few (said he) Sir knight, that I fear it
will be very hard to get one. Notwithstanding, I had rather have my hopes
(replied the lady) the^ thy uncivil answer: whereto the knight said. What,
coming on foot and with such little show of valor, dare you make comparatiues
with my words? which were you better mounted then I am, I would not suffer,
especially coming as you do.

There is no fault (said the Lady) but may be found in a discourteous knight,
and therefore, having committed this, there is no doubt but you have all the
rest: yet if you will try your much strength with mine, I am content to do it:
conditionally, that he which shall forgo his saddle, loose his horse and
armor. Had you a horse (said the knight) I would not much care to do it, were
it but to disburthen you of your armed load: which now in hot weather will
be surely troublesome.

Let not that grieve you (said she) for my companion will lend me his horse,
and be content to loose him, if you overthrow me. Ear he could answer, with
such grace she leapt into the saddle, that the Queen and Prince were amazed,
and brandishing her Lance, she went toward the knight, saying.

Go too, discourteous knight, now is the time to try whether of the two can
better keep his armor. Forced through the challenge he had made, and the
presence of his companions, he turned about his great horse, which was the last
he did in all his life. For meeting, although the Lady received a strong
encounter, hers was such, that making three parts of the lance appear at his
back, at one instant, he lost horse, armor, and life.

No longer stayed the other two, seeing their friend slain, but ran against
the Lady, no more stirring her, then if they had run against a rock. The
Queen was abashed, seeing how basely the Knights behaved themselves, so drawing
forth her good sword, at two steps she was where Floraliza stood, with
Camillas in her hand. The Queen entered sidelong with her sword aloft, which
valiantly discharging on the Knights helm, she struck him from his horse, and
with another, on the ground ended his life: which done, quickly mounted his
horse, confounding the Assyrian with admiration, who turning about, saw the
Lady beat the other Knight unto the earth, with a most pitteous wound: whose
pain, ere it left him, left him lifelesse. The Queen went to her, and
laughing said. In faith (sir Knight) we have now horses for Pages, had we
brought any, if they were on foot, and wanting armor, here we want no choice.

A greater punishment then this (said Floraliza) deserved their discourtesie:
and turning to the Assyrian, thus spoke. Have you any need (sir Knight) of our
helps, for since we have got horses, a little haste else calls us away. By
the voice he seemed to know her, whose figure he had impressed in his heart,
and so in some amazement did reply. Not at this time (sir Knight) more then
coming in time, that I might enjoy the sight of your high deed, I would not
loose the conceived content of gazing on them, especially being atchiued by
whom deserves the honor of every victory. So fearing the Prince had known,
or that by longer conversation she might be discovered, she took leave of him,
and with the Queen entered into a thicket adjoining, to rest, not of the
battle toil, but of the seas weariness. They allighted, letting their horses
feed on the grass, where she recounted who Don Clarisell was, and how
sincerely he published himself to be her Lover, and how unknown to either,
they were brought up in one wood. She did recite the adventures with such
passion, that the Queen verily he should certainly marry her.

In many diverse matters did the two Ladies chat away the afternoon, leaving
until the next day their approach unto the great and famous City of Tynacria,
where so many adventures happened unto the mighty Emperor Trebatio. It
greatly pleased Floraliza to tread on the soil of her dear knight, heartily
beseeching the immortal Gods, to grant her no other end of her desires then
her faith deserved, wherewith she sought him: for she never imagined any thing,
but what increased love, to love him, and with unfeigned constancy harboring
his affairs in the midst or her heart, transferring them from thence unto the
soul, to give them there a place more quiet, free from the worlds
perturbations, and fortunes assaulting storms: and where she might better
contemplate her happiness, being the Tynacrians Masters.

They scruple of that little they had from the Bark brought, with more content
in being there pursuing their Lovers, then were they in Constantinople, feeding
on the daintiest cates of the Emperors Court. Having done, they a while
discoursed of their knights, thinking that time lost wherein they did not
remember them. The hour of rest being come, the tender Ladies made their
blanckets of their beds, the earth, and for pillowes took their Helmes, and
not without some tears to see themselves in that manner, and uncertain
whether their toil would avail them. She that slept least, not for loving
most, but fearing her affections zeal would not be accepted, was the Emperor
Alicandros Niece, that about midnight vnclasping the book of her secret
thoughts, she found it so full of amorous arguments, grounded on dear
experience, that it caused in her a new grief: which tormenting her with some
extraordinary passion, to give it passage she sat her under a lofty Pyne,
where supposing the Queen of Lyra was not awake, she began with more melodious
harmony (then his, that descended into the vawtes of hell, among those black
inhabitants, to fetch his dear wife) to sing these verses.

Once I thought, but falsely thought
Cupid all delight had brought,
And that Love had been a treasure,
And a Palace full of pleasure,
Bur alas! too soon I prove,
Nothing is so sower as Love.
That for sorrow my Muse sings:
Love's a Be, and Bees have stings.
When I thought I had obtained
That dear sollace, which if gained
Should have caused all Joy to spring,
(Viewed) I found it no such thing:
But in steed of sweet desires,
Found a Rose hemmed in with Briars.
That for sorrow my Muse sings:
Love's a Be, and Bees have stings.
Wonted pleasant life adieu,
Love has chaung'd thee for a new:
New indeed, and sour I prove it,
Yet I cannot choose but love it.
And as if it were delight,
I pursue it day and night.
That with sorrow my Muse sings:
I love Bees, though Bees have stings.
With many Millions of sighs she ended. The sweet melody awaked the fair
Archisilora, ioying to see her so firm a Lover. Long did they not continue
thus, by reason that from the farthest side of the thicket, they heard the
trampling of many horses, and now and then, the cries of outraged Ladies, by
violence oppressed. A little thing was enough to move them, being naturally bold,
together they rose and bridled their horses, and swifter then the wind they
spurd after the noise. In such haste went they, that though they quickly got
into the high way, yet could they not know the cause. They durst not sunder
themselves for fear of loosing, but rather referring their affairs to
Fortunes dispose, they followed along that way which was most beaten with
horses hoofes: Two miles they gallopt not finding what they desired, til with
ye mornings suns vprise, in a large fair plain they descried some 40. knights,
and 3. Giants, that guarded a wagon drawn with 4. horses. Assured to have
found what they sought, they let go their Coursers reigns, with more
fierceness then Mars himself. Never was such boldness seen, for the knights
were mighty, and for ye enterprise chosen, and ye Giants every one an
Hercules. Nevertheless, the royal Ladies nothing doubting the fearful assault,
with their swords in hand, entered among those knights, as the hungry Lion
enters a heard of harmless sheep, to seek his pray.

Against the Ladies strength, their adversaries steel doubled sheelds nor fine
tempored armor was no defense: for their valor and puissance was infinite, and
the desire they had to free the prisoners, made them with more force floorish
their swords among them. Ere they were aware, eight of their fellows were
slain, and the rest struck the Ladies with many encounters: but their Armor
was such, as they suffered no impression. So the fury of their Lances being
past, Oh Archysilora, who would not admire thee, seeing thee raised on thy
styrrops, the sheelde at thy back, and with thy sword betwixt both thy hands,
range among those knights, giving no blow, but was deadly, or deadly wou^ding?
At her heels followed the Sythian Matrone, that no less then she made her
self feared with Camillas blade, whose edge even to the bone pierced their
armor. It seemed they both striued to exceed the other in deeds, almost
impossible in humane sight.

Abashed were the Giants together with a big Knight that was Lord of them
all, to see how two knights hazarded their pryze, with so much labor obtained:
to be rid of them two Giants, with croes of Iron made toward them, crying to
their knights: Away, away, you cowards, for shame blush to see two Knights thus
used. Never were they by them obeyed more willingly then then: for with the
word they withheld their swords, accounting that command their lives, which
fighting with the two, they adventured on the dyce. The two mighty Giants on
their styrrops stretched themselves, and shaking their arms, threw the croes
more fiercer then were they hurried from a Cannons mouth. Carfully did the two
Ladies (seeing how it concerned them) expectit, that spurring their horses,
gave way unto the Iauelings, and joining so near their Masters, that ere they
drew their Comitors, they made them feel the weight of their arms. So eager
was Meridians daughters assault, that she lost the strength of her blow, yet
was it such, that falling on his Beuer it dazelled his sight, and wounded him
at large on the front, from whence the blood issuing, and dropping in his
eyes, blinded him, to the Ladies great advantage. Forward she past, swifter
then lightning, and with the same she turned: at such time that the Giant did
so, as furious as a bayted Bull, with his Fawchon raised against her, that he
wounded him, and at once on either discharged the fury of their weapons.

A thousand stars saw the Lady within her rich helm, but the Giants was
filled with blood, for the thin edged sword on the head, wounded him
dangerously. This while was not the Queen idle, for in her assault she had
bravely done he part: and being longer winded, and more used to the war then
Floraliza, with Mars his strength, she laid him on the side of his helm,
disarming all that part, and on the head gave him a mighty wound, cutting away
a piece of the skull, and the blade discending down the shoulder, with like
fury, as the roaring waters run through a locked river, it struck away all
his Vanbrace, and with it cut all the laces off his shield, and made him shake
like a lofty Pyne: struck with an other blast, she gave her horse the
reigns, and quickly turned him before the Giant, settled himself, she let
fly at his wounded arm.

This blow assured her the victory, for lighting on the unarmed place, she
threw it to the ground, and made him roar horribly: for the wound was mortal.
Without payment escaped not the Queen, for ere his soul departed, dispairing
of life, so mighty a blow he discharhed on her head, that she fell upon her
horse, voyding much blood from her mouth: with such strength was it executed,
that finding no other stay, it drew the Giant after it, who like a Tower
ouerturned with a whirle wind, he fell down.

Long in accompanying him was not the other, for Floraliza envying what the
Queen had done, so vehemently pursued her Combat, that she tumbled the Giant
at her horses feet, with so many deadly wounds, that he straight gave his
soul unto the devil, that long since had expected it.

No longer stay made the other Giant and knight, but with their Coursers
fastest running, pricked against the Ladies, to surprise them unawares.
Dangerous were not the encounters, by reason of their enchaunted armor, though
they were extreme grievous. Between the four, they began one of the brauest
battles on the earth. But at the instant it was disordered: for the knights not
respecting their honors, altogether stepped to aid their masters: in no little
danger were the ladies, seeing themselves assaulted so many ways: but fetching
strength and courage from their amorous breasts, they inacted deeds impossible
to Mars his sight.

He that most vexed them was the great Knight, being one of the stoutest in all
Paganism. With him the fair Queen made her battle, thinking by that means
the victory was surest. She left the beauteous Floraliza with the Giant, and
some twenty Knights that were left, but so wounded, that she quickly brought
them to twelve. They were all busied in those bloody affairs, when the brave
Assyrian like a thunderbolte galloped along that field toward them: who also
had heard the Ladies outcries in the Chariot, and hasting to help them, had
lost himself in the wood, notwithstanding he came in good time, amazed to see
so many dead.

He knew the Knights, and they him: he entered with his lance above hand: a
better blow was not executed in that battle, for approaching the place where
his Ladle fought, strongly brandishing, he threw it at the Giant, which
penetrating all his steeles places, it appeared at his back, the pike bloody
with his hearts gore. This blow was to no small purpose, for it moved a
sudden strange alteration in the Ladies breast, judging so well of him that
gave it, that over ioyed with that content, she said to her self. Oh most
heroicke Knight, would I might satisfy thy desires, and not wrong the
Tynacririan. There stayed not the galliant Don Clarisell, for drawing forth
Mylos furious sword, he gave no blow, but overthrew an enemy dead: close by
them went the Lady, exceeding glad to see him. On horseback was the Prince,
one of the greatest Knights in the world, and so richly armed, no heart could
desire more. For all this, ceased not the warlike Lirian Matrone to pursue the
great Knight, entering, and retiring with such agillitie, as Mars himself, were
he there, could wish no more.

In his country was the Pagan accounted the valiantest known, wherefore he
bravely held out in fight. Of all helps needed he, combatting with the Queen,
both in beauty, and in valor, who flourishing her weapon, stepped in with one
foot forward, and lay open, that the Pagan might enter: who being exceeding
skillful, perceived her intent, and making her loose two blows, gave her two
thrusts one after another, which forced her to bow backwards on her horse: as
she raised her self, with all possible speed he struck her on her rich
helm, but reached her only with the point, wherefore the blow was not to much
purpose, though it grieved her much.

No Hircanian Tiger was now comparable to the Queen in fury, to see her self
so used, she flourished her sword, and let it fall so mightily on his head, that
it field him along the saddle, sorely wounded. She trusted to the strength of
her Horse, so giving him the spurs, ran against her enemy, incountring him
so strongly with his breast, that she overthrew them both to the ground.

But the Pagan knowing his disgrace, leapt aside, and though weak and with
many wounds, settled himself to make his defense against the Queen, that
nimbler then an Eagle, leapt from her horse after her pray. Deadly wounded was
the Pagan, and no marvel then, if with every blow she make him kiss the
earth with his hands and knees.

Already were the Lovers (though different in affection) rid of all their
enemies, and were set to gaze on the battle, when from the top of the
mountain descended a Knight with more bravery then the sun. Farefull it was to
hear the trampling noise of his neighing Courser, wheresoever he trod. He
arrived at the chair, extremely abashed to see all his have had not auailde
him. Oh cowardly Prince (said he) is it possible thou have shown thy self
slow in thy Ladies service? thou do wrongfully call thy self hers, being
the least in ayding her in her greatest distress. There was he interrupted,
hearing a horrible blow: which was thus, The Queen noting they all looked on
her, judged it weakness longer to continue, and therefore strongly stretching
her self on her left foot, with both hands laid on the Pagans broken helm
such a blow, that dividing his head down to the neck, at one instant she ended
both his loves and life. And as if she had done nothing, mounted into her
seat, and turned about to thank the Assyrian for his good help: whereto he
answered. All, and more then this is due to your valor, (most excellent
Knight) for where yours and this Knights is, little auailes mine. So thence
they went to speak unto the Ladies in the Chariot, which were Garrofilea, and
her bewtious daughter Rosaluyra, with two other damzels their attendants, whose
beauty made our two Ladies somewhat envy them. Never did any Knight affect
with more reason, Lindoriano Prince of Nyquea, who was new come. Well did
mother and daughter know him, and none like him had the Princess esteemed.
From the heavens may you receive your deserved recompense (most mighty
knights) for the succor you lent me and my daughter (said the cruel
Garrofilea:) although considering the duty by your selves due to the valor of
your own persons, in discharging it, so the immortal powers long since
guerdoned it, by imparting so largely their matchless gifts with you, making
you absolute in all complete virtues: yet that our joy may be repleat, and we
know to whom we rest bound, we shall account it an exceeding favor, and remain
debtors together with the former for the same, if you will relate your names
and states unto us. To which, Archisilora replied. In more then this
(sovereign Queen) does this Knight and my self desire to fulfill your will.
This Knight, poynting at Floraliza, is called the Knight of Hope: and my self,
of the burning flames of Love: we came together, and therefore know we not
him, to whom we are all so much indebted. Yet more then this must you do at our
entreaties, (said the beauteous Rosaluira) and for my sake unlace your helmes,
unless you will cancel the bonds of my indebted love. There is none but
trembles at that word (divine Lady) and fears it will be so (answered the
Qeeene) and therefore for so much as it touches me, I will loose no favor I may
thereby reap. Who shall dare do otherwise (said Floraliza) exceeding joyful
thereat, thinking she spoke with her Tynacrian. At once they put off their
helms, and being somewhat heated by the battle, there is no beauty comparable
to the two Ladies. Oh Prince of Assyria, oh thou have a heart of steel to
resist this blow! Many days it was since he saw her, yet presently he
acknowledged her to be the sovereign of his soul. Have patience magnanimous
Lover, for against loves accidents there is no better shield. So like was the
Qu. of Lyra unto the Prince Polliphebo, that Garrofileo assuredly thought she
had her son before her, she leapt out of the Chariot with an extazie of joy,
and embracing the Queen, said.

Oh my dear son Polliphebo, may it be thou should thus long be absent, and
not advertise me of thy adventures and happy successes, and cruelty more then
inhumane it has been, and were you not son to such a father, I could not
believe it of any, but knowing whose you be, I am assured of your natural
cruelty, which makes me resemble your tyrannous father. The Queen did
straight perceive Garrosileas deceit, and by her words confirmed the report
blazoned of her rigors, she told her of it, and who she was, which not a little
admired the beholders, and also when they knew her companion to be a Lady, a
new the Queen embraced them, saying.

Pardon (sovereign Lady) my bold entreaty, for judging you to be the
Prince Polliphebo my son, has made me commit this fault. There has been
none, unless intended (mighty Queen) replied Archisilora, but rather it is a
favor exeeding mercy, which I thereby received.

By this the faithful Earl of Modica was arrived with above three hundredth
Knights, and the Ladies unwilling to be stayed, craved leave to depart. You
will not I am sure so wrong us (said the Queen) as to leave us absent of your
company. We can do no otherwise (imperious Dame) said Floraliza, for the good
success of the adventure this Lady and I have in hand, consists in brief
expedition. If it be so (heroicke Ladies) and least you should loose that
happy success, I am content to loose the great content I should reap by your
conversation: whereupon they kindly embraced and departed, leaving in Tynacria
eternal memory of their beauty and bravery. And whilst Lindariano made his
excuse, craving pardon for his stay: the beauteous Floraliza thus spoke unto
Don Clarisell. Pardon me (sir Knight) for not doing this before, but let our
lawful and vnauoyded business be our sufficient excuse, although it needs
not be given to him, that may be assured all happy content is wished him. Words
were these that gave new life unto the Lover, nourishing it many years with
these words.

The Prince taking her by the hand, said. You have done me mighty wrong
(most sacred Lady) to entreat him with these words, that only desires to live
perpetually at your obedience. The Lady drew away her hands, not suffering him
to kiss them, but casting her arms about his neck, said. He that has showed
his to be so worthy (heroicke Knight) is iniuried to have mine, but his rather
are to be requested for that sacrifice. And inquiring for Forsiana and Don
Argante of Phenicia (for they all loved one another like brothers) she took
her leave of him, refusing his companle, which with his soul he offered,
alleging how it behooued them to go alone. And as one that with admiration
gazeth on the splendour of the heavenly Sun, with his radiant beams
illuminating the earth, and on a sudden sees it dashed with mystie vapors of a
black cloud, wherewith his light being obscured, blinds and bereaues the
poor beholders of his contented sight.

Even so thought the Princely Lover he was left, though glad to see how gently
his gentle Lady entreated him. Toward the sea did the Ladies take their
journey, where they found two Barks without any to guide them. It was
admirable, for so soon as the Queen entered in the one to help the Lady in,
so swift flies not the arrow loosed from a steel bow, as of it self it lancht
into the deep. In a minute it vanished out of sight, leaving fair Floraliza so
extreme sorry, that she was about to fling her self into the sea,
considering what she had lost. What content can thou hereafter hope for poor
Lady (said the afflicted Dame) being robbed of that good the heavens had
imparted thee with her company? What may thou account happy, having lost
her sweet comfortable conversation? Oh fortune, would thou but weigh how
little strength I have left me by thy inconstant changes, thou would among
so many unfortunate happes, mingle one fained pleasure.

She shipped her horse in the other bark, and waighing the anchors that held it
to the shore, lying along upon the hatches of the same, she committed his
government to Neptunes mercy. Yet it was not so ill looked too, but the
envious Lupercio had taken charge of it, who by all possible means assembled
all the mightiest knights in the Haven of Nyquea, to transport them thence unto
the marvelous Tower: for he had already known, there should be a knight
would win Theseus armor, and his battell-axe, wherewith the inchauntment should
be ended: and knowing he was an enemy procured to get and bring these so
valiant Knights on his side, and therefore did he guide Floralizas Bark, who
on the fourth day of her Navigations, met with her brother Don Cellindo, with
whom she fought a most cruel combat, which for breuity is not recited: but
being known for her brother, he entered into her Bark, and were directed toward
Nyquea, meeting continually all their voyage on the seas, infinite Galleis and
ships, as well Christians as Pagans: where being arrived, we must leave
them a while, to remember Rosabell, whom we have long wronged with
forgetfulness.

CHAP. X. What happened to the most valiant Rosobell, departed from Grecia in
the company of a Lady.
WIth some grief of mind (fair Ladies) left we Rosabell, to see himself
absent from the sweet company of his dear Oristoldo, and armourlesse with the
Damzell was he shipped in the doubtful Seas, yet knew not whither: some comfort
was it to him, seeing he had not all his arms, to have the sword that erst
belonged to Hector. He inquired of the Damzell the cause why with such speed
she hasted his departure. For none other (sir knight) replied the Damzell, but
to see one of the fairest Ladies in the greatest danger in the world, and
knowing that only in your presence rests her remedy: and in the least delay,
the greatest death that ever befell to any, is sure on her. For know (most
valiant Knight) that in the kingdom of Tentoria, there is a Lady no less
beautiful, then adorned with all good quallities and graces of the mind. She
was and is beloved of all her subjects, because they know that chastity and
beauty holds in her one equal degree of sovereignty. Through the only fame
of her perfections, with her the mighty Dardario fell in love, who was said to
be the valiantest Giant in the universe. He with a puissant host came unto
her land, though peaceably: with him he brought a son vnknighted, for his
years did not allow it, who became far mightier then his father. He sent his
Ambassadors to our Queen, to let her know of his coming and demand, which
was to marry her.

A thousand times was my Lady about to stay her self, to avoid a match so
unequal. She called a Council of her Nobility: who resolved to withstand him
with fierce war, by reason there were many valiant knights that would loose
their lives to defend their Queen and countries safety: for although they saw
the Giant come with signs of peace, yet doubttng the woorst, had gathered a
great army of men, because they would not be suddenly surprised.

There were many voices among them, that the Queen should marry him, being
Lord of all the Isles in the Adriaticke Sea. But in the end, most part agreed,
they should rather die with honor in field, then for fear suffer such a
marriage. Eight days respite had the Giants given them for their answer. In
which time the beauteous Syrinda commending her affairs unto the Gods, and her
wit, she resolved on the greatest deed that ever Lady did imagine. She
acquainted it with her Captains and Council of war, which are the shiefest
Lords in her land: and this it was. That she would seem to consent to his
desire, and that she durst undertake in the night of her wedding day, to give
the Giants head unto her Knights, who should be in readiness to issue upon
their enemies, whose vanquishment would be easy, being with the Feasts
careless and unarmed. Almost all the Council approved my Ladies devise, and
praying the immortal Gods to give her good success therein, they advertised
the Giants thereof, that with extreme joy was almost besides himself. All his
subjects laying by their arms, with gallant shows welcomed her answer. Two
days after, the proud Dardaria entered the City with his soonne Abstrusio,
whom he begot on a strong Gyantesse, and so issued like his Parents. He only
carried his big Cemitor at his side, accompanied with two Knights richly
adorned, and himself in robes of inestimable valor, with a triple crown on his
head, worth a kingdom, with Princely bravery was he entertained by the
dissembling Syrinda, whom the fierce pagan embraced with the greatest content
in the world, thinking himself in heaven, seeing the Ladies exceeding beauty:
who with a thousand fained love toys inueigled the disarmed Giant.

The desired night being come, which was eternal to the Pagan, and supper
ended, he was most sumptuously brought to his bed: where the Lady faining
some modest shame to be seen naked, so long deferred her going to bed, that
the force of the many meats and wine, forced him into a sound sleep. He
never more awaked: for the Lady seeing her advantage, drew forth a sharp two
edged Dagger, which she thrice stabbed in his brutish breast, pearcing his
heart therewith. Now that the courageous Dame was assured of his death, she
bravely cut off his head, and presently gave it to those knights she had
appointed to expect it.

They took it, extremely ouerioyed, and conveyed the Queen and Ladies out of
the Palace, for fear of some danger that might happen the next day. With
great desire they expected his coming, whereon scarce had the Sun sent
forth his messengers of morn, when an alarm was sounded through all the
City: they of the Camp without, thinking it was in honor of the Nuptials,
replied with all their millitary Instruments. In an instant were above fifty
thousand men Armed, whereof five thousand assaulted the Palace, leaving none
alive that with Dardario came, except his haughty son, that hearing the
noise, ran forth with one of the bed posts, making such pitiful
slaughter that none durst assault him. He got some weapons of those that were
slain, wherewith his deeds are incredible. But being alone, and by so many
thousands assaulted, his death was certain: which the sturdie youth
perceiving, got unto the Camp: where being come, he found it so disordered and
so many sail, and the rest so affrighted, that he could scant meet with any
that might tell him the cause of so great evil: in the end he came to know
it with such great grief, as he was about to kill himself: his fathers Armor
he put on, and the first he met guirded him his sword. The fury that possessed
the youth when he saw his fathers head pearched on a pole upon the highest
Turret of the City, cannot most (valiant Knight) be credited. He went forth
into the field roaring like a Bull, and killing without mercy: but his force
was to small purpose, for all his Army was discomfited, and the Queens
subjects behaved themselves so well, that ere the day was half spent, they had
put the better three parts of their foes to the sword, and gave chase to the
rest even to their ships, wherein sore wounded, as many as could imbarke
themselves, and among them the mighty Abstrutio, purposing with new powers to
return, and with fire and sword to destroy our kingdom. In his he arrived,
where his intent he presently put in execution, not without grief, to see that
of forty thousand men his father had carried with him, he had returned back
again scarce five thousand. The Paganne spoils left all our land exceeding
rich: and our Queen with the greatest Honor that ever Lady obtained.
Notwithstanding the great tryumphes made for so happy victory, yet would they
not live careless of their safety: but every day mustred and trained their
soldiers, and strengthening all their garrisons with the best men in the land,
because they would not loose what was obtained for want of diissipline, being
assured the son would come to revenge the fathers death: whose body was cast
out for food unto the birds and beasts. But now (Magnanimious Knight)
returning to our purpose, the murdered Giant had in his own Palace my Ladies
lively counterfeite, which he had caused to be made, when he first became
enamoured of her.

This being left at home, came to his sons hands, which daily frequenting,
and the help of his tender years, with continual consideration of the
content, which to be beloved of so fair a Lady would yield: kindled such a
fire in his breast, that he could in nothing delight save in contemplation of
Syrindas beauty, whose love so oppressed him, as it bereft him of his best
senses, and diminished his health. He resolved to pass unto Tentoria, and
colourably procure alone, what his father with so many men had mist. He was not
of shape and feature nothing so deformed as his Sire, but certainly far
stronger, and higher he is a handful then any knight, being no Giant. Arrived
in my Ladies country, he brought in his company eight Knights, his near
Allies, of no less force then himself. Disguised he entered the City, where
the Queen kept her Court, and knowing that she used to walk abroad unto a
near adjoining Grove, he watched his time, and having opportunity one day,
followed her, took her, and setting her before him on his horse, carried her
away, not doing nor offering her any discourtesie, though she had most cruelly
slain his father: he told her his desire, desiring her not to refuse his
marriage, since all the world knew how much it honored her to do it. Whereto
she answered.

If like a good Knight (most cruel Abstrusio) thou had procured my good
will, it had not been much I had yielded to thy request: but since thou have
employed thy force upon a poor weak Lady, I will rather be my own
murderer, then consent to any such thing.

Why then (said the lover) that thou may know what assured confidence you
may repose on my strength, and arm, I Will give thee leave for six months space
to send and seek about for that Knight, whose Fame above al others shall
memorise his deeds, to be the greatest with whom hand to hand I Will Combat about
thee: proouing, that none but I merits thy beauty: so that if I prove
Conqueror, thou take me for thy husband, with willing and blythe mind: but if
I be conquered, I vow and protest by all I may, to remit and release any action
I may pretend of marriage toward thee: for which cause, and that the battle
may be effected, I Will set thee free with all pleasure to enjoy thy liberty, and
this because thou shall not doubt I will deny the Combat, or violate my word.
Somewhat pacified was the imprisoned Lady hearing the Pagans offer, and
considering that was her best, agreed thereto. Which gladded the Pagans very
soul, supposing himself sure of the Lady, thinking none able to take her by
that means from him. While these things past, news were thither brought of
the never dying honor ye had obtained in the Iousts of Grecia, ending them to
your immortal glory. Whereupon my Lady thought to none safer then to you,
this dangerous adventure could be recommended, because the strong Abstrusio is
the valiantest in all those parts. She put me in trust with this business,
being from a child brought up in her service, which I promised to perform
with all diligence: and either loose my life, or let you know the necessity
wherein I left her, trusting that a knight so absolute in all excellencies,
would be pitiful, lending his help bound by laws of knighthood, to a
distressed Lady: and let not my report of the Giants strength, put any doubt in
your unconquered breast: for having on your part the strong shield of Justice,
it will be sufficient to give you the eternal honor of so glorious a Conquest.

This is the cause brave knight, that has from such remoted countries brought
me to seek you, and consider whether my journey be not lawful, and your
liberal offer just. It is (kind damzel) and am much amazed at ye Giants
tyranny (said the Prince) to force the Lady against her will to marry him: and
would I were already with him, that (Lady) you might know your Queens remedy
if it lie in me, is made void for want of power, and not will to hazard my
person in her service: and my life I will adventure in any danger, to right the
wrong and violence she does sustain. Why then brave knight (said she) I may
go merry, seeing you so willingly affected to my business, and may the Gods
give you the due merits your bounteous care deserves: and seeing that for my
Lady you must undertake such a fight, she sends you Armor and Horse convenient
to cope with such an adversary. She drew forth the Armor which were indeed as
she said, and excepting his of Hector, he never saw better: of color they
were purple, crossed with sanguine bars, garnished with some flowers of rich
glistring stones, which more adorned them.

The Greek put them on, which fitted him as they were made by his measure. On
his shield was bravely figured the pictures of Justice and Chastity embracing,
and over their heads this motto.

Upon each other both relies,
(Twins) kill one, the other dies.
This device greatly pleased the Prince, because it iumpt with his business.
With these arms was gallant Rosabel armed in, neither in these affairs nor
the thought of his hoped battle, forgetting his Lyriana, whose absence not a
little grieved him, for none had lost such happiness in love as he, with so
many sighs obtained, and so his sorrow was tolerable, loosing so great good,
for none will grieve at a loss, if the cause be not respected. Not meeting any
adventure worthy memory, he arrived at the I Will wherereof Abstrusio was King.
Straight leapt he on shore, mounting a mighty roane courser, which the needy
Dame had sent him: then which he never bestridde a better, his Bollador,
excepted. The Damozel masked her self, for fear of being known by any of
those that brought her away, when the Princess was stolen. They approached very
near the City, where the fierce king made his abode. It was admirable,
chiefly the Castle, where the King kept his court, which seemed inexpugnable,
both by nature and situation of the place. About it, were many pleasant Groves
and Meades, where the Pagan often recreated himself with Syrinda who by
continual conuersing with the Pagan, his valor and gallant disposition, had
exceedingly mollified her obduracy. And Lyrgandeo says she, had repented her
self for sending her damozel to seek any by force to plead her cause, being
to her honor to take him for her husband, that was able to protect both
kingdoms, that united was one of the mightiest in the world. The like
imagination had stirred the Greeks thoghts, thinking that he being so far
different from the condition of others, his marriage much advanced her. On this
considered he, along the Crystal Current of a bubling stream, when the
mighty Abstrusio walked on the other side, armed in strong plates of steel,
bare headed without helm, to take the coolness of the fresh air: only two
knights without armor, attended him, bearing his: who was horsed on a furious
Courser, his sight greatly pleased the Prince, for his damozel knowing him,
told it Rosabel.

At his right hand rode the beauteous Syrinda, on a milke-white Palfrey: she
was gallantly attyred, for being well entreated by the king, she by doing the
like, did more allure him, and he lost nothing by using her in that manner,
forcing her to do nothing against her will, which to his sovereign
gentleness, may be attributed. Coming more near the Lady, knew the Armor and
horse which she sent unto the Knight should combat for her. She was so amazed
(though his disposition greatly contented her) that the stout Pagan noted it,
and demanding the cause, half trembling told it.

Oh Jupiter (said the Pagan) how do thou show thy immortal power to honor
me, sending him at such time hither, whom I heartily expected? Now shall you see
fair Lady, whether my valor deserve not some estimation in thy breast, being
so near to see it by experience. So daunted was the Lady, that she could not
answer, reuoluing many things in her thoughts against her self: for if she
should stay the battle from proceeding, it were to dishonor the knight, having
sent for him so far, only to that: and if she suffered it, then she imagined
she wronged her Lover toward the Pagan: so that she was set between two
contraries, altogether opposed against her happiness, and which she might
judge the least to lay hands on, she knew not. The hasty coming of the Greek
suffered her not to choose, for crossing the river over a bridge, brandishing
his Lance, went toward the Lovers that greatly admired his comely grace.

The Pagan nothing doubting his hoped victory, expected him in a fair plain,
joining to a thicket of tall Pynes, called the Grove of Adventures, for never
any entered it, but found something to try the valor of his person. The Greek
being come to him raised his Beauer, and saluted him thus. God save the valiant
Abstrusio: I think I shall not need to relate the cause of my coming,
because it was with thy consent: nevertheless, if without battle thou will
remit the suit thou do pretend, thou shall obtain a sure unconstant friend:
for I doubt not, but thou know how it stains a Noble mind, by force to
force a Ladies will, for it neither belongs to a good knight nor a true
Lover: yet for all this, if thou will insist in thy enterprise, let us no
longer defer the combat, which instantly to be done, will be too too long.

While he spoke, the Pagan steadfastly gazed on him, and judging him of great
strength, because his constitution was not much less then his own, and this
imagination he confirmed, noting the liberty of his words, which he said
proceeded of valor, for others at his sole sight, were ready to tremble. So he
answered. In faith (Sir knight) I see no reason but any thing should be done to
obtain your friendship, which oght not be little esteemed by him that has it.
But you see if I leave the battle, it redounds to my dishonor: for it will be
said, I did it for fear, which could never yet be reported, since I knew what
armor meant: so now to give occasion of such speech, he will not permit that
knows the estimation of true honor, and how it ought to be embraced. So let
our battle be presently, although I assure you, more then this, I never doubted
the end of any: witnesses we shall need none, for my promise past to this
fair Princess shall be sufficient. It is so (replied the Greek) for since ye
one must of necessity sacrifice his bloold in this field, let the suruiuer be
Conqueror and Judge to carry away the Lady. Who came to speak unto the
knight, so amazed, that the Greek conceived the cause, and quickly assured
himself thereof. It gladded him, purposing if he vanquished, to marry her to
the Pagan. Defied each other had these combatants, and sought for a convenient
place to make the battle, when from the thicket issued a knight upon a nimble
Coueser: he did no more but take view of the number that was there, and
returned.

Every one noted him, and mused what he intended by such haste. But the desire
the two had of their Combat, made them forget him. They turned their fierce
horses about, whose success an other Chapter must unfold: for it deserves
much more.

CHAP. XI. The adventure that befell unto the two most mighty warriors, being
in their combat, and what else happened.
With a thousand amorous doubts, the bewteous Syrinda expected the two brave
warriors encounters, greatly fearing the Greek, because she sent for him, and
the Pagans success, good or badde, she felt in midst of her soul: and
eythers blows she received on her breast. So that dear (Ladies) never had
Combattants a more suspicious Judge: because she through love, pleades the
merits of the one: and the Greeks worthiness, the bounty wherewith he
undertook her cause, enforced her to defend him. Oh (sacred Damzels, Natures
cheifest bewties) lend me some little favor, that I may woorthily relate the
rarest single Combat fought upon the earth: for the one is Rosabel, of whom
the world already trembles: the other, the haughty Abstrusio, mirror of the
Pagan Nations. The nimble swiftness of their horses, was occasion of their
quicker meeting, making more noise in their carrier, then Vulcans forged fire
rattling through the skies, renteth his passage, flashing among the darkened
Clouds. Big and knottie were their Lances, but incountring with their steeled
shields, they seemed of slender willowes: Whose shiuers mounted so high, that
their sight gave notice of that Combat above the fourth sphere. Neither
miscarried by the shocke, though both warriors were assured of the others
strength. Amazed was the Pagan, seeing his adversary in his saddle, for in all
his life til then, he never incountred any but he overthrew him to ye hard
ground. The Greek drew forth the Troyan Hectors sword, glad to see the Pagans
valor. And flourishing it aloft with that celeritie he used in all his
hattles, let fly at the Pagan: who turned to ward it, yet his diligence
prevailed not, for he had not scarce offered his defense, when the skilful
Greek redoubled the strength of his proffered blow, and bravely discharged it
on his adversaries shield, it boots not to be of fine tempered steel, for
all it reached was thrown to the grassy plain. Sometimes would they proffer
advantages, as in a school of Fence is accustomed, which would redownd unto
the offerers disadvantage, as now it befell the Greek Prince. For spurring his
horse, he would have given the Sarracen another blow before he settled himself:
he did so, but the unbridled fury of the horse, most fiercely ran beyond the
Pagan, whose course Rosabell on a sudden staying, the plain being wet, his
hinder feet slipped, so that both headlong stumbled down. Galtenor says the
Greek, lost not his saddle: but Lirgandeo affirms it: adding, that his fall
was the cause he performed one of his usual acts: for being on his feet, in a
dry place he awaited.

The Pagan coming, that eagerly ran to overthrow him: his Horse he would not
kill, but meeting breast with breast, with no less force then Mars himself, he
made both Master and horse recoyle back in such a maze, that he had time to
follow the Pagan, and cast his arms about him. He was so quick in performing
it, that he had almost pitched the Giant on his head. So Syrindas Lover fearing
some evil success, was enforced to do the like, and shaking the stirropes
from his feet, suffered the Greek to pull him off: who so mightily snatched him
from his seat, that he tumbled him on the ground: but closer does not the Iuie
incompasse about a moss begrowne Tower, then the Pagan embraced the
Brittanicke youth, so that both fell grouelling on the earth, where rising,
they began a most gallant wrestle, using so many slights and tricks, that
the God of battelles could no more desire.

And so their wrestle falling out at the beginning of their fight, it longer
continued, either procuring some advantage to get ground of his adversary.
Never were they in more danger then now. Along while striued they thus, till
weary of grappling, wresting forth their arms, flung themselves strongly the
one from the other, with such admiration of those that beheld them, as they
believed not what they saw. Highly did the Lady esteem the Greek, seeing him
so bravely maintain himself against him that was famoused to be the
valiantest in all the Adriatricke Isles, who on his own behalf greatly
misdoubted, judging his adversity the mightiest in the world. Now keep they
no order, nor nothing procure they more then death, or eternal honor by
conquest of his adversary. One of the worlds best swords was the Greeks,
being at Venus instant request tempered for the Trojan, wherefore he never
struck blow but it fetched blood, cut armor and flesh. And he himself received
them nothing inferior, and though they drew blood through the defense of his
armor and dexterity, yet they bruised his flesh in grievous manner. The Pagan
at this time assaulted his adversary, thinking with that blow to assure the
victory. But Trebatios kinsman, that was in all things his superior, by
stepping aside avoided it, letting him fiercely pass on, so turning after him,
the Greek discharged his rage on the others waste, in two he had cleft him,
had he given the blow with good aim, yet it put the Pagan in great pain: who
for all that, recovering himself, at once confronted each other: most mighty
were the blows that fell on their helmes, either drew his sword besmeered with
the others blood, and with the force of the stroke they set their hands on the
earth.

The Greek did first rise, being longer winded, and ere his foe was settled in
his broken shield, he gave him such a blow, that cutting a great piece off
it, descended on the shoulder, where it lighted so heavily, that his knees were
forced to the ground: Close he would, thinking to overthrow the Pagan. But this
bold attempt had like to have cost him his life: for the fierce Abstrutio
being very nimble, and seeing him come unadvisedly, he set his sword between
him, on which the Prince cunning, felt the point in his flesh, whereat
staying, he gave backwards, else it had pierced a passage for his life.

Here mist he his good Armor, attributing the fights continuance unto the want
of them. He turned fiercer then a sauadge Bear upon the Pagan, who by that was
on foot, laying on him so many mortal blows, that quickly some advantage was
discerned on Rosabels side: but it was such as often his adversary hazarded his
hopes of conquest: for the Pagan seeing how it concerned him, did from his
wounds draw strength, both to defend and offend: which yet made the event of
the battle seem doubtful: wherein the warriors were eager and greedy one of
the others overthrow, that they spied not till they were almost surprised, who
issued out of the Grove: they were four mighty deformed Giants, with above an
hundredth knights, who knowing the Pagan, pursued him for revenge, by reason of
their fathers death, by his, which they deferred til they might take him at
some advantage from his Court.

Well did the haughty Greek guess at their intent, noting the manner of
their coming: wherefore using his accustomed magnanimity, said to Abstrusio.
Leave we our battle in this estate sir knight, for I repose such trust in your
person, as when farther occasion shall permit, you will end it: and now procure
we to defend the Princess from these knights, whose hasty coming seems not
for peace. It cannot be expressed how the Princes words gladded the Pagan, who
replied. Your pleasure be fulfilled (Sir knight) for henceforth I yield to you
the victory of this battle, because far more your magnanimious bounty
deserves. So both recounted on their horses. For the Giants arrival brake off
their speeches. The knights were attired after the Parthian manner, with bows
and arrows, which like a shower of rain they let fly at the two knights, who
felt some of them in their flesh through their armor.

To shun this fury, the Lady was forced to leap from her Palfray, which she
had no sooner done, but one of the Giants with twenty Knights took her up,
and in great haste spurred away. At the outcries she made, her Lover saw her,
and considering his loss, loosing her, said.

Now (most haughty Knight) must you extend the utmost of your valor, against
these vilde villains, whilst I pursue the robber of my joy, for without her I
desire no life. Do so (brave Knight) replied the Greek, for it is reason you
should. And I by shedding my hearts dear blood, shall but satisfy my bounden
duty due to the Lady. Away like the wind in swiftness departed the Pagan,
leaving Rosabell in the greatest peril in the world: but he was borne to
endure them, and encouraging himself being alone, courageously he thrust his
horse among that treacherous people. Never did Reaper in Harvest season, with
more desire enter his sharp sickle in the yallow ripe corn, then with fury
Lyrianas Lover pressed among those Knights, bereauing some of arms, some of
lives, and others wounded to the death, some he cleft down right, and some
he parted at the waste in two: thirty Knights had the Greek slain, and
wounded many, ere any of the Giants could at full give him one blow; so at
length one of them preased to him, egerly to execute his wrath: but in the
encounter, he opposed himself with death. For although he wounded the Greek
on the shoulder, yet he not respecting the others blows, he cast his shield at
his back, and though unadvisedly he spurred against the Giant with his sword
raised in both hands, it fell on his thick helm, which unable to resist, it
was with the head cleft in the midst to the neck, felling him down at his
horse feet.

So great was the Ire that possessed the Knights, seeing their Giant slain, that
under him they slew the Greeks horse. Now he was in no less danger then of
his life: for being on foot, they all ran to ouerturne him with their
horses: some defense found he behind the heap of dead Knights, which was
nothing, had not fortune hither brought the Tynacrian Polliphebo, flower of
Chivalry: who having past many storms in the seas, the heavens for eithers
good, did cast him on that shore, directing him thither at such time as he
might succor his cousin, who like Mars himself behaved him, for having slain
another of the suruiuing Giants horses, in the fall he took from him an Iron
Mace that hung at the saddle bow, the which at that instant served him better
then his sword, for with it he reached more out at length. The Tynacrian blessed
himself to see a knight of such force: he judged him to be a Greek, for in
them consisted the worlds strength: he said never a word, but with his lance
above hand, like a fierce comet entered among them, killing above ten before
he brake it. He would needs rid the Knight from the Giant that remained on
horseback: so drawing forth his sword, went to him, and taking it twixt both
hands, raised himself on his stirropes, and finding the Giant careless of
him, executed the brauest blow that in all that day was given (for he
discharged his sword on his middle, higher he could not reach) in so brave a
manner, that from thence downward he left on horseback, tumbling the other
half at Rosabels feet, that with the noise of the fall turned about, and
seeing a deed so extraordinary, could not but a loud say thus.

Oh mighty Jupiter, what unmatched incomparable strength is this? He looked on
his devise, yet knew it not, for he had never before seen it: but desirous to
let him see what he believed, stepped with his left foot forward, closed with
the Giant that unmercifully laid on him, and strongly firming himself on the
ground, with both hands discharged his sword on his shoulder, which effected
such a blow, as it was doubted whether of the two the God of war inured: for
all that part down to his legs he cut away: and like an Eagle leapt on a
horse that was near him.

Neither of the kinsmen spoke to the other, leaving it till better opportunie,
but thrust themselves among that miserable rowte, and grieved they were so few
whereon to show their valor. In less then an hour were the two warriors
left alone, yet might it well be said, in them consisted the most part of
humane power. Together they put off their helmes, discovering their beauty
admired, able to have slain Apollos in his glory.

They were almost of one age, so Rosabell first spoke: Most mighty knight, the
best that ever mine eyes beheld, make me meritorious, to know to whom I am
bound for my life: for to your happy coming, when I accounted it lost, must I
attribute my now enjoying it. Whereto the Tynacrian answered. Excellent and
most renowned warrior, there was so little need of my help in presence of
your valor, as I desire no thanks for any thing done, being solely due to the
strength of your arm: for if I presumed to the attempt of any deed, it was
only to have the fruition of your sweet presence, which binds me to tell you
who I am. Although there want in me sufficient merits to equal me in valor,
to deserve the name of brother to the Emperor Alphebo, and Rosicler the most
glorious knight of Cupid: I am Polliphebo of Tyuaria, son to Queen
Garrofileo, and the Emperor Trebatio, and I arrived at Greece, with desire to
make my self known unto my Lord the Emperor, though I am assured he is
displeased with my cruel mother. The joy cannot be expressed, which Rosabell
conceived, seeing him whose fame had filled the earth with immortal honor. He
embraced him with these words.

In faith (heroicke Prince) I may hereafter think my self the happiest knight
alive, through the knowledge of such an uncle: for know (though my deeds deserve
it not) I am your cousin Rosabell, of great Britain, son to Rosicler, and
the Princess Oliua, and he that nothing more desired then to know you. With
exceeding content the Tynacrian embraced him.

Oh unexpected happiness, is it possible such goodness was in a land so
remote, reserved for me? what may I hope for that will not befall me, since
fortune has so luckily begun my good, acquainting me with one of the
puissant Emperor Trebatios kinsmen? I do protest (most excellent Prince) this
day shall so be inprest within my memory, that first every vytall power shall
abandon their natural nation, ere I will forget the remembrance of this
present content, caused by the knowledge of so warlike a cousin: and be assured
(dear Rosabel) that seeing you are the first I have known of my kindred, so
you shall always be in all things: for I will never obey any with more
willingness.

He performed it better then he spoke it, for never cousins loved one an other
more, nor Rosabell esteemed none of his Uncles as he did she Tynacrian.
Quickly did Fortune or Nabatos power, (through the Dacians intercession, whom
he accounted as his child) separated them: for the Greek telling his cousin
why he came from Greece, and the necessity Abstrusio might be in, forced them
as quick as any thought to seek the Lovers.

but being overtaken by the nights approach, and they following their haste,
lost one another in the wood, which so grieved either of them, as they were
ready for grief to yield their selves: and surely they had fallen into some
danger, (for they had engendered the greatest affection that can be imagined)
had not the wise man comforted them, alleging how needful their parting was.
So he returned the Tynacrian to his damzell, and launching his Bark into the
deep seas, we leave him, returning to the Greek.

CHAP. XII. How Rosabell met with Abstrusio, fighting with them that had stolen
his Lady. How he aided him: and after, how he suffered shipwreck on the seas.
CIth some comfort given by the wise man, did Rosabel Prince of great Britain
have his journey, ioying in the knowledge of the Tynacrian prince his Uncle: G
thousand thanks gave he the heavens, for being allied to kinsmen of such
might. Till midnight did he gallope seeking for Abstrusio, wishing in heart he
might arrive in good time to lend him his aid: herein would Fortune seem to
favor him, for even when fair Endyminos love shined fairest, then heard he a
noise of blows and armor clashing. Lighter then a young wanton Goat, spurred
he thitherward, and entering into a spacious field, he saw Syrindas mighty
Lover, like a new Mars among his adverse Knights. He stood a while gazing on
him, glad to see such haughty strength, and judged him worthy of the Ladies
bravery. He assailed them saying. To them, to them brave Knight, for their
own weakness shall here confound them.

The Greeks courageous words did greatly encourage him, whom knowing, he
humbled himself for his good help: the which he not a little needed, for at
that instant above two hundredth knights under the leading of a Captain Giant,
came marching down along the field against the Pagan: this Giant was king and
Lord over them all: the fury which they brought, made the Greek fear the
loosing of the Lady, whom he entreated seeing her on foot, to get up to the
top of the hill, and hid her self among the trees, whither he would quickly
follow her.

She did so: kindly requesting the Greek to look unto the safety of
Abstrusio. It grieved him not to hear her tender speech, purposing to marry
them if he could. Then like a thunderbolt he turned on his enemies: and with
Abstrusio ranged up and down among them, dyed to the chinne in adverse blood,
and though the Pagan were somewhat weary with the many battelles of that day,
yet the sight of the Greeks brave deeds, so animated his fainting heart, that
he forgot his wounds, and their pain.

Such miserable destruction on the hard rypened corn, makes not the
ouerflowing of an unstayed current passing his limits, as the two warriors on
those coward knights, giving no blow in vain, but slew outright, or for ever
maimed: which it behooued them so to do, being only two, and their enemies so
many. Follow me brave knight, (said the Greek) for ere we part from hence, I
vow to be revenged on these base villains. Do what you will (most mighty
warrior) answered he, for I Will obey. His shield he cast at his back, and took
his sword twixt both hands, beginning to execute such deeds as Mars would not
attempt.

More feared was not Hercules among the Centaures, then Rosabell of his
enemies, that beating them down on every side, at length he metwith the Giant
that stole the Lady, whom he assailed with a terrible blow, and past on,
where the Pagan stayed him till he returned, when with both hands he
discharged his sword on his thick helm, whereon the famous Troyans blade
finding no resistance, made his head a good way to skip from his neck. This
pleased him not, so that above ten lost their lives in the conflict: for
repairing thither, it was as much as to be led to the slaughter house. By
this, the Lark the mornings Herald, mounting into the lofty ayrie skies,
began to sing the days approach, welcomming bright Phoebus to the East, when
the two warriors like two fiery meteors of heavens consuming wrath, ranging
about the battle, encountered in the end (weary of killing) with the chief
and sole suruyor of the Giants, who roaring like a Lion for his pray, seeking
them, met, and with them his death: for stepping between them, with a heavy
Iron mace thought to revenge himself at two blows.

It fell out otherwise, for the furious Greek with one stroke cut away half
his shield, and sorely wounded him. Here did Abstrusio bravely second him,
though it cost him dear, for thrusting himself under the Giants arms,
although he thrust a handful of his sword in the side of his breast, yet did
the Giant execute his blow, discharging it on the top of his helm, so
fearcely, that senseless it struck him along upon his horse. At the noise
the Greek turned about, and thinking his companion dead, no Hyrcanian fury
may be compared to him. With more eagerness furiously flies not the lowering
Eagle against the spoiler of his nest, as the Greek to be revenged. Again
would the Giant raise his Mace, when with incomparable strength with one blow
did Rosabell throw down his arms and club: and with a thrust going to run
through the Giant, he turned aside, making the Greek strike his head against
his breast, with more strength he embraced him, then Hercules, when twixt his
hands he crushed to death two serpents: yet it auailed him not, wanting one
arm: for the Greek drawing forth his dagger, terminated that war with two
cruel stabbes. Dead tumbled down one of the mightiest Gyans of all those
Isles, whose father lost his life by the hand of the great Dardario, and the
son procuring his just revenge, sacrificed his blood with honor, being
bereft by the Greek Prince: who fearing to leese Abstrusio, did execute more
then humane deeds.

Better was not the Hesperian fruit kept, before Alcydes spoiled it, then
Rosabell defended the sounded Pagan, offending his enemies on all parts so
lamentably, that woe was to him that approached to try the effect of his
hands: even as one awaked from a deep slumper, so amazedly the Pagan raised
himself, and remembering the state wherein he was, and what the Greek had
done for him, said to himself.

Oh Jupiter, let me live, that I may gratify this knight, what his deeds on my
behalf have deserved. The furious braveness wherewith he behaved himself, so
animated the stout Lover, that as if but then the war began, he began to
turn himself among them, to the dear cost of many lives. So Rosabell
spurring his horse away, said.

Follow me knight, for our fighting now is to no more purpose, the drawing of
the mornings brightness coming on so fast, may make us loose the Lady. The
Pagan followed him, for whom the Greek hewed out such ample passage, as he
could reach to effect no blow. They galloped through the thickest of the
troops, leaving behind them the cruellest slaughter that ever was done by two
knights. They arrived to the hill where the Lady was, there they dismounted to
speak to her: who full of joy (guided by Love) embraced the Pagan, thanking
him for his kind careful rescue. She on the instant perceived her committed
error, but could not salve it: for Lyrianas skillful Lover, straight judged the
cause, and being glad thereof, knowing the Pagans will, and considering of the
signs which the Lady had showen of her affection toward him, said to try
what would come of it.

Now is the time (sir knight) to end our former battle, that I may right the
Lady which has called me from so far countries. Both Lovers were moved by
the Greeks wordse, but passing that fit, and waighing what he had done,
Abstrusio thus replied. Oh Jove forfende (brave Knight) that seeing you have so
often saved my life this day, I should now employ it against your service. The
glory and victory of the fight is yours: and more then it deserves your
valor, which the heavens have imparted you: and though it be more then hell
for me to live without this sovereign Lady, so I may seem grateful to your
deseruings, my self shall force my self to forgo this happiness, which is
the only nourisher of my forlorn life.

Worthy the honor of your high merits (excellent knight) has this your
answer been (said Rosabell) and I do in heart wish my faint woorthes were
now equal to my will, that I might (were it but in part) pay the great bonds
your liberal bounty has bound me in: and since this Lady is now
infranchised and free, I am ready (as I promised her Damzell) to conduct her
to her kingdom, or where else she please. Whereto she spoke. Ever since (sir
knight) my fortunes made me need your help, I put my honor in your hands,
and so I am sure you will (considering my necessity) protect it, in liew
whereof, I vow obedience to all your commands.

It fittes so ill (fair Syrinda) with my conditions, (spoke the Greek) to
guard Ladies, as the experience I have of my own misfortunes, enforces me
refuse this charge, leaving it in the hands of this mighty knight, protesting,
that if I had a sister, and with her many kingdoms, I would commit her to none
other. And seeing you have so plainly heard my will, I expect your reply
according to yours, that hereafter I may serve Ladies after a new manner. I
know not whether of the two were more ioyed with the Princes words, but the
Lady with the accustomed bashfulnesse in such cases, thus replied.

It well appears (sir knight) you would by all good ways procure my good will
to accomplish yours. But that you may see, there is in me no less
acknowledgement of your deserts, then in this knight, for what on my behalf
you have performed, I once again submit my self to your order, to dispose of
him at your content, assured that a knight of your worth, will regard my pure
honor as your own: for having put my self in your hands, the laws of
knighthood binds me to it. The Greek did highly (as reason would) esteem
what the Lady did, and unwilling to defer the happy content which the Pagan
might receive, did presently espouse them on the top of that hill, with more
joy then if they were in their rich royal palace. Witnesses they did not
want, for at the contract there were present, the beauteous Nymphs Oreades and
Hamadryades, with many hairie Siluan Gods.

The Greek by telling them who he was, did very much please the new betrothed
couple. There they past away the remnant of the night in pleasant chat, for the
Pagan with gladness felt not his wounds, and the Greek not willing to
disturb their content, dissembled his own. But when Apollos light expelled
Cynthias darkness from the heaven, all three took their next way to the
City, where hearing what had befallen, they had armed above twenty thousand
men, the which several ways divided in many troops went to seek their king.
Many of them they met, that greatly rejoiced seeing him well, who gave order
for the recalling of the rest back again, which was so well followed, that
before noone they all returned. In honor of the Nuptials, throughout the
City and all the Kingdom, many triumphs and Iousts were ordained: therein
the Greek showed the incomparable valor of his person. He continued there in
the cure of his wounds above a month, so tendered and honored, as in Greece he
could be no more. So thankful did the Lady show her self by her tender care
and careful attendance, that the Greek accounted all his pains well bestowed
for her. At length thinking it time, he told the Prince how necessary his
departure was.

It extremely grieved them, for they loved him as a brother: They entreated
him to stay one eight days more, till the ending of an armor which the Lady
had caused to be made, he was constrained to stay because he would not go
without them.

I well appeared by their riches, the good will they bear to him: they
likewise gave him a lusty strong Courser, wherewith, and with the arms the
Prince was well pleased. He took his leave of brave Abstrusio, and not without
many tears from Syrindas fair eyes. They remained so affected unto him, that
when the Greek wars were known, this was one brought great aid thither,
doing the Greeks such good service, that thereby they sufficiently paid the
Prince, who with some grief for their absence in a well rigged ship, Nauigated
toward Nyquea, thinking he should sooner there then in any other place, hear
of his Lady.

On the fifth Navigations, Fortune already being weary of her stay, would show
him one of her fiercest changes, for obtaining Neptunes favor, she conspired
with Eolus topsey turuey to ouerturne the seas, raising such tempestuous
storms, that the Prince saw himself a thousand times in the hands of death:
sometimes mounted aloft upon the devouring rigges of a wave, as high as a
heavens weeping face, and then tumbling down, as low as the lowest Center of
the deep, thinking himself and ship overwhelmed in those merciless waters,
accompanying the watery dwellers in their Cauerns. Then would he pity his
weak ouermatched vessel, to see it strive against two such mighty Elementall
foes, for having lost by fury of the raging winds, all her sails, her
masses, and tackels above, was below so cruelly assaulted with the seas,
remorselesse surges, that beating at her belly and sides, had hewed their
passage through her ribs, entering her breaches so without all pity, that
neither by pumping, nor any other means, her leakes were unable to be stenched,
that the poor Mariners tired with labor, amazed at the tempests, fierceness
and confounded with death: submitted to the pitiless mercy of winds and
waters, whose pittious woeful clamors piercing the roaring noise of their
opposed enemies, ascended the high heavens. The casting ouerboord, of goods,
anchors and tables, nothing does avail, and what in haste they cannot hurl
ouerboorde, the furious wind does blow away, and that it leaves, an envious
surge does wash into the sea.

Thus hopeless of all remedy tossed up and down, for the unbridled rage of
violent fighting winds, being unchained from the earthes obscure concauities,
blew from every corner nothing but consuming wrath, death and distructio^,
tying their force upon the small weak vessel, which they had torn in many
places. Four days fought they thus against the vnceasing dismal tempests, in
the end whereof, the poor death-fainting sailors seeming to foresee an
unlooked for calm, a sudden furious Southern blast opened the torn Bark,
leaving the distressed lover grapling at a planke upon the whistling Billows,
and yet with his sword in his mouth: for without it (pitiful Ladies) he would
not die. With such violence blew the winds, that violently on a flintie Rock
they hurled him, to whose top, with the strength of his arms he got. From
whence he looked to see what would become of the ship and mariners, where he
saw the lamentable spectacle, the poor Master ryding on the waters, upon a
Chest, whereon he set all his hope, till a devouring wave came and bereft him
of both it and life. The groans he heard, of the rest that perished, seeing
the fardels, packes, trusses, caper on the dancing billows, and foming waves.
No courage prevailed with them, nor their continual living on the seas: for
every one (as it is wont) it buried in her watery bowels. So extreme
sorrowful remained the Prince of great Britain at the lamentable spectacle,
that with tears in his eyes he burst forth into this passion. Oh supreme high
heavens, how no man in this miserable world may justly call himself, sure or
happy? There is no state, no dignity, nor office how high soever it be
advanced, but is by Fortune, subject to the greatest and most dangerous falls?
Him call I happy that least does set his confidence in Fortune, or has least
received of her blind gifts, terming her benifites, the threatening of greater
misery. What good is there on earth but is mingled with a thousand unsavory
displeasing euilles, and of discontents, misfortunes, and lamentable euentes,
such and so many, that only leave him with his bare name, ouerpressing the
soul with torments, and greeuing the perplexed mind with most grievous and
woeful pains?

After that, by little and little the fury of the sea was assuaged, he hasted
to a coppes that not far from thence he espied, there to dry his clothes,
and himself. There Trebatios haughty Nephew disrobed himself, leaving but
his only shert upon him, remembering with some tenderness the troubles he had
ouerpast: judging by the greatness of them, they would at length, weary of
themselves, bring him to a delectable sweet end, that then with the present
happiness he might joyfully recount his former infelicities.

This consideration somewhat animated him, suffering that distress more
patiently. Example should they take by him, that in less dangers forget to
make use of sufferance, esteeming that death, which peradventure the celestial
powers does but ordain for trial of their works.

The Greek again apparelled himself, his vestments being dry, and laid him
down to rest, never more destitute thereof then at that instant: it was
little, for straight he wakened to seek some path which might lead him to
some Village: he found it, but with some trouble: for without it, nothing
desired is lightly obtained. And going along the same, there happened to him,
what the ensuing Chapter does mention.

CHAP. XIII. What befell unto the mighty Rosabell, with certain other Ladies,
of whom he learned the country wherein he then was.
I Dare almost assure my self (fair Ladies) your bewties have with some
feeling (except your hearts be harder then the flint, or more obdurate then the
Dyamond) attended ye Greek princes shipwreck: In faith his worthes deserve it:
for he that with an (aim) submits himself to grief, makes himself
unworthy of comiseration, being in necessity: and yet, never any merited
favor, that denied it to the needy. Something destitute of it was Olyuias
haughty son, but from the midst of his heart drew he strength to resist
his woes: who although encompassed on all sides with so many extremes, did
never forget her, whose favors were wont to cherish him, and now in absence
putting him to his trial.

This virtue has true love (remoueable by nothing from the soul, where it
builds once his rest,) opposing it self against all inconveniences, though
ordered by his Lady, whereof being assured, takes them as comforts to his
distress. Many examples there are of this, yet of them I will recount but one,
witness my mothers son, whom neither the changes of time, nor time altering
course of life: nor yet the Mutabilitie of state in life, can make him deny
his Captivity, nor omit the dulled accentes of an vnaccent passion, with
remembrance of his groans for his vnpittying wars. And though she know it,
and the sincerity of his affection, yet turns she away the pity of her
favor, one telling him his pains are too few. Pity so unfortunate a Lover
(pitiful Ladies) and ye that shall first hear of his grief, greater then
that which never any had, nor worse respected: yet this comfort has he, that
a lady (exceeded all worth of comparison) moved with his laments, said
(unknown by whom) ungrateful truth may she be called, that thus entreats
this distressed Lover: Venus and Cupid reward thee (beauteous Lady) and su^^ I
am he will when thou shall desire Loves help, against Fortunes tyranny: for
the Greek Lord suffering his labors with constant sufferance, in the end
obtained his Lyriana, whose only sight made him deem all his former
discontents, most sweet contents.

With this hope traveled he on foot, only with his sword, having taken the
straightest and most trodden path. He had not gone far, but vexed with thirst
(although new dried of waters) he turned up a long by a clear stream, till
he came to the head of the spring, about which, was builded an Allablaster
Fountain, whose work, with the clearenesse of the waters, invited the Prince
to drink. Which done, he did eat of such fruit as the fruitful trees did
yield, that round encompassed the Fountain. Tired with his former toils, he
laid him down and slept a good while, resting his rest wanting amorous joints.

Far was he not from the great city of Golthuerg, chief in the Kingdom of
Sylephia, lying between Polonia and Bohemia, and therefore at the instant, he
dreamed the sweetest Vision in all his life: for thinking himself embraced his
Lady, the Princess Eufronisa, whose beauty was inferior to none, equalling
the fairest that met in Constantinople at the Tryumphes. She was very young,
having not yet attained to 14. years, which made her as children use, walk to
sport her self about those woods that bordered on her garden: and having lost
her self with one Lady, from the rest of her attendants, so amazed was not
Venus, when she first saw the boy Adonis along the banks of Nylus, as with
admiration the bewtious Eufronisa was astonished with the Greek Princes sight
that lay upon the grass, seeming more fair then when young Apollo in habit of
a shepherd tended Alestes Goats. He was big of body, his other parts and
liniaments are already set down, although now he entered into 20, they were
better perfected. With more desire did the Lady gaze on him, then in the woods
of Troy, the three fair Goddesses expected Paris sentence.

So much she yielded to the sight, that she began to feel a new alteration
never felt before in her heart: for being but a child, she yet knew not the
meaning of Loves pretty fooleries. With some wonder she turned to her damzell,
with these words. Have thou ever seen more perfect beauty then this gallant
youth does show? I believe that Nature at his birth, angry with her self, did
thus create him to despite her self: I cannot think but he is child to some
of our immortal Gods, that have now sent him on the earth to alienate all
strangers wits.

Which if it be so, we Ladies must strengthen our selves with courage, for I
fear, the wisest will need it to escape free of his sight, so absolute is he in
all things. This advice came too late to the tender Lady, for Love had already
made her his Goddess till the death: neither had she power to untie the knot
wherewith blind Cupid had bound her heart, tying it so hard, as he left it
insoluble.

I pity thee gallant Eufronisa, that in the nonage of thy years, thou
should begin so sower an office, as to be subject to an unknown lord, I would
willingly give thee some consolation, but so much I do want it, as rather for
both I should procure it. No vain, no color, no fashion was in the
Brytanickes face, but she coted it within her very soul, giving it the shadow,
and her heart the substance, which being so tender and unacquainted with
change, took such impression, that never Lady yielded more to love then
Eufronisa. Now she desires to speak to him, then fears she. Already becomes
she suspicious, that never learned to love.

Before she knew who he was, she became so skillful in the Art, that she feared
whether he loved, whether he could love or acknowledge anies sovereignty. Now
she that stains the blushing of the mornings Sun, becomes envious of her
own thoughts, and does distrust her own worths, seeking new devises and
invented means to be beloved, deserving for her own beauty, Jove's immortal
worship. Oh Cupids blind snares, happiness in misery, a plague in pleasure,
and grief without remedy, found unsought for, and yet a torment that contains a
most sweet life. By her amazedness, perceived the damzel her Ladies malady,
wherefore she merrily said: Let us awake this knight, and try whether his beauty
have more force waking or sleeping. Do what you will (replied she) although it
be no modesty considering who we be. Rather waighing that, I think it best to
do it (said the witty Selia) to see what he is that has such power over
Ladies: for if his merits equals all other parts requisite in a good knight, he
may call himself one of the happiest in the world. So long continued the
Ladies in their amourous chat, that the Prince awaked with these words. Oh
fortune, how do thou flatter my hopes, for if thou give me any good, it is
only dreaming, that when I wake to see it, I find it but an illusion. He said
no more, for the Ladies sight stayed him, both from the publishing his woes, as
of the cause of them. He rose, admiring the Ladies beauty: who first spoke
thus. You should seem to have few enemies (sir knight) seeing so carelessly
you lie and sleep in passages so open, that any by you offended, may at his
pleasure right himself. He answered: So cross and austere has my fortune
always been most bewteous Lady, that it did never let me know the state
wherein I might say I had a friend, for even my own thoughts do most within my
breast, make war against my rest: wherefore having none to trust unto, forces
me to set my self in the hands of every one, that one in this generality,
would show the office of a friend, by taking away my despised life, then as
such a one I should account him, for by the deed giving me one death, he riddes
me of a thousand that I suffer in continual languishment: and it, might I well
call life: for he lives well, that feels no more pain. Great is your grief
(answered the Lady) and of force to draw commiseration from the hardest
heart, and greater it is, seeing that none pities you, were it but with a
counterfeit remedy, noting the weight of your complaints.

In faith (fair Lady) said the Prince, so mighty are my oppressions, that
although I know them, and the pain I endure by them, yet I must suffer them,
for if I live, it is by living in pain, so that should I, but never so little
ease this pain, it would be seen in the want of my health.

If it does so please you (replied the Lady) unjustly you complain, and I
think you greatly wrong your Lady, terming her cruel. My complaints (most
sovereign Lady) are not so much meant against my life's directnesse, as against
my unhappy stars, that make me unfortunate in favors, but not in my
employment, for never was any better, but in such a place where my griefs be
scorned. Some reason you have (said the Lady) having this occasion to bewail:
for where sorrow is not regarded, there is a double grief, and gladly would I
know who you are, and where borne, for you seem a stranger in these parts. I
cannot but obey your sovereign command (most excellent Lady) answered the
Greek: I was borne in the farthest Confines of great Tartaria, and am called
Corolano, cast by foul weather and tempest of the sea, on this Country,
passing so many troubles, that had I not received such unexpected comfort with
your fair sight, no doubt, but that my soul seeing the body drenched in
misery, and as unworthy to contain it, had it forsaken me, but to enjoy
within it the view of your happy sight, gave life to her liuelesse habitation:
And that I may commit no error (for it is impossible but I have incurred some)
suffer my prayers by your admittance to make me deseruer to know the name of
the land so happy in the possession of such admirable bravery. Quickly do you
require a payment for the discovery of your name (Sir knight) replied Selia,
(for the Princess could not, busied in her new and painful business) but
because you shall not altogether judge your self unfortunate in your
pretenses, know this land is called Sylepsia, whereof this Lady is Princess,
and going on hunting, we lost our company and our selves: yet we have not
hunted ill, having found the amourousest knight in the world: and so according
to your shows, none like you have better assurance of the Lovers Tent, whose
adventure was newly brought into this City, and the proof thereof shall
within these four days be begun, and little shall you not please us to
hazard your person in the trial.

I am so ill provided of Armor and other necessaries, (fair damzell answered
the tender Prince) that though I were unwilling to do it, yet to content your
bewties, with them I would try it, assured that for loving and being
unfortunate, to me the glory is only due.

This want shall not hinder you (said Eufronisa) for I will furnish you with
the best armor that ever you saw, erst belonging to the first king that
reigned in this country, named Tersio, equal in sovereignty of Fortitude and
Wisdom, strengthened by Art and skill wherewith he forged them, and never
were seen by any. These i will send you by this damzell, first swearing you shall
not absent your self from this Kingdom without my leave, and in our Palace
shall you be cherished.

The amorous Lady spoke so plainly, as the Prince could perceive Loves new
wound. There is none so destitute of judgment, but would have weighed what he
obtained to be beloved of so fair a dame: for if the Prince had ever seen
pure beauty, she was the perfect stamp thereof: in whose creation, Nature the
old Mars of living form, had showed the utmost of her skill, modeling her
liniaments, more absolute then thought could wish. Among so few years as they
both had, was never seen completer excellencies: so he answered. Who dares
most sovereign Lady, show himself so ungrateful to the favors imparted by
your rare bewty, as to commit a fault so heinous to depart from you without
your license? I am so long since captive to another will, as now to acknowledge
it anew is no pain, but rather cheifest happiness, knowing to whom I owe
service. Why then (said she) we may be gone, assured you will do no otherwise,
and this night will I send you horse and Armor, whose sight will content you:
In the mean time hyde your self amongst these Pynes: for having lost our
selves, it cannot be but our Guard will seek us out.

The Greek now had no more will but to fulfill the Ladies: and so taking his
leave of the young child, already old in love, he thrust himself into the the
thickest thereof. Without a thousand embracements she had not sent him, feared
she not to be too much noted of wa^tonnesse, yet with her eyes she expressed her
hearts desire. They are (soueraign dames) the tonguelesse messengers that best
make known the pain and pleasure of the souls. Better signs of like or
dislike, is there not, then the motion of those speechless speakers.

As one rapt in a dustie black cloud, so seemed Eufronisa in absence of her
son. Ay me (my Selia) said the amorous Lady, what in auspicious luck
crosses my tenderness to affect the knight that has already another granted
the possession, of his soul? Who can love him, knowing he affects another,
wherewith the heavens have adorned me, and yet not made me proud? for if he
loves another, how shall I love him, being sure that for my sight he will not
violate the promise of his sacrificed faith, and yet who will not dote on him?
What inconveniences can restrain me from his love? what infamy, what
dishonor, or what stain of maidens fame may befall me, but my soul will
regardlesse trample on, so with equal love her pains might be rewarded? Why,
I do not fear the foolish rude reports of common multitudes, when they shall
join their mouths to fames shrill trumpe, far and near to sound my shame,
when this my folly shall be noysed abroad I will love and dote on him, and yet
I do believe, that doing so, I do not sufficiently answer the merits of his
valor, nor noble carriage of his mind.

And though it be a torment intolerable, to know another is inshrined in his
breast, I cannot refuse the divine appointment, nor what herein my hapless
fates ordain: for otherwise, none more happy then I in love: and I cannot
believe he is as he has said to be, for these that have the power to be
beloved of every one, do never disclose their true names, country, and
estates, wherefore we must by all means procure to learn his certain name,
for being entreated thereto, I do not doubt but he will.

That he is easy to be known (answered the damozell) having him in our
lodging, for if he be in love, (as he seemed to be) being alone, he will
publish it, and perchance more then we now wish, for entire love cannot be
hushed in secret, and every one too much bragges of this blind opinion, as to
account the greatest comfort to participate the inward thoughts, to stones, to
walls, to groves, to fields, and winds. Ay me (my Selia) by experience thou
do show to have been in love (said Eufronisa) who can discourse of seas, of
rocks, of shallowes, and of tempests, but such as have nauigated, escaped and
past them? What is he that fears his enemy, that has not been wounded at
his hands? If this be so, and thou so skillful, I will repose the trust of
this my business, on thy discretion and experience.

Had it been for nothing but to help you in this tempest, (sovereign Lady)
answered Selia, I account the time well bestowed, I spent in Loves toys,
letting my soul confess with content, another superiority. I am well
acquainted with Loves devises and his allurements: I know where he is resisted,
there enuiously he strives to subiugate new forces, causing afterward greater
pains for refusing his deity, and denying his prerogative over all the world,
as he that can only give life or death with joy. Why then (my dear Selia)
said the Princess, it is likely he will not so cruelly tyrannize over me, that
willingly admitted the heavy yoke of his slavery, as he uses against them
that levied arms and war against his power. Selia answered. To demand no
condition of this God, is best for governing absolutely by himself, does not
(being blind) consider the grievous pains the soul indures, and many times
with a little, rests he more content, (in the end he is but a child) then if
a thousand hearts were sacrificed to appease his wrath. They could proceed no
further in their sweet chat, for many knights came to them that carefully did
seek them, fearing some disgrace had befallen them. They were glad when they
met them, so altogether returned to the City, for the Princess would no
longer stay, having already food to nourish her conceits. The night being
come, they bound the armor in a bundle, and the Lady sent to a kinsman of
hers, whom she trusted to make ready the best horse within the City. He did
it, desiring to do her service, which when she knew, making him swear to keep
her counsel, she bad him go with Selia, for she had promised a knight to
furnish him, to prove the Lovers tent. So leaving her, they arrived in good
time at the fountain, where they found the Greek overwhelmed in imaginations,
expecting the Ladies command. After courtesies past on either side, Selia
said. The Lady (sir Knight) that met you here this day, sendes you this armor
and horse, for seeing you promised her to prove the adventure of the Lovers
tent in her name, she thought good to furnish you with necessaries therefore.
Whereto the Greek replied. Fair damzell, you may tell that Lady, that with
such a favor, a harder enterprise is assured. They would not talk of other
matters, because of the old man's presence, more then to give him direction for
his way, and thereupon departed, leaving the Prince expecting the coming of
the next morn, wherein fair Ladies there befell him what you shall hear.

CHAP. XIIII. What happened to the Prince Rosabell, going to the City to
prove the adventure of the Lovers Pauilion.
Unable to conceive the cause why that beauteous Princess should show him
such kindness, lay Rosiclers brave son upon the grass, passing away the
night in that thicket, looking for the desired morn, mean while, taking some
rest. Two hours before it did appear, he awaked with the remembrance of his
lost Lady, recording with what rigor fortune had crossed his joys, judging his
shipwreck was not yet an end unto his troubles, thinking that yet the blind
Goddess was not content with his tried patience. He heartily wished to know new
means to endure such excessive torments as he daily suffered. This imagination
so oppressed him, that to ease with passage his burthening passions, he began
to plain him to the trees, that with their stirring noise, moved by the
gentle blasts of Zephyrus, seemed to pity his laments breathed against her,
whose mutabilities are the plagues and scourges of mortal men. They were not
uttered with such silence, but might be heard by Astorildo Prince of
Callidonia, brother to the beauteous Rosamond, that departing from his sister
in Greece, (glad in his soul to see her so well bestowed) traveled to seek
adventures through the world, performing many brave deeds under the name of the
knight of the Griffon, all which are at large set down in the Chronicles
Lupercio writ of all the Pagans acts. Galtenor does not here mention them,
because they appertained not unto the story he composed. So now was the free
Pagan ouerhearing the Greeks complaints: he was not moved at the^, for he had
not yet yielded his liberty to love. A while he stayed, thinking the complaint
would further proceed. It fell out as he would have it, for he uttered many
pitiful exclaimes, before Auroras shining in the heavens, yet could he not by
them judge who he was, more then the constancy he published of his Love: who
was so careful to go unto the City, that in the instant he put on the rich
armor Eufronisa had sent him.

Such were they as appertained to a novel knight, all white, bur garnisht with
many flowers of precious Rubies. They greatly pleased him, being of the best in
the world, as also because with such of like colors, he departed from Nyquea,
and combatted with his father. His shield was like his armor, in middle
thereof, bearing the picture of Faith, held by a white hand, which for all that
two Serpents with their stinges did prick, would not loosen it. The word this.

Loves greefes the longer,
Holds Faith the stronger.
Though orepressed: still my self.
Clad in these fair arms, and mounted on a lusty Courser, did Trebatios
haughty Nephew pace on toward the famous city, glad to see it with so many
Danubious streams, which made it one of the fertilests soyles in the world.

The same way did he spy the valiant Astorildo, in fair green armor full of
Pomegranates, and on his shield a fearful Griffon. Wonders had Rosabell heard
of him, rejoicing to see him of such brave disposition: so did he admire the
Greek, supposing he was him, that in the Forest he had heard complain, he
gazed on him a while, judging his behavior to excel his that in Grecia had
ouerthrown him. Having each met with the other, they extended such courtesy,
as they judged eithers merits to deserve. The Callidonian spoke first in that
country language, saying.

I would gladly know (sir knight) who you are, for it seems to me, I have
seen you far from hence. In the same tongue replied the Greek, being well
skild in most. I am (sir knight) of such remoted country, that though I should
tell my name, you could not know me: notwithstanding through those places I
have traveled, and where I am best known, I am called the Knight of the
Flowers, being by storms and fortune of the seas, cast on this land, where I
understood, there is in the Kings Court, a certain adventure arrived very
lately, which ere I did depart, I was willing to know and prove it, hazarding
but little thereby, being on Ladies behalfes, whose service brings with it a
reward for any pain how great soever, although it should be thought none done
in a Ladies name.

There is reason (replied the Callidonian) to procure their content with peril
of our lives, but this must be with assurance of reward. Whereto the Greek
answered. Then deserves he not to be beloved, that does it for reward. Never
(sir knight) was that love famous, whereto a recompense was proposed, which
must by deserved love be obtained: for as love is the motion of a noble act,
for which all good is desired to the thing loved, so does not he merit that
honored, title that seeks it for any other thing, unless it be to let the
world admire the rareness of his quallities, not inclining to the other, which
rather is a price prefixed for love, dishonouring the reputation of the Lover,
and disableth his worthes, through the hopes of that guerdon which otherwise
might make him most happy. And well it seems you know not what it is to be
another, alleging such an irronious opinion, condemned of all that know
what happiness it is, happily to love, which makes me smyle to think how safe
the Tent is from you, for being to be given to lovers, your liberty excludes
you from that privilege, which by being one, you have obtained. I would not
have you so rashly judge, by what you know not (replied the Pagan) for you may
be deceived. How should I be (said the Greek) hearing you so plainly urge your
liberty? Nay then (returned the Callidonian) that you may know the
unadvisedness of your judgment, I say, none shall prove it, unless he first
prove me upon the speeches we have urged, for who the devil has ever
loved, without hope of something. That hope (answered Rosabell somewhat moved)
the Lover must not have, but leave it in the Ladies dispose, for it is she
must consider the merits of that faith, wherewith she sees she is adored, and
according to those deserts and her bounty, she yeeldes the due reward. And I
am sorry we should with new brawles enter into the Palace, and I being
first advertised of the adventure, the first trial ought to be mine. And so
about both matters (having now opportunity) let our battle be, with this
condition, (least we want time for the adventures promised) that he which
forgoeth first his saddle, shall not see the adventure, unless he be
commanded by the conqueror. Nothing does better please me (said Astorildo)
that you may know your error by your love.

So these two famous warriors turned their horses bravely confronting each
other. More horror makes not the furious waves, beating on the stony rocks,
then they by their incounters.

The Pagan was one of the greatest that the Greek had received, for it cast
him backwards on his horse, with loss of both stirrops: but the Pagan chanced
worse, for Mars on horseback equalled not the Prince, that met him so
strongly, that fetching him clean from his saddle, he fell on his feet.
Recover he would his seat before the Greek returned, having the bridle in his
hand, but the horse starting at his offer, mounted aloft and put him from it,
that the Greek when he turned, saw him on the ground: where he required the
combat with the sword. We should so stay ouerlong (said the Greek) for fear
thereof made me condition thus: but we shall have time ere you depart this land
to do it, the which I promise to perform, be it but to dissuade you from your
heresy. And that you may begin to credit me, I am content you first prove
the adventure, so shall you see what advantage you should have, not having this
opinion which your liberty makes you maintain. Otherwise could not the Pagan
do, for noted he would not be of discourtesie: so he promised to accomplish it,
and mounting again like two great friends, they took their way to the
City, arriving there at the first hour after noone, when all the principal
thereof repaired to the Palace to see the adventures proof, together with
many valiant strangers that about it were thither come. As these two warriors
passed through the streets, all the peoples eyes they drew after them, admiring
to see them so well armed, and of so brave disposition. Gallanter Knights were
not in that City seen of many years before. As too and fro the streets
were crossed by passengers that went to the Court, and they doing the like, the
suns splendent rays reuerberated on their glittering armor, as no sense
could more desire. The amorous Eufronisa lost not this sight, for standing on a
turret, she saw the maiesticke pacing of her gallant, and said unto her self,
she had given him but little to make him Lord only of her heart. There is no.
Lady (said Loves new Scholar) that has more reason to love then I, since
(in my opinion) the Gods have not reserved unto themselves, more grace, more
bravery, nor more worth, then they have bestowed on this knight. Somewhat did
this deefied couple prick their horses, and passing under the Ladies being, the
Greek made his, bend his knees to the ground, and his head lower then his
breast. The Lady seeing it, raised her self to do him courtesy, which as a
favor she bestowed, not respecting how she might be noted for it. Near her
stood her witty Selia, that burst into these words.

I cannot blame you, (sovereign Princess) for loving him that was borne to be
beloved, and if for him you suffer, he has with him a remedy for your
greatest malady, and therefore do not complain, for if you do, I Will swear
you do dissemble. She answered. If there wore any with him, that would so well
plead my deserts to him, as he has here to read his merits to my belief, it
might be I should be able to dissemble my pain when it takes me: and yet can
I not deny what thou alledgest, for his gallant behauior is a comfort in
midst of my greatest woes. The two famous Knights alighted, for the hall
(being one of the fairest in the world) was full of knights, that expected the
proof of the Lovers Pauillion. In the outward yard they left their horses,
and as friends together entered into the hall, having round about an infinite of
rich seats, excepting a corner, purposely hung and reserved for ye Ladies that
then entered, whose beauty and bravery delighted every heart. The most
beauteous Eufronisa would not differ in her color of garments from the
Britains armor, apparrelling her self al in white, imbrodered with red roses,
that never to the Ladies sight it admitted no compare. The Greek did note it
well, and smiled at it. This occasion expected Cupid to yoke the breast of
warlike Astorildo, that in scorn of him had long time led his life: and so
with the sight of the Ladies rare beauty, he was beset with new desires,
feeling his heart subdued. A wound was this he received, that only death
cured, for that solely had power to remedy it: for the Lady busied her eyes
gazing on the Greek, he thinking on Lyriana, in whom his hopes, life, and
felicity consists. So that only Love must please this third intruder: for
Astorildo already loves, his life depends on his alienation: now he greeues
for appoynting combat with the Greek, seeing it touches what he adores, and
with a word he has even now changed his opinion, by being in love, and
without hope ever to obtain any recompense for his distress. And yet the Lady
scorning the firmness wherewith he loves her, places it in affecting him that
laughes at her, because he dotes upon Lyriana. So the Ladies sat them down,
being above a hundredth in number, daughters to the chief Nobles of the Realm.
When all were silent, an ancient grave man, for so he was that brought the
Tent, did set it in middle of the hall. A fairer piece was never seen: it was
all of blew Satin, imbroderad with Artechokes of gold, set with so many
stones, that their splendour deprived the sight of it.

At the door thereof appeared two knights richly armed, that seemed to
challenge the fight of every one present: within was seen a fair throne,
whereon sat a Lady of exceeding beauty, holding in her hands a crown of
inestimable value. Thus every one expecting to know of the ancient knight the
sum of the adventure, the Ladies and knights yielding him grateful audience,
he began to recite the cause of his coming, whose relation deserves a new
Chapter, inferring me to entreat of you, fair wonders of natures beauties
like attention, for now have I most need thereof, expressing a matter of it
self so worthy to be known.

CHAP. XV. How the knight ending his relation of his adventure, his knights
began to prove it, and what them befell.
MOst high and mighty King of Sylepsia (began the ancient knight) in the
Southern parts and regions of the world, there sometimes dwelled a man in the
hidden and secret mysteries of Art and Nigromanticke spells the skilfullest of
his time, whose knowledge and great wisdom could not keep him from the
snares of deceitful love, who intrapt him with the beauty of Belisa, daughter
to the king of Arabia the Felix, one of the fairest Ladies on the earth, who
governed with higher thoughts, admitted not the wise Nycostratos affection. He
atchiued many worthy deeds in her service, yet all would not prevail to
move the Ladies love, nor yet to show him one counterfeited favor, which put
him in such desperation, as daily he neglected the estimation of his credit,
and more and more lost his health. On this Lady were also inamored two
Princes, alike in valor and deserts, though one was more happy having the
Ladies favor: who fed him with those hopes that they are wont to give their
lovers, al which was worse then death to the wise man, as also to the other
knight rejected.

So Nycostrato knowing it, as also the approach of his lives fatal hour, and
finding that Belisa was cause thereof, purposed ere he lest the world, to be
revenged, and so formed he this wondrous Tent, where he enchanted the Lady,
bereauing her of judgment, for the little respect she had made of his great
love.

Also he enchaunted the two lovers to defend the entrance, until there were a
knight so amorous and valiant, but as unhappy as either, that by vanquishing
might restore them their lost liberty. And Belisa, by the Lady that without
exception, best deserved the title of constant Lover, yet worse rewarded: for
only this and to be fairest, must free enchaunted Belisa. In the estate they
be, they suffer many torments: for so pleased it Nycostrato, the more to
satisfy his revenge. That knight that is favored by Fortune, shall end the
Combat, must after lead the Lady that will prove the adventure. In many
courts of mighty kings have we been, hoping to find some knight to set a
periode to our travel: but the Princes being valiant, and the Lady very fair,
none has prevailed, no not so much as in the entrance. Almost dispairing ever
to find remedy for these Princes, I heard of the famous knight and bewtious
Ladies of your Court. With some better hope I turned hither, which I trust will
not be frustrated, considering the worthies here assembled of either kind. So
I humbly beseech your Majesty, command your knights unto the proof, for no
small honor shall he win that ends it.

There were so many desirous of it, as they expected but the kings command,
among them were two of the kings Coozens, both lovers and reputed valiant. Many
proouing the entrance, and loosing it, made show of their valor, attributing
their loss not to it, but to their happiness in love, and so returned with
great comfort, thinking they had obtained much thereby. The Prince of Laronia,
a young knight, but a notable lover, prepared himself: who drawing forth his
sword, made against the two competitors, beginning a well sought combat: but
after a while he retired back, unable to endure his enemies strong blows.

No longer stayed the kings two Coozens, but one after an other made known
their valor unto the beholders, yet in the end were forced to withdraw. More
courageous warriors had not the King seen then those of the Tent, who in less
then two hours had overcome above fifty knights, besides the strangers the
chiefest of the land. Only now were left, the mighty Greek, and Astorildo:
who taking his leave of the Greek (with whom he would not have no longer
quarrels) drew forth his sword and marched toward the Tent. The Prince was most
skillful in fence, and so marked the manner how they kept the door, where
carefully fixing his eyes, flourishing aloft, let fly 2. blows one after an
other. They of the Tent, stepped out toward them, which was to their evil, for
he in despite of them won the entrance, whereat so many warlike instruments
were heard, as if some general field were to be fought. All the Hall did
verily judge he would win it: for being within, his deeds were incredible, so
be laboring the Lovers, as were he a little vnfortune, Galtenor, doubtless he
had saved Rosabell a labor. For one of the Princes (being the beloved) going
to wound him below the shield, Astorildo avoiding it, ran at him with so strong
a thrust, that he tu^bled him bacwards upon the steps that ascended to the
Lady. Being rid of him, he might execute a blow upon the others helm, it was
with such force, as he was forced to set his knees upon the ground, run to
overthrow him he would, which was the loss of his battle, for the other
abashed at his hap, stepped thither, and with both his hands laid on Astorildos
helm, which made him stagger, like to fall.

An other seconded the Competitor, with no less might then that which made him
set both hands and knees on the earth. They cast their arms about him, and
though he a while delayed his vanquishment, in the end he was thrust out,
winning more honor then any had before him.

Now was none left but Lyrianas Princely Lover, who rising from his seat with
excellent Majesty, drew forth that worthy sword that once belonged to the
mightiest and greatest enemy the Greeks had. There was none, but with
admiration gazed on the Brytaine, for his gallant carriage assured the
victory. More eyes then Argos had, wished the Lady, to cote all his
perfections, for she loved him dearer then her life. With furious pacing went
the Greek toward the Pauillion, whence was heard, what never was before, for
the signal as to a battle of several armies was sounded, with many shoutes
and clamors, that it drowned every ones hearing. Which being past, with more
warlike aspect the two Competitors awaighted their adversaries coming: with
their swords aloft they expected him that with his accustomed courage went
near them: at once they discharged 2. mighty blows, yet bigger they must be
to hinder him the entrance, for with a leap, ere they could again raise their
swords, he ran in between them, and meeting with ye vnbeloued, with his
shoulders thrust him from him, fiercer then a bullet shot from a musket. With a
thrust would the fauorit wound him, which the Greek being (skilfuller then he)
nimbly avoided, and discharged his fury on his helm. The enchauntment is
unable to resist the sharp edge of Hectors blade, for it cut all the top,
wounding him a little on the head. Before he could settle himself, he turned
upon the other, giving him a puissant blow on the shield. All that his sword
reached it cast to the ground, leaving his arm with such extreme pain as he
could scarce stir it.

Exceedingly praised in the Hall was the valor of the knight of the Flowers.
New baits for Eufronisa that gave ear to them, with more affection then
Venus, when she met Adonis going to hunt. Yet now has she no more to give him,
having done it all before, save constancy does she procure to maintain,
wishing him a happy victory, which was to some effect, for the Competitors
came only to fight, and thereto do animate themseleus: but he that was borne
in armor will not be daunted with fear, bestowing never a blow on the
Lovers, but makes them with hands and knees kiss the earth. None doubts the
victory, generally giving it to the Greek, that like a Lion fought between
the Competitors. The vnbeloued thrust at him strongly with his sword, thinking
to have run him through, so much he made him give back, he seconded an other,
which was trebled with a cruel stroke upon his head by the Favored. Something
they amazed him, and doubling their blows again, made him set one knee on the
ground. Hold on him to wrestle would Belisas Lover have taken, but Rosabell
refused it, giving on his head so mighty a blow, as senseless at his feet
he cast him. Swifter does not an Eagle take her flight, then he turned upon
the vnbeloued, and twixt his arms he raised him aloft, and breathless threw
him to the earth. A greater noise did not Illiums tower make when it fell, then
was heard at the Lovers fall. Ouercast was the Pauillion a while with a thick
fogge, which being past, it appeared as before, saving that the knights lay at
the Ladies feet, that then seemed fayrer, having an other Crown on her head,
besides that she held in her hands. With the sound of heavenly music there
also appeared the adventure of Hope, which Don Eleno discovered at Esclauonia:
and at the Ladies right hand, an old man that was judged to be Nycostrato. So
soon as the knights were vanquished, the ancient knight said to Rosabell.

Most valiant knight, you may highly think of your self, having to your
immortal glory ended, what in so many years could never be attained. Now
remains, that the Ladies you lead, by you do prove the adventure of the
Crowns, and I hope also here to see it terminated. Every one in the hall
greeted the knight of the Flowers, with much joy: neither expressed nor thought
may that be, which Eufronisa did receive, seeing what her knight with such
honor had obtained, calling her self a thousand times happy, for placing her
affection on him. The proof of the Crowns was begun by the ladies, with some
fear, which notwithstanding was lessened by the Knights company. One of the
Kings Nieces, a Lady of rare beauty, taking the Knight by the hand, said.

I would be sorry Sir Knight, that through my company you should loose what
every one knows your valor does deserve. That is it I fear (fair Lady)
that my unfortunate hap may debar me from the honor your beauty had assured.
Which being not so great as Belisas, made her return without the Crowns: but
with more glory then any other had got, having ascended to the highest step
where the Lady sat. Every one proved, yet got little by it. I believe (Sir
Knight) said the old man, you have attained a troublesome office by
vanquishing the two amorous Knights. It is a pleasure (replied the Prince)
being in service of Ladies. Now only remained Eufronisa, fearing she should
not obtain the victory: judging the enchaunted Princess to be fayrer, yet
every one was of contrary opinion, although the Arabian was very fair: but
being so near him, she had impressed in her soul, added beauty to her beauty,
that when she came to the tents door she seemed Angelical. She was not able,
nor could she there otherwise favor her gallant, then to wring him by the
hand, that if Lyriana had not been possessed of his heart, it had been no wonder
if she there had made him her prisoner. With a most solemn consort of
melodious harmony, were the two different Lovers received. Having entered the
Pauillion, many Nymphs strewed all their way with sweet odorious flowers, of
whose pleasant smell all the hall participated. With more joy did she mount the
stairs (the^ the Carthage Dydo entered the Cave, where she found her dear
Aeneus) till she came unto the top, where the princess Belisa rising,
welcomed her, and taking off her Crown from her head, set it upon Eufronisas,
saying. This receive most excellent Princess, as a token I acknowledge the
sovereignty of your beauty over mine. And in assurance of the exceeding love I
must bear you, and the extreme pain you shall endure, take this at my hands,
which if you put on, when most you shall despair of comfort, this shall give
it you, though short and after, pain till death. But what thereby shall ensue,
shall for aye content you. And you most glorious knight, though Fortune has
hitherto most cruelly persecuted you, have courage against her chaunges, for
you shall not return to Greece without the thing your soul most loves.

The Lady had no sooner ended what she would say, when on a sudden the
Pauillion vanished, only leaving the beloved Prince in all his judgment with
the Lady. A sentence was proclaimed, whereby was gathered, that the vnbeloued
Lord in recompense of his says, so ill repayed, went to accompany amorous
Celio, in the Castle of Hope. Every one rejoiced thereat: for his love to Belisa
merited some reward. Who was most courteously entertained by the King with her
beloved Prince, exceeding joyful to be at liberty, in company of his Lady,
that assured his happiness with a kind look.

The Ladies entreated the Greek to unloose his helm: he refused it, till
Eufronisa with a wincke did bid him. He obeyed, which more allured the Lady,
his beauty increased as much admiration as his valor, for being heated by the
battle, it was the greater. Some there was that said, it equalled the Ladies,
and having as yet no beard, and being like his mother, no marvel if it were so
compared, making the Ladies envious of his graces. Among them he sat him down
with the greatest content he ever received, excepting that his Lady gave him,
when she received him as her husband, although he lost her at the instant.
There discoursed he with them, some demanding who he was, others, whether he
was in love, and others where his Lady was. With such wit, and discretion he
answered them al, as he greatly gained their good wills. With her eyes did
Eufronisa speak to him, till the nights approach made him take his leave of the
king, whose importunities could not make him stay. Softly did the Lady remember
him of his promise of Belisa and her Lover, he craved leave, leaving them much
bound unto him, he demanded of the knight of the Griffon, whether he would stay
there or no, for he could do no otherwise but depart. So far in love was
Astorildo, that he answered.

Sir knight, in my soul I would be glad of your company, greeuing that I ever
crossed you in your words: but at this time I am forced for a while to abide in
this country, until I be advertised the contrary from mine: and if in any
thing my person or what I have may do you service, be assured I will perform
it with my life. The Greek gratefully accepting his offer, departed out of the
Palace, and on his lusty Courser went out of the city, minding being more
darker, to return and keep his promise. How he accomplished it, the next at
large relates.

CHAP. XVI. How the Prince Rosabell returned to the city, and what befell him,
with the Princess Eufronisa.
WHere I have hitherto implored the favor of your desired aid (most fair and
only worthy to be most fair Ladies) to prosecute this story to record of your
fames, the imaginary grant thereof, having brought me to this stay, doubts his
sufficiency farther to proceed, unless it be anew allowed, and sealed with a
pardon, which for your own sakes, gentleness and pity, I hope for my self
I shall obtain, being but the interpreter of my Authors offense, committed by
the Greek, against your search: although it was done by him, constrained by
her, to assuage the burning fire of Eufronisas love, and to remove the
desperate violent passions of the same. Whose reading (oh think then how you
have pardoned me) craves such extenuation, as patiently you will not deny:
for his return will offend your bewties, violating plyted faith to Lyriana, by
which injury, your worthes cannot but receive some detriment. And so coming
to the place appointed him by Selia, he left his horse among the trees, to
feed alone maisterlesse: although he was not long without one, for being so
good, he did not little esteem him, that took him thence. But Rosabell went
straight unto the ladies garden, and knocking at the door, Selia opened it,
saying.

Now are you worthy greater estimation knight of the Flowers, th^^ you would so
willingly come and observe your word, which I may attribute to your sufficient
virtues.

Far unworthy of favor were he (fair damozell) that would not know what
happiness by doing it is obtained. Why thou come with me (said she) for I Will
commit you to better hands then mine, and since you have this day displeased
me, proouing of the Crowns, do not marvel, if I should put you in such a
prison, as Jupiter would not leave the Empire of the heavens to live in it. Any
thing proceeding from you (gentle Lady) I Will accept as a favor (answered the
Greek) being assured, that since you know my will, you will not be against my
content, which I shall esteem most great, to work yours. And they arrived at
the Ladies lodging, where they were forced to silence, least they should be
heard, and the Prince took off the armor from his legs. So went they even
where Eufronisa did expect him fairer then Diana, yet so abashed and fearful,
that though she saw him, yet could not speak. But from her weakness she drew
strength to say, embracing him, now Love began to help her. I would not
(valiant knight) have you attribute this my boldness, to more then to requite
what I am indebted to you, having this day to your high honor, most noblely
honored our court, where my self also had part (through your valor) of the
glorious end of the adventure.

In eternal records of living memory to succeeding ages shall this remain,
together with this my wanton deed, if it be known. He replied. There nothing
happened this day (most sovereign Princess) but was achieved under the name
of your excellent beauty. And therefore, undergoing it as yours, what
difficulty could happen, which I might not vanquish, to enternize your
glories. Ay me (strange Coriolano) were I assured thereof, what torment were so
great, which I should not account a pleasure and most sweet. But oh cruel
grief, it is thou that have conspired with my malignant stars, to make me
explain my will before I know how it will be accepted. Exceedingly content
rested I, seeing you at the Fountain, and conceived such delight, that
therewith I live, and ever shall possess this mancion of my life: but if you
knew or would understand, with what pains and greefes it was intermixed, there
were no heart of Diamond, walled with Adamant, but would pity my distress.

She there ended, raining down her crystal rubie cheeks, such a shewer of
liquid pearl, as it expressed her souls sorrow. It was not unconsidered by
the Britain youth, for he was M. of Loves school. A thousand times cursed he
himself, complaining against the blind guidresse of unhappiness, reuoluing
many inconveniences, the least whereof were worse then death: for if he yield
to the Ladies will, he sees the wrong he offers to his Lyriana, and if he do
it not, he fears she is resolved for aye to keep him there. Both things he
ponderated wisely in his mind, yet could not choose which he might do, or how
to excuse himself. Notwithstanding of these evils he took the less, yet
greatest, choosing rather to suffer a living death, then to offend his dear
Lyriana: and so he answered contrary to her expectation thus. I cannot but
confess (most excellent Princess) how much you desire to favor me, altogether
immeritable of your benefits, and if ending the adventure in your name, may be
thought any service, for ever be it happy for bringing me to this estate,
wherein if my woorthlesse life sacrificed to confirm your content, may be any
sign of thankfulness, behold me here ready to yield it. With a heavy sigh
the Lady answered. Woe be to thee unfortunate Eufronisa, since in thy tendrest
years thou haste begun to feel the bitter chaunges of inconstant Fortune.
Sure, sure I am, I shall remain an example to all posterities through this
unseemly act, made worse by thy uncivil usage. I do not require you cruel
knight, nor will not have you hazard your life in now dangers of new
enterprises, only I request, seeing I love, (oh Gods that I should say so) you
would do the like. Most fair of fairest Ladies (replied the afflicted youth) I
am yours, and as such a one dispose of me, for none with more will shall
procure your content. But yet do not bestow your sacred faithful love on so
mean a knight as I, both in conditions, blood, and estate, the which neither
your Princely honor, fame, nor dignity, does allow, nor my self, seeing and
knowing your loosing choice, bound by deserts unto your worthiness may permit,
without infringing the constant laws of faith, hospitallitie, and
thankfulness. The which rather then I will commit, these my hands will I
stain with my own blood: for where there is such inequallitie of deserts, I
should be hated and abhorred of all men, so to accomplish your languishing
desire, and therefore have patience (beauteous Princess) for there is nothing
better then it, to tolerate these hasty accidents in Love.

Oh inhumane cruelty (said the weeping Lady) how much do thou extend thy
power against me? what auailes it thee, hard hearted knight, to procure my
honor, by giving me a most untimely death? So shall thou rather be called an
homecide, then a man seruitor of Ladies: well, well I wot, that my over liberal
giving thee my heart, mooues thee to this strangeness, knowing there is no
reason in that breft where Love commands: which were it in me, I could not
but see the increase of my honor by being silent: but with such vehemency was
my pain augmented, as I could no longer conceal it. And if thou know what
it is to love, this can thou not judge strange, when true affection could
never yet be limited, and mine exceeding all others, forces me to say: I
only live to love thee.

Here she pawsed, unable to proceed further, nor the Prince to reply, the
one intercepted by the grief the poor soul endured: and the other, to see he
caused it by being so obstinate and unrelenting to her requests. In the
greatest confusion of the world was the Prince in, to see the Lady, so
determined and amorous, and he himself be reaft of possibility to help her.
I hope most beauteous Eufronisa (said the Greek) this conceived anger against
me will be pacified, knowing how long since, and before this time, Tyrant Love
had made me his tributarie vassal, delighting from mine infancy with those
that were touched with this evil, and if the consideration hereof may move you
knowing my weakness, to satisfy your desire, I hope you will desist from
making your self guilty of dishonor. Aim (cruel knight answered she) now
I Will not so much complain of thy disdain, as of my own lightness, seeing
what a capital and heinous crime I have thereby committed, not only against me,
(yet that is no matter) but against all Ladies in the world besides, that only
for the name deserve to be sued and entreated. But I (ay me, that I) as ill
accounting of that name, as of my pure honor, have yielded to Loves triumph:
rather become a suter, then reserve my self to be sued unto. And yet do not
you think, but I perceive your mind is still busied, imagining on an others
absence, this and many other things I know by experience, since I first and
last saw you at the fountain. I do confess it all, and also my reputations
wrack, but a resolved mind in constancy, cannot leave lo love, nor will I
otherwise, though it treble my sorrows eternally.

For this I did entreat thy help, and for this requested thy good will. But
for all I am denied all; I will till death persist in this my pure love, and
hope for no remedy, evermore co^plaining alike of my self, as of thy most
inhumane barbarous cueltie. And therewith flung out of the chamber, bathing her
cheeks in water of her eyes. She sent him by Selia some Iuncates of her own
making to refresh him with, for she knew he had eaten nothing all that day. She
entreated him to be answerable to the Princess love, though it were but
fained, for according to the grief that has possessed her, I doubt she will not
live till morning: and consider what by her death will be imputed to you, when
you shall be called the murderer of so fair a Lady. I would to God (gentle
Damzel) said he, it were in my power to redress the Princess grief: but you
know, being heretofore sworn another, it is impossible I should pleasure her,
without committing the greatest fault that ever knight has none. I will no more
importune you (said the damzell) for I should think my self much iniuried with
your disdain: how much then a Princess so fair and honorable. That is it
(replied the Greek) which hinders me: for should I do what she requires, it
were but to satisfy her will against mine, which were the greatest wrong that
might be done her, for having pawned my faith unto another, I cannot violate
it to pleasure her.

The damzel returned to her Lady, leaving the Prince the most perplexed in the
world, seeing himself in place where he could not use his valor. Selia found
the beauteous Eufronisa tumbling on her bed, drowned in tears. What say
thou my dear Selia (said she to her) to the tyranny wherewith that cruel
knight does use me? what means may I use? I my self know it not, nor do
think there is any? and to desist to love him, thou see is impossible: for
neither my affection will permit, nor am I able to let it. She spied near her
the Crowns she had won, and with a sigh that seemed to end her life, said.
Oh glorious rewards to increase my harms, you were the sole cause of my
unhappiness. Now that she thought the Greek to be in bed, not able to be
quiet, she went alone unto his chamber, whose sight made the Prince offer
quickly to rise, she stayed him, saying. I Will not have thee use me with any of
these ceremonious courtesies, nor is my coming for them (thou cruellest knight
that ever the heavens did create) but only do I come, not to entreat of thee
what thou should of thy self procure, had thou thy perfect judgment,
save to demand of thee two things, for with either of them shall I receive some
comfort, and believe me, they be not to thy prejudice, for were they, I would
not require them.

Most worthy Princess, I nothing more desire of Fortune answered he) then to
have that occasion offered, wherein I might endanger my life in your service,
and would to God by loosing it, I might cure your woes, then should you see
with what willingness I would cast it on a squadron of deaths darts: therefore
demand (fair Lady) what you will, for I will at the instant accomplish it,
being with the conditions you propounded. Without them (most cruel Knight
said she) who durst require any thing of thee, seeing thy strangeness and
barbarous disdain so extreme against me. The first thing therefore that for
me thou must do, is, to tell me who thou art, and the Ladies name to whom thou
have rendered that freely will of thine? The second thing I Will demand, this
being known, for seeing I must be disdained and forlorn, I will know whom I
love, and for whom I am not loved. Your excellency (sacred Princess) so far
urges this matter, that I cannot think (replied Rosabell) why you will know
the thing, that being known, I am sure will but augment your woes. They cannot
be greater then them I have already (did she answer) and therefore you must
not break with me, unless you will be as disloyal, as cruel. I am content to
do it (said he) though sure I am of your hate when you know me, but that I may
give some ease unto your greefes, I will keep promise. Know therefore (divine
Lady) I am Rosabel of Britain, son to the Greek Prince Rosicle^, and his
Princess Oliuia, espoused unto Lyriana Princess of Nyquea, and he that in
nothing will take more felicity, then to procure your content. But will you not
(excellent Princess) force me being so enraged, to break that faith I vowed
on her hands to be true Lover. And now may you see what reason moved me to be
so obdurate, finding that any remedy from me, can but dishonor you.

And is it possible knight (said she) that you are son to the famous knight
of Cupid, whose worthy deeds and loves have with immortal fame filled all the
world, Well, had I no other cause, but that you are son to such a father, it
were sufficient to make me love you till death.

I only entreat your leave, being alone and oppressed with these extreme
passions, I may disburthen my cares, by seeing the unhappy Eufronisa is yours,
for so I shall receive some rest. Whereto he answered. Most sovereign Lady,
Princess of Sylepsia, you see what little power is in me, to grant you that
license, for having no interest in my self, I cannot without her will grant
any such thing. Then (said she) tell me where she keeps, for I Will send to
her for it?

So envious has fortune been to my content, that yet that I cannot say, not
knowing it, because she rest her from my hands. Well, well, (replied the Lady,
chopping her words in the middle, and drowning them with tears) because I
ask, I see it is impossible I should know it, least I might receive some
little comfort thereby. And since the earth cannot afford me any, the second
thing that you for me must do, since you have promised it, and vowed by the
faith of a knight, is, that with this dagger you bereave me of my despised
life, seeing your sight gave me so many deaths: do not deny it, for you have
promised it, and if you do, be sure I Will travel through the world, proclaiming
your disloyalty.

And so she drew forth a dagger from under her gown, and with manly courage
she put it in his hands, saying. Through my breast hew forth a passage for my
soul (most cruel knight) and yet I will not have you make the wound upon my
heart, least you should hurt your self, modelde in the midst thereof. The
Greek took it, so amazed, that he knew not where he was. But the resolute
Lady immediately discovered her breasts, the purest work that ever nature
wroght. Make an end thou fellon-stealer of my liberty, to give me some content
by this expected death, and stain with blood this constant object of thine eyes.

Oh rare force of love (fair Ladies) whose power consisting on extremes,
makes all things else seem madness, being compared to it. Oh, who would not
be moved, seeing the Greek holding the dagger in his hand, sitting on his
bed, yet ranging with his thoughts on Lyriana, and the Lady urging him to
hasten the deadly stroke? Oh cruel inexecable knight (said she) will thou yet
in this torment me? make an end at once, with one sweet death to end the many
I suffer, Rosabell being the sole cause. In not doing this (most Princelesse
Lady) I neither commit disloyalty (said the Prince) nor break my word, for
I Will rather loose my life, then spill yours. So exceeding great was the greef
that suddenly surprised her, that stopping her breath, and benumming all her
artires and usual powers, she fell on the Greeks breasts. The greatest proof
of constancy was this, that ever knight was tried withal, and had he
continued it, no doubt but the example of it self had been a sufficient
memorating marble to record a deed so famous. I do not wonder if he began
something to yield, and join his face to hers, (fairer then Apollos) half
resolved to accomplish her request. Ere he was fully determined, which wanted
but little, she recovered her self, and seeing she was so used, conceived an
unhoped joy, feeling the heat of his cheeks on hers, nevertheless with many
sighs she said. How is it possible, tell me knight, thou should still
harbor such cruelty, as suffer me to languish in such pain, which thou
may remedy by taking away the life I abhor? That thou were cruel and
inexorable, far more then Hyrcanian beasts, poor hapless Eufronisa knows
it long sithence by experience. But that thou want loyalty and faith to
observe thy word, who can believe it of so mighty a Prince? I do confess
(fair Princess) answered he, I do offend my self not doing it, yet the
offense is greater against both, and woorthily I then deserve the title of a
cruel homecide: but that you may not longer complain of me, grant time till
to morrow, to be resolved in those extremes, and then I will reply to your
content. It pleases me (answered she) although one days stay will I fear
kill me outright, with this vehement and cruel grief. But I must suffer,
being borne to do it, and you disloyal and faithless knight, consider well
what you determine, for seeing you have denied me death, these hands shall be
guilty of it in your sight, when your prevention shall want speed to stay my
execution. And thereupon she went away, where had she stayed, and once again
urged it, no longer then that instant had been enough to answer, for the
Greek resembled his Grandfather in these affairs: he had already pondred the
Ladies beauty and her woorthes, in such sort, that some of her distilling
tears mollifying his obdured heart with such tenderness, that he forgot
Lyriana. His light vanished with her absence. With many wishes he desired the
happy appointed night. Little did he strive with his thoughts how to be
resolved, for ere she went away, was the haughty Britain in mind agreed.
With more rest steepes Eufronisa then Rosabell.

Accidents be these ordered by the blind God, understood of none but him,
although the soul suffers them, and yet cannot he, nor will conceive by whose
appointment it happens: a just reward for his disloyalty, since nothing should
have been able to make him err against his dear Lyriana, that with such
generositie received him for her espowse, her Lord and husband. The Lady
returned glad with the hope of her expected good to Selia, and told her every
thing that happened. With some content they entertained the expectation of her
joy. By chance, and it was a happy chance, the Lady took one of the crowns
that she had won in the Tent, and set it on her head, it was that which
Belisa gave her, to comfort her in her distress. Having it on, she seemed
far more beautiful, and somewhat elder. The virtue of the Crown began his
operation. Selia was amazed, and plucking her by the arm, said. Be still
(Madame) for see the fairest adventure in the world, for this Crown has power
to disguise the face, and believe me, you are not like Eufronisa. Peace fool
(said the Lady) it is but Loves devise, and thy wits conceits. Then do not
credit me (replied Selia) but the evidence wherewith I prove it. So she fetched
her a looking-glass, and setting it before her, said. Here (Madame) may you
see the Crowns effect. She could not but laugh, seeing her countenance
altered, and between them both they iarred, whether she so were fairest or
not. Then she remembered Belisas words in the Tent, that there she should find
remedy in her greatest necessity. She could not imagine whose semblance she
represented. They would no longer defer the knowledge of so happy business:
so hand in hand they went into a gallerie, called the Ladies Treasury, because
therein were the pictures of most in the world. This was a curiosity the king
for his pleasure had made. Many they saw most fair, and they were those that
in Grecia then flourished: but passing further, they perceived their deceit,
finding Lyriana, whose beauty she possessed. They read the title, which told
them she was Princess of Nyquea, to the greatest joy that ever Eufronisa did
conceive. She embraced Selia, saying.

Oh my Selia, the heavens now will take my part, for know, the Lady that has
captiuated this knight, is she whom I represent having on this Crown: and by
this devise, mean I (nothing thanking him) to fulfill my desire, although he
have promised me an answer to morrow. And if I can, with this deceit I Will crave
no answer, seeing it must come with so many pains and groans. And see my
Selia, how my suspicion at the fountain is verified, that he was not him he
said, for he is son unto the famous knight of Cupid, and betrothed to this
Princess, and so I think I may stand excused for this my boldness.

Well knew she it, that in the enchanted Tent told me, that though thereby I
should obtain greatest good, yet would it be intermixed with infinite troubles.
Joyfully returned the two Ladies unto their chamber, expecting the next morn,
to deceive him that was already deceived, repenting him of the disdain he
showed. The new crowned Lady entered his lodging, to give him the good time of
the day. The Greek had scarce seen her, when falling in the deceit, he took
her to be Lyriana, and with great tenderness he ran to her, saying. May it be
dear Lady, that in time of such sorrow you would be pleased to glad my heart
with your presence. How ill should I requite your love dear Lord (said the
mistaken Lady) if I did not procure your content, being able as at this time,
and though I be with you, yet none knows of it.

The Greek Lover embraced her, thinking he enjoyed his Lyrianas company,
which made Eufronisa most glad to see the effect of the pleasant deceit. What
happened by this meeting, is left to honest consideration. Only Galtenor
says, the Lady forgot her pains, enjoying many days the fruition of the
Greek Lovers bed under that devise, telling him that a wise man her great
friend, had for some time fetched her out of the enchantment, to accompany him
in that distress. Much bound did the Prince think himself to him for so good
a turn. So far wrought the virtue of the Crown, that all the time she
enjoyed him by that deceit, the Greek could comprehend no more, but took what
Fortune offered him.

At length Eufronisa judging it reason to let him go, feeling her self with
child, conferred with Selia that approved it. She took off the Crown,
kissing it a thousand times, for having enjoyed by it her hearts content. She
had no sooner set it by the other, when it was presently taken away, not
knowing by whose hands.

A voice she heard, which thus comforted her. Have patience Lady, for the
heavens will have it so, and till you know the fruit that by this deceit
shall rise, never look to see it more.

So soon as it was taken away, the Greek thought all that he had past but a
dream, having scarce the remembrance thereof. What time he had so spent he
knew not, but stayed for the Ladies coming to give her his answer, which she
determined to refuse, because she would not be bound unto him for it. She
entered his chamber with her damzell, thus speaking. How are you determined
(most cruel knight of the Flowers) that according to your resolution, she may
live that loves you. He answered. I am sure (excellent Princess) you have had
time to consider the wrong you do me, to enforce me break my word: yet I am
yours, and will be till the death, and so may you dispose of me at your
pleasure. Whereto she thus returned. Ever since (most glorious Prince of
Greece) that Fortune or the powers of Love made my heart obedient to your will,
I only procured but a grant from your mouth, by so many means as you have
seen, solely devised to affect you, and that you might know I love you. And
since you are assured thereof, and now to comfort my sorrows in your absence,
I will have you leave with me some remembrance, and let it be your dagger, for
which you shall have mine, that wherewith I entreated you to end my life, which
now I Will keep to employ it in your love: and believe me (brave Prince) while
this soul shall have power to breath, this affection shall never decay.

And therewith, with exceeding joy she embraced him, and taking his poniard,
she gave him hers, bidding him prepare his departure against the next morning.
The Prince did so, somewhat abashed to have been so importuned. He took his
leave of the Ladies not without many tears, for trust me, he was beloved in
the highest degree that ever knight was. A very rich Jewel the Lady gave him
at his departure. All armed in precious armor, and mounted on a lusty
Courser, given him by Eufronisa, he went out of the famous City of
Golthuerge, whose departure she took most heavily: yet some comfort she
conceived to be big with child by him.

Straight the two Ladies began to devise how they might keep close
Eufronisas travel, who being a stranger to such matters, grieved thereat.
Only this consolation she took, to look from the top of a high turret
toward Grecia, whither her joy was gone, calling it a heavy land to bring
forth such fruit.

Thus this bewtious Lady passed away the season until her time of delivery,
which being the first, she felt extremely. She was delivered of two boys, the
fairest that the heavens created: for he which was first brought forth, had on
the face of a Lady, fairer then the suns Splendour in his pride. The other a
heart thrust through with a dagger, with the wound so fresh as it seemed then
to bleed. Selia showed them her, saying. Rejoice fair Princess, with the
issue sprung from that deceit, which is such, that it frees you from any fault.
The tender mother embraced and kissed them, saying. Oh, may the powerful heavens
dear children of my heart, let you live to know your warlike father: for
though he used me with all cruelty, yet are you his sons. Bless you may the
Gods, and make you as happy as I am unhappy, although I may now call my self
the happiest on the earth, only by being your mother. So careful Selia, took
them away, and through a secret door in the garden, she gave them to the old
ancient knight, to see them nursed in some Village. At their carriage away, a
thousand kisses and blessings did the loving mother give them, as divining the
long time she should be ere again she saw them.

With much care did the old knight carry them to a Village, where he had
prepared a nurse for them. That he might pass more covertly, he cros^ the
Forest, bearing the children in two baskets on a little Ass, by the way he
rested, and took down the boys to quiet them from crying. Scarce had he
done, when a chased Lion ran thitherward, being hunted by sheepheards, with
their dogs. The knights age and the Lions sight, put him in such fear as he
fell down in a trance. As then the cruel beast meant not to take any pray, but
to escape his pursuers.

In this manner lay the old man and the children crying for hunger, when by
great chance a mighty Lord dwelling on the confines of Sylepsia, past that
way with his wife, that had been at the City to to see the tryumphes there.
With them was an ancient Lady, lately delivered of a child, that dyed in
Golthuerge. So soon as the Lords wife saw the children, and having none her
self, took such affection on the babes, seeing their wonderful beauty, that
she commanded the other Lady carefully to nurse and bring them up.

In this manner were these two Infants carried by this Lord, and tendered as
his own. He that had the Ladies face, they named Clarabell. And the other with
the wounded heart, Leobello. Who so grew in years and beauty, that they were
accounted children of the Godds.

Where we will leave them, nourished by the good Knight Sergio, for so was he
called, omitting also their afflicted mothers sorrow for their loss: and a
while must remember the mighty dispayring knight Claridiano of the Sphere,
already departed from Croatia.

CHAP. XVII. What adventure the Prince Claridiano met in the I Will of Creet,
where he disinchaunted his Uncle Claramant.
FOr a while (fair Ladies) I am constrained to leave Loves amorous discourses,
and trust me, with some grief: but having to treat of many things, I must
describe them with diverse styles. And now the warlike Greek, with an
Adamantiue power, attrackts me to lighten him from the dark center of
oblivion: who departing from the most bewteous Venus, and gallant Laysa,
lanched into the Adriaticke sea, down the which, he Nauigated four days:
and the fifth, he crossed into the Affrican, and happening on no adventure
deserving memory, he put into the Carpachian and Egeum seas: where sailing
some fifteen days, his enchaunted Bark ran it self on land, in the I Will of
Creete, (now Candy) the happiest and fertilest in all those parts, because
Jove was borne and reigned there.

A shore leaped he and Palisandro his Squire, and landed their horses. The
commonest way that they could judge, they took, and did ride above an hour,
meeting with none to learn in what land they were. Under a high Pyne they
dismounted to rest and pass the heat of the afternoon, eating of such
provision as Palisandro had carried from the Bark.

The pleasantness of the country much delighted the Prince, although it was
such little comfort to the pains he suffered, that were it not for Palisandros
consolations, he had without doubt run into excessive dangers.

As he sat down, certain sheepheards came that way, driving their flocks to
feed on the downs, below a hillocke near to that place. They told him, how
he was in the famous I Will of Creet, of which he had heard so many things. It
much pleased him, to hear the sheepheards name the adventure of the three
Pypes: for though he had heard thereof, he never knew it to be in Creete: to
be assured thereof, he demanded of them thus. Can you tell me discreet
sheepheards, the beginning of this adventure? who made it, and for whom? That
which now is said thereof (Sir Knight) is, that not many years since, this
adventure appeared here, where (it is said) there is only one of the famousest
Princes of the world inchaunted: whose strength is also given out far to
exceed Theseus, so celebrated in this I Will, for killing of the Minotaure. So
difficult is the entrance to the Fountain, called of the three Pypes, that
none, though many mighty knights procured it, have arrived thither. Only
there is one entrance, so surely guarded, as it is thought impossible to pass
that way by force of arms, all the rest is immured with so high a wall of
stones, cut so smoothe, that there is no ascending nor entrance, but through
the difficult passage, which is a little beneath your hill. I do greatly thank
you (kind sheepheards) for your courteous relation, and will requite it in any
thing I may.

So they went away, leaving him conferring with his squire about the proouing
thereof, for he much desired to know the Prince that was within. The squire
would not gainsay it, knowing his valor sufficient for greater matters.

Then having a while rested, they followed the sheepheards direction, within a
little time they came in sight of the stupendous Edefice. Never before had the
Prince seen a thing more worthy admiration then it: for it seemed to check
the most highest Clouds. The passage to it, was along a fair Valley, a stones
cast in length, whose entrance was through a Lane of mighty trees, whose
innumerable thick branches joining together, did well declare the difficult
passage.

Without any fear Trebatios haughty Nephew arrived thither, not far fro the
Grove that leaded to the Fountain, of which the adventure took his name. The
breadth of the way that the Prince went, would suffer but sir knights to go it
together: the which, as one prepared to the fight, the mighty youth traced. So
coming to the end of the Lane where the Valleys entrance began, he was not so
amazed with the battle he had against the hellish beast at Merlins sepulcher,
as seeing here one of the fearefullest winged Serpents that might be. He stayed
himself, to bethink him by what means he might combat with the ugly
monster. In the end he resolved to be best on foot, the better to use his
nimblenesse and weapons, so did he dismount, giving Palisandro his horse, and
taking his Lance in his hand, and with his heart in heaven, he marched toward
the infernal monster: the which seeing him come, stretched her self on the
ground, and raising half her body, hissing fearfully, crept against the
Greek, who with that discreetnesse he used in all his affairs, settling
himself strongly on his left leg, hurled his Lance at her. Upon her
inpenitrable scales wherewith she was armed, it fell, rebounding back as if it
had lighted upon a Rock. Nevertheless, it made her bend her head as low as
the ground. With a nimble leap he got within the beasts Cabin, where there
began such hideous outcries, that he was about a thousand times to turn back,
but judging it base cowardice, with his sword drawn he expected the serpents
coming. Never was that I Will witness of a more brauer Combat. In it the Greeks
dexterity auailes him, for the edge of his sword can make no impression in
her. He found it, when at his first assault, he gave her a mighty blow on the
scales. Whipping the earth with her tail, came the furious Serpent against the
Greek youth: and being near him, with her mouth he would have hoysed him
aloft: he defended himself stepping aside, so scaping her claws, but not her
tail, wherewith she gave him such ayerke, that she floong him far without
the entrance he had won.

More furious then she rysed the Greek Hercules bruised with the fall, and
with hasty paces he ran again unto the entrance, but there he found the
Serpent. Fearelesse, the valiant Greek approached to her, holding his sword
sure between his hands. He had scarce made an offer, when the devilish
furious Serpent snatched at his shield with one of her fangs, dragging him
thereby, within her inchaunted pale, until she brake the girts. It grieved not
the Prince to be there, nor yet to have lost his shield, but with his sword in
both hands, stayed for her that furiously came flying to him; she stretched
forth her paw to take him with her sharp claws. With much heed the Prince
expected her, and being near, with a flourish, he gave her a most strong
blow. It was venturous, and that which gave him the victory. For discharging
it very near her breast, where the scales were not so hard, it mortally
wounded her. No hellish fury is now comparable to her being wounded, for
striking the earth, she flew to the Greek, whose courage and strength could
not now defend him from her tail: for therewith she struck him to the ground,
where also he could not escape her tallents. His armor saved his life, though
some of the joints ran into his flesh. The Greek in this extremity forgot not
his dagger, which drawing forth with his left hand, he stabbed it thrice under
her neck, with which wounds she let him go. But she had no sooner done it,
when she returned upon him, opening wide her infernal mouth. He strongly held
his left arm, and holding the point of his dagger upwards, he ran it into her
mouth, whereon she thinking to pray, twixt her jaws, she thrust it into her
brains. With some trouble the Greek drew it forth, glad of the good success:
yet before he got clear, or that she fell, with her tail she gave him the
last yerke, in such manner, that had she been able to second an other, he had
been in great danger. He fell on the ground, voiding much blood through his
mouth. The like to that the Greek Lover never had received. He rose, because
carelessly he would not loose what his valor assured. And saw the serpent
weltring in her own goare, till by little and little she dyed, to the Greeks
exceeding content: who to rest, sat him down under a lofty oak that grew in
the end of that Lane, and took off his helm to take the air, that then
freshly blew. On the bark of the Oak he saw a scrowle, which he read thus.

To thee Knight, whom Fortune has so favored, as ouercomming the fearful
keeper of the entrance unto the three Pyped Fountain to let thee here arrive
to rest, have courage, for it must end what yet does want. The words did not
so much fear him, as the doubt whether he should have to do with knights on
whom he might better show his valor. Long would not Archysiloras Lover rest,
for presently rising he took his sheeld, and casting it at his back, went
down the Valley. Great comfort did he receive with the byrds sweet harmony
that welcomed him, where Philomelas sad complaints increased his, and the
Larkes sweet song (the mornings Herault) eased his travel. A more pleasanter
place the Prince had never seen, for besides the flowrie Tapestry, the
diversity of all manner of fruitful trees were so many, and in such order
placed, that Nature mistress of invention, seemed there to strive with Art
(the adorner of her wants) for sovereignty.

Every thing the prince considered not, omitting the dear remembrance of his
souls commandresse, fair Archysilora. He made such haste, that about the
second hour after midday, he arrived to the famous Fountain, whose proud
making, much amazed him. For the Pypes through which the water ran, were three
mighty savages, cut in Alablaster, whiter then the snow (upon the Appenines)
all gilded and inamelled. Under the three pypes was a fair great Cesterne,
where she little birds flew to drink. Before it stood a brazen Pillar with
this insciption.

The unknown Castle shall be seen by none, until the dispayring Lion,
freeing the passage to his own bloods cost, shall arrive unto this Pillar:
where to pass forward, he must leave here some piece of his Armor. The Prince
a good while doubted which it should be. In the end he resolved to leave his
sheeld. He hung it on the Pillar, and straight went on, discovering before him
the stately buildings, so high, that they seemed to reach unto the middle
region of the air, it was all so covered with Gold, that it scarce admitted
any sight. There was but one door, the which the Prince found fast locked,
whereat with the pummell of his sword he knocked very hard. At the noise, a
window opened above the gate, out of which there looked a Lady all in Armor,
saving the head. The sight astonished the Greek, thinking it was Archysilora,
who with some anger, said. What seek you (audacious Knight) for none may enter
here, but that lives to love without hope? half trembling, the Prince
answered. I do confess, how I offend you (most excellent Queen of Lyra) by
demanding a reward for my faith sacrificed to thy gallantnesse: but yet if with
death or endless dishonor you will still be revenged on me, appoint the manner
of the vilest death you can, and I will be he that shall most willingly
perform that sacrifice.

It is well knight (replied the Lady) now you have committed a fault, you
think by confession to extenuate your descrued punishment. So overcome with
contemplation of his Lady stood the Greek, that he heard not the opening of
the gate, with as much horror, as if a peale of ordinance were discharged.
Through it, came forth two Knights richly armed: and also after them, followed
the bewteous Claramant, apparelled in cloth of Gold, whose presence would
have made Narcissus leave his self-love to stay and dote on him.

Having their Lances in their rests, and as swift as the wind, they ran
against the careless Prince, that was busied gazing on his beloved
Archysilora. So valiant were his two adversaries, and so desirous to hit him,
that they lost not their encou^ters, which were so mighty and sudden, that
when he would have warded them, he found himself on the ground, so sore
bruised with the fall, that he could not rise when he would. So eager is not an
Eagle to defend he yoonglings, as the Knights turned upon the Prince, and both
at once again hit him, but being warned by the former negligence, stoutly
resisted them, that they could not overthrow him, but made him stagger
backwards. So skillful were the Knights of the Castle, that the one seeing the
ill success of their encounter, like a second Mars, flung his Lance at him. He
mist him: for in the midst of his amorous breast, he gave him the greatest
blow that ever he received, and was forced to stay himself with his left hand
on the ground. Never before did the Prince judge himself in more danger,
seeing the knights so active and strong.

They could not so prevail with their dexterity, but the Greek with his,
reached him that hurled his Lance, such a blow, that senseless he struck him
on his horse neck. He ran to pluck him down, but he was stayed in the
attempt: for the other knowing he could not come in time to rescue him, settled
himself on his styrrops, and out of his arm let his Lance fly, like a
killing Comet: it struck him on the one side of the closing of his armor,
where Galtenor says, it wounded him a little: but Lirgandeo affirms, he was
felled to the earth, yet howsoever he could not perform his attempt: for all
he much procured it. Now the two companions being spearelesse, drew forth two
swords vnequalled in all the world, and with them arrived upon the Greek, that
expected them: A floorish discharged one upon his helm, which he grievously
felt, and the other somewhat lower thrust at him fiercely: which he dearly
did aby: for Claridiano more furious then thundering lightning, avoided it
stepping aside, leaving him hanging upon his horse. Thinking to have slain
him, with both hands he laid on his shoulders. The Prince imagined he had cleft
him in the midst, but he could not be vanquished on horseback: who therefore
returned with more courage then before, and began to help one another against
the Prince, with such strength and lightness, as he thought himself in
manifest danger, doubting the event of the battle. So one assaulted him with
his Coursers swiftest course, which carreir he lost: for Archisiloras Lover a
little yielding sidewaies, cast his strong arms about him, and maugre all his
forces, pulled him from his saddle to the ground, much glad thereof, for so he
might better deal with them. Who were so instructed to aid one an other, that
he which was on foot, would neither loose nor step from Claridiano, till he saw
his companion run at him, and then with a swinge he turned him against the
horse breast, who encountered him so strongly, that he made him stumble backwards
like to fall.

And more to help him down, he on foot thrust at him in his amaze, two such
strong points, that Claridiano never did what he was now enforced unto, for
neither courage nor valor preuayling, he fell down. But like Anteus towching
on the earth, he rose fresher and fiercer, that he on horsbacke escaped not
free for his encounter: for as he turned, Claridiano as wrathful as a hungry
Lion, let drive at him with so puissant a blow, that whether he would or no,
he field him from his Saddle down to the grassie plain: where it added
pleasure to content, seeing the fortunate and unconquered Greek enter, and
retire as he would. Wearied he had them, although himself was no less: for
they of the Castle were of the valiantest in the world, and about that matter,
would not refuse Mars his challenge.

Crossing his sword inwards, the one assaulted the Greek, it was but an offer,
for going toward it, he stayed his arm, and bearing it lower, struck him on
the legs, and on the left thigh he gave him the greatest blow that he had
received in all that battle: for though it did not wound him, yet it put him in
such pain that he could not stir that leg. The good effect of the stroke,
perceived they of the Castle, and that they might take the advantage, before
the pain left him, they began to hammer him with more strength and speed,
then the Cyclopes did when they forged Aeneas Armor. The Prince much feared
being so lame, but seeing it concerned him no less then his life, dragging
that leg, performed wonders.

The first Battle that ever Claramant had seen was this: the which he judged
to himself would be the last, so fierce and terrible it was. He said, more
cunning skill nor valor could not be wished in one knight, the^ what he in
the yallow showed. It was a matter worthy the Prince, for as he was, he never
suffered them to close within him, though they nothing else procured, still
keeping them out with his intolerable cruel blows, which made them kiss the
earth, sometimes with their hands, and then with their knees. And again other
times, all at once.

In the end he flung at him that had wounded him: quick he was, but
Archysiloras Champion was possessed with extremest of his rage, and therefore
reached him on the top of his Helm, in such manner, that in despite of him,
he tumbled him on the green breast of his mother earth. At him with a thrust
ran the other, which Claridiano striking aside, he struck him with both
hands on his arms, that he could no more use his sword. He closed with him,
and hoysing him from the ground, flung him down on his back, near where his
Companion was. Upon them with his naked Dagger busseled the Lover: for having
exceedingly incensed him, he forgot the pity and accustomed clemency which he
used toward his vanquished.

Before him stepped the bewteous Claramant, saying. To end a Combat with death
(most valiant knight) whose conquest is so manifest, will rather blemish the
Victors victory, then dignifie his fame: Wherefore I pray you, give me those
Knights as by you are vanquished.

The haughty Greek lifted up his head to answer him, for through the anger
of the fight, he had not noted the Donzell. So looking on him now, he was
astonished, thinking he saw himself: for were he a little elder, none could
have distinguished them, nor yet from the Emperor Alphebo, for they resembled
so much one another, that in the beginning he verily judged him to be his
father, which opinion his tender years frustrated. And yet supposing him some
kinsman of his, did grant it, and would have done had it been far more. But
that was enough, had he been any other then Claridiano, to make him never
return to Greece. For scarce had the Donzell raised them with his hand, when
as fresh as in the beginning, they let fly at him, together two such blows,
that they made him kneel on the ground.

It extremely grieved him to be so mocked, yet was not he angry against the
Donzell, imagining through lack of judgment he had done it. He animated
himself to this new Combat, although with some doubt to see his adversaries
nimbler and lustier then at the first, and himself somewhat weary. Clasping his
sword strongly in his hand, he went against them, making them know, nothing
could bereave him of his assured victory. So closing with the one, with his
shoulders he thrust him from him, like a loosened arrow from a bow. And with a
leap he turned on the second. His speed could not save him, for the furious
Greek cut away half his helm, with part of his head. This blow gladded him,
resolving to deny the Donzell any thing he should ask within that place. By
this arrived the other, but what auailes it, for the Greek Mars gives no blow
which they feel not within their flesh. They had kind Ladies in this second
fight lost the virtue of the Enchantment, only helping themselves with their
natural strength, which was very great. And yet it preuailes not against him
that was borne a Conqueror.

End this cruel war would the Greek, calling himself coward to prolong it
so long: And avoiding one of their blows, he ran at him with the brauest
thrust that in all his life he executed: for piercing shield, breast and back,
he tumbled him dead at his feet, to Claramants great admiration. The second
encouraged himself for all he was alone and sore wounded, it was but a little
lengthning of his life, to endure a more cruel death. For the Prince having
Fortune by the Front, struck at the top of his helm, yet not with the
strength he might, but he yielding back his head, covered it with the shield:
whereat the Greek turning his arm, discharged it on his thighs so mightily,
that almost he cut one clean off. Before he could setle himself, he ran upon
him, and with incredible haste (least Claramant should interrupt him) he reaft
him of his life: himself remaining so weary, that his legs could not then
sustain him.

All his life time he most esteemed this victory, for it cost more labor, more
blood, and more trouble, then any other of that quallitie. He went toward the
beauteous Donzell, elder then him by six years, but having suffered no cares,
nor pains, nor love passions, made him seem younger then his cousin: who took
off his helm, discovering that Mars his countenance of his. Either rejoiced to
see the other, thinking they saw one another in a glass. So Claridiano spoke
first, saying. I entreat you (fair Donzell) so the heavens make you happy in
all attempts, to tell me the cause of your being within so defended a place,
and also who you are? for considering how dearly your sight has cost me,
(although I think it well bestowed) you are bound to tell me: whereto
Claramant replied.

Of neither (sir knight) may I resolve you, unless I receive the order of
Chivalry, and in faith it not a little greeues me, that I cannot herein
satisfy you. Such desire had the Greek to know him, as he was determined to
give it him: but remembering how he was before mocked, thus answered. Nay sir,
if your knowledge must cost so much, I will not more wish it, for in not
performing as yet your request, I am sure I do you some service. Why then (said
Claramant) fare you well, for I Will return unto my Castle, and in faith, sorry
to be denied in my first request I ever made to any knight. Go with me from
hence (worthy Donzell, returned the Greek) and you shall receive it with
such solemnity, as is due unto your person. The gallant youth answered not,
but in great haste returned to the Castle, where had he entered, his cousin had
not been able to have fetched him thence, for being with arms, none of all
his kinsmen did excel him. But the wise Nabato knowing it concerned his son
Don Eleno, with his charms and exorcismes, clowded with mists and fogges all
those shining buildings, so astonishing the Donzel, that thinking to enter the
Castle, he mist his way, and took it toward the Fountain of the three
pypes, where being a dry, and hearing the waters running noise, he drank. But
he had scant touched it, when such horribible and hideous noise was heard, that
Claramant was half afraid. The end of that adventure consisted on Claramants
arriving to the fount, to take down the shield which his cousin had hung on
the pillar, on condition of his passage.

So all that mighty edefice vanished away, made by the great Magitian
Lirgandeo, as the second part related, wherein he had enchanted this valiant
Prince, when he took him from the barbarous Scythians that belonged to
Bramarant, who stole him from his mother in the woods of Grecia, as in the
third book of the first part is expressed. Alone did the Greek find himself
in a broad field, and Palisandro by him with the horses. So looking for the
Donzel, he spied him in great haste entering into a thick wood of trees, that
stood in the valley. He rose and went thither, at such time as Claramant only
with his shield, had thrust himself within, whose sight he quickly lost.
Accompany him he would, but it was in vain, for a strong contrary wind blew
him out, where he was forced to expect the success of that adventure reserved
to the Donzel.

CHAP. XVIII. How Claramant entered into Theseus walk, where he won his
armor: and what else happened.
WIthin the intricate grove (sweet Lady) we left the Donzel Claramant, whose
disinchauntment being exceedingly desired of every one, made me (to please
those desires) a breuiate the presedent combats, although Lyrgandeo does not a
little enlarge his discourse therein. But my self wishing no less his
enlargement, then any other, forced me to enter him with such brevity, within
the way-confused wood, wherein having lost himself, Trebatios son wandered
three days alone, only with the Greeks shield. This was that crooked
intricable mancion, in whose contriuing, Dedalus at Minos petition, king of
Greece, did show the sharpness of his skill and wit, wherein the famous
Minotaure was enclosed: whose original sprung from she beastly blind love of
Pasiphae the Queen, for the king being employed in the Troyan wars, she
with inhumane appetite lusted after a white bull, that was among her herds:
and not knowing how to accomplish so foul a deed, she recommended it to
Dedalus: who with his wit, being the Oracle of his age, contrived an
artificial Cow of wood, wherein he put the Queen, covered with the hyde of
another which the Bull most followed, by which means she satisfied her lust,
ingendring the Minotaure which the Poets feign: and yet Arsanio in the fourth
of his Problemes, approoues with wonderful arguments, the possibility of the
act: and says that at the time of the monsters birth, returned the king, who
would not, although the Queen died of the labor kill the beast, but rather
commanded him to be kept in a place most difficult to come forth, reserving
him there, for what he further intended. For making cruel war upon the
Athenians, in revenge of his son Androgeus death, whom they flew, he
compelled them in satisfaction thereof, yearly to send him seven men, and as
many maids, to be devoured by the Minotaure. Whose form was both of man and
Bull, and of proportionable bigness. For some few years lasted this cruel
custom, until Theseus coming, whose strength was nothing inferior to
Hercules, in so much, that some will have him to be he.

Being young, he aided Hercules against the Amazones, whom after they had
conquered, he married their Queens sister. He slew the Tyrant of Thebes, that
would not bury his dead kinsmen. And in the Marathonian fields he slew the
wild Bull that wasted all Attica. This was he that ravished Helena the first
time, whose tender age might then well acquit her of the error. He descended
into hell with Perithons, to steal Proserpyne, where he lost his friend. This
by lot was sent to Creete as food unto the Minotaure. But the beauteous Ariadne
affecting the youth, gave him a clue of thread, which should (after he had
slain the beast) lead him out.

He ingratefully requited both her love and life good turn, leaving her alone
in Niosia I Will, which act of unthankfulness so grieved the most wise Dedalus,
that he enchanted him in the laborinth, in recompense of his ingratitude,
suffering eternal pains yet to few, in respect of his deserts. He more
enlarged the mazed house, that his liberty might be more difficulter. The
which he made so singular, as at the least it equalled that in Egypt, and far
excelling king Porsenas which he builded in Italy for his sepulcher: which was
so fearful, that he commanded before he dyed, he should not being dead, be
there left without company, and so every year, many being put therein, were
enforced finding no way out, to associate him in his death. In this
inextricable wood, did Dedalus place Theseus, where the Greek youth had lost
himself, not knowing how, nor which way he had got in there. It grieved him
not, for his invincible heart encouraged him to greater matters. The fourth day
of his wandering through the wood, he came unto a fair walk, whose Covert of
green Iuie, reaching from tree to tree on either side, was so thick, that
neither sun nor star could penetrate it at no time, and therefore it was
naturally most cold, besides that Dedalus with his skill had made it more,
when there he left the ungrateful Thenian, with freezing cold to extinguish
the burning heat, wherewith he loved Phedra, forsaking her sister that had
given him no less then his life, helping him to the bottom of the thread, by
which he issued out of the Laborinth. So he endured exceeding torments, minding
on nothing, save that none should pass that way, fearing that some one would
vanquish the Minotaure, that kept somewhat more within.

Scarce could the Greek Prince endure the coldness of the Lane, and but that
he judged it base fear, he had returned back: yet encouraging himself,
valiantly with his sheeld, he passed on forwards, till he met with the mighty
Theseus, clad al in most rich green armor, garnished of tawnie Lions, beset
with many rich and invaluable stones.

A foot stood the fierce Athenian, leaving against a mighty steel
battle-axe, with a sword girded at his side, looking with such a stern aspect,
as Mars had feared him. But Trebatios son borne to master him, undauntedly
stepped to him with such courtesy, as he thought his person merited, saying.
Most valiant knight, I would gladly find a passage from a place so yrkesome as
this, and if along this Lane be the way, I entreat you suffer me freely to
pass. With admiration of his gallant disposition, did Hercules companion thus
reply. Most willingly fair Donzell, I would pleasure you in this, or any thing
else, but my ingratitude bringing me hither, forces me to let none pass this
way, only to have more company (being alone) to associate me.

And so may you seek an other way, although I believe there is none but this.
Why then (said our new Mars) I shall be constrained to procure it, and so rest
nothing beholding to you for it. Whereupon as if he were better armed then the
Athenian, well covering himself with his sheeld, paced toward him, who became
more fiercer, then when he descended into the earthes black Center, seeing the
boldness of the youth so young and armorlesse, presuming to win what only was
committed to his strength, in so many dangers and haughty enterprises
approved. He raised aloft his axe, thinking to have cleft him in the midst.
But the gallant youth leaping aside, meant not only to make him loose his
blow, but to close with him, having an eye unto his sword, hoping that if he
had it, to assure his victory therewith.

At this time he mist of his intent, for Theseus was none of those that
admitted any such brauados: but in the midst of the stroke, before his
adversary could enter, he stayed the axe, discharging such a blow on his
sheeld, with the point, that he enforced him back swifter then he came, with
greater pain on his breast, for the sheeld striking there, made him almost
breathless. He had not effected this blow, when with the blade he offered an
other. He floorished it above his head so mightily, that had not the Greek
fallen on his, he had been clean parted in two. He saw himself within deaths
claws, for the very wind the weapon yielded in his passage, was enough to
strike down an other less valianter then he. He would not then ketch at his
sword, because the other ouerwharted him in it, but rather with the nimble
skill his tutors had taught him, seemed to stay a blow, lifting his sheeld on
high, the Athenian believing that he would, and that therewith he should
terminate that controversy, well settled on his left leg, he let fly at him a
downright blow. It is credible, that hitting him with the axe, he had
divided not him alone, but the strongest Rock. He that should liberate the
Scythian Lady, would not so trust to his sheeld: for as the axe descended,
swifter then thought, he closed with him, thrusting himself under his arms,
and with his, he astonished him with a blow running his sheeld against his
head, whereat the other for fear of giving back, resisted him with all his
strength, and so ayding his left leg outward, our new warrior met with the
swords handle, the which without more adoo, he easily drew forth, whose blade
yielded such splendour as the Prince was amazed.

It was many years since ye Athenian had not seen his naked sword, which now
viewing in his enemies power, there is no Lion in fierceness comparable to
him. Needs would the Greek youth try his conquered weapon before he got from
him, discharging it with all his strength on that side it hung. His armor it
cut not, for the world had none better, but it so tormented his leg and
thigh, that he could not stand thereon. So Claramant stepping from him, said.
Now shall thou know (knight) how much better it had been for thee, to have let
me freely pass, and keep thy weapons, then to be without them, for they now
shall make me way. Why then stay (said he) discourteous youth, and thou shall
see whether the having of my sword can defend thee from Theseus wrath, at whose
presence al Plutos kingdom trembled. And so he struck at him a most mighty
blow. He could not so defend it, but it fell upon one side of his shield,
cutting it away: and made him thrice turn about. But suddenly he recovered,
and firmed himself against his adversary, that with his axe point came
against him. He turned away and escaped it, discharging his sword upon his
helm. It sounded like a bell, making a displeasant music chattering of his
teeth.

Ere Theseus could recover himself, he gave him another, it was it which gave
him the victory, by the passing with the point between the closing of his
armor. Cutting his privy coat of male, the sharp blade entered unto his
flesh: had he not feared the axe, and a little forwarder thrust his arm, he
had slain the Athenian: yet it was the first time that the ungrateful Lover
saw his own blood, whose sight added such fury to his fury, that now he
will not proceed like a skillful knight, but let his blows fly at randon,
which put the youth in more danger and advised care to shun them, assuring
himself, that blow which took him full, would be his death: and therefore he
behaved himself with such dexterity, as his cousin had he been there, could
have done no more.

Oh it was a spectacle worthy the Greek Theater, for the haughty Athenian
fiercer then when he slew the Tyrant Creon, procured to give him but one blow,
the which with singular agilitie the Greek shunned. There is no Roe in
swiftness like to him, for entering and retiring at his pleasure, sometimes he
wounded Theseus, and every time he took him full with his famous sword, he
made him tremble like the top of a high proud pyne, shaken with the voice of
heaven. He himself received some, but they were on his shield, the which in
that dangerous battle saved his life. Six hours they have fought without
rest. They were in the end (sweet Mistress) made of flesh and blood, and must
feel the excessive pain and trouble, so at once without any word, they
withdrew to breath: for although the Greek was not wounded, yet his much labor
had over much wearied him. Against himself bitterly exclaimed the Athenian,
seeing himself both matched and wounded, by one knight without armor. The
Greek had no cause yet to complain, for this was his first battle, yet he
encouraged himself to end it to his glory. As he walked up and down, he past
by an oak, whereon he read an inscription to this effect.

Dismay not, oh thou valiant Knight, that by thy valor haste arrived to
ungrateful Theseus walk, but take courage, for vanguishing him, and winning
his armor, thou do arrive (this being thy first battle) unto the highest
top of honor, reserving in thy power, the hopes of greatest joys. Having read
the letters, the Greek thought nothing what he had before him, considering
the promise redounding by the victory. No longer would he rest, for the
desired end of the adventure will not suffee him more to breath: and so
covering himself with the remainder of his shield, and strongly gryping his
sword in his hands, went against the Athenian, saying. Come knight, let us end
our battle, for it is a shame it should so long last, being but between two.
Theseus replied, taking his axe twixt both his hands. There is not any, but at
his first semblance would have trembled like an Aspen leaf: yet the haughty
youth fearelesse, confronted him. His axe flourisht, the Athenian thinking to
have hit him with the blade. But the gallant youth, whose strength excelled
his, with his sword struck it away: within him he stepped, letting fly a
mighty thrust at his breast, whose force made him fencelesse give back,
drawing his battle axe after him. Trebatios son followed him hard, and ere
he could raise it from the ground, he laid on the visor of his helm such a
blow, that he thought the firmament had fallen, so many stars he saw about
his ears. So abashed to be so handled was Ariadnes reiecter, for even as he
dragd his axe, he hoyst it aloft, that the Greek could not escape the blow,
nor shun a wound upon his right side, and yet but little, for feeling the
blade, he yielded to the left side, and let it pass, and seeing his wished
occasion, presently closed with him. The Athenian durst not let go the axe, for
therein consisted his strength: whereby unable to help himself as he would in
this strife, surely Claramant won ground of him. A better wrasle could not
almost be seen, for the Prince being unarmed, and therefore nimbler, trippes,
tangles, and vntangles his legs with more dexterity: which his adversary
could not do, although by mere strength he valiantly resisted. The Greek
offering to take the axe from him, snatched at it, but too strong so easily to
part from it, was the Athenians hold.

Oh, who would not wish to see this brave contention, for ungrateful Theseus to
defend it, fetches forces from his already fainting mind, and the Greek to
win it, imployeth the utmost of his valor. Thus contending, they were almost
at the end of the Alley, when Trebatios issue with a fine slight got the
victory. For seeming to let go the axe, loosened a little his hold, and
himself stepping something back. The Athenian did the like, thinking so to
reassure his axe: but the Greek settling himself strongly on his legs, stepped
in, and on the sudden wroong it out of his hands. No sooner had he done it,
but all that abhorred freezing Alley, seemed on a light burning fire. The
thundrings, lightnings, and hideous shoutes, not a little amazed the Prince,
and him that was without, no less, who not able to endure, imagining the
haughty Donzell to be in some danger, entered through those intangling paths.
By the Athenians loosing of his axe, the passage was free, so far as the
Donzell was. So he arrived when his invincible Uncle gazed on the armor Theseus
had left him upon a table of Iaspar, where there stood a Pillar with an Epitaph.
He then quieted himself, seeing it was the knight that had disinchanted him.
They embraced with such love, as if they knew the consanguinitie between them.
Now may you (sir knight) said Claramant, seeing fortune has given me armor
and weapons, let me receive the order of them at your hands. In all things I
desire to satisfy your content, fair Donzell (replied the dispairing Prince)
wishing it no less then mine. But now rest a while, for we shall have time
enough to do it, for I believe the winning of these arms, have cost you no
small trouble.

Some indeed it has (said Clarament) but being so well acquittanced with the
enjoying of your sight, and these rich arms, I account it well bestowed. But
let us read this scrowle, for I fear we have more to do to get from this
accursed place. So hand in hand they went to the Pillar, and read the
description thus.

When the two most fiercest Lions shall meet in the valley of ungrateful
Theseus, the one winning his armor, and receiving the order of knighthood of
him that gave him his liberty, and vanguishing the Minotaure, then shall the
enchantments of ancient Dedalus have end. It greatly rejoiced Claridiano, to
see that he might safely give him the order of Chivalry. And with one accord
he armed and knighted him at once. They fitted him so well, as if of purpose
they had been forged for him. Never had Archisiloras Lover seen a gallanter
knight: somewhat bigger he was then his cousin, but not taller: wherefore the
wisemen always doubted whether was the valianter, for their particular battles
one against the other, it could never be seen. But rather on foot with the
battel-axe, no knight could abide the strength of Claramant. Few times carried
he shield, the better to play with his are, and therefore was he surnamed the
Cruel, for with it he spilled more blood then the fierce Affrican. With
exceeding joy did he gyrt his sword, embracing him with exceeding signs of
love. They vowed such great amity, that their knowledge of uncle and cousin,
could not more augment it. A while they rested, that with more courage the new
knight might prove the adventure of the Minotaure. So much desired the late
armed Prince, to see the beast, as he rose, saying. It is time (sir knight) to
end this business, for being so surely backed, were the enterprise more
difficult, the victory is most certain. His cousin followed him, glad to see
his brave and gallant gate. His are he carried on his shoulder, the best weapon
that the world contained, and his sword gir^ by his side. In this manner they
paced toward a stately building that stood in midst of the field. Narrow was
the entrance to it, but within if had so many intricate ways, that they could
not devise where it might end. Enter into it would the vallerous Claramaunt,
recommending himself unto the immortal Gods protection.

The like did Claridiano, committing him to his keeping, that with a (F^at)
framed the whole heavens, earth, and vast seas. With tender kindness the two
kinsmen embraced each other, which done, the haughty youth prepared to enter
the inextricable house of Dedalus. What within happened him, and the battle
fought with the monster, deserves a new Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. How Claramant entered the laborinth of Creete, where he slew the
Minotaure, and the glorious end he gave the adventure.
I Doubt not (gallant Ladies, beauties ornaments) but that neither the
excellencies of your perfections, whose powerful virtue can only with the
sight command the greatest heart, nor yet the tender pity attending on your
sex, will not with timorous fear appall your gentle minds, reading these
fierce accidents of stern Mars. And then I hope you will not conceive less
pleasure with the bloody battles wherein I am entangled, then at Cupids
amorous discourses. But where they seem offensive, pass them over, though love
have ordained them, and yet respecting the cause, I know you will not condemn
the effect. For although now you see the Greek Prince busied with cruel
wars, too soon he will be led where he shall confess, there is no good
where the little blind God does not reign, and this even when aided with
nothing but his strength, he shall set free the fair Princess of the
Scythians, from her strong inchauntment. But before that happens, attend, and
you shall hear what him befell entering the blind Laborinth.

His axe he carrid before, and with vnremoouing steps, he entered the
way-confused habitation, where he so often turned and returned, coming back
when as he thought himself to go forward, and crossing such by-waies at every
second pace, that when he judged to be at the end, he found himself at the
door. Sometime he heard, not without great amazement, the noise of voices
crying: The rich armor thou haste won bold knight, shall not avail thee to
get from our dwelling, in recompense of thy presumption to disquiet us: and
then felt he such mighty blows, that often made him set his hands and knees
upon the ground: but considering how little he had done by winning the armor,
and how the other valiant knight expected him, so animated him to endure those
huge strokes, which none but he could have suffered. Weary and tired, he at
last came where he saw a little light, that issued from a high cranny of the
wall. It gladded him, for by it, he found a way that brought him unto a fair
large yard, about whose walls were many pictures and stories so naturally
drawn, that they somewhat eased his pain.

By them he understood Pasiphaes beastly access unto the Bull. It so disliked
him, that he turned away his eyes, being offended, not with the pictures, but
with what it represented. He saw Theseus cladde in those arms he won of him,
enter the Laborinth, with the thread tied to his arm, and at the door the two
beautiful sisters, that with fear did stay for him. The cause was, they
loved, and where that passion is, none can live secure, fearing also the good
it enjoys. A little beyond, he saw how ill repayed Ariadne was, being left
to the mercy of the winds among wild beasts. To such pity was he moved
toward the Lady, that casting up his eyes to heaven, he said. Oh cruel
knight, unworthy the name of Theseus, employing so ill those parts the
heavens has adorned thee with, but especially against a weak tender Lady,
whom if reason had been thy guide, thou should have helped, although thy
life were hazarded. A new battle (were it possible) would I have with thee
upon this, to make thee confess thy cruelty and ingratitude.

He vowed to himself to help all Ladies, though he indaungered his life:
which he performed so well, that many under that name, only durst travel
alone, and every one called him the knight of the Ladies. His own image saw
he a little further, and his battle fought with Theseus, together with those
which Claridiano made about his liberty. He rejoiced to see the haughty deeds
of his new friend. Being about to go to the other side of the yard, to view
those pictures there, as he turned, he espied two knights all in armor coming
toward him, with their shields and swords ready for the fight. Their gallant
semblance and bravery much pleased the Greek: being near him, one said.

Thou haste been much ouerseene (knight) not acknowledging Loves sovereignty,
to enter a place so prohibited, where be sure thou shall be called to strickt
accounts. They stayed for no answer, but ere he could sway his axe about, they
gave him two mighty blows, one on his shoulder, and the other on his helm.
Both he greatly felt, especially so cowardly to be assaulted. With an Eagles
swiftnes he got from between them, into the midst of the broad yard, the
better to use his dangerous axe. He stretched it out at length, awaiting for
his adversaries, that nothing fearing, followed him. With the point he hit one,
almost beheading him, for with the blade he sorely wounded his throat: he
drew back his axe, and winding it about, laid on his shield, the which he
struck to the ground, and his Master headlong at his feet. His companion was
not careless, but coming behind, gave him so strong a blow upon his helm,
that though he cut it not, yet he bended it to his breast.

Like a furious Lion turned the Greek against him, whom he found so near,
that to hit him, he was feign to draw back his arms, and with a fierce
encounter he ran his shield through, and wounded him on the breast, making
him stagger backwards, and to help him down, he raised his axe, and
discharging it on the side of his helm, he cut away all that part, with a
great piece of his inchaunted gorget. He felled him at his feet, and was so
eager to end with him, that he forgot his other adversary, who assayling him
at his back, gave him so fierce a blow upon his middle, that his companion
executing ano, there in the same place, they had almost felled him. Never was
Bear nor Tiger more fierce then now the Prince became against his enemies,
raising aloft his axe. He could not miss his blow, for they were before him.
So with all his strength he hit one on the shoulders, the blow was so mighty,
that all the blade he hid within his breast, splitting his heart in two.

Scarce had he finished this, when he laid upon his other enemy, who was so
skilful, that ere the axe descended, he got under his arms, running at his
breast with a thrust. This blow much grieved the Greek, for it stopped the
passage of his breath: and he seemed to awaite the axe: but for all the haste
he made to ward the blow, it first crowned him with death, for falling on his
head, divided in two, he sent him to accompany his friend.

The hideous noise which he heard in the next room, would let him take no
rest, but rather leaning on his axe, he stayed more warily to see what it was.
When presently with admiration he was amazed, seeing the fearful Minotaure so
ugly and deformed. His face was like a man's, although far bigger: his eyes
glowed like a furnace of kindled fire. On his large front he had two mighty
horns, whose points were harder then any Diamond: his neck short and thick.
So big and broad a breast he had, that the very fight witnessed his strength.
He was of a dunne color, and went upright as well on his hinder legs, as on all
four. In stead of cloven feet, he had most sharp claws, with which there
was no armor but he would rent. In bigness he was but as an ordinary Bull,
yet swifter then an Ounce, and so with his strength he assured his light
incounters. With such fierceness he came, that the Prince thought he should
want time to view him. Nevertheless, he fixed his foot strongly on the paued
yard, until approaching to execute his blow, he gave him way, letting him
pass swifter then the wind.

There wanted no spectacles to ouer-view the battle, for the windows over the
yard were full of beauteous Ladies, among whom, (had he but his right
judgment) he might have seen the tamer of his heart: neither did their want
gallant Knights to accompany them, for Dedalus had also provided that, when he
first made that enchantment in revenge of Ariadnes wrong.

The speedy return of the lustful Queens sons return, put him from his
gazing: but he found the Prince so watchful, that his hasty course was to no
effect. Three carriers past they thus, neither wounding the other, yet so well
could not the Prince defend himself, but at last the Bull met with him. He
struck him not full with both horns, for so he had indaungered him, save with
one, hitting him on the shoulder, which forced him to show more signs to be a
tumbler, then a skillful Knight. He was so abashed to be so used, that fiercer
then any Tiger he stayed his return: which he did with his accustomed
lightness. Him did the warlike Greek expect with his axe on high, till he
approached so near, that to his thinking he could not loose his blow: with all
his strength he turned it, giving the furious Minotaure such a blow between
his horns, that he made him give back.

He thrust the blade so much forth, that the blow was but with the staff,
which sounded as if it had fallen on a plate of steel. With his paws the
beast catched at the Prince, who with a leap escaped him, swaying about his
dangerous weapon, discharged it on his fore knee, whose hard hyde could not
save it from cutting clean off. Never on the earth was heard more fearful
bellowing then the Bull made, wounded so dangerously. Somewhat careless stood
the youth, thinking on the venturous blow he had made, that he was forced to
receive one nothing inferior to his: for the beast suddenly ran at him with
both his horns. To the fine temper of his brestplate, is Claramants life
imputed: for had it been otherwise, from side to side he had pierced him: but
finding a stay, so fiercely to resist him, he was struck with a sore fall on
the paued ground. There, having his other foot to help him with, he had
surely slain him. Nevertheless, with his right pawe (which was that was left)
he took hold of his shoulder, and wroong him so hard, that ye Prince thought
that part, to be crushed to pieces. He drew it to himself, bringing away all
it caught in his enchaunted claws, which was his vanbrace.

So strongly he hoysed the Greek, that he set him on his feet. Some fear
conceived the haughty youth, at the beastly creatures fierceness. He was not
able to use his axe, before ye Minotaure holding down his head, took him
between his horns, and floong him exceeding high into the empty air: falling
so miserably on the stones upon his left arm, that he thought it and his body
all bruised. Here Galtenor dares not undertake certainly to express the rage
that possessed the Greek Prince. The hardest Dyamond would he have cleft: so
fierce he turned upon Pasiphaes son, that like lightning came against him,
again to hoyst him on his horns: but before he approached to execute his
furious encounter, Trebatios son discharged such a blow on one of his
horns, that it and part of his head came to the ground, and from (...) wound
issued gutters of gore blood. Shrill shoutes of hideous cries ecchoed throghout
the edifice, answering the Bulls roaring. Who closed with the Greek, casting
his claws upon his sword hills, the which he drew forth, laying such a blow
upon his helm, that with hands and knees he kissed the earth. He feared not so
much his combat against Theseus, being without armor, then now seeing his
weapon in his enemies hand.

Increased so was his fear, hearing a clamourous noise that said. Dead art
thou distressed Prince, for never shall thou see thy desired Parents, nor thy
new friend that expects thee. It was no time to make reply to those words, nor
seek for them that spoke them: for the devilish beast fenst with the sword so
bravely and quick, that he constrained the Greek to use all his possible care
to shun his blows by his dexterity. And the Bulls bleeding, was to his no
small avail, for with his turning it fell on his eyes, that it much blinded
his sight. So well could not Alphebos brother save himself, but he was ouertane
with a mighty blow, sidelong it lighted on his neck piece, cutting most part
thereof: and had the stroke been given advisedly, his neck from his shoulders
he had sundred. The beast ever so closed with the Prince, that he could not
fetch about with his axe, that taking it by the top, he could no more but
strike him with the point, yet all ye blade with the strength of his arms he
hid within his breast, and thrust him away all the length of his axe, that he
could not hit him with his sword, being out of his reach.

There is no poisonous Basseliske to be compared with the wrathful
man-halfe-Bull: who casting floods of blood from his eye and breast, prosecuted
his disordered battle so cruelly, that the vexed Greek breathless, and tired
with overmuch labor, knew not which way to turn himself. And for all he saw
the Monster deadly wounded, yet he misdoubted the victory, because he never
reached him with the sharp slising sword, but it made him set his knees to the
earth. All the yard was dyed with beastly bloody gore, and such abundance
thereof he had shed, that he seemed nothing so fierce as in the beginning. Well
did Claramant perceive it, which infused new hopes in his fainting mind. A
thousand times called he himself coward, seeing that battle so long continued,
which he judged his friend would have had long before ended, if he were in his
place.

Most circumspectly, and with the greatest care he could, he awayted, and it
was not in vain toward the ending of the cruel fight: for the fierce beast
returning with his full carreir, he struck him on the head: in two he cleft
it, and field him dead at his feet. He was no sooner down, but all that
edefice was covered over with thick black fogge.

Shrikes and howlings were heard, ugly illusions and fantasmos, appeared to the
Prince, that had he not been Claramant, there he had for ever left his life.
The horror which the Castle and all the Inchauntment made in the vanishing,
struck him in a trance on the ground, and was no less, then if heaven and
earth should have met with fierce incounters.

An hour and more lasted the tempestuous noise, in the end whereof, the skies
cleared, and Claramant found himself near to the Fountain of the three Pipes,
from whence Claridiano ran to embrace him, and joyful to see him safe, said
taking off his Helm. How do you feel your self (most valiant Knight?) for I
am sure, considering the outrageous cries I heard, you have not been idle. I
have undergone all things easily (sir Knight) replied his uncle, only by hoping
of your sight, which has lessened all my troubles if any be sustained. So
sitting down at the Fountain, he related to him all his successes, whereat his
cousin remained no less amazed then content, judging ye knight to be the son
of valor, of whom Claridiano entreated he might know who he was.

Were it for nothing else (Sir Knight replied Claramant) but to satisfy your
content, I should have thought my self most happy, if Fortune would have let
me tell you who I am: But having so favored me with your dear sight and
acquaintance, no marvel if this pleasure so savor of some discontent, as in
not being able to reveal my parentage to you, because indeed I know not who I
am, more then that I have some years been nourished in this Grove, being made
exceeding much of, yet not knowing by whom, nor for what cause, it is
incredible.

Sometimes to comfort me in my solitariness, they told me I was of Greece, and
of Noble parents. There is no joy comparable to Claridianos, hearing he was a
Greek, persuading himself certainly he was his kinsman. Again he embraced
him, gratulating his being of that Country, and his Country man. Claramant
requested also to know him, since the friendship vowed between them, might
allow no secret from the other. To please him, Claridiano did it. The kissing
of his hands entreated his fair uncle, saying. The not knowing you (sovereign
Prince) has made me commit so manifest an error: wherefore in sign of
inpenetrated pardon, grant me your victorious hands, that I may thereon
expiate the offering of my innocence on them, due to your worthiness. His
tender Cousin embraced him and said. Most valiant Knight, this is not
tolerable, yours being of such deserts, meriting the duty of all the world:
And trust me, you are too blame to use me with such ceremonies, that am your
professed friend, and will be til the death. All that day they rested there, in
pleasant conversation passing away the time, where Palisandro rejoiced in his
very soul, that his Lord had found so mighty a friend.

So many things did the Prince discourse to him of Grecia, which so contented
Claramant, that he entreated him to return and accompany him thither: The
which Archisiloras Lover granted, purposing to discover himself to none,
arrived in Crecia, and so he prayed his uncle.

In the afternoon, the two Heroicke warriors took their way toward the Sea.
At their departure from the Fountain, on the Pillar that contained the former
words, they read these.

The intricate Laborinth and vanquishment of Theseus, the most ingratefullest
of all Lovers, was ended by the mighty Kinght of the Lions, in presence of his
greatest friend and kinsman: by whom he first received his liberty. And so
both ended the famousest adventure in the world. The suspicious words to be
near Allies, could not more augment the Lovers amity between the two
haughty youths, although they increased new joy, hoping in the end that
Prophecy would issue true. Thus they arrived at the sea shore, where they
found their inchaunted Bark richly provided with all necessaries for the
Greek Princes. Who being shipped therein, with more fury then does a Commet
cross the azure skies, it launched into the deep. Where of force we must
leave them, returning to Greece.

CHAP. XX. How Lysarte King of Tharsis, and his son Florisarte, Prince of
Argentaria, arrived with their Fleet within sight of the Marvelous Tower, and
what else happened.
ALthough I am constrained altogether unwillingly to leave treating of Love and
Loves discourses, yet will I not leave to implore your favors (bewteous Ladies)
to march under the displayed Ensign of stern and bloody Mars. For if it he
well considered, this is an amorous war, proceeding of affection, wherein the
cheifest and valiantest thereof, imparts no blow upon their enemies, but is
guided by Cupid. Some fight here to please their Ladies, others, to give her
liberty enclosed in the Tower, whose love many prosecuted, but only by one is
obtained. And others to become Lovers, choose this war as their best means
for it, which indeed sorted not in vain, because many sacrificed their
liberties to unknown Ladies, especially in Greece, where the blind God kept
the greatest part of his treasure, wherewith he captiuates the strongest
hearts. So that (divine Ladies) while I follow Mars his Drum, I do not
forget the footing of Cupids daunces. And this opinion is well confirmed by the
gallant Florisarte, Prince of Argentaria, who neither Arms, nor the being
among so many bloods, could extinguish the remembrance of his Love, not knowing
who it was, save only to maintain his word, engaged to disguised Artinio, that
for Arbolindas sake, the fair Princess of Scotland had so laid that plot,
heretofore recited: whose memory and absence, made him within his Helm drown
his eyes in tears. It is common (excellent Ladies) among amourous Gallants,
always to bewail their greatest evil, although many other present dangers
do incompasse them.

In this perplexity the valiant youth in his fathers company, with all his
Fleet nauigated the Greek sea with prosperous wind. With such great desire
came the Argentarians, and men of Tharsis to fight, that they thought they
should never see the occasion to show their kings how greatly they desired to
have them. Ten days they sailed on the Vast seas, meeting with nothing that
might hinder their voyage, bearing the Greek arms in midst of their
Colors. The eleventh day early in the morn, they discryed a mighty. Navy
of ships and Galleys, houering up and down, upon the calm waters. They were
above seven hundredth sails. So not knowing what they were, nor of whose part,
they struck alarm, seeing the great advantage they had over them, both in
wind, and lightness of vessels. The Fleet of the Tharsian Prince, in good
order began to cast about in manner of a half Moon, discharging two pieces of
ordinance, in sign of battle, setting forwards against their adversaries. Who
as it seemed trusting to their strength of multitudes, made ready their well
furnished ships, and answered the^ in like manner, advancing on their Admiral,
their royal arms: and thus they approached one an other, seeming to cover the
seas. Four of the Agentarian Galleys rowed forth without, spread sails to
discover their adversaries ensigns, which to their content they discried: for
being in sight of them, they saw the imperial Eagle, with two crowned heads,
the selfsame they had. In sign of peace and message, the Tharsians hung out a
white flagge. So they were suffered to pass among their ships, whose numbers
of men and fierce Giants amazed them. They boorded the Admiral, from whence
two ancient Knights of Argentaria, were in a Barge, conducted to the royal
Galleon, where they delivered their embassage unto a mighty knight, that
little wanted of a Giants height, telling him how in their fleet were the
kings of Tharsis, and Argentaria, from whom having seen their arms, they came
to know whether they were on the part of Grecia, under whose standard they also
fought. These news exceedingly gladded the gallant youth, being no less then
valiant Abstrusio: who would needs express his thankfulness for what Rosabell
had done for him, having through his valor and strength obtained his fair
Syrinda: who knowing that her Abstrusio went to Grecia, would not stay without
him, dreading the want of his presence. And so to conduct her with more
safety, he had mustered together from both kingdoms and all the Islands he
had conquered by his valor, 300. thousand Combattants, the skilfullest in
Navigations in all the wide world besides, and he himself excelling all others
therein, because with advantage to give a battle on the seas, he seemed to
have been only borne thereto: he brought with him 500. puissant giants his
friends, yt to please him with many of their knights, accompanied him in that
voyage. And in his ship to guard his dear lady, were twenty, proportioned
like to please pynes. Now seeing the Navy, he had reputed to be against him,
came on the ^ehalfe of his honored Prince, he declared who he was, and how he
rejoiced to have met such friends unto the Greeks and Rosabell. Presently they
sounded in sign of peace, yet many of Abstrusios followers, and Argentarians,
grieved thereat, because they first desired to have made trial of their
persons: but long was it not after, that they had occasion to do it. By this
was it known to Lysart, who his reputed enemy was, and so to show him
extraordinary courtesy, he and his son with fo^^e Lords of estimation went
to visit him, whereof Abstrusio being advertised, expected their coming on the
hatches of his Galleon, commanding as they passed by, they should be welcomed
with a general peale of Ordinance from all his ships: which was performed in
such good sort, that the haughty Lysart much commended their good
entertainment: who with all his company went aboord^ of the Galleon: and most
kindly the two lusty warriers embraced one an other. And so being known how
they were all voyagers for one enterprise, and either relating how much they
were bound to Rosabell, the mighty Abstrusio burst forth into these words. Oh
Jove, now I am fully assured, how effectually thou do impart thy favors to
the Greeks: and I nothing wonder at the lamentable desolation of ruined Troy,
since all the good adventures of the world are soly reserved for the^, as due to
their worths. And your Majesty has reason mighty king of Tharsis, to show
the office of a friend unto so brave a Prince, and as for me, were I not he I
am, should I deny what I owe, since through him I enjoy my life, possess my
kingdom, and that which is more, and I most esteem, is the happy fruition of
my dear wife. And then he told him all yt happened with him, to Rosabels
immortal glory. So Lysarte requited his discourse with an other of his Loves,
and that therefore he brought that Navy to aid them. It is no more then due
(said Abstrusio) to help him that helps so many to obtain their joys, in
whose pursuit let us spend our lives, to make him happy in content. And so
joining both fleetes together by the Tharsians direction, they set forwards,
for Lysarte was best acquainted with those seas, and knew where the
enchauntment stood, having been at it when he freed Rosabell from it. Who
desirous to honor the Pagan with more then ordinary courtesy, commanded to be
proclaimed throughout his Fleet, that every one should obey the mighty
Abstrusio, as their Captain General. Who taking some offense thereat, said.
Since our amity must be of such force and continuance, I would not (mighty
Prince) you would use these ceremonies with me. I do, but what I know you
deserve and is your due. Brave Prince (replied Lysarte) and therefore do but
command, and we will all obey: for now and at all times, we entend to be your
soldiers, and so he entreated him to pass into his Galley* but not able to
obtain it, he and his son were feign to stay in that Galleon. With the
noise of many instruments, the two puissant Nauies began to shape their course
toward Nyquea. They had such fair weather and prosperous wind, that on the
fourth day of their Navigations, they discried the flames of fire that issued
from the Tower. Thither they turned their course, sending forth six swift
sailing Galleys, to discover their way. The which were so near the Tower, that
they saw a most dangerous battle fought between the Arches. The reason was,
for that the mighty Brauorant making his abode there, would suffer none to
prove the ascending up.

Some about it had lost their lives, and many their honors. They so long
tarried, that from the South they discried before they went away, such an
infinite number of sails, that it amazed their judgments, deeming them to be
above 4000. vessels of Ships, Barks and Galleys. Never did Xerses see at
once so many sails together. This fleet was the mighty Soldans of Nyquea,
with whom all his friends being joined, came thitherward covering all the sea
of Greece.

In the Admiral, was the two Soldanes of Nyquea and Egypt, being a brother of
his whom Rosabell slew. Who seeing himself so mighty, resolved with all his
strength to revenge his brothers death, and his was the greatest part of that
power. With them joined the Prince of Syconia, Venus Lover, the Sophy, the
mighty King of Assyria, with the Phenician: who hoping there to see their
sons, as Lupercio told them, agreed to aid the Souldan of Nyquea.

Also very strongly came brave Epirabio, with proud Brufaldoro, Brauo^^nts
great enemy. Many men brought not Bembo Prince of Achaya, but without doubt,
the valiantest and most expert in war.

Envious Lupersio so well pleaded for this brave knight, that he caused him to
be created Lord General both by sea and land, he accepted the honor, judging
his strength to be sufficient to discharge a greater charge. He named for his
Lieftenant and Substitute by sea, the discreet king of Assyria, because he had
rather fight by Land, that he might order and dispose of the Ships and
galleys, least their numbers breaking into disorder, might hazard their
victory, which otherwise they had assured.

Every one highly esteemed him, seeing his gallant behavior, and knowing how
he was honored throughout the world. So many hundred thousands of men they
brought, that he thought he was able with them to subdue all the world: For
most of the Princes were accompanied with furious Giants, and many Sagitaries:
especially the Soldane of Egypt, because his country affoorded most. With such
noise they arrived at the Tower, as if heaven and earth had met. Yet for all
this, did not the two Combattants desist from the cruel sight, until the
strange knight saw how great a Fleet made thitherward, and then thinking it no
wit, longer to stay, with a cruel point thrust ye sturdie Brauorant from him,
and turning his bark, put forth into the sea, leaving the enraged Pagan so
furious, that he was about to follow him. He was nothing daunted with the
sight of so huge a Navy, but rather wished they would assault him, that he
might execute on them the wrath that the knight had put him in, who was none
other, but the bewtious Archysilora, who seeing the flames, came to the Tower.
Within sight she stood, and so did the six Galleys, to see what order they
took. With sovereign praises did Lupersio extol the merits of the Knight of
the Tower, so every one called him. They all rejoiced knowing whose son he
was, and how he would take their part. He advertised his friend Bembo, to
honor him: for in him consisted the sure hopes of that doubtful victory.

The Prince did so, sending a Galley to salute him in his name. A little did
not the Pagan esteem the account that was made of him, and much honored
Bembo, being acquainted with him. By Lupercios counsel the three most mighty
Pagans, Bembo, Brauorant, and Brufaldoro, his competitor, placed themselves
before the Arches, for he ^red what after did ensue: and there (had it not
been in respect of Bembo) would Brauorant have had assaulted the Mauritanian.

There was never a Prince in all the Fleet, but went to know him, all whom he
received with singular courtesy. But how he tendered Floraliza, requires a new
story: hers was the third voice in counsel of war, for that dignity had
Lupercio procured her, by whose direction all the army was governed.
Nevertheless, greatly sorrowed the Soldane of Nyquea for his sons absence,
thinking his presence would have assured his hopes.

Scarce had that mighty Navy cast about the Tower, when another no less
puissant then it, appeared Eastward from the coast of Grecia, the which but
stripping the winds, purposed to get the advantage of his enemies. It was the
Emperor Trebatios, that with five hundredth ships and galleyes made toward
the highst part of the Tower: somewhat a far off, and from the tops of
their masts they could descrie the Fleet at the Tower, which they judged to be
their enemies. Never did Neptune on the seas behold a thing more stupendous,
for both armies seemed two populous Cities. In the royal Admiral, all the
Princes were met to consult on the giving of the battle.

The Emperor brought with him the best men in all his Empire, and in his guard
his son Rosicler, the warlike Rosamond, with famous Brandafidel, and the
stout Bramidoro king of Cerdena^. For the Lady persuading her self that in so
renowned an enterprise, her beloved Dacian would surely be, would not stay in
Grecia; but rather clad in her rich armor, was one that won most honor both
on sea and land. With him also came the sons of the mighty Croanto, Lord of
the Carmenian Isles, knights, whose like the world contained few. No less
guarded was the Emperor Alphebos Admiral, within which there was besides
himself, his dear Empress Teffereo, and the two valiant Spanish brothers:
for his more safety, he had with him twelve Giants his neighbors, then who in
all the adverse army, there was none valianter, nor that with more trust and
care defended their Prince. The Spanish Admiral was one of the brauest and
best furnished ship in eithers Fleet, for therein would Torismundo show his
magnifisence, with his brother in law Clauerindo, and both their sons that
were in her, and at their guard fifty Spanish knights, that against Mars,
neither of them would refuse the combat.

The new King of Thessaly, would needs manifest how much he was bound unto the
Greeks, to whom with his Sarmatia, the first onset was committed, and to be
seconded by the Spanish and French, as me^ most hardiest at the first assaults.
The Emperor Trebatio like a wise Captain, showed himself in sanguine colored
armor (for this device pleased him best) and mounted the hatches of his ship,
that every one might see him. With him came the two wise men, Lyrgandeo and
A^tomidoro, who as yet knew not the end of the adventure, for it was in Medeas
books, and he that had them, was their friend Nabato, that in a Cloud houered
over the Tower (for his dear Don Elenos sake) least Lupercio with his
exercismes might devise some new treason against the Lady enchaunted there.
The counsel was ended, with resolution straight to begin the battle, although
there wanted the Kings of Antioch, Babylon and Persia, whose presence was
greatly missed. Every Prince and commander passed to his own ship, to order
their necessary affairs. And while the quiet waves with gentle calm hoar
their vessels, the great Emperor of Greece leaped into a Frigate, wtth his
Helm off: on the one side went his son Rosicler, and on the other, Don
Elenos fair Lady, and having gone round about his Navy, encouraging his
soldiers, set himself in midst of them all, and thus began.

Come is the time (most valiant knights) wherein deeds will be more requiset
then words, having such multitudes of strong enemies to cope withal: and if I
be moved to speak thus, believe me, it is but to renew the memory of the
royal blood from whence we descend, and the glory ye our predecessors from age
to age have maintained, eternizing their fames thereby, to all posterities:
entreating you as friends, that none would fight otherwise, then to make their
enemies confess the worth of their persons, and not for desire of spoil or
gain, and to express his duty, love and fidelity toward his God, Prince and
country: for this, and nothing but this, will assure his victory. And let not
their ouermatching numbers daunt our courageous minds, but still uphold our
woonted valor, wherewith in despite of foes, we made our names to be feared.
There can be no greater honor, then with glory here like good knights to die,
if sates have so appointed. And since every one of you knows the right and
justice of our cause, let us confidently trusting thereto, make them know how
unjustly they have topsey-turuey turned the world.

Here ended the brave Emperor, and with amiable Majesty, commanded his
frigate to his former place, leaving his soldiers so animated with his words,
that they thought every minute long, till they met with their enemies. Straight
he ordered his battles, dividing his Fleet into three parts. The middle most
he himself conducted, being all the Greeks and Macedones, whose General was
Meridian. The right squadron guided the Emperor Alphebo, with all those of his
Empire, being very warlike people. The left going somewhat foremost, led
Torismundo, Prince of Spain. Before than all went Priams valiant heir, backed
with some Spanish Galleyes, to succor those in most danger. On the Pagans
side, in no less good order had Bembo disposed his battle, in form of a half
Moon, an usual custom to fight among them: in which manner they approached
our Navy, at the sound of many thousand military Instruments. Being ready
to give the o^^^t, the famous General from this Admiral, spoke thus.

Where (valiant Knights) there is so many Princes, and such great experience in
war, I should have little need to advertise you, that Fortune has ministered
unto us occasion, forever to perpetuate our fame. Sure may we account the
victory, for being as valiant as our adversaries, we exceed them in numbers,
and may if me list, two or three at once assail every one of his enemies. As
for my self, loosing my life in the office you have given me, I satisfy the
duty of a knight, and vow to be your general friend till death. And
therevppon displayed a bloody fla^gge crossebarde with black, a sign that
none should take his foe prisoner, but shut the doors against all mercy. So
closing his beauer, lead after him the best soldiers in the Fleets, and leaning
under the arches the mighty Brauorant, and Brusaldoro his competitor, those
two puissant Fleetes began to come within shot one of another. Where, oh
Apollo, who may without thy help relate such a famous conflict? whose success
well deserving a new Book, it cannot have less then another Chapter.

CHAP. XXI. How the most cruel fight between both the Nauies began: and the
admirable successes that in the process thereof happened.
THis is the time, being encompassed with so many enemies, that I dare not
(fair divine Lady) pass one foot further without your special favor.
Black and fatal was the day to many, tasting in it the sower cup of death.
But to those whom fortune was bent to please, reserving their lives to see the
dismal bloody loss of others, some comfort was it to them, the hearing of so
many drums and trumpets echo in the air, resounding in the deep, rejoicing
a so many displayed flagges and bannerets as daunced with the winds, the
waighing of anchors, and hoysting up of sails, the noise which the poor
slaves have on the waters, beating them with their oars: the clamorous cries
of every Captain, encouraging those whom fear had already daunted: the
glistring shine of armor, and the confounding numbers of brave Knights and
fierce Giants, that on the hatches of every vessel did expect their enemies:
these and such like sights, amazed and admired the beholders. Neptune would not
this day show himself cruel, nor Eolus let forth more then one gentle
breath, that did with swelling pride blow big the Pagans sails. Who taking
advantage of the good occasion, with redoubled courage offered to grapple,
accounting the conquest theirs.

Oh who is he, able to describe the manner of so many deaths that there were
given? So great was the smoke issuing from their shottes, that they neither
heard nor saw one another, which being past, and the welking clearing over
head. Oh Mercury, would thou were in midst of this battle, in apt eloquence
to model forth the merits of every particular worth. But first the hideous
cries of slaughtered bodies, the noise of warriors, the shrikes of the
wounded, could not but be a cruel spectacle: for they were all between two of
the cruellest oppressed elements that were, fire and water.

Quickly fomed the seas with bloody froth, and on it floated the dead
carcasses of sometime living creatures. Exceeding great was the slaughter that
the Christians made, with wild fire and balls of burning pitch and rozen. And
as they used all possible celeritie in casting it, and the wind that played
with their running wings a little strong, by that means was the destruction,
which they made infinite: for neither striking of sails, remoouing cabbins, and
casting ouerboord all necessary tackle, auayled to avoid the merciless
devouring fire, which left neither mast nor sail unconsumed. Oh cruel Sultan
of Nyquea, that do delight to see the thing that would have moved Nero to
some pity.

Strange ways for deaths were there seen, for some flying the fire,
perished in the waters: nor is there a friend, that will help the other. The
father in such hurlebourly knows not his dear son, nor he remembers his
sire to pay him the debt he owes him, for life and nurture. Only every one
procures to live, and when he cannot escape, to die, not to depart unrevenged.
This satisfaction was the sole comfort to them, that with cruel wounds flung
at their enemies, and stumbling on their own guts, embraced a willing death,
together with their adversaries. Some ha^ging by their strong hands ouerboord,
saw the cruel axe descend, and cut them from his hold, and he rejoiced with
such a death, rather then to be hewn in pieces by an Infidel. Others embraced
like good friends, sought their ends in the lowest deepes, glad to kill, being
killed. The proper life is here had but in equal estimation with his
adversaries death. Others that to themselves complained toward the heavens,
against Fortune and their happes, saw their friends come stumbling without
arms and legs upon them.

Such was the confusion among them, that no order could be observed, although
therein the Greek got some advantage, because their vessels were lighter and
better provided. The gallant Spanish Captain with advise of his Lieftenant
general, County of Medyna, appointed some small boats well furnished, who
with all necessary diligence, closely pierced through ten of the Pagans
greatest ships, the which with such fury leaked, that on the sudden, not
knowing which way they were suncke, with an infinite number of men, cheefely
Giants, whose waights did soonest ouerwhelme them.

Then prevailed not outcries of Pilots, nor the hasty calling for boats,
because the Rowers fearing the fires which the Spaniards hurled, rather striued
to save themselves, then their friends, whom they saw smothered in those
unquenchable flames, and being up to the chin in water, yet seemed to burn
alive. Peace, they judged the two contrary elements had made, seeing the
abundance of water could not free them from the fire, nor the fire for fear
of it, keep the waters from ouerwhelming them. From side to side some were
thrust, and these exclaimed not for being wounded, but for want of company to
comfort them, in their funeral obsequies. Well do the Greeks defend
themselves, offending on this side, where the Spaniards bravely cried S. James.

And although they were confronted three to one, they gallantly stuck to it,
seeing how victoriously the Thessalians had assailed their enemies. Wonders
performed the Troyan with his beloved Sarmatia, against the Pagan: but what
auuales it, when for one they kill, there came twenty in his place, and so on
either side the battle was at one stay: whose fiercenes may be forgot,
remembering what on the right wing was done, where the fierce Alphebo which
Claridiana commanded, for no devise can there be distinguished, being all died
in one sanguine hiew. There all other means they did forget of fight, save
with their arms, that being come to handie blows, who would not, but with
more then admiration admire, seeing them board the Ship, wherein the two
Soldans of Egypt and Nyquea were, walled about with so many furious Giants. On
his right hand went his Empress Claridiana, like lightning among them. But the
gallant Teffereo, expressing there who he was, showed by good experience the
high valor of his person. I beseech your Majesty to follow me, for in despite
of our foes, I will enter this ship (said he.) Do so, for we will all back you
(replied the two Lovers) that no less wished it then he. So the Lady desirous
to be first, courageously leapt into the adverse vessel, and maugre all the
Giants that defended it, she rusht in among them: but it had like to have cost
her life, for the Giants judging her to be of estimation, two of them gave her
two such blows at once, that careless they struck her at their feet.

Outright had they slain her, or at least taken her prisoner, if her
invincible husband with his utmost speed had not followed her close, almost
falling down, with such strength he leapt among them. Many blows he suffered,
making no reckning of them, because he only aimed at them that struck his
Empress. It is no new matter what he now does, dividing the two Giants at two
blows in four parts, that had offended him, offending his Lady.

He durst not go from her till she recovered her self, becoming fiercer then
a mountain Lioness. Many lives dearly bought her wrath. Bravely were they
backed by Teffereo, and the two Spaniards following them, together with most of
the Imperial guard, and the four Giants, all which kept still together in a
round, back to back.

There was so many in the Soldans ship to keep them at work, that they had
no time to look about: for the Barks and Galleyes of supply, which Bembo as
a skillful General had appointed for their purpose, served to no other end but
to fetch away wounded men, leaving fresh soldiers for them, and of the best.
Here were one of the fiercest conflicts that happened all that day: for the
Tribizonians imitating the valor of their Princes, would not have them loose
what they had won.

And therefore although thousands perished, they bravely hindered their
adversaries from succor, which was no help for the Lords within. In her
inchaunted Bark, had the brave Queen of Lyra ranged about all the battle, to
find out her friend Rosamonde, whom she greatly affected: but not meeting
with her, her good fortune, or theirs that were in the ship, conducted her
thither.

Seeing that cruel fight, and thinking them to be the Emperor Trebatios his
Sons, she bravely leapt into the Egyptian Bark, crying: Grecia and Lyra.
Many knew her by the voice, among whom were the Emperors that were opposed
against a number of Giants.

More destruction make not the unseasonable showers of drowning waters, beating
down the ripened corn: nor with more fury flies not the hasty fired powder,
then the warlike Matrone with her sword, shows her self joining with the
Greek. Mars wounding the first Giant she met so bravely on the helm, that
cleaving it, she also cleft his head down to the neck. With such help
(sovereign Queen said Alpheo) our victory will not be so great, if this
ship should of it self yield, although the greatest personages of all the
fleet be in it.

It was no time to be spent in answering courtesies, for the Giants be many
and strong, and die willingly in defense of their ship, that by this was at
the last to be conquered: for with the Queens help, and the Trebezonians
diligence, the two Soldans were constrained, rather then to fall in the hands
of such fierce warriors, to leap into a Pinnace, in whose succors many others
came, among which, was the Galeon wherein he came from Nyquea, into which they
went, greeuing for the loss of the other, which was one of the best in all the
Fleet. Whereof never a man suruide, but every one perished by the sword, and
they that fled that death, leaping into the sea, swallowed it in water of
eternal sleep.

This victory was not so clearly won, but they lost ten galleys of
Trebizound, which the Pagans suncke, who also kept them company with some of
theirs. Leaving the conquered vessel well manned, and displaying on the top
thereof the arms of Greece, victoriously they returned into their own, and
with all speed the Emperor commanded the Pilot to hale toward the Tower,
where there was most to do, for the two brave Competitors being there, would
suffer none to come thither without loss of life.

We have no reason thus long to forget the mighty Bembo, Lord general of the
Pagan army, who espying the Greek Admiral, supposing that most of her
Princes were in her, made with his against it. The noise of the vehement shocke
was such, that it seemed no less then the encounter of two huge rocks. The
Greeks got the best, by reason she bore her beak higher, wherewith she bruised
all that side. Here do they fight as if they were on maine land, for Galley to
Galley, and ship to ship, being grappled together, the arm must only
procure the victory.

Oh Bembo, who would not wish to see the busied in the things thou did never
exercise? For firmly fixing thy feet on the ships side, and with thy sword
twixt both hands, executed blows ye Mars would have thought impossible, but as
in the other, there were such knights, his deeds did nothing amaze them,
neither Don Celindos, nor his brave sisters, who were confronted with the
haughty Emperor Trebatio, his son Rosider with the bewteous Rosamonde, that
with victorious courage did behave her self, giving no stroke but it field an
enemy into the deep, that seeing they must die, had rather do it by her
hands, devoured or consumed, either in the water, or with fire. She eagerly
pursued Don Celindo, and followed him more then she should: for the Achayan
seeing her so near him, discharged a flourish on the best helm in both
Nauies. It made the blood gush through her mouth, and bend her head as low as
her fair breast. She conceived such mortal hate against him for this blow,
that first the general Greek wars ended, before it was extinguished.

Nevertheless he escaped not unpaid, for trusting to her Arms, (although
Floraliza gave her a fierce thrust,) she lost not her intended blow, which she
executed on the Pagans shield: which is no defense against it, for the blade is
the best on all the earth: and therefore clean in two it parted his shield, in
whose making, Lupercio had shown such skill. It daunted the Sarazen Prince, for
he had never seen his Armor cut. Yet there stayed not the furious sword, for
lighting upon one side of his Helm, cutting, it descended down to the
shoulder, where it lost his force, making him stagger back. And then she would
have leapt into her adversaries ship, had not then come against her, the
Giants of his guard, that made her violently retire. Idle were not Father and
Son, behauing themselves there like Sampson, among the Phylistines.

And on the other side, the two friends, Bramidoro of Cerdenia, and the strong
Brandafidel, with his flying unaccustomed weapon, who sometimes, with it, at
one blow field three of those deformed Giant. On the other side, was this ship
likewise boorded, by the valiant Prince of Assiria, so fiercely, that had not
the good Theban Duke been near to her, she had been entered: but his coming,
with the Duke of Medynas, intercepted their adversaries from their purpose.
Ashamed was Bembo to be so repulsed, not knowing his adversary. Some paid
dearly for his anger, for returning to his place, he met with Oliuias Lover,
something careless of him, being carefully busied against the Giants.

With a downright blow he struck him. The Pagans arms were not of such
weakness, as that his blows should be received without ward, for it forced
him to set his hands on the hatches of his ships, and before he rose or were
succored, the Achayan seconded another, nothing inferior to the former. There
is no Hyrcanian Tiger that may be compared unto the great Emperor, seeing his
son so used. He clasped his sword strongly twixt his hands, laying the weight
thereof upon his helm. Never til then, did the Sarazen feel such a blow, for
his sword flue out of his hands, and he set both knees on the hatches. At his
rising, a pellet of Brandifidels weapon, did hit him on the breast, and
depriving him of breath, made him recoyle back. Well did the two brothers
know him, but they could not deny their duty unto their General: and
therefore together they requited the Giant with such blows, that stumbling
backwards, he had like to have fallen: and had they been able to reach his
head, they had field him: for few arms were like to theirs.

With such eager fury did Rosamond seek Bembo, that she did not respect the
others strokes, whom Brandafidell well befriended with his terrible Mace: for
with it, he struck aside the two brothers, that bravely defended their party:
so that the wrathful Lady past along, and with both hands gave the Sarazen
Lover a mighty blow. All the top of his helm with a great piece thereof,
she struck away, and wounding him a little, she made him tremble like an Aspen
leaf. Ere the Pagan could turn himself, putting forth her arm, she gave him
a dangerous thrust on the breast. His Armor and privy coat it pearst: and
Lyrgandeo says, his flesh felt the blade. But howsoever he gave back
yielding from the sword, a manifest token that he feared the point. So well
could not Bramidoro, and Brandafidels blows defend her, but Floraliza found
opportunity to give her one with Camillas sword about her helm, with all her
strength. She greatly felt this stroke, for it made her turn amazedly about.

With another full as great, seconded Celindo, with Queen Iulias cutting
blade: it fell on her shield, whose inchauntment being far auncienter then that
of his sword, it could not cut it, but it struck it so violently against her
head, that she was very much astonished.

Forward stepped Bramidoro King of Cerdena, to pay what Rosamond did owe (for the
furious Bembo not seeing him, and meeting with a Giant in his place) with both
hands he gave him so terrible a blow, that he constrained him to set both
knees on the ground. So busied were father and son against the Achayan, and
another, that he had time to bestow another at his helm, it was with such
mightiness, and discharged (as he could not more desire) that he field him all
along upon the hatches, to the astonishment of every one that saw the Battle,
to enjoy whose sight, many left their sights, for of four to four, a fiercer
Combat could not lightly be wished. Ready to burst with rage was Rosicler now,
seeing the Achayan was only he that disturbed the entrance of that vessel. He
closed with him, and with both hands they either discharged upon the other,
such puissant blows, whose echo was heard over all the fleet, the which,
both Nauies horror could not drown.

With much courtesy they received one another, bowing their heads very low.
So enraged was the Pagan seeing his shield in pieces, and his head wounded,
that it made him second an other before Rosicler was ready. It was like one of
those he used to execute, making him touch the hatches with hands and knees. He
could not add any more, but raising his sword, with it he reached Brandafidell
(surprising him unawares) upon his arms: It was a miracle he did not cut them
off, yet it enforced him to let go his Mace, dragging it along, not able to
wild his arms through pain.

This did Trebatio well note, ending then the dispatching of a Giant to hell.
At one step he confronted Bembo, whom before he could settle himself, the
Greek gave so strong a blow, that maugre his might, he struck him away from
him: and said to his friends, that their pursuing particular Combats, made
them loose the general battle, their enemies so much exceeding them in
numbers.

It was as the Emperor said, for indeed they had the worst, having every
vessel of their own assaulted by three and four of their adversaries, and
yet the courage and valor of the Christians was such, that it supplied the
want of men. All had not been sufficient, had not at this time, some five
hours before the setting of the Sun, Eastward appeared at one instant, two
proud Fleetes, that with a fresh gale made toward the Battle, not seeming
any whit to assault each other.

And from the coast of Niquea, was also descried a number of barks with
soldiers. Both Nauies feared, not knowing to which they would incline, for
that side was sure of victory, whose part they took. At once they both
approached, yet in different manner: for that which coasted more along the
land, came altogether in one squadron, discharging their ordinance. The other
kept with the wind on the seas, and in form of an Arch, with their greatest
vessels in the midst, lingering nothing behind. Whose arriving, and what
they were, deserves a new Chapter.

CHAP. XXII. How in the Greeks aid there arrived the mighty Abstrusio, and
the King of Tharsis. With Sacridoro, King of Antioch, Pollidolpho, and the
Persian Prince.
THere is no content that might be equalled to mine (fairest of all fayres) if
I durst but imagine you had with some pleasure ouerpast the beginning of this
Nauall conflict: the which favor were soly sufficient to add thereto such an
end, as every worthy accident therein happened did deserve. For that Fleet
which coasted more along the shore, entered among the Pagans side, that for all
they were so many, were not able to forbid it, nor to break their order.

This was the famous Abstrusios Navy (then who upon the seas was never any
more skilfuller) and bringing with him, so many men and well furnished
vessels, with an ifinit number of brave Knights, advancing aloft the Greek
arms, he passed through his enemies with winde-blowne sails, and oars, in
mosthorrible manner: crying Grecia, and his country. He kept such good order,
that ere he lost it, he made mortal destruction on his enemies, for his
smaller barks entering, where greater could dot, did naught but cast wild
fire, melted pitch, and scalding Lead, which was present death to those that
only defended themselves with the sword. Armed like Parthians, were Abstrusios
followers with bows and arrows, wherewith before they fell to handy blows,
they bereft a number numberless, of lives.

Which horror of shafts being past, it was admirable to see with what bravery
they betook themselves to their weapons. They were all expert and exercised in
war, because they lived in it continually, against their neigbouring
Ilanders. Wherefore the Sea began a new to floate with dead trunckes of men,
with such horrible outcries of the wounded, because they could not before death
revenge themselves, that there is no heart so stony and remorcelesse, but would
have been moved to pity.

Sylla that wished to see rivers of purple goare, had here been satisfied with
sight of seas of blood. The mighty general Abstrusio did set himself upon
the hatches of his galeon, doing what Mars durst not imagine: on either hand,
Lysart did accompany him, with his son Florisart, desiring to make manifest
their affection to the Greek. The Giants that were appointed to guarde the
fair Serynda, were cyzed like tall high mastes, clad all in steel, with Iron
Maces in their hands. A better defended vessel was not in all that Fleet: for
not dreading any thing, it went forwards sinking all it met. The furious Bembo
having seen the merciless destruction of his men and Galleys, had commanded
his to be vngrapled from the Greek Emperors, to send succor where it most
needed. He was straight espied by Abstrusio, that presently sent those that
followed him to board her, leaving way for his encounter. The beak of whose
Galleon was all of Iron, fastened even down to her keele, which made him
presume on more then was lawful on the seas. So seeing how well his Galleys
had assailed his adversaries, not omitting his intent, Abstrusio entered with
his, running with such force against the side of his adversaries, that he split
her clean in two, and had almost endangered himself: for trusting to his
strength, he would have leaped into her when she began to sink, and they
within her, cried out for boats to save themselves. Oh Bembo, here did
thou show thy self to be whom thou art: for leaping into a small Barge, he
opposed himself against Abstrusio, as if he were in as good a Galleon as his.
The Pagan laughed at his folly, and noting him more narrowly, by his colors he
knew him to be his enemies General.

It gladded him, thinking to have taken him prisoner. But the haughty Lover
that had his life reserved to endure greater troubles, made his valor there
known to the uttermost, and how in deeds of arms he would be second unto
none: for though he was beset on all parts, he so bestirred himself, that
neither his adverse General, nor Lysarte, with his sons power, could enforce
him from his standing. Presently was he succored and taken into Lindauros
Admiral, dyed in blood and so enraged, that he would speak to none, nor any
durst look on him. To be in such unaccustomed brunts amazed him, and more, not
able to learn, nor guess whom his adversary was, that making such destruction
of his, had succored the Greeks. From this imagination was he put, hearing
the entry of the other Fleet nothing inferior to the first.

Diverse were the voices heard, for some cried, Babylon and Persia, some
Antioche, others Croatia, and all at once, Grecia, and then let fly such
volleyes of shaftes, that no less havoc they made, then Abstrusio. Whose
arrival utterly vanquished that wing of the Pagans: And Sacridoros Admiral
where Oristoldo was, past close by the Tower, which none else had done. It
astonished both Father and Son, to look upon the two Competitors, Bramarant
and Brufaldoro, who with their ponderous blades suffered none to approach the
Arches: to do the like arrived Bembo, making himself strong between the
Pillars that sustained the Tower, where he animated himself with gazing on the
Lady he most affected, that opening the Casements, then knowing none of them,
had set her self to behold the battle.

She appeared like the Sun of May, in all his glory, chasing away the
duskie Clouds from about him, that would obscure his brightness. There was
none in all the Fleetes but turned their eyes to gaze on her beauty. Many knew
her, whereof one was Oristoldo, who thus said to his Father. This is the season
wherein we must procure to liberate you Ladies thence. For the fairest of them
is Lyriana, whose carrying from Nyquea, cost our friend Rosabel and me so much
blood, and more labor. And believe me not (dread Lord and Father) if these
knights have not purposely taken their standings there, that none might prove
the ascending to the Tower.

As they were thus talking, they descried two knights of rare disposition,
coming in several Barks. The one was presently known to be Don Eleno of
Dacia, whom (being departed from Pollidolpho) Nabato had guided thither. Of
his help there was no need: for the Pagans had then the worst: yet he entered
as he was accustomed, covering the frothy waves with dead carcasses. He
assaulted no particular knights, but the fierce Giants. Quickly was Rosamond
advertised of his coming: whereat she straight commanded her Royal Galley to
waft her, where he was, she met him. Her Armor was well known of every one,
and so her beloved Dacian also knew her. He leapt into her Galley, embracing
one another with intyre love. It was no time for long discourses, so having
kissed the Emperors hands, the two Lovers began to perform such deeds as were
incredible, but not to those that to their cost beheld them.

The other knight clad all in Rose color Armor, none as then knew: but
approaching near the Tower, and viewing his Lady, he conceived such content,
that he suspended his fight, til he had well noted the possessor of his heart.
He became so fierce with that sole sight, as he judged nothing, the subduing of
both Armies. Casting his shield behind him, and taking Hectors sword twixt both
hands, at few blows he was known to be Rosabel, to the exceeding content of
all his friends. In this inchaunted Boat, he flung to the Arches of the Tower,
but he found them so well defenced, that neither his friend Aristoldos help,
nor his own strength, could make his way to them: For the three famous
warriors being in a rank, with such bravery behaved themselves, that every
one judged the approaching to the Pillars impossible. With Brauorant closed
Lyrianas Lover, crossing his sword on high: nimbler he was then Scythian, and
so with all his strength before he could ward it, he discharged a furious blow
on his helmet, the which had it not been of such force, even with his head it
had been cleft, yet he forced him two steps back. Into his Bark he would
have leapt: but the Pagan (inured to such blows, although it much grieved him)
returned, and with a thrust drove him back again, as fast as he came forward.

Few blows like unto these had the Britain felt, but seeing the Ladies
looked on him, and also his Father, and Graundsyer, that were come thither,
returned unto his place, where he began one of the fearcest Combats of all that
day. For against the other Bark wherein Bembo was, came Don Eleno, no less
furious then Mars: and Brufaldoro was confronted by the Emperor Alphebo. He ye
first executed his blow, was hasty Dacian: so close grapled were ye barks, yt
they could fight as sure as on land, and therefore Rosamonds beloved, with
Brutus sword, flourished it twice aloft. Well perceived Bembo his intent,
wherefore leaving his Helm bare, gave him a strong thrust on his amourous
breast: the which taking him as he stiffly stood, and with his mind another
where, it was a great chance he overthrew him not, but made him stagger into
his Bark. After him would the Pagan leap, but as swift as a Leopard returned
the Lover, and ere he could do it, with both hands he discharged his sword, in
such manner on his helm, that he thought he saw more stars then the heavens
contained: and bore so heavily on the one side, as he set his left knee upon
the ground. Another seconded the Dacian a little lower, descending down the
shoulder: a better blow was not given in all the Battle, for it cut away all
his Vanbrace, with his sleeue of Male, and somewhat wounded him. The Pagan
trembled at the blow, and knowing that was he which overthrew him in Grecia,
he animated himself, for he was greatly vexed to see his cross fortune, and
began to show, he was no less then Bembo, Prince of Achaya. The Emperor
Alphebo that knew his enemy, warily assailed him, although he quickly broke
off order, for the Moore remembering him, will not use tricks of defense, but
give and receive without pity. So at once they laid on their helmes. Both kissed
the ground: the Emperor with one hand, but the Mauritanian with both, and both
knees. The Greek seconded another, bearing his sword outward: which offer he
had scarce made, when turning his hand, with all his strength he thrust at his
breast: thence the point glaunced to indaunger the Moore, more: for if he had
not yielded to the thrust, clean through he had bin thrust, for happening
twixt the buckles, it ran to the other side. None saw the blow, but judged
either the Moore to be dead, or deadly wounded.

Who having escaped that great danger, became more furious then fire smothered
within a Basseliske, charged with powder: And recovering his former place,
casting his Shield at his back, began so with blows to weary the Lord of
Trebizond, that almost he could not fetch his breath: yet not in such sort,
but he often astonished the Moore, and made him to feel his strength and fury
of his arms.

All this while was not Trebatios Nephew idle, with Brauorant, the flower of
Paganism, for their fight is worthy the sight of the towred Ladies. It was
more dangerous for the Moore, because the Lover supposed his Lady had known
him. He never showed himself more skilfuller nor fiercer. Many particular
battles were left, only to behold that of the six. Both are well armed and
sure from being wounded, which made them fearelesse abide one another
strokes. Like a chafed Bore fomed the Scythian, seeing so many adversaries to
resist him, and more they that could hazard his battle, as he that then was
before him, who refusing no labor, entered and retired at his pleasure. Nimble
and active was the Pagan, and so helping himself therewith, before the
Britain youth could turn about, he executed a blow upon the rich helm
which Eufronisa gave him, whose fine temper saved his life, for else it had
divided him in two: yet it made him set his hands to the ground: ere he rose,
the Pagan discharged again a flourish on him, nothing inferior to the other.
It was somewhat besides his head, and not able to make impression, it glanced
away without more harm, although it had done enough to inrage him. With more
fury issues not the Tiger from his den to seek his pray, then he returned
upon the Scythian with Hectors sword, strongly clasped in both hands. Above
four lost the vermillion of their faces, seeing the fearful blow descend,
whose noise was heard over all the armies: his helm sounded like a bell, and
he voyded much blood through his mouth and nostrels: and staggerd up and down,
not knowing where he was. With such another he helped him, which forced him in
amazement, to set his hands and knees on the hatches of his bark, wherein he
would have leapt, if the two brothers, Don Celindo and Floraliza, had not there
arrived.

At once they both eagerly discharged two blows on him, that he was
constrained to bow lower then he would Quick and bold was the Lady, so would
she have won the entrance of his vessel, but she had like to overthrown
her self: for the Emperors Admiral being near thereto, and the haughty
Rosicler knowing his brave son, and seeing him so ill used, like an Eagle
leapt into his boat, saying. Courage brave Prince, for your father is with
you. With the blow he gave, she was forced back, and for fear of falling
into the sea, she withheld her self.

His son could not answer him, so enraged he was, imagining some show of
cowardice had made his father come to succor him. And his blood repaired to his
heart, the which burning like fire, and closing bark to bark, leaving his
father with Don Celindo, he turned his revenge wholly upon the Lady, whose
beauty deserved no such requital.

Camillas army may she thank for her life, else this had been her last
battle and term of breathing. Three steps he made her stagger backewards,
and followed her with so strong a thrust, that he thrust her so far within
the bark, that easily he won the entrance in despite of the Pagans.
Exceeding danger does Meridians daughter incur, fighting with Rosabell, with
whom no Lion may be compared. Again before the Lady recovered her self, he
gave her another that had almost felled her. Never was she in such peril: but
he that loved her as his soul, Don Clarisell, (that long had sought her) came
thither in such good time, as it was worth no less then her life to her: who
seeing his Lady so handled, let fly a cruel thrust at him. Against him that
had struck him, turned the Britain youth, giving the Lady leave to rise and
breathe.

Thither also arrived the furious forsaken Lindauro, with many mighty Giants
of his guard, and seeing the cruel fight, and knowing the Lady (whom they all
tendered) he went against Rosicler, that hand to hand warred with Celindo: he
entered between them, parting both Barks, whereby the brother and sister
turned both upon Rosabel. He did not refuse them, although the Assyrian
troubled him every time he reached him. On every side else of the battle,
the Greeks had plainly got the victory, which they bravely maintained. And
indeed the mighty Abstrusio was he that won it, winning the title of an
excellent Captain, which he kept for ever. There wanted not them that told
him news of his dear friend Bosabels arrival. It gladded his very soul, for
as it he loved him. Him for gratitude does Galtenor extol above all the
Princes in the world. He told it to his beloved Syrinda, saying. Let us go to
aid our Prince (dear Lady) for he that is so much indebted to him as we
both, it is the least we can do. His strength and valor do I wish I had
(replied she) to employ in the thing I most desire. With an embrace the Pagan
encouraged himself, and commanding his Galleon to be directed toward the
Tower, in a trice he rusht in among the Barks there. Easily he might have
suncke them, with the advantage of his being the strongest and best in all the
Fleetes, but yet he would not, save enter them with his person. By his manner
of fight he knew his friend, whereupon he committed his Galleon to the stout
Lysarte, that showed himself that day to be a good warrior.

The Greek Lover wanted now no friends, for on the other side came the
haughty Oristoldo, all covered with Pagans blood. Abstrusio first arrived,
whom every one feared, seeing him so stern and mighty: from his own to
Rosabels ship he leapt, pronouncing his proper name. It much contented him to
have such a friend by his side. Little could Alicandros Nephews win at their
hands: for the Pagan merits not comparison with less then with Brauorant, and
if he have any advantage over him, it is more then is known. In his assault
he struck Don Celindo on the helm: had he done it with advise, it had been
the last, with the latest moment of his life: nevertheless being besides his
head, it falls him headlong down. He clasped him twixt his arms, thinking
either to kill or imprison him. Either he might have done, if the gallant Don
Argante had not lept thither from his vessel.

Of haughty courage was the youth, so upon the Pagans bark he discharged a
fierce blow, which made him leave Don Celindo, and tarne upon him. Against
them both would the Pagan defend himself, to his honor, had he place to wild
about his strong arms: but there was such little room, as they were all
heaped together one upon another. Yet Rosabell bravely keeping his standing, I
know not with whom I may compare him, unless it be with him whom Fortune
exalted above all knights: who, while matters thus past to eternize the Greeks
fame, appeared in sight of both armies, like the God of war himself, whose
arrival deserves far more then another Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII. How to the battle arrived the two Princes, Claramant and
Claridiana: and what end happened to the adventure of the Tower.
TIred with bloody conflicts of stern war, I now will return me (fair
Ladies) to Loves sweet pleasing battles, whither bringing those two that have
the sole pre-eminence over al others in arms, and only to liberate the
beauteous Lyriana, I shall not need to crave your favors thereto, for I trust
(though not all) some will deny it me. This hope animates me to proceed in this
laborinth, and commit the two princes to your protecting smiles. Plowing up the
billows of the calm seas, they resembled the glorious sun, appearing
through the clouds, displaying his fiery rays. As they approached, Claramant
said.

The world (brave Prince) is so full of your haughty deeds, that there needs
no more trial to eternize them: wherefore let me entreat you at this time, to
let me be foremost in this attempt, that presuming on your help, I may win
some honor by your aid. Most warlike warrior (replied he) considering the
necessity, you should not demand of me, what I ought to entreat of you: for
where your axe hewes his passage, there my sword is not required. So do as you
will, for I mean to keep where I am, to enjoy the sight of your deeds. And as
I think, there is more to do at the Tower then any where else. He needed not
to have said so, for Galtenor that guided their bark, directed it thither.

Straight did Trebatios unknown son close his beauer, and setting one foot
on the edge of his vessel, with his axe twixt both hands, he entered between
both armies, crying: Grecia, Grecia, that none might strike him. There was none
but much rejoiced, seeing one with Theseus axe at one end, and the other, with
the best sword in the world, defending his back at the other. More furious did
not Hercules show himself among the Cennaures, nor Theseus beating at the
brazen gates of Hell, then were the two Princes among those miserable Infidels.

No blow does the new Mars bestow, but riddes his father of an enemy: who was
ouerioyed with pleasure, seeing the excellent disposition, of them both. He
expressed it to the two Giants that were with him, saying. Have you ever seen
any knights of haughtier disposition? credit me, these be they will win our
victory. I think no less (said the King of Cerdina) for excepting my Lord
the Emperor of Trebizond, I have not beheld any of better constitution and
shape of body then the foremost. It is so (said Brandafidell) but I Will be
surety for the other, that he will not for his part loose any jot of the
victory. Why then (spoke the Emperor Trebatio) let us behold the trial of
their bravery. Quicly did they verify it to be true, for passing by the
imperial Admiral, and thinking the Emperor to be there, they did their duty
very gallantly.

Swifter then the wind past their Bark forward, till it came even where
Rosabell was: round beset with mighty enemies was the lusty Britain, for
Epirabio a valiant Pagan, with others, exceedingly troubled him. So was
Abstrusio by the rest that were in the ship, as is already said. Now
Claramant arrived, and with a flourish swaying about his axe, he struck the
Pagan on the helm: it is too weak to defense the head, for with a big wound
he was felled. To succor him came the brave Assyrian Prince, who here got
nothing now, for the rigorous axe will not pardon Love it self: the which was
discharged on the midst of his shield: It cleft it in two, and had not his
armor been Telimonios, his breast had been so too: yet he stumbled backwards,
not knowing what he did. Then turned he upon the two valiant brothers, reaching
Floraliza besides her helm: and although her beauty did not deserve it, he
made her stumble as she would fall. At her did Rosabell let drive, felling her
altogether on the gound. To help her hasted Don Argante, which was to no small
effect, hitting Claramant a venturous blow on his arms, making him loose his,
whose force could not but have indaungered Don Celind^ Like an angry Lion did
the gallant Torisiano set upon Lyrianas ^^^er, and giving him on his helm a
most fierce blow. It forced him touch the Bark with one hand.

By this was Floraliza on his feet, who more furious then an Hyrcanian beast,
with both hands raised Camillas sword, laying it on Rosabell before he rose.
With a little more, she had laid him along: yet she stayed to give him a
thrust at his rising, which she did with the utmost of her strength, driving
him two steps from her. Disgraced was the Britain here, for either tripping
one leg with another, or by the strength of the blow, he fell on his back at
Don Celindos feet. Who thinking he had occasion by the front, would not omit
it, for seeing him so stagger, he turned his sword about over his head, and
discharged it at full on the Greeks helm. Doubt do the wise men, to whether
Rosabels fall may be attributed. It extremely grieved Abstrusio that was hard
by him, then who was never Lion more fierce.

He met with Floraliza, that eagerly followed the Greek, on whose shield he
laid the weight of his arms with his broad sword, in such manner, that
beating it against her head, it left her senseless. He had time to turn upon
Don Celindo, that would have kneeled on the Britain, whom he gave so mighty
a stroke on his shoulders, that he enforced him backwards faster then he came.
Then gave he the Pagan his hand, who quickly got on his legs, and so at his
pleasure took his revenge on the brothers, that they were fully requited with
interest.

In this season was not Claridiano so idle, as to witness what his uncle
performed, for never any knight did better back his friend. There was no
Giants durst come near the enchanted bark, but in satisfaction of his
presumption, left his life in the hands of the one or other. Sometimes would
Claramant hitting his enemy with his axe, strike him even to Claridianos
standing, who finished the reckoning, bereauing him of his life, whose fortune
brought him thither. The horror which was made there, seemed no less then if
the whole frame of heaven would fall: for all the famous Pagans repaired to the
Tower, maintaining the battle in an equal state where they were: but in all
other places else, there was nothing heard but victory for the Greeks.
Breaking through so many valiant adversaries rusht the enchanted Bark, till it
confronted Brufaldoros. It much pleased Claramant to behold the Pagans
disposition, and with what fury he defended his arch. With thousands of dead
bodies he had strewed the vast sea, having thitherto with honor augmented his
fame: but the blind Goddess intending altogether to favor the Grecians,
conducted thither the invincible Claramant, all died with Sarazens blood.

The Moore then ended the felling of the gallant Persian on his Bark, to poor
Laissas extreme grief that beheld it: who quickly saw him pay for it dearly.
For as the Bark past all the Christian vessels, made the warrior way,
somewhat he might revenge them for their sustained disgraces, and others (that
waighed not their honors) because they would not meddle with him. Many left
their fights, hearing that the Knight of the Lions combatted with him that kept
the arches of the Tower. With fresh courage entered the famous combattants. Most
nimble was the Moore, and knowing his enemies valor, with what advantage he had
with his axe, he purposed to proceed warily in this battle, and help himself
with that dexterity the heavens had lent him. So with his shield on his arm,
and his sword poynting outwardes, stayed for him.

The venturous youth did not respect nor care toward his adversaries blows,
save only brandished his axe about, letting it fall where it would, but
Brufaldoro was no knight to be assaulted so openly and carelessly, for letting
the axe fly over his head, he set his knees on the ground, and in that manner
he gave the Prince so mighty a blow on his left side. Had not his armor been
so sure, in two he had been divided, yet it made him stagger as if he would
have fallen on that side. This was the first and greatest blow that Claramant
received. With more advise he turned, and being well settled, whilded aloft his
axe. All his tricks nor agilitie auayled the great Mauritanian king, for
falling on the edge of his shield, all it reached was cut away, letting the
cruel blow light on the Pagans temples. Neither armor nor enchantment can
resist the furious axe, for in sight of the greatest Princes and best knights
of the world, the mighty K. of Mauritania with a dangerous wound was felled
all along upon the hatches of his bark. Highly was the knight of the Lions
extolde by all the beholders, for they that knew Brufaldoro, and at one blow
saw him on the ground, could not imagine whom his adversary might be. With
mighty fury did ye bark pass forward as far as Bembo, at such time as the
proud Moore rose in amaze, and flinging to his enemy, in his place he
encountered the haughty Claridiano, representing the stern God of battelles on
the seas. Betwixt them both they began one of the fiercest combats of that day:
for the Pagan rores and blasphemes against heaven, when thinking to be
revenged, he met who^ he imagined not, being so bravely to his cost resisted by
Claridiano, that many times he was struck senseless.

Many gazed on their fight, judging him and his companions of the Lions, the
flower of both armies. Quickly did the furious Claramant, attract all the
spectators eyes after him, who then had like to have incurred much danger, for
bearing his aim on Brauorant, the valiant Bembo stepped under his arms, and in
his passage gave him a dangerous thrust. There stayed the Bark, and ere the
Greek could turn about his axe, Achayan was joined to Claramant. The Pagan
greatly fearing the Greeks weapons, went as near him as he could, and so
reached at his sword. With some amaze he made him give back, else he had
easily drawn it. Claridiano did by chance perceive it, whereat with one step
he was with him. Never did two knights better aid one another, then the
kinsmen. At his arms he let fly a mighty blow, it made him forget his hold
of the sword, and retire three steps, helped thereto with an envious thrust.
And having performed his succor, he returned very quick unto his first place.
For the Assyrian and Don Argante were come thither, to both whom he made
known the valor of his person. More abashed then may be expressed. Claramant
retired a little back (seeing what had happened him with Bembo) to fetch about
his axe, which he did with such fury, that it caused chil cold fear in the
hearts of the furthest removed, but not in the valiant Achayan, that nothing
at all daunted, entered within him as he raised his weapon, and with his utmost
strength he struck him on his thighs.

A more troublesome blow had not the Greek received, for the pain thereof
made him loose his. Whereupon he would have closed with him: but the mighty
Bembo striking his axe outwardes with his sword, and before he could defend
himself, he discharged it on his helm. He made him set one knee on the
ground, and see the least stars in the firmament at broad day. Ere he could
rise, he struck him again on the shoulders with no less fierceness. But all
this cannot avail him, to shun what the cruel Mistress of inconstant times
had decreede against him.

For the Greek being well recovered, and strongly getting on his feet, with
extremest fury of enraged wrath, with his remorcelesse axe, he met the
Achayans head. It cut away all the top, and a great piece on the side, and
had killed him outright, striking something lower: yet in a trance he felled him
down.

And so bravely passed forth unto the third Arche, defended by the flower of
Chivalry. There was neither friend nor foe but admired ye knight of the Lions
fortitude. So well was he backed by his Coosen, that his praises with his
Uncles merits, were sung in an equal key. For there was no knight so hardy
that durst but imagine to interrupt their passage, seeing their maintenance.
Within reach one of an other, approached the two warriers. Either by the sole
view esteemed his adversary. Brandishing his heavy blade, the Gran Campeons
Nephew, prepared himself for his defense, with such aspect, that I know not
he, would not fear him.

Now manner of fight would Claramant have devised against him, considering his
well knit sinews, and strong composed members. There he repented that little
pause, judging it cowardice to make that small stay. With his axe on his
shoulder and his left foot forward, he went against his enemy, that with his
sword in both hands expected him in the same manner. A more fearful spectacle
was never seen: for most of the spectators dreading their sight closed their
eyes. So Claramant made as if he would execute his blow, but in the midst of
his course he stayed his weapon, to take him unawares, as he fetched it about
again. Careless was not the Scythian, but rather none like him, did with more
wariness lay hold of advantage in the process of his battles. And so
perceiving his adversaries intent, he closed with him so quickly, that when he
would have struck him, the Pagan had executed his blow.

There is no knight how valiant soever, that having received such a one, durst
have expected an other: for this forced the Prince backwards within his bark,
and dragged his axe after him. A thousand times would the Pagan have leaped
after him, which he left, because he would not forsake his Arch. A brauer blow
in all that war was not given, nor never did Claramant receive a bigger, for
it made the blood gush from his nose and nostrels. So far had the Pagan run
within him, that he could not strike him with his axe, but rather Bramarants
fierce son seconded it most mightily. Never did Trebatios haughty son do,
what at this instant, which was by stepping aside, to shun his adversaries
stroke. And as he wished it, so he saw the stout Pagan follow the furious
weight of his blade. Whereat the Greek settled himself on his left foot, and
crushing one tooth with an other, with the utmost of his strength, he
discharged his rage on his Helm. From it bounded the Axe, else it had battered
all his head: nevertheless the blow so astonished him, that not knowing what
he did, he staggard as he would fall.

Whereupon Claramant bravely leapt after him into his Bark: the like did
Claridiano, and either supposing the other would not strike him, they both at
once executed two most puissant blows. Altogether without feeling, they felled
him. Little honor got the kinsmen by the deed, for being two, and of such
note, it was rather the Pagans glory to be vanquished at their hands. Scarce
was the blow discharged, when the Tower was all covered with a black thick
mist, and with the same, with such horror was a larum sounded, as in ye
beginning of the conflict. With thundering and lightnings, shrikes and hideous
fearful cries, and terrible claimours, were both Armies affrighted: the cause
was, that Lupercio seeing how his hopes were by Fortune crossed, procured to
obtain by his Art, what with so many thousand men he could not get.

But Nabato the Greek friend, that had more skill then he, with Nygromanticke
spelles and Coniurations, dissolved the others exorcismes, and so cleared the
Tower as before. From whose highest top was a Ladder let down, by which two
knights might well get up at once. Slow to do it was not the valiant Greek,
casting his axe upon his shoulder, at such time as the strong Pagan rose from
the ground. There is no Lion missing his pray, more fiercer then he, for
roaring like a bayted Bull seeing him with the axe ascend, he would have
followed him: but Claridiano prevented it, confronting him, arm against arm,
and sword against sword, and with a brave thrust inforst him back.

Well did Branorant express his wrath by discharging his blade with both hands
on the others rich helm, the finesse of whose temper, saved his life: yet it
did not keep him from touching the ground with his knees, voyding blood from
his vysor. Thither rowed amain in their Barks, came with enraged fury, the
two lusty warriors, Bembo, and Brufaldoro, by whose coming, Claridiano had
incurred much danger, if they had entered: but the gallant Rosabel, that with
Don Celindo and Floraliza combatted, having approached so very near to
Brauorants bark, he leapt into it, when Bembo arrived to do so. The Brytaine
hindered him from it, driving him away with a brave thrust, not only making him
loose his intent, but hopes of ever getting his desires: For the magnanimious
Dacian rushing among them, interrupted Brufaldoro from ayding the Scythian. And
so one with others beginning a fierce battle, the second Mars Claramant had
time to ascend up the ladder, not without much pain, for unseen of him by
whom he was struck, he felt himself mortally wounded. Unto the top of the
Tower he arrived, with more courage then Hector amiddest the Myrmedons, where
he was opposed by two deformed Giants with heavy Maces. But as Fortune had
vowed to favor him, like lightning he put himself among them, with the best
weapon the world contained. In midst of the Gallery he stretched him at
length, which being broad enough, oh who were able distinctly to dylate the
wonders he performed, swaying about his axe: for the Giants only are there to
fight, from whence they draw strength for their defense, and courage from their
wounds: the which makes our knight take the condition of a Lion, assayling and
retyring, like an Eagle in swiftness: but the more he toils, the more does
it augment force in his adversaries, for their inchanment lies in tumbling
down the way Claramant ascended. Long endured not this strife: for the Prince
seeming to fear them, gave a little back, whereat they eagerly followed him,
which he well noting, set on him that came foremost, and meeting him right
against the ladder, he turned about his axe, with such fury, that with it he
feld the Giant over, who was never more seen. The Greek was of pregnant and
sharp understanding, so he straight perceiving the cause, which made him
avoiding a blow of the suruiuer, close with him, and suddenly hoysting him
aloft, tumbled him the same way his companion went. If all the frame of heaven
and earth had fell, it could not have caused more fear, then what surprysed
the hearts of every one by the Giants death. So weary remained Claramant, that
to ease himself, he raised his Beauer, to breathe a while, and so he looked
out at a window on the battle, rejoicing to see so many of his enemies vessels
to burn with fire. Long stood he not so, because the wise Nabato in company of
the Ladies, issued out of an other fair Gallery. The Greek had not till then
(since his enchantment) seen any woman, which made him admire these fayres,
judging none might equal the cheifest of them.

So the wise man approached, saying. Most excellent knight, you may account
your self in more then I may well express, having ended such an adventure as
this, only reserved for the valor of your person, and virtue of those arms,
the which until this instant, have cost you most dear: yet must you more
endure, sustaining many dangers about them: and therefore henceforth begin to
take courage. And as for what you have done for these Ladies, because in part
it concerns your self, they shall not need to thank you. And more in this
matter I am not permitted to say till you shall loose your liberty, recovering
then both father, mother, friends and wife. And while I live, will I assist you
to my power, for my Lions sake that is among you, whom I account as my son.

So for this time ceasing, I commit unto your victorious hands, Lyriana the
fair princess of Nyquea, espoused unto the valiant Greek Prince Rosabell,
that below expected her, bravely backing you with your dear friend. Having
thus said, he vanished, and Claramant taking the Lady by the hand, fairer then
the sun, he led her down the steps, at the noise of such sweet music,
that it much delighted both fleetes. Thither repaired most of the valiantest
Pagans, imagining the adventure ended. Oh Bembo, it touches thee more the^ any,
and so more then humane deeds do thou perform, yet all avail not against
thy contrarious fates: for the Greek Emperor seeing the adventures end,
commanded certain Giants to row him there, with more fury to break through
his enemies: with whom went most of the warlike Knights: He that best deserved
in that exigent, discharging the hopes of him expected, was the brave Tartarian
Zoylo, being high treasurer of all the fleet, who desirous to show how much he
was indebted to Rosabell, chose out eight of the best furnished Galleys, both
of sail and munition, and with them in a rank, he set himself along the
Arches, that way to hinder his adversaries approach, although all their fleet
made thitherwards: and so joining with Oristoldo, and his valiant father in his
ship, with Abstrusios bark, which was the strongest on all the sea, they
bravely resisted the Pagans fury, that then seemed reuenous. Nothing helped
them, for then Claramant descended with his Beauer closed, because he would not
be known by any. With a loud voice he demanded for Rosabell.

Far from him was not the glad youth, most joyful seeing his Lady sure from
his enemies. She was delivered to him with these words.

I do so much desire your content (most valiant Prince,) that to procure it, I
have endeavored to do thus much: and so in sign that I will ever be your
friend while life indures, I present you with the spoils, only due to your
valor. Whereto the Prince replied. Brave knight, I do not so much esteem
the good you have done me by liberating my espowse, although my life depended
thereon, as the generositie and magnanimity wherewith you do it, which is so
great, that I cannot requite, save by perpetually acknowledging the debt you
have bound us all in, and refer the satisfaction to your own merits, from
whence this memorable act proceeds. The great hurleburly brake off their
farther speeches, whereat he returned, for the other Ladies and Rosabel with
his in his arms, was conducted to the Christians Imperial Admiral, where the
Greek Emperor received them with the greatest joy in the world. Presently
was victory proclaimed for the Greeks: who being assured thereof, fought
fiercer then at first.

The sun with his absence parted that more then wondrous Battle: and so the
Pagans fearing their utter overthrow, sounded retrait, leaving the third part
of their vessels swallowed by the sea, with infinite number of Knights and
Giants. They entered into counsel to see what befitted them. Voices were given
altogether to end the battle: but in the end they resolved the contrary,
because their adversaries held Fortune by the hand, and thereuppon withdrew
toward Nyquea, from whence with fresh supplies and new hosts, to turn upon
Grecia they resolved. Some comfort was this to those that were like to burst
with fury.

Bembo would not be cured, til the Souldan himself entreated him. So mad was
Brauorant, that none durst look him on the face. The wise man, consolated and
animated them, saying he did find by his Art, that if there do not come more
supplies to Grecia, they should surely conquer it: for their party would be
far augmented, by the uniting of many more Princes much wronged by the Greeks.
With this they were appeased, although destitute of consolation. Nothing so
were the Greeks, that all the night spent in joy and pleasure, not missing
their lost men, though they were very many.

The Emperor with all his sons, would needs pass into Abstrusios great and
strong Galleon, to do him that favor. Who requested the kissing of his
hands, but the Emperor would not, and embracing him, said.

If I had known we had been all soldiers unto so brave a Captain, I had with
better hopes expected the happy success of this conflict. What I did, in what
degree soever, (most mighty Monarche he replied) was through imagination of
the great content I hoped would have redowned by my service, the which I assure
eternally unto your Crown. All the warlike Ladies assembled together, where
Archysilora made her self known. The Emperor took her in his arms saying.
In faith, believe me fair Queen, our victory has been too small, since
procured by such hands. Rosamonde rejoiced in her heart with her coming, for
they intierly loved. Then the Emperor sent for Venus, and Layssa, who brought
with them their two little daughters, whose beauty every one admyred. There also
the graund Trebatio greatly thanked Pollidolpho for his good aid. And every
one in general, were busied in the entertainment of so worthy a success.

Through all the Fleet, the Emperor commanded the two knights to be sought
for, that had ended the adventure: but not finding them, he was advertised how
they departed in the greatest haste possible. After them had the Emperor sent,
but that Nabato stayed him, that would not depart without visiting his Dacian,
and speak to the Emperor, who entertained him as his deeds and merits
deserved.

He made reply according to his wisdom, persuading them not to grieve for the
two knights absence, whom they should see in other new contents, which the one
should conceive until death, although the other, is so tormented with amorous
cares, that the earth can afford him no pleasure, because the giver thereof is
in this ship. None could directly suspect who he was, yet some judged him to
be Claridiano, and they were the two gallant Ladies, Rosamond and Archysilora,
who was comforted with hope to see him in Grecia, where she would assure him of
his glory, and how that if she were beloved, he was no less. It was presently
known by spies, how their enemies were withdrawn homewards. It nothing
grieved them, in that for Lyrianas sake, they willingly would have accorded to
any good motion. Before that Nabato departed, he advertised them, they should
not dissolve their Hosts, for that they would return upon Crecia, with the
greatest powers on the earth, against which the fierce Lioness would rise,
stirred up by the Russet Lion. With this he took his leave of the Greeks,
leaving them much bound unto him. A great while he conferd with Don Eleno, to
whom he declared the cause of the future war, and that since he was the
greatest cause thereof, he should procure to make known the utmost of his
valor: because that party which should most respect him, would most oppress
him, and would many times put him in imminent dangers of his life, yet all
should honorably end, to his lasting fame, and Rosamonds. So he embraced him,
vanishing far from thence.

The next morning, the victorious Greeks in tryumphant manner made toward
Constantinople, having finished the famousest nauall fight that was heard or
read of. Forewards did King Sacridoro put forth, to be the first should bear
those happy tidings unto the Empress, which he accordingly performed. And with
prosperous winds, not long after they arrived all at Constantinople, in whose
welcome, there happened what the next Chapter shall declare.

CHAP. XXIIII. How the Emperor Trebatio with all his Fleet, arrived at
Constantinople. His welcome, with what else happened.
NO sooner were the furious horses of the Sun, harnest in their bright
Caparisons of shining light, ready to draw the golden Chariot of heavens
glittering eye, through the Crystal paued ways of the Azure skies, expelling
thence the duskie Clouds of leaden melancholy darkness, when the Greeks
gallant Fleet containing so many Princes, and brave Knights, appeared in sight
of the famous City of Constantinople, sounding so many millitary Instruments,
as if that were the instant of the earths general desolation.

Such thick smoke of smothering fiery mysts, raised the discharged ordinance
in well ordered peales, that one vessel could not discern the other. Which past,
the Galleys and Ships began to show themselves, daring the winds with
their proud streamers, and all their tops with dancing Banners made of
silk, whose meeting displayed in the air, ravished the beholding senses with
joy: which on the other side, was a corsiue to the hearts of the afflicted
prisoners, seeing theirs as trophies of the victory, set up among their
adversaries. The echo on the water of mellodious harmony of concordant
Music, was a comfort to the poor wounded soldiers, who were all committed
to the warlike Trojans charge.

The discreet Citizens were not all this while careless, but rather in
preparations to feast their Prince had been most careful. All the Castles in
the City welcomed them according to their usual custom, placing on the
highest of every one, the Emperors Imperial standards.

To the sea side came all the gallant youths bravely Armed, and every one a
blew scarf, and in their hands swords and daggers, wherewith they skirmiged as
they went. In two parts they divided themselves to take the Princes in the
middle, that then were coming forth of Abstrusios Admiral. A most fair
Bridge they set up, from the Galleon to the shore, with many stately Arches,
all covered with green cloth of gold, and they with many curious Pictures,
containing all the Greek Princes Battles and adventures. Who issued forth in
this manner.

First marched the Emperor Trebatio, between his two sons, representing such
Majesty and cheerful semblance, that therewith his subjects were much
gladded. A little behind them, appeared those three Myrrors of beawtie,
Lyriana, Archysilora, and Rosamond, who to please the Princess of Nyquea, had
put off their strong abillements of war.

They were all three attyred in green, cut upon cloth of silver, and tackte
with knottes of Pearl, and between every cut, a button of rich Dyamonds: on
whose sparkeling light, the reuerberating sun dazeling thereon, deprived the
beholders of the Ladies sight. Large and wide were their garments, with long
sleeves hanging to the ground, all richly Embrodered, even much like the
fashion now used in France.

Other shorter they woare on their arms, laced over with great Orient Pearls,
with cuts drawn through with finest cloth of Gold, faced with white and
crimson, according to the vsance of the Parthians. Their disheueld hair
dangled down in tramels, whereon, there is not any, but would have hung
thereon a thousand souls, and judge them too few for their merits. To
conclude, they were so exceeding absolute in all perfections, that Apollo
blushed to be excelled in beauty by humane creatures, who to enjoy the
contemplation of their excellencies, and surfeit in imaginary conceits of their
rarieties, curbed with his reigns, the hasty galloping of his fierce and
unstayed steeds. A little after them, followed other three, no less bewtifull
then they. These were the gallant Venus, the brave Layssa, with the fair
Syrinda. They would not change color, and therefore were all in Crimson, cut
upon Gold.

Next to them, the excellent Empress, Claridiana, attired according to her
Maiesticke state and gravity: yet with such exquisit bewty, that the former
six became envious of her fair. She passed on with the mighty Abstrusio,
whom all the Greeks much affected. The rest of the ladies were al richly
apparelled. At the end of the bridge, upon a tryumphant arch, stood three
images, most lively representing the first three ladies. Not far from them,
three Sirens, with Amber tresses dangling to the ground came forth, and playing
on several Harpes, sung several notes one after the other, thus.

From the Lillies is she hight,
Robed with Emperious might:
Yet she staynes the Lillies white.
When she had done, then the second turning to the Queen of Lyra, sung.

Earthly thing gives not her name,
Earth cannot express the same:
Heavenly it is, and thence it came.
The third, with no less sweetness, remembered Rosamond, in this manner.

Though last, not least, but with the best,
The worlds sweet Rose is well expressed:
A fair paire-royall ever blessed.
Having all ended, they recorded them together, with such recording voices, to
the consort of their delightful music, nothing different from Angels harmony.
And as they went under it, from the opening of a Cloud, spredde under the
Arch, after a tempest of artificall thunder and lightening, there reigned
down, an odoriferous shewer of sweet water-dewed fragrant flowers, whose
comfortable odor, revived all their sea-weakened minds.

Before they had passed it, from the thickest of the same Cloud, there
descended three mighty Eagles, either with a coronet of flowers in their
bills: and whipping the air with their great wings: they with them, crowned
the three most gallant Ladies. So soon as they were gone by, and Venus with
her company come thither, the three Sirens, to a new dulced tune, with one
voice sung this note.

An other fair payre-royall of like fame,
That doubtful it is, which hand will win the game.
The twelve Governors of the Empire, with all the courtiers and gallants of the
City, expected their landing at the shore: where twelve ancient Peers, clad
in long robes of cloth of Gold trayling on the ground, took the six Ladies
under a cannabie, whose value exceeded estimation, and in that equipage marched
forward, till they stayed to behold a Castle, erected and drawn on four
wheels: within they rung a larum bell, crying, Nyquea, Nyquea: advancing on
the highest of the same, three Ensigns, with the Ladies arms.

Then in rich Armor issued out thereof, three well accomplished Knights, who
aloude made a challenge, to maintain they were the Paragons for beauty and
fortitude. There wanted not enemies to defend the contrary: for from the same
Castle came forth nine knights, between whom, they began a brave combat at
barriers.

Then began the Castle to move, discharging so many fireworkes, as if it
were al on a flame. The Ladies would not mount on horeseback, because they were
very near the chief gate of the City, through which the Theban Duke issued
forth with the imperial Ensign: who entreated the Ladies in the Citizens
behalf, to dispose of the City as their natural Lords. They returned their
tha^kfulnes according to their states, highly esteeming of their solemn
entertainment, which had so exceedingly contented Lyriana, that she accounted
all her forepassed troubles well bestowed, since they had brought her to so
happy end. In all the Court there was not any but came to see the arrival of
their Princes. In opinion was the Ladies beauty had, whether of the three was
fairest: for Lyrianas sight had attracted all eyes. And in no less admiration
were the others had.

Such press of people were in the streets, that had not the Emperors guard
gone before, they had not been able to pass. But being entered into the yard,
new matters did happen, for an alarm bell was with fury rung in Lyndabrides
enchantment: which ended, they heard a most heavenly noise of sweet music.
There was none but demanded the cause of that unaccustomed accident. Whereto the
wisemen answered. That by reason of the Nyquean Princess coming, the gates
were opened, that every one that would, might freely prove the adventure.
Very great pleasure conceived the Emperor Trebatio thereat: so did the grand
Alphebo, imagining the end of the adventure was at hand, so much by them
desired.

I do omit (fair Ladies) to shun prolixitie, their new welcomes in the
Hall: only remembering Oliuas joy, with the sight of Lyriana and her son
Rosabell, whom also with the other Ladies, sons, and kisme^, the Empress
Briana, most kindly entertained. Few days after, was the Britain Prince,
with the Princess of Nyquea, married by the Patriach of Constantinople, being
first baptized, which sacred and divine Sacrament, Rosamond would also receive,
for her dear Lords sake.

New triumphs had been ordained, but that the proof of the disamorous Tower
did intercept them: for as the promised reward was so great, every one procured
most, to show himself most forward in that adventure.

Dinner being done, there wanted no knights that offered the trial, but as it
required such great valor, ere the sun setting, there was hung about the
Tower, above two hundredth Shieldes, every one placed according to his Masters
deserts. Drown would Apollo his clear light, in Thetis watery lap, when
through the place there entered a gallant and well accomplished Knight, clad in
rose color Armor, and bravely mounted. His disposition pleased every one. Who
galloping along, leaped from his saddle, and with admirable bravery passed into
the Tower. Many suspected he would end the adventure, seeing with what courage
he ascended the defended steps. But four he wanted, when unable to go any
further, he was senseless cast from the Tower, having his Sheelde set very
near unto the haughty Trojans.

This knight was a valiant Pagan Lord, of Lesbos I Will, not far from Troy. Who
having landed a little after the Ladies came thither, at such time, that he
well made known the prowess of his person. Scarce had this stout Pagan lost
his entrance, but Lyriamandros haughty son, named Tersildo, presented
himself, to be no less valiant then free from the vnweildie yoke of of love.
His Armor was of Azure color, with many stars of Gold. In the midst of
his shield, was portrayed a knight treading on Cupid, having his Bow and Quiver
broken: with this Motto.

Love resisted is a child,
Suffered, is a Tiger wild.
And a little lower.

The scourge of heaven, and earth, hell, sea, and land,
Is scourged and maistered by a humane hand.
There was no Lady there, but grieved at his free device, nor never did they
more wish any knights vanquishment, as this: thinking it was an injury unto
their sex, to have him live at liberty. Quickly was their desire satisfied:
for proouing the entrance, he did courageously arrive as far as the Pagan,
whence with like violence he was cast forth: whose unhappy chance did greatly
please all the Ladies present. The nights approach with sable couerture, taking
her place in Phoebus absence, brake off the instant trial: whereupon the
Emperor with his company returned to the Palace, where was open reuelling.

Rosabell daunced with Lyriana, and every Prince with his beloved Lady, to
their incomparable joy. All which, did but more and more grieve the Queen of
Lyra, for wanting her Claridiano, she was not capable of the least pleasure: so
was she there present only, but in person, for her soul wandered to seek him.
Just guerdon for her strangeness, which she long time was forced to suffer:
for although he was in the Greek wars, none knew him (as in the fourth of
this part shall be expressed) nor would he be known to any, imagining his Lady
to be still displeased with him: whose sight did sufficiently strengthen him
to tolerate his pains. But now we are enjoined to leave her, and the
disamorous proof to explicate the manner, how the Princess Roselia, and
Arbolinda of Scotland were liberated, whom in the Forest, three miles from
Rome, we left enchaunted.

CHAP. XXV. How Claridiano and Claramant arrived at the Port of Rotta, where
they found the strange enchauntment of Roselia, and what haughty deeds of
Chivalry they there performed in the company of Alphebo, Brauorant, and Don
Celindo.
PLowing the foming Billows of the vast deep sea, with their inchaunted bark
(most bewtious dames) we left Claridiano and Claramant, with no small joy, for
the good success of the valiant Greeks, and yet much wondered at the little
reason the Nyquean Souldan, had not to accept as his son in law (whom Darius
would not have refused) the famous Britain Rosabell, Competitor with Mars
himself in arms: and for state and royalty, equal to the Greek Macedonian
Alexander. Of these and such like matters did the two Greek warriors
discourse, admirnig to behold, with what swiftness their bark cut through the
swelling waves. And to see whether they could discern any Haven or Arbor, not
long after they descried one, the fairest and safest that they ever saw, the
which Claridiano ouerioyed thereat, told his uncle it was the famous Port of
Rotta, three miles from the renowned City of Rome, whereat they desired to
land, because they wished to see a place so glorious as that.

Their will was quickly accomplished, for the Bark with incredible Vellocitie
came a shore in the same Haven, where the Princes imagined they were to abide:
whereupon landing and mounting on their Horses, they took their best way to
Rome, which Claridiano partly knew, having before been there. And crossing a
great wood, they came into a fair plain all dyaperd with Floras fragrant
Tapestry, over which an Imperious Castle seemed to command: whose lofty
height and toplesse Pyramedes, controwled the starry Firmament.

In midst thereof, stood an Alabaster Tower, five ways squared, the
workmanship thereof, greatness and altitude, amazed the Princes. At every
edge of the square, it had three Bulwarks of finest Jasper, so that the middle
Tower was encompassed with fifteen Bulwarks. Round about, it was Moted, with a
broad deep Ditch, over which, fell a draw Bridge, to pass it: at the farthest
end thereof, there stood a mighty big Crystal Pillar, on which hung by
Chains of gold, five rich Horns, a little beneath, a Table with Letters, that
yielded such splendour, as they almost deprived the beholders sight. Greatly did
the Prince wonder at the strange rich Edefice, and so Claramant said.

Truly (most excellent Prince) this seems to be a most gallant adventure, if
we may judge it by the strong fortefied bigness of the Castle, Tower, and
Bulwarks, whose like, mine eyes til now did never yet behold: nor is it
possible they should again see such another.

And therefore I much desire to read the Letters of the Table, if you so
think it good, to be certified thereof, for least I be deceived, this should be
some Inchauntment: and if it be, of no small esteem should the person
inchaunted be of. Answer would Claridiano, when through the air they heard a
hideous noise, by the rising of a sudden whirlewind, with such horror, that it
seemed to lead a Legion of devils after it, leaving the way desolate by which
it past, renting by the roots all ye pines, oaks and elmes it met. This sight
confounded the Princes, who looking to see the end, they saw a black fogge
rise over the ditch, whose obscure aspect, deprived Tytan of his bright rays:
but a little after, the Welkin cleared, and Apollo being restored to his former
light, they discerned the Bridge raised above ten faddome high, hindering the
passage over: and on this side, there was placed an other Pillar, but of
Brass, with an inscription of Emerald Letters, that signified the adventure.
Not speaking one to another, they went to the Pillar, and having learned all
manner of languages, they could read this in the Germane tongue thus.

Let none, (though Mars in Arms) be so daring as to pretend the liberty of
Roselia, unless they be five Warriors, whose famous deeds have through the
world extended their eternal glory: for till they shall be together in this
Forest, the passage over the Moate shall be granted to none. Whereupon
Claridiano took occasion thus to speak unto his uncle. I think (heroicke
Prince) it is in vain for us to offer to prove the adventure, seeing the words
say, there should be five that must do it together. Oh how should I rejoice,
were we now accompanied with the strength of Paganism, Brauorant, Bembo, and
Brufaldoro, that we might undertake this enterprise: but seeing the wise men
have thus ordered it, let us if you please, go unto the populous City of
Rome, where you shall see such antiquities, that without admyration you cannot
behold.

Be it as you have said (mighty Lord) replied Claramant, for I will in all
things obey you. As these famous Princes of Greece were about to tread the next
way to the City, they heard a great noise toward the sea coast, as if many
knights were in battle together, whose horror of vncontrowled blows, was no
less then that of Vulcans Aetnean worke-house. Slow were not they that were
borne to fight, in pricking their swift steeds thitherward: and having crossed
the Forest hard by the shore in a fair plain, they saw two sturdie knights
in Combat one against the other. A third of no less gallantnesse mounted, and
leaning on his spear, beheld them.

To him went Mars his Competitors, and after due courtesy, Claramant thus
said. You shall not a little favor us Sir knight, to let us know the cause of
so terrible fight, which in mine opinion, will not cost less, then eythers
life, with such fury they prosecute it. So much have your kind words bound
me, (Sir knight answered he) that I cannot in honor deny to satisfy all
your demand. Know therefore, that you big knight in Russet armor, is called
Brauorant, one of the strongest that this day breathes: who having taken part
with the Souldan of Nyquea, in his last expedition against Grecia, where he
lost most of his ships and men in the Nauall battle, as no doubt you have
heard: this knight left him of purpose, to sail unto his kingdom, to assemble
new powers against the Greeks on the Souldans behalf, having sworn utterly
to distroy them. And I, Don Celindo by name, desirous to see the high deeds of
this most famous warrier, did offer my self to associate him, which he
refused not. So to morrow will be eight days, we departed from the Souldans
Fleet, in a well rigged ship.

Long sailed we not with prosperous weather, but were by a cruel storm cast
on this shore: where finding this Knight, the valiantest (as his fame
memorateth) that ever the spacious world has known, we knew him straight to
be the Emperor Alphebo of Trebizond (for treacherous Lupersio had conducted
him thither to end his desire.) Whom Brauorant knowing to have been on the
Grecians side, and remembering the weight of his cruel blows, did on the
instant challenge him: and for this slight occasion, they so batter and mangle
one an others Armor and flesh.

No longer stayed Claridiano, but understanding that knight to be his father,
drew forth his sword and stepped between them, with these words. Withholde
brave Knights, for so fierce a quarrel is not lawful on so small occasion,
since the loss of either will be a noted want unto the world. Whereat the
courteous Emperor leaving, replied.

In faith (brave Knight) were it but only in respect of your gentle speech, I
would have done it: how much the more, when I win thereby, wanting an equal
estimation with this knights valor.

How mild the Paga^ was, being mildly, used, and how tractable is already
expressed: who now hearing his adversaries gentle words, did accordingly make his
answer to the Emperor. So greatly have your friendly words inchayned me to your
obeisance (most mighty Lord) that though this knight had not requested it, I
would have desisted from the combat, especially, it being my advantage,
considering how Fame through every mouth blazoneth your worth, and my
unworthiness. As Claridianas Lord would have answered, Claramant intercepted
him thus.

If (most valiant knights) the greatest part of your rigorous battle, has
been to manifest unto the world the rareness of your unmatched strength,
wherewith the heavens has armed you, then go with us, where there is occasion
offered, whereon you may more securely employ your redoubted valors in lawful
attempts of brauest arms, which may be undertaken with more sufficient
reasons, then you began this your slender quarrel. For know, that at the end
of this Forest, in the midst of a fair plain, we found a Fortress, which
we judge to be the strongest on the earth, and reading certain letters
insculped in a Table, we perceived it to be the inchauntment of the Princess
Roselia, daughter to the Emperor of this land: and more, that none but five
knights together, whose fame the world should report to be admirable, should
prove the adventure. Wherefore since you be they (according to the conditions
required) it were unjust we should neglect the liberty of so great a
Princess. And although my companions merits and mine own, be not in the least
degree, such as the adventure challenges, it shall satisfy us to march under
the shadow of such woorthies, to end a more harder enterprise. Whereto Alphebo
replied. I am content to offer my person to the proof, although in me there
be nothing meriting your praise: but the controversy had with this knight,
has been enough to teach me to imitate his valor. I, and to have stolen some
part thereof from him to encourage me to this attempt. It shall not be left for
me, (said Don Celindo) for in the company of such knights, the hardest is the
easiest to be atchiued. Then Brauorant, it is not lawful the liberty of so
great a Lady should be remitted through my means, although my fame nothing
deserves your estimation. Then let us no longer delay the trial of so happy a
proof (said Claridiano:) who presently spurred his swift Courser, leading the
way unto the brave inchauntment. Followed he was by the flower of arms: that
altogether in short space arrived at the deep mote, where they admired the
greatness and exquisit workmanship of the Castle, whose like they accorded the
world contained not: especially when Alphebo said, it excelled that of
Lindaraza, where he disinchanted his father, as in the first of the first part
of this great History. No sooner were these valiant warriors arrived, when the
drawbridge (that yet stood on high) was let down, which having past, they
stepped to the Pillar whereon the horns hung. The engraven scrowle of the Table
they thus read.

When the five warriors the adventure does require, shall be here together,
if they be of such daring hearts, as to prove it, let each of them hang one of
these horns about his neck, and winding them, the Castle gates shall be
opened, and they may enter. In performance thereof, these mighty Princes were
nothing slow, but every one lovingly embraced one another, they each of them
presented themselves before either of the Castles, whose gates presently flew
open at the shrill founding of the horns, the echo whereof, was also heard
within the City of Rome. Through the door that befell unto the invincible
Alphebo, issued a deformed ugly big Giant, mounted on a lusty Courser, with a
strong knottie lance in his hand, having a pike of well tempered steel, above
two handfuls in length.

Him Alphebo received with the swiftest running of his horse, the like did the
Giant, with such fury as the earth could scarce bear them. They met so
strongly, that the giants big lance flew in pieces, against the inpenetrable
shield of the knight of the Sun, whose shiuers hissing through the air,
mounted higher then the proud top of the enchantment.

The Giants mighty spear was not of strength to pearce Alphebos thield, the
which was resisted by the magic spelles wherewith Lyrgandeo had forged it:
yet was he cast backwards over his saddle bow, loosing the raines out of his
hand. I know not to what I shall compare the Emperor of Trebezounds encounter:
for hitting the giant in midst of his shield, he pierced it, together with
the plates of steel, and privy coat, whose inchaunted power unable to defend
the lance guided by so brave an arm, he ran it through his left side, mortally
wounding him directly on his heart, against which the strong spear bending, he
broke it, and leaving a piece in the wound, the rest flew into the middle
region of the air. So passing forward, they met with such a shocke, that it
deserves eternal memory: for as the two warriors, incountred shield against
shield, and body with body, the haughty knight of the Sun, first ran
against the Giant upon the spears trunchion, which he so vehemently thrust
through his body, that it cleft into his miserable heart: yet he escaped not so
free, but felt himself so bruised on his Corneryno, that the poor horse was
driven to strike his buttockes on the ground, along whose back his Master
fell, in such amazement, that he knew not whether he was in heaven or on earth.

But recovering himself, and judging it cowardice, he set spurs unto his
horse, which made him fetch light carreirs upon the ground. And looking after
his adversary, he saw him lie upon the earth, voyding his blood as through a
river: by him lay his horse with his shoulder broken, and both at one instant
accompanied each other in death. A little rejoiced not the courteous Emperor at
his speedy good success, and after his due thanks to God for his victory,
would not proceed until the end of Brouorants battle, whom he judged one of
the best knights of the world, wherein he nothing deceived himself. Who
having sounded the rich horn, whereat the Gates burst open, whence came forth
a well proportioned Giant, both bravely mounted and clad in defensive arms,
with a huge mace of seldseene greatness in his hands.

Against him made Bramarants son, brandishing his lance above his head: so
did the Giant with his mace: but in the meeting, Campeons Nephew mist his
encounter, running his spear through the head of his adversaries horse, who as
Brauarant past by him, discharging his mace with such strength in the midst
of his shield, the which (though enchanted) it battered and descended to his
helm: where it fell so heavily, that maugre his courage, it made him bend his
head below his breast, and void much blood.

There is no Lion crueller, nor chafed Bull more furious then is now the
invincible Scythian: for having well recovered his seat, and drawing forth his
slycing blade, with more fierceness then a thunderbolte, he looked for his
enemy, who^ he saw on feet, with his mace aloft. Against him he went, but
first bravely leapt from his horse, and griping his sword strongly twixt his
hands, he neglected to watch his advantage, but let fly at the Giant: so did
he, and at once executed two blows worthy such warriors.

Venturous was the Giants blow, for lighting on his enemies helm, although it
could not break the enchantment, it forced him to tumble headlong on the paued
floor, where he thought he saw the twinkling of more stars then is in the
firmament. The Giant had no time to vaunt of his victorious blow, for with
another nothing inferior, his shield was cut in two, through which the sword
descended to his helm, cutting away all the one side thereof, with all the
top, the which had it fell right, his head had been cleft in the midst: yet
fell he to the ground on his hands, amazed with the stroke. The haughty
Emperor not a little admired the strength of the combattants, much esteeming the
Giant, considering Brauorants disgrace: whom he animated, (though needless)
with these words. Courage brave warrior, for there is much to do: but making
the world know the utmost of your singular valor, with it we shall easily
liberate the Princess Roselia. Though almost choked with chollor, and
blaspheming against himself, (for no God he confessed) he turned his head at
those words, and seeing the Knight of the Sun not fighting, because he had
already killed the giant, there is no tongue able to explicate the fury that
entered the fierce Pagans breast, supposing that knight excelled him, when he
would not acknowledge Mars any superiority. And accounting it base
fearfulness to let a single combat endure to the third blow, foming through
the mouth, he raised his sword and went against the Giant, that was already
up: who well noted with what fury he came, and trusting to his Mace, crossed it
ouerhead, whereon fell the strongest blow bestowed in his time. For being
possessed with the utmost of extremest rage, and Brauorants son desirous to make
known the might of his arm, he discharged on him a fierce stroke worthy his
valor) which falling on the mace, (whose inchauntment being of no force) it cut
it like as it were of wood, and sliding to the shoulder, where his armor was
not able to resist ye sharpnes of ye sword, (guided by the strongest arm that
ever the Gyantiue nation knew) it sliced him in the midst, dividing the
brutish body in two parts: which deed the Knight of the Sun so admired, as
he judged him to be son to such a father. Little had the fierce Pagan thought
he had done, whereupon like an infernal fury he entered the gate.

All this while was not the Heroicke Claridiano idle, for in the opening of the
Portall, at the shrilnesse of the horn, there issued forth a mighty
Centaure, with a big dart in his right hand, and in the other a chain, by
which he led a cruel Lion. This sight daunted not the second Mars, but
swifter then a Roe he pricked against the Centaure, that expected him,
brandishing his steely dart, the which, ere the prince came near him, he
flung at him with all the strength of his arm, it ran through the shield,
and wounded him a little on the breast, pearcing his armor, whose inchauntment
could not withstand the sharpness of the spear.

The Prince hit the Centaure in the midst of his breast with such puissance,
that had not his plates of fine tempered steel, (wherewith he was armed)
defended him, he had been then slain, yet he so thrust him back, that
staggering up and down, he fell on the ground, at such time as his horse past
on, which stumbling on ye Centaure, fell shrewdly on the earth, where it had
cost Claridiano no less then the price of his life, had he not used his
dexterity, wherewith he leapt at one side from off his back before he fell,
the which scarcely touched the ground, when the cruel Lion with his paws
seyzed on him, and rent him asunder piece by piece, which much auailed for the
Princes victory, for whilst the Lion devoured the horse, he discharged at his
pleasure the weight of his arms upon his head, of the which, as much as the
murdering sword did take, was cut away: yet the blow was not sufficient to
kill him outright, but rather roaring amain, it forced him leave his pray to
fly at Claridiano, closing with him so speedily, that he could not shun him,
but with his sharp claws held him so hard, that he crushed his crimson blood
through his armor, gryping him closer then does the little Remora cleave to the
keele of any ship, to hinder her swift course.

In great anguish of mind was the warlike Greek all this while, feeling
himself so fast bound between the Lions fangs, and seeing the Centaure come
against him with a heavy naked sword. No remedy found Mars his Competitor,
but to draw his dagger, and stabbing it into his belly, forced the Lion with
the pangs of death to leave him, the which meeting with the Centaure, not
knowing what it did, caught at his breast, which with his claws he rent,
letting forth rivers of blood through his mortal wound. Whereat the fierce
Centau^^ forsaking the Prince, raised his blade on high, and with it divided
the Lion in two. Which done, trailing the one half with him, he marched
toward Claridiano, who wondering at the sight, did so too, and on his shield
took the beasts blow, which he requited with a point that he thrust at him,
which penetrating his plates of steel, wounded him to the death.

Roaring like a Bull, the Infernal Monster towred his sword aloft, which when
he would descend, he was stayed in the midst of his course, by the remorcelesse
stroke of death: whereat he fell down, at the time that Claridiano thanked his
God for the victory. And imagining his companions were before him, he past on
through the gate. No less fierce was Claramants renowned battle, for in the
end of the horns shril sound, there appeared a well disposed knight, richly
armed and mounted, bearing a Lance in his hand, and a big Cemitor at his
saddle bow. Our new Mars nothing feared him, but spurred his horse against him,
and meeting in middle of their course, their shiuered lances flew into the
air, giving place unto the furious shocke of their bodies. Trebatios son was
feign to get about his horse neck, for fear of falling, having almost lost his
bridle: but recovering his seat, he spyed his adversary lie on the ground,
groueling under his horse, striving to get from it.

Courteous was Claramant, and so alighted to help his enemy, which kindness
he had like to have dearly bought, for through the gate that the knight issued
forth, flew out a hideous terrible Griffon, who suddenly surprising the
Prince, clasped his body about, and with his sharp tallents crushed his armor
within his flesh, and vehemently fluttring his wings aloft, raised him a little,
purposing to have mounted on high, and then to let him fall, and beat him in
pieces against the stones.

It happened not as the beast intended: for the Prince noting how treacherously
he had been assailed, and feeling his flesh bruised in many places, and his
armor with his own blood bedewed, stretched forth his arms on high, more
enraged then an angered Tiger, and getting hold by his wings, plucked him down,
making him loose his pretended flight, and so both fell on the ground.

And the haughty Greek being of great force, turned upon him, where refusing
to use any of his weapons, being extreme wrathful, he seized on either wing,
which with the utmost of his strength, he plucked away by the roots, leaving
the truncke without motion, voyding inuenombde gore from the wounds. He
performed not this so safely, but he had his helm cleft in two, and a small
wound on the head, the which the ugly beast had done with his enchanted bill,
whose death prevented his further danger.

By this was the knight recovered, and with his shield and sword marched
against the Prince, but what auales it: for Bryanas son being swelled with
wrath, tarried for him, with his axe, who directed a blow toward the disarmed
part of his head. The angry Prince would not receive it, because he would not
endanger his life, but leaping at one side, gave place unto his enemies blows,
whose sword ran almost to the midst into the ground, and he himself
followed it.

The occasion would not Claramant forgo, but like a Fawlcon at his pray, stepped
to him, and with his axe struck him to the earth, where he tumbled up and
down. So Claramant desirous to make an end, closed with him. But the knight
with the fear of death plucked him upon himself by the skirt of his armor,
making him loose his blow, and casting his arms about him, thought to get
some ground of him: but the unhappy knight missing his purpose, the gallant
Prince held him fast, and setting one knee upon his breast, with his dagger
opened a passage through it for his hateful life, sending him to be wasted
over the infernal poole, by the black Ferry-man of hell. Thanks did he
render to the god of his father for the victory, and without further stay, as
he would pass on, he heard a great cry, and turning his head, he saw it was
a Giant dragd about the feels by his horse, with one leg hanging in his
stirrope.

The cause was, that Don Celindo having winded his horn, and his Castle
opening, that Giant on a mighty Courser issued forth.

Agaifist him went Alicandros Nephew, but bing over eager, mist his encounter,
and was by the Giant struck along his horse back. Either past by the other
bravely set in his seat, where drawing their strong swords, they laid such
load upon their battered crests, renting their armor, and mangling their
flesh, until the Giant slipped his body aside, to avoid a blow that Don
Celindo let fly at him, reentring with a strong point with all his strength.
This offer of the Giants got him no less then the victory: for the inhumane
wretch mist his thrust, and running the sword between his arms, it slid down
the armor, bringing the Giants head upon Don Celindos horse neck, inclining it
downwards, who seeing him so near, and not omitting so good opportunity,
struck him on the helm with his sword hilts, ouerbearing him on that side he
most declined, which was the occasion of his fall from his horse, and thinking
to have stayed himself, thrust one leg so far into the stirrope, that when
he would, he could not draw it forth: whereat the Giant noting his disgrace,
drew his dagger, minding to cut it, but so unfortunate he was, that somewhat
annoyed with the former blow, he mortally wounded his horse belly with the
stroke, the which feeling it, with extreme pangs of death, fetching a Carreir,
ran about the field dragging his master after him, where both ended at once,
leaving Celindo thanking Fortune and his Gods for his good success. Through
the gates of those Towers that befell them, entered he and Claramant, and yet not
with such have as Claridianas Lord, that having seen Brauorants good hap, no
longer delaying the time, fearing to be out gone, he past on til he came to a
large yard of strange work. And round about it, there was a Gallery supported
with twenty pillars of clear Crystal. In the midst of it, stood a fair
Fountain, distilling water through diverse pipes, encompassed with Rose Trees,
and other Odoriferous flowers. On the top of the Fount, there was a rich and
precious Armor of inestimable value, lying upon a Table of silver, with twelve
feet of gold, whereat hung a brave sword. At the entrance to the yard, stood a
reasonable Pillar of Brass, whereon was written certain words with Letters of
Rubies. No further would Trebatios eldest son pass, til he had read the
scrowle, containing thus.

What Knight soever would end the Adventure, it behooues him ere he pass
farther, to win these Arms, for considering the keepers, he shall have need of
them: But if his courage fails to do it, let him go on, for the passage is
free. So great pleasure and liking he conceived of the armor, that although he
had not intended to prosecute the adventure, he would have spent a thousand
lives to obtain them, such was his valor. Then covering himself with his
shield, and unsheathing his sword, he entered the yard, and going toward the
Fountain, he saw it guarded with so horrible a Serpent, able to affray any but
Alphebo. She was of a spears length, and a brace in breadth. Four feet she
had, and two arms, armed with nails of steel, a handful long: and teeth too
of that kind.

Of these Serpents, do ancient writers make mention, to be dull, heavy, and
drowsy: insomuch, that no small noise will easily awaken them. A while stood
the Emperor still, to see if she would rise: but noting her slothful sleep,
he went more near her, greatly wondering at her horred fierceness, misdoubting
humane strength against so terrible a monster. But his heroicke breast, being
unacquainted with any fear, recommended his safety to the supreme King of
Kings, and with his sword struck the ugly beast on her defensive scales,
whereat, with hellish horror she awaked. Against her went he when she being on
her feet, with her scaly tail, she struck him so fierce a blow on his body,
that the Greek staggering, had like to have fallen, but that his back
stumbled at the Pillar, where he stayed. This much enraged the Emperor, who
like a Bazeliske awaighted her, he avoiding an other stroke wherewith she
approached him, and then he discharged his blade in all possible haste, upon
her ribs: but it happened not as he thought, for the sword rebounded back,
unable to batter her scales, at whose strength he much wondered: and being about
to second a point, she entered upon him: raising aloft her arms. Careless
was not the warrior, and misliking her embracements, wreathed aside his body,
and as she would have closed, he turned his sword, and therewith cut away her
hinder legs, making her fall flat on her buttockes, howling at the pain of
her wound. And lifting up her truncke on her arms, swoong about her tail, and
hitting him on the shoulders, she field him on his hands, and as he rose, got
hold of his Armor with her nails, and (furious with pain) rent away half
of his armor, and had not he been wary to look to himself, with her teeth
she had made an end of him.

But he seeing half his body disarmed, and fearing a disastrous death, shook
himself from her, having two pieces of his armor sticking in her jaws,
imbrued in his purple blood, that issued from the wounds she had made him.
There is no fury of Hyrcania, like to Claridianas Lover, seeing the yard
besprinckled with his blood, and himself unarmed: that taking his sword in
both hands, on the Serpents back, he executed the brauest blow that ever
knight performed: for happening in the midst of her body, and the strong
scales unable to resist the sharpesse of the blade, guided by the best arm in
the world, she was parted in two, and the gates of her life opened to
entertain the freezing air of cold death. Infinite deserved thanks rendered
the Greek to his Creator for the victory: and taking off his torn Armor, he
went to the bubling Fountain, and being vexed with thirst, drunk of the
Christaline water, remaining as well and lusty, as if he were neither wounded
nor had fought, blessing the water and he that made it. But looking on the
arms, he saw them to be the richest he had ever before seen.

They were of russet color, full of white and read stars, made of Dyamonds
and Rubies, inchained one by an other, with knots of Gold. The sheeld did
nothing differ from them. In midst of it, was the picture of a Knight,
naturally resembling the knight of the Sun, when he maintained the beauty of
Lyndabrides, under the title of the knight of the Chariot, as the first part of
this History remembered. He was also mounted on a horse, the counterfeyt of
Corneryno. The motto thus.

His power cannot be withstood,
That has horse, arms, and cause so good.
Slow was not he to arm himself with these arms, and having in mind the
liberty of Roselia, like a whirle-winde he passed through a door he found in
the yard.

All this while, the furious Brauorant was not: idle for having ended his first
battle, he entered the gate from whence the Giant came forth. Through Lymbo he
thought he walked, so exceeding dark was his way.

A great while did he grope about the wall on either side, to find and issue
from that dwelling, until he found a door: the which, although it was of
strongest steel, yet he quickly battered it with the pummell of his sword.
Forward he passed, and in the end, he found himself to be at the gate of a
fair hall, in midst whereof, there stood the confused picture of a mighty
Giant, made of Brass, with a sword in one hand, and in the other, a big
sheeld: and as the stout Scythian would enter in, the Fantasmo made against
him. No whit at all was Cmpeons nephew afraid, yet stood in great confusion,
not knowing in what manner to make his battle.

First arrived the Fantasmo, and with incredible force executed his blow on
Brauorant Helm: who having no sheeld to ward it, was constrained to set his
knees and one hand to the ground. A point was seconded with so strong a thrust,
that hitting him as he was disordered, it laid him along upon his back. Upon
him went the Fantasmo, yet mist of his intent. For the strong Scythian did cast
his arms about his neck, felling him to the floor, and in the fall, being
within his reach, he gave him such a blow on the misshapen face with his fist,
that therewith he rolled him along the ground: and rayfing himself, went
against the ugly shape, that being up did the like: but he avoiding a blow,
with a floorish on high, he descended his cutting blade, paring away some of
the shoulder, and half his arm. Which no sooner was done, but that part
turned into an ugly Giant, who having a Mace of Iron in his hand, said.

Think not (fierce knight) thy strength able to end the adventure, for all the
united power of the universe shall not free thee from my hands.

Much amazed was the sterue son of Bramarant, seeing the Giant before him,
yet with most invincible courage he prepared himself for the Combat, and so
coming toward him, offered to strike at his head, which made him lift his
Clubbe to defend it. But Brauorant withdrawing back his strong arm, stepped
in with his right leg, and ran at him with a mighty thrust. It cut all his
Armor, and mortally wounded him on the belly.

Unrecompensed went he not away: for the Giant swaying his Mace about, he
struck him therewith on the breast, and field him to the earth, but he
quickly rose, ready to burst with rage, blaspheming against himself, from
which passion he was put, by the approach of the Phantasmo that came to wound
him. But he scaping it, would turn his edge upon him, but with the back of
his sword he struck him on the helm, that it made him stagger a good way from
thence, and then swifter then an Eagle, receiving the Giants blow on his blade,
it cut his Mace of Iron clean in two. Which when Floralizas Lover spied, he
closed with him, and crossing his legs with the others, he bravely tript him
down, felling him on his back, and then he stabde his dagger into his brutish
breast, making him belch forth his soul to him that long before that expected
it.

Now could not the vallerous youth so cleanly go away with this good hap, but
that he was hit on the helm a heavy blow by the Phantasmo, the fine temper
thereof saved his life, yet was he in a trance laid along. On the shoulder the
inchaunted shapelesse Picture seconded another, which made him tumble on the
ground, and as he went to thrust at him a furious point, he got on his feet,
but so blind with rage, that forgetting what had befallen, he took his sword
in both hands, and with the utmost of his strength, he discharged it upon his
shoulder, dividing the Phantasmo clean in two. He had scarce executed the
blow, but the courageous Pagan repented him thereof, for each part of the
accursed Phantasmo, turned to a mighty Lion, whose ferocitie could not but
have feared any other save Brauorant. It amated the Pagan, yet not that he
fainted, but with more bravery then in the beginning, held the point of his
sword before him, letting the beasts come, whereof one thirsting for his pray,
ran upon his sword, splitting his heart in two thereon. The other assailed
him on his left side, where finding no resistance, fastened his claws on him:
and although his Armor was strong, yet he pearst them, renting his flesh
within, which but more kindled his fury, seeing his blood there shead, which
til then had happened in no fight be fore. Bramarants son would not immitate
Sampson in that action, because it should not be said he followed the example,
but rather performed an act no less memorable, for letting his sword hang by
the Chain at his wrist, he took the Lion by the neck twixt his hands, and
with incomparable strength choked him, himself remaining both wounded, and
with his Armor rent. There is no joy like to his, having ended that perilous
Combat, and although he was weary, yet went he forward, fearing his companions
would be before him. No less famous were Claridianos battles: for vanquishing
the keepers of the first Castle, like a whirlewinde he past on, making stay at
a little narrow Lane, seeming to have no end on no side.

Amazed was Archysiloras gallant, at the obscurity thereof, yet he went on,
and coming to the end, unawares he did tread in a hollow place, falling into
a Vawte, filled with nothing but Worms, and venomous Vermin. It was but six
yardes broad, and eight long: It yielded no more light, then what issued at a
little casement, where he espied a very old man, swarter then Chimnies soothe,
who with a hoarse voice said.

In faith (brave knight) you have got very good company among those Worms, on
them you may execute your revenge: but I fear they will first take it on you
with their venom: and therefore your best way is not to strike them, if you will
not be slain: for it is better to prorogue your life a little, then nothing to
enjoy it. Exceeding great was the Princes wrath, seeing himself so betrayed
into that pestilentiall Cave, and having understood the Magitians words, blind
with rage he replied.

Small is the Conquest, got by such treachery, thus to betray any knight: which
assures me, that he (which made this Inchauntment) was more inured to treasons
then good deeds, seeing without battles, by vndesent stratagems, he prosecutes
his devilish intent and purpose. Why then, that I may see how thy words will
agree with your deeds (said the infernal Coniurer) there be within that place,
two beasts, to whom all the rest acknowledge their obedience. Now if thou be
so hardy as to encounter with them, on their deaths depends thy liberty: else
art thou for ever there enclosed. Although extreme wrathful, yet glad in some
respect, Trebatios Nephew answered.

I am content to hazard my person in any danger to issue hence, and for an
instance thereof, show me the way I must go forth, and then place the beasts
there. Be it so (returned the Magitian) and in yonder dark corner there is an
iron King, the which if thou do pluck at, thou shall descry whence the
beasts do issue. Slack was not the Princely Greek to go thither, and
getting hold of the King, he plucked so hard, that drawing a Plancke from the
Wall, he fell backwardes, with it almost upon him, but fearing the sudden
coming of the beasts, he quickly got on his feet: when against him there came
a Monster of strange shape. His body was proportioned like a Bear, save that
he had a long Tail, and crooked teethe, like Tuskes, and on his head, he had a
horn near a yard long. His arms were nothing differing from a man's, being
footed like a Lion. In one hand he bear a Bow ready bended, with a steel
Darte. And in the other, he had a Chain, which tied a mighty Bazeliske.

Nothing daunted with the sight, was Claridiano, although a little amated at
their fierceness: but having an eye at the Darte, drawing his sword, and
covering himself well with his shield, he marched against the ugly misshapen
Monster. Who shooting his Darte, did make it fly swifter then lightning. The
Prince warded himself, receiving it on his shield. And then the Monster having
so done, he let loose his Companion, marching both together against the Prince.
He also incountred them, and meeting first with the Monster, he let fly at his
head, striking away half his horn, with all his Jaws on that side. Before he
could second it, the Bazeliske with his steely Bill, struck him under his
arm, that it made him stagger three or four steps, and stumbling on the
wall, saved himself from falling. In manifest danger of his life was the
Greek, for the wounded Monster roaring with pain, closed with the Prince (ere
he could recover his last mischaunce) and casting his arms about him, would
have plucked him backwards.

Here Alphebos son could no otherwise but do the like, and having greater
strength, and being more nimbler then the Monster, slipped one arm between his
legs, and hoysting him aloft, he flung him to the earth on his back, and as
he drew his Dagger to end with him, the furious Bazeliske fluttering his
wings, flewe on his shoulders, where with infernal fury, with his inchaunted
Bill he struck the Prince on the head, that it made him loose his blow and
that good occasion, and with his helm cloven, field him a toside. In which
season, the Monster rose, spitting fire through his hellishe mouth.

Straight did Claridianas son rise, but being half astonished of the blow,
the Monster had time to run at his breast with his broken horn, which made
him so recoyle back, that he had much adoo to save himself from a fall.

But what auailes it, all being for their worst: for the Prince (stifeled with
rage) took his Dagger in his one hand, and not knowing what he did, aimed it
at the Bazeliske that came flying at him. Straighter then the Monster shot his
Darte, he flung it, and hitting him in the breast, it stayed not til it cleft
his heart in two, and flying out at his back, fell with the beast at once, that
with a hiddeous shrike stird no more.

This death greatly displeased the Monster, who bellowing, and spitting
sulphur flames, leapt to the Prince that set his swords point against him, the
which he took between his tushes, and rising on foot, would have plucked by
the Princes skirt, but that he saved it with his shield, through which, as if
it had been of some composed clay, he thrust his claws into it.

The haughty warrior did let it go, and raising his right hand, (letting his
sword hang by the Chain, the which he had already drawn from the Monsters
mouth) he would needs make the Magitian witness his vnequalled strength, for
closing his armed fist, he gave the deformed Monster such a buffet, as he
strewed all his face with his own brains, making his eyes fly from the head,
and he himself bellowing, fall dead at his feet: to the Princes exceeding
joy, though not to the Magitians, that would not any longer stay in the
Window. Whereat the victorious youth without farther delaie, fearing to be
outgone by the rest, past the door he had so dearly discovered.

Admirable were these battles of the second Castles, that happened to Alphebo,
Brauorant, and Claridiano: yet nothing inferior to them, was heroicke
Claramants, for having done with the first, he stepped through the Gate,
receiving innumerable blows, not knowing by whom they were given: making him
set his hands and knees unto the ground: neither his shield nor terrible Axe
auailed, not seeing his adversary.

This so tormented our second Mars, that he began with all his strength to
strike on either side, still keeping his way forward along a fair Gallery,
and being near to the end thereof, the blows ceast, at the opening of the
wall whence came forth a wild Sauadge.

In either hand he did lead a Centaure, bound with a Chain, bearing in their
hands long Cemitors.

The haughty Warrior not fearing them, with his shield about his arm, and
raising his Axe with the other, went toward them. At first the Sauadge met him
with an iron bat, leaving the Centaures behind him: and at the Princes Helm,
he let drive a terrible blow. Claramant lifted his shield to take it thereon,
the which was driven with such fury to his head, that he could scarce keep
himself from falling. With admired speed the Centaures aimed their Semitors
at him: And then he bravely turned his Axe, striking one upon his breast,
felling him in a sound, and with a counterbuffe he cut away the others arm
with his Semitor.

Vnrepaid could not Bryanas son escape, for the Sauadge seeing his Centaures
so entreated, discharged his bat upon his shoulder, with such monstrous
strength, that maugre his valor, it struck him down, falling upon the
astonished Centaure, that then would rise, who seeing him so near, did cast
his strong arms about, crushing him so hard that he could not stir, giving
the Sauadge occasion again to raise his bat, discharging it directly upon the
Princes head.

But he seeing it descend, with the utmost of his strength, on the sudden got
from between them, some half yard away, and so avoided the Batte, striking
the Centaure so venturous a blow on the breast, that he opened the Portall of
his heart, with hideous horror, to vent forth his living breath.

Incomparable was Claramants content of this great good success, yet was it
not sufficient to expel his wonderful exceeding rage, which made him as
nimble and swift as a Roe, get on his legs, even when the Sauadge seeing the
ill hap of his stroke, did discharge another.

Lightly did Claramant shun it, and so the Batte finding no resistance, ran
one half of it into the ground, and before he could fetch it out again, the
Prince with a downeright blow easily cut asunder both his arms, and turning
again upon the Centaure, with another mighty blow, he claue him from the
head to the breast.

And so leaving him dead, and the wild Monster roaring with pain, he would
have passed to enter the breach the beasts had made in the wall, but he saw it
close, not knowing by what means, and ignoring the cause, with raging fury,
returned on the Sauadge, and with his axe wounded him in the middle, parting
his brutish body in two: at the instant the wall opened, whereat thanking his
Gods, he went through the door, fearing his stay might yield some advantage
to his companions, the which he would not acknowledge Mars to have over him.

No less strong then venturous, was Don Celindos Combat, for when he saw the
Giants disgrace, he valiantly put himself through a Cave, and being at the
end thereof, coming to a great gate, he did tread in a hole, falling: yet
happily as it fell out. For before the gate, there was a Vault, covered with a
boorde made less then the mouth thereof, and fastened to a round pole, whose
ends crossed the hole at one side, and so treading hard on the boorde, it
ouerweighed the one side downwards, whereby he fell in: but the holes mouth
being narrow, and his sword hanging by his side, in the fall it crossed upon
the hole, and so he hung thereat, over knees in water.

This unthought mischance, daunted Meridians son, yet recommending himself
unto his Gods, he lifted up his arms, and raising his body, cast it flat over
the boorde, and as light as he could, with much adoo, he got out of the hellish
place, thinking himself now to have new risen from death. He had scarce gone
thence, when he heard the voices of certain men, and listening, he heard them
say: Come, come, let us go apace, and we shall see how well the Rat can
swim.

A while stood the youth still desirous of revenge. It was not long deferred
him: for through the same gate that opened into a garden, there issued six
swains, every one with his Bill in his hand. More destruction makes not the
hungry woolf among the tender lambs, then Floralizas brother of those
villains, saying. See here you villains, the Rat escaped from your trappe,
defend your selves from him. By this he had already cleft one to the waste, and
ran an other through the body and heart. Amazed were they to see that the
knight had escaped their trap, and so trusting to their advantage, they made him
sometime kiss the ground with his hands, and then with his head: yet all did
but increase his rage: For Alycandros Nephew being abashed to let them hold out
so long, so swoong his sword among them, that he field one dead, an other with
shoulder cut: an other without legs: and the last, armelesse, and all wanting
their souls, he sent them post unto hell: finishing with their lives, the
end of the entrance of the second Castle, and staying no longer there, he
entered into the Garden.

Now is the time (admired Ladies, Goddesses of those souls that adore you) to
lend me a little pity, (the ornament of your sex) equalling your magnificent
bounty, with your rare and divine bewties, suffering the sunnie rays of your
sweet favors, so to strengthen my harsh quill, (although immeritable) that I
may express the fiercest battle that ever Mortalles heard of, worthy to be
achieved by none but the mighty Alphebo, deseruer of the worlds greatest
Trophies.

Who having put on the best and richest Armor in the Universe, took his
sheeld about his Arm, and with his unsheathed sword, put himself through the
gate in the yard, staying in a room darker then Erebus, and from the door
thereof, issued sulphire flames of fire, making it resemble hell it self: and
looking within the door, he saw a great Hall, all of a fire: wherein there was
a huge Sallamander, as big as any horse.

She had a great head, fashioned like an Eagle, with a steel Bill, with claws
of the same metal, of excessive length. Moreover she had a long tail like a
Serpents, and did nothing but void volleys of fire through her mouth.

Much amazed was the Emperor at the strange fashion of the beast, especially,
not knowing how to make his battle: for if he enters the room, so great is
the fire, that it is like to consume him: and therefore he made a noise, to try
if she would come forth, and so he struck his sword against the gate, at which
noise she arose, but would not move: and being up, looked at the door, yet
sturred not, and did cast more fire from her mouth, then a smithes double
bellows rayseth with blowing.

Many times was Alphebo about to follow after her, but judging it ouerhardie
boldness, he would detain himself: yet calling to mind his companions might
out go him, he thought the danger too small. So drew he forth his dagger, and
stepping to the door, he threw it at the Sallamander, and the mark being so
great, and aimed by such an arm, he missed her not, but through her ribs he
made it fly up to the hylts, launching out her gorie blood. The wound did not
harm her, for licking it with her tongue, it healed, but yet it put her into
such pain, that any other but the Emperor would have been affrighted, hearing
her hideous howling, and having an eye at the causer of his extreme pain,
with two iumps she was with him. Back stepped the Greek, thinking she
would have followed out, but he rested amazed, seeing she did not, but kept
still within, roaring like a Bull.

Well did the Trebizonian Lord note it, and therefore taking his sheeld about
his arm, and commending himself to his God, with his sword he marched against
the beast, and offering to strike her, she being watchful, turned about her
scaly tail, wherewith she made him loose his blow, and recoyle three steps
back. But being angered therewith, he returned with more advice then in the
beginning, and hollowing his body at her tail that came again in the same
manner, he thrust a point at her breast, running his sword a handful into it.
She shryked most horribly feeling the wound, and in the instant did spit so
much fire, that some ouertaking him and getting into his Helm, it so heated
him, as he thought his face to be a mere cole.

Two steps did Alphebo go back to avoid the fire, whence he saw that the
beast touching the wound with his tongue, it presently healed, and she
instantly set her self at the very edge of the door.

It greatly confounded the Emperors senses, to see he could not devise how to
vanquish her, and imagining her virtue consisted in licking her wounds, he
determined to strike her on the head where her tongue might not reach it:
wherefore covering himself with his sheeld, he went to her that expected him at
the door. He offered to strike her on the breast with a point, which the
Sallamander fearing, shrunk her body back, omitting the use of her tail. So
the Greek Mars stepped forward with his hinmost leg, letting his sword fly at
her head. He thought it would not less then cleave her, yet found he such
resistance, that glauncing down it wounded her a little on the neck, which
she straight curing with her tongue, it nothing hurt her at all.

This madded the son of Trebatio, especially to see how little it auailed him
to wound her: so unresolved what to do, he concluded to receive a blow, and
then follow her, to execute an other at his pleasure on her head, hoping her
cure would not be so certain there. Thus determined once again, he went to the
door, where she carefully awaighting him, and seeing him so near, ere he
could strike her, she cast her claws upon him, and gryping him hard with them,
she not only frustrated his blow, but plucked him so strongly, that the good
Emperor could not so soon get from her, whereby of force, he was constrained
to enter in, where scarce she had him, but she grapled him about ye middle
with her steeled tallents, that had he not then had on the best Armor in the
Universe, without doubt he had there perished. But though he had escaped her
sharp claws, yet he could not avoid the cruel burning heat of the
enchaunted fire that then encompassed him on all sides, chiefly that which
issued from the Sallamanders mouth.

It exceedingly tormented the Greek, seeing himself so burn without remedy,
and his Armor to glowe like a bright cole of fire. And so with that fury,
(having his death before his eyes) nimbler then a cat, leaping out of a fire,
he took hold of the Sallamanders body, and straining his strength beyond his
power, feeling his flesh broyle, he ouerturned her to the ground, and still
maintaining his fierceness, he brought her to the door, and although she
there striued most to withstand him, yet he hurled her out of the burning
lodging, where on the sudden she dyed, even as the fish wanting the water that
nourishes it.

With his dagger he went to wound her, but seeing she styrred not, he went and
found her dead, wherefore he gave his Creator due thanks for so great a
victory: and without more stay, he disarmed himself, for all his Armor was
of a very fire. Having done, he felt himself so weary and tired, as ever
before at any time he had been: and sitting down upon the Sallamander, he
tarried the cooling of his arms.

While this cruel combat lasted, the haughty Pagan, both Lover and subject of
the gallant Floraliza, had not been idle, who abashed at his long staying in
winning the passage of the second Castle, went along through the hall, where he
did find the Fantasmo, whose end brought him into a fair green plot, in
midst whereof there was a Tower, circled about with a high steepie wall,
which had no gate nor sign of entrance.

Amazed at this sight, the stout Schythian looked to the top of the Tower,
where he saw a well accomplished Knight, clad all in rich Armor, who with an
angry voice said. What think thou knight? it is in vain to seek an
entrance hither, for there is none: unless thou will creep up the wall, which
is impossible, and were it to be done, see thou not I am here to forbid it?
but were it not so dangerous, it is granted to none, nor none shall ascend
hither. In terms of answer would not the vntaymed youth procrastinate the
time, but rather with greatest haste disarmed himself, keeping only his Helm
on his head, and his sheeld the which he cast at his back, and his sword
hanging by his side, he drew forth his dagger (and being desirous to make his
valor known unto the Knight) he struck it into the wall, and with both his
hands plucking out some stones, he clamored up, and as he ascended, so he
stuck his dagger, for thereon sometimes he set his feet, whilst he made
his hands sure to mount.

Amazed was the knight, to see with what nimblenesse and dexterity he did it,
but fearing to be assaulted on high, he flung down a great stone from the top.
It fell upon Brauorants Helm, which with a sore fall, half senseless it
tumbled him to the earth. Nevertheless, within a while he recovered himself,
being fiercer then any Lion, an reuiling himself and his Gods, which others
adored, he returned to prosecute his way: but with great care and watch to
escape from an other fall, if the Knight played as he did before. Who much
delighted to see with what courage Campeons Nephewe clymed up.

He so occupied himself in gazing on him, that Brauorant had leave to ascend
so high, that when he would have hurled an other, he had no time to do it, for
while he fetched it, which was some two yards from that place, the Pagan had
got to the top, which being loath to loose, he bravely leaped in. His stern
presence somewhat feared the knight, but seeing him disarmed, he recovered
strength: yet it avails him little: for Brauorant so charged him with a blow,
that it cut his sheeld clean in two, and descending on his Helm, made him set
his knees to the ground.

It angered the Knight to be so used, who stepping in with one foot, did let
fly at him a strong point. By wresting aside his body, Mars his Competitor did
shun it, and so suddenly closed with him, that standing but on one leg, he feld
him on his back, even when the knight drew forth his dagger, the which the
Pagan being unable to prevent, was enforced to let him go, who got up, and more
irefull then a Bazeliske, going nearer, gave him such a blow on the helm, yet
not able to penetrate, there it glaunced down, wounding him a little on the
shoulder.

Now was the furious Pagan mad to see his adversaries blade reeke with his
lukewarm blood: whereat detracting no more time, escaping an other thrust,
again he closed with him, and presently taking him by the middle hoysting him
aloft, he instantly tumbled him headlong down the Tower: where on the ground,
with the extreme weight of his Armor, he was broken in many pieces, and at
the instant, the Tower vanished away with such a noise, as if the earth were
overwhelmed: so that Brauorant found himsefe beneathe where his Armor lay, and
the dead Knight near unto him. There he armed himself, getting through a Gate
he had espied.

No less victorious remained Archysiloras Lover of the adventure of the last
porche. For having slain the infernal beasts in the Vault, he went in at the
opened wall he had descried, and crossing through a fair Orchard, he came at
last unto a big strong Castle, shut with brazen gates, whereon were made
certain Letters of Emeralds: the which he thus read.

What knight so ever would end the adventure, let him wind his horn, and the
gates shall be opened. He ended, making all the field resound with the echo
of the Horns shrill sound: whereat the gates flying open, there issued a
mighty ugly Draggon, shaped almost like the Sallamander.

Doubtless any other save Claridiano would have feared his aspect: but he
that was borne to fight, as if he were a weak knight, taking his Sheeld about
his arm, went toward him with his sword drawn.

He warded a huge stroke with his scaly Tail: it struck his shield from his
arm, and had almost field him. It enraged Claridiano who stiffly settling
himself on his feet, thrust a point at the hellish beast, it had like to have
cost him his life, for the Dragon escaping it, as he past, did strike him so
terrible a stroke, backwardes upon his gorget, that he was field on his face.

Then would the fierce Dragon have closed with him, but he found Claridiano
nothing remiss, who raging mad, with a quick leap atoside, avoided his fury,
and turning upon him, with his good sword he cut away his legs by the knees.
With dreadful crying shrikes, the wounds beast draling his body on the
ground, would have taken the Prince between his paws, but being wrathful,
and this his last battle, with a downeright blow he cleft a piece of his
head, and with a fierce thrust, cut his heart clean in two, felling him dead
at his feet, and so past on, desirous to end the adventure.

At one instant finished Claridiano and Claramant their Battles, although
Trebatios sons was somewhat longer, because it was more troublesome. For
having slain the sauadge and the Centaures, he paced that way they came, til
he issued into a delightful Plain, where he was incountred by a gallant
knight in hose and doublet, who said. So feared are Theseus Arms (Sir knight)
in this habitation, that dreading the loss of the Castle, I am enjoined the
Combat in this manner, and if you intend to pass on, you must do the like: and
therefore presently unarm you.

The Greek not refusing it, did straight put off his Armor: to whom the
knight delivered a Rapier and Dagger, with these words. (With these weapons
must you defend your self, valiant knight). I am content, replied Claramant,
and taking them, prepared for the fight.

The Greek first settling himself, did with his Dagger strike away his
adversaries point, and with his Rapier wounded him with a thrust on the breast,
and drawing back his leg, controwled the others Rapier, that came directly to
his head. The wound much greeuing the knight, made him respect no tricks of
Art, but ran against the prince, who fearing his unadvised desperate coming,
crossed his rapier against the other, and so stayed his fury.

but he burning with ire to be so prevented, thought to have slain him with
his Dagger, imagining Claramants care was only in the prevention of the
rapyer, but it was not so: for he stretching out his arm further, did first
stabbe his dagger into the knights shoulder, which made him forgo his purpose:
whereupon the Prince having opportunity to draw back his sword, did it, and
suddenly with a strong point wounded the knight mortally in the flancke, which
altogether made him faint.

The wounded knight seeing his date of life expyred, dispairing of remedy, he
hurled his dagger at him, with the utmost of his strength, that he miraculously
escaped an untimely death: for Claramant chancing to take it on his hilts, the
point thereof was stayed at the Pummell, and had it not there found that
resistance, it could not but have run it up to the hills into his body.

Amazed was the Greek Prince, judging that, the moment of his birth, but going
to take his revenge of the knight, he saw him splitted on his own rapyer: for
seeing himself deadly wounded, and that he could not escape with life, chose
rather to be his own executioner, then the Prince should tryumphe over his
death at his hands. Ioying at the victory of so dangerous a Combat, he
prosecuted his way.

No advantage had Claramant over Don Celindo, who ended his fight as soon as
he: for having slain the swaynes, and passed the Garden, he came unto a
green Meade, where a knight gallantly mounted, expected the battle: not far
from him there stood a Pillar, whereto a luftie courser was tied, the which
Alicandros Nephew imagining to be for him, he did quickly back, and taking a
strong knottie Lance that he also there found, either parted from the other,
to take his carreire, and valiantly made their strong encounters.

In midst of the sheelde did Don Celindo hit the Knight, and clearly
piercing it, thrust him so strongly, that breaking his saddle gyrtes, he
tumbled him from his horse. The knight struck Don Celindo on his Beauer, which
so astonished him, that he let go his horse bridle, who feeling his head at
liberty, elevated himself so high, that both fell down, yet Don Celindo
perceiving it, before the fall, did quickly leap from his back.

With shields about their arms and swords on high, the two brave warriors met.
With a furious thrust did Don Celindo first wound his adversary, which made him
give back three steps. But he presently returned, and gave him such a blow
on the helm, that he thought himself in heaven, so many stars he saw about
his head, and with a counterbuffe on the shoulder, he had almost field him.
Like a ravening Lion became Floralindas son, and offering to strike him on
the head, the knight repaired thither with his shield. It was the cause of his
overthrow: for Don Celindo not minding it, with a point wounded him mortally on
the breast, pearcing all his Armor, and then with mighty strength turning his
sword to the others head, he cut away half his helm, with a piece of his
scull. Howling and shriking with the wound, the knight turned his back, and
fled through a fair Gallery.

After him went Don Celindo, ouertaking him in a great plain, where he saw
four great Arches inchaste with precious stones, held up with eight mighty
Crystal Pillars. There did Don Celindo assail the knight, even when a
bewteous Lady most richly attyred confronted him. He was astonished at her
sight, thinking he saw his dear Rosiluera.

Stay your hand brave knight (said the Lady) and do not execute your wrath on
him that yields you the victory. I cannot (most sovereign Princess replied
he, amazed to see her there) but satisfy your content, obeying what ere you
shall impose on me: as he only borne to do your service: yet is my poor soul
tormented with grief, that this command is no greater. It is too much
(answered she) for her that has shown you no kindness: and so the crafty
Damzel taking him by the hand, placed him under the last Arche, leaving him
there inchaunted, without judgment or understanding, saving how to accomplish
her will, who leaving him there said. Here must you remain Sir knight, and
defend the entrance against all the world, if all the world shall come. Be
assured (Lady) I will (replied the inchaunted youth) and first I Will leave to
breathe, then desist from defending the Arche. Away went the Lady along the
Arches, when the furious Brauorant came thitherward, having put on his Armor.
He stepped back as one in a trance, imagining he beheld his Floraliza, into
that shape she had transmuted her self.

The Pagan so admyred her sight, as he was struck dumb, but she revived him
thus. Come with me brave knight, for we greatly need your strength. He did not
refuse it, saying. Lead the way (divine Lady, replied he) for it is my
felicity to loose my life for your beauty. Leading him by the hand, the
deceitful Lady left him inchaunted under the third Arche, saying.

Courteous Knight, this Arche must you defend, with the utmost of your valor.
He made answer. Leave that care to me, for will at least shall not want, if
strength forsakes me not. At another Gate by this, appeared Archysiloras Lover,
to him she went, representing ye Queen of Lyra. Whom (to be short) she also
inchaunted in the second, and in the first did the like by Claramant, having on
the presence, and countenance of the famous Lyndabrides, whom he by report
already began to fancy. Then like the wind she vanished away, yet ere she
went, she commuunded them on their lives, they should not go out of the Arches,
unless they would embrace their deaths. And so leaving a scroll upon a Pillar,
she left them.

CHAP. XXVI. How the Emperor Alphebo ended the famous Inchauntment of Roselia,
and what else happened.
SO great was the care that those wise men, Lyrgandeo, Artemidoro and Nabato
had over the Greeks and their Empire, that by their Art had reached to the
knowledge, how that memorable Monarchy would be brought to the point of an
utter overthrow, and perpetual desolation: wherefore so entierly affecting her
Princes, (as this great History has amply mentioned) for their Loves, they
reuolued their books, to know the cause, and causer of such bloody wars:
which they found to be the two Princesses, Lyriana of Nyquea, and Roselia of
Rome: whereupon they resolved to Inchaunt them, beginning first with Lyriana,
within the sea Tower, as has been related.

And seeing that the Roman Princess was left, they joined themselves
together, in the making of this Enchantment the strongest ever seen, for while
she was so kept, her Father should not know what had happened between her and
Don Eleno of Dacia, nor should she at his hands require revenge against him. As
they did determine it, so did the wise Magitians perform it, making it far
stronger then Lyrianas, for they intended to keep her long time there, until
some good order were taken about the Greeks affairs.

Again, they resolved to have Lyriana disinchaunted, and her Nuptials with
the Brytaine Prince solemnized, hoping it would be a means to reconcile the
Souldan of Nyquea, giving him so great a Prince as Rosabel to be his son in
law. They would not do so by Roselia, because she could not be wedded with
whom she had imprinted in her heart. But the perverse Selagio (by means of
Lupercio) hunting after revenge for the death of Fangomadon (whom Rosicler
flew, as in the first Chapter of the first book of this third part is expressed)
would needs procure the liberty of this Lady, with Arbolinda of Scotland, that
accompanied her: for which purpose, in a Bark he drew Brauorant and Don
Celindo, from the Fleet: doing the like by Alphebo, directing also Claridiano
and Claramant thither: where all of them performed such deeds in arms as is
specified, and worthy of such great Princes, slaying all the keepers of the
Castles.

But the wise men fearing the two Ladies liberty, as the last refuge of their
hopes, erected these four Arches, there to Inchaunt those mighty Warriors,
that none might end the adventure, they being the sole Pillars of humane
strength. Twenty years they purposed the Inthauntment should stand, finding
by their Art, that after that time Greece would flourish with most happiness,
by a contracted League, with the greatest Potentates of the world. But the
supreme King of Kings, having otherwise disposed of those affairs, frustrated
(as you shall see) their toils, bringing thither at that time Alphebo, sole
Phoenix in arms, valor, and all bounty.

So much the longer he stayed, until his armor was cool, and then buckling it
on, past the last Portall, coming to the Arches, at the very instant the Lady
had done inchaunting the knights, and lighting on the Pillar, he thus read the
inscription.

Let none though he be Mars in Arms, pretend to pass forward, for what is
done, is nothing comparable to what is to do, seeing he must Combat with the
Myrrors of Chiualry, Claramant, Claridiano, Brauorant, and Don Celindo. The
Trebezonian Lord did feel his blood freeze in his body, hearing his strong
Companions were there inchaunted, and among them his son, for whose sake he
greatly dreaded the fight, fearing some ill mischaunce either to him or his
son: for he deemed none equalled Claridiano. Oh, Claridianas Lord wished his
son thence, and in his place the whole world: for that power united, he not
so much did doubt. As he was thus considering with himself, he heard a voice
(that by Selagios procurement said) What doubts thou Illustrious Emperor?
Consider it is not worthy thy great valor to refuse these Combats, for their
ends shall conclude the famousest deeds in arms that was ever heard of.

Altogether did these words put him from his pensiveness, judging his delaie
to proceed from base cowardice: wherefore as swift as a Roe, he went toward the
first Arche, when he heard the noise of certain voices, that said. Leave,
leave, this accursed enterprise, thou mighty Alphebo, for with the blows thou
give to one knight, thou woundest Bryanas soul, and with those thou
dischargest on the other, thou do split her heart, to whom thou owe all
content: thy dear Clatidiana we mean.

Back stepped the Emperor, not in fear of the Battles, for his heroicke mind
was not used to it, but to have understood those words, yet supposing they were
uttered only to threaten him, rather desiring to die (oh admirable courage)
then to be tainted with cowardice, recommending himself to his true God, he
began to march toward the first arch, being nothing hurt by the Enchantment,
for the virtue of his King defended it, the which he always woare, wherewith
he freed his Father from Lyndarazas imprisonment, where he atchiued immortal
fame. He had no sooner entered it, but like a blazing Commet, Claramant issued
to entertain him, (unknown to his brother) by reason of the enchantment. At
that time a gallant window opened, where appeared two ladies, whose bewties
stained Venus in her pride, there come to behold the battles. At length
together met the two haughty combattants, either receiving the other, with the
puissance of their strong terrible blows. They discharged them on the top of
their heads so rigorously, that squadrons of sparkles flew from their helmes.
Either did set one knee on the ground, bowing their heads with such low
congies, as if they had known themselves to be brothers. Both remained angry
and fearful of the others strength: so rising, they gave beginning to the
hammering of their bodies, as if it were a battle of twenty knights.

The Emperors new won armor, did well defend his flesh from the cutting of
Theseus axe. Nevertheless, within an hour of their fight, he felt his body
sorely bruised, yet he comforted himself, seeing his adversary besmeared with
his own blood, having his armor rent and torn in many places, but yet as
lusty as when he began, and raising his axe, he laid on the others
shoulder. The inpenetrable arms he may thank for his life, the which they
saved, though not him from touching the earth with his hands. And so the
valiant Prince seeing this good occasion, closed with him, that either cast his
strong arms about the other, to procure eithers advantage. Soon got Claramant
over the Emperor, because he assaulted him with a sudden advised charge.

But Claridianos Lover having recovered his foil, made him loose his ground,
and so ouerturned him of one side, that crossing his leg with his, he tript
his brother, who fell under him: yet as swift as an Eagle he got up, and
grappling together, they tumbled up and down the paued earth.

Where seeing they could not so vanquish one another, let go, repairing to
their weapons, with such mightiness and heavy blows wounding their bodies,
that none save they in all the world, could suffer them: yet did not they faint,
nor loose no whit of their fierce courage, whose fury being thoroughly heated,
seemed to increase their strength and ardinent, becoming so nimble and quick
in assaulting and retiring, offending, and defending, that their feet seemed
to be winged. Greatly did Alphebo wonder at his adversaries fierceness,
judging him one of the best in the universe, calling to remembrance the battle
he had in Constantinople with his brother Rosicler, about the Princess
Lyndabrides.

He could not devise how to get from him that arch, supposing his victory
consisted thereon. Committing himself to God, and trusting to his forces,
avoiding a thrust, he closed with Claramant, and before he could prevent it, he
hoysed him from the ground, who unable to forbid it, he carried out of the
arch, but with exceeding labor, for Claramant with the utmost of his power
striued to let it. He was no sooner thence, when as one dead he remained in the
Emperors arms, who laying him down, imagining he would revive with the end
of the adventure, he past that, till he entered the second arch, where against
him, came the Mirror of courtesy and fortitude, the magnanimious Claridiano.
Almost did his father know him, by the maiesticke gate and comeliness
wherewith he made against him, giving him so sudden a blow, that ere he
repaired to the defense, he seconded two thrusts, which sorely vexed Trebatios
son, making him stagger three steps back, and before he recovered himself,
he gave him a down right blow on the helm, which made him see many millions
of fiery sparks. It greatly enraged the peerless Alphebo, who seeing
himself so handled, forgetting that he was his father, and he his son, did
most terribly discharge his rich blade upon his shield.

It yields no defense against the best arm in the world, for in two pieces it
was thrown to the ground, and descending to the helm, finding there more
resistance, it made his head bend with an awful congey due to his authority,
and kiss the earth with his hands, and as he rose, with a strong point he was
ouerturned to the ground. Long was he not so, but rising like the wind, blind
with rage, he took his sword in both hands, discharging it on his fathers
shield, the which resisted the edge, was struck with such might against his
helm, that he thought the firmament was within. With his knees on the ground
he so remained astonished, till the sound of another blow upon his shoulder
awakened him, to stay himself with his hands from falling.

Never did Alphebo feel himself more chollericke, nor furious, nor never by
one battle so indaungered: but fearing to be overcome, with madding rage he
went against him he tendered as his soul, and on his waste gave him a most
mighty blow.

It made him incline his body that way, for cutting his armor, it wounded him
alittle, sprinkling the ground with his crimson blood. With a counterbuffe the
Emperor returned, hitting him on his Go^get: upwards bounded the sword, and
falling on the buckles of his helm, it cut them all, making it fly from his
head. With admiration did the Trebizonian Lord gaze on his picture, in such
careless manner, that Claridiano had time to strike him at his pleasure on the
midst of his precious helm, and straining the utmost of his strength, he
felled him down, making the blood gush from the closings of his helm. With
more eagerness does not the soring hawk seizeon his pray, then Claridiano
closed with his father, and casting his arms about him, thought to choke him
between them, at such time as the fierce Emperor returned to himself.

Oh, then did he wish to have any other then Claridiano between his arms,
(I, though it were the God of battles himself) to inflict on him the deserved
punishment for such vsance, the which he could not now do, unless he should
power vengeance on himself. But having good hold on him, with some trouble at
length he lifted him from the ground, and with violent striving, opposing his
greatest forces against his sons resistance, with blood gushing from his
face, he carried him out of the arch: and leaving him even like Claramant, he
felt his body never wearier in all his life.

A while he sat him down at the foot of the same arch, to rest himself,
and putting off his helm, he wyped his bloody face: but with the sight of
the two Ladies in the window, whom he judged to be Roselia and Arbolinda,
remembering their freedom, he rebuckled on his helm, and marched to the third
arch, where Brauorant, the flower of Pagans strength, incountred him with a
strong point.

On his shield did the Emperor receive it, against which the sword bending,
forced him two steps back. Another seconded the Pagan on his breast, making
him bend his body backewards.

And coming upon him with the third, Trebatios son gave way unto the
furious point, which finding no stay, it drew the hardy Scythian after it.
Whom Alphebo following, struck him on the flancke, and unable to cut his
armor, he bruised his flesh within. This blow chafed the fierce Pagan, who like
a Basseliske, with Mars his strength, did let fly at him a mighty blow.

On his shield did the Emperor take it, the which was struck so against his
helm, making it thunder like the stormy heavens. And then he gave him a
cruel thrust, that had not his armor been the best in the world, he could not
but have incurred mortal peril. The Greeks respected no tricks of defense
being so handled: wherefore like winters hayle, he charged the Pagan with his
blows in such sort, that he rested amazed at the Emperors fierceness, yet
fainted not his shown valor in the beginning, though his own blood had
besmeared his armor, whose inchauntment was not of force against the cutting of
Alphebos sword.

About this time, the Greek with all his puissance, gave him a blow on his
helm, whose force greatly enforced him back, which occasioned the Emperor to
execute his intent, for noting with what blind eager fury the Scythian came
against him, the pollitick Lord returned back by little and little, even to the
first Arch. So Brauorant thinking he did it for fear, hastily followed him,
and being almost out of the Arches, he heard a voice that said: Return,
return, renowned Brauorant, and remember Floralizas command: go not out of the
first arch, for if thou do, thou art but dead. Great was his affection
toward that Lady, hearing himself called by her own name, amazedly turned
his head, supposing she was there. Which happy occasion Bryanas son would
not loose, for watching such opportunity, with one stride he joined with him,
hoysting his body in the air, and being near out of it, maugre the Pagans
strength, he threw him forth, leaving him as one dead.

Infinite thanks did the Greek render unto God for this victory, and without
longer stay, he paced to the last arch, kept by Alicandros Nephew, with whom
he had one of the brauest battles in the world: for the advantage the Emperor
had over him in strength, the other supplied by being fresh, and he weary and
tired. It so pleased the bewteous Roselia (being one of those that looked on
them) to see with what dexterity and valor Don Celindo prosecuted his fight,
that she purposed (though she was enchanted) to make none Patron of her
heart but him, if she wedded not Don Eleno. Here does not Lyrgandeo
particularize this combat, because he would not be tedious, only he affirms
it was one of the famousest that ever was: and how in the and he was as his
companions carried out of the arches, but with a new wound, for while he made
his battle, he chanced to behold Roselia, whom he so well liked, that he
almost forgot the fair Rosiluera Exceeding great joy conceived the Greek
Mars, to have won the Arches, and as he returned through them, a Lady
incountred him with these words.

Know, illustrous Emperor, mirror of the worlds chivalry, that the end of
this adventure consists in giving me that ring on your finger, to put it on
your wife Claridianas that yonder lies, and it behooues you to do it with
speed, for else her life is short, and ready to exspire her cancelled date,
by the hands of that knight which stands over her. Toward the place whence the
Damzell came, he turned his head, where he thought he saw his Claridiana lying
on the ground, and over her a knight with a dagger in his hand, wherewith he
offered to stabbe her. No longer stayed the haughty Greek, but like a furious
Lion, leaving the Lady he ran to the knight, who fearing to be slain,
(being Nabato so disguised) together with the damzell vanished away: whereat
the Emperor wondered, as also of the strange adventure of the Castle.

In the end of the arches, he found a large wide pair of stairs, made all of
precious stones, he ascended them quicker then a hurried bullet from a cannons
mouth, and being at the top, he saw a fair rich Gallerie, from whence the
Ladies viewed the battles. At the end thereof, he past a gorgeous Portall,
that opened into a great Hall of admired riches: and as he would enter into it,
two Ladies saluted him, whom he thought to be those before mentioned, being
indeed the Princess Roselia, and Arbolinda. With much courtesy the Emperor
returned their salutations, and to be assured if they were whom the Tables
mentioned, he demanded of them thus. Let me entreat you fair Ladies, to tell
me where within this dwelling I may find the Princess Roselia of Rome, and
Arbolinda of Scotland, for I much desire to see them, to know whether it be
true, what the world reports of their beauties? Then they said. With one
condition (sir knight) we will lead you where they be, which if you deny, it
will be impossible to see them. Demand what you will (replied the kind
warrior) for I will perform what ever it be.

We hoped no less from your valor (said Arbolinda) and therefore we pray you
give us that ring on your finger, that we may carry it to Roselia, that
greatly needs it. I am content (answered the wary (Greek) but first go we
beyond yon first Arch, and there I protest by the faith of a knight, to
perform my promise. That is to deny it (said Roselia) for we may not go any
farther. Why then sovereign Ladies (replied Alphebo) I recall my promise,
intended on this condition.

If you be so resolved (said Arbolinda) farewell, for we must go unto the
Princesses, unworthy of your discourtesie, that because you will not perform
your promise, shall here remain inchaunted, until the coming of some other
more kinder knight, to pity them. I do so greatly desire to be absolved of my
passed word (replied the Greek) especially (as you said) Roselias liberty
depending thereon, that I intend perforce, (craving pardon for my boldness) to
carry you where I may give you my ring, and be freede of my promise. Whereto
Roselia said.

You will not I hope, entreat us with such violence, for it is not the part of
a good knight, to oppress distressed Ladies, enforcing them against their
wills: which to prevent, we will leave you, returning to Roselia, that expects
us. As the gallant Ladies were turning their backs, Trebatios son stepped to
them, and took them in his arms, and in his going out of the Gallerie, many
hideous fearful shrikes were heard, and he charged with mighty invincible
blows, enough to have dissolved Vulcans work house: yet for all this, did not
the flower of arms cease to go forward, sometimes setting his hands, and
sometimes his knees to the ground, and then inclining his head below his
breast.

Many terrible illusions were opposed against him, sufficient to daunt Mars
himself. But they nothing feared him, for the magnanimious Alphebo, by this
had descended the stairs, and although tormented with oppressiue vlowes,
confronted with horred apparisians, and his hearing made deaf wfth miserable
howlings, yet he got out of all the arches, at what instant there sounded the
lowdest and most shrillest noise, with the mightiest thunderclap that ever was
heard in the world. Ten miles from Rome it was heard, making that famous
City shake as with an earthquake, utterly dissoluing the best inchauntment
that ever mortals heard of.

In midst of an oderiferous plain, did Alphebo find himself, clad in his
rich won armor, with his son Claridiano, that equalled him in all things: with
them the mighty Claramant, in all respects comparable, to brother and Cousin.

There also was that furious Brauorant, Paragon of the Gyantean regions,
accompanied with the new Lover Don Celindo: and with them, the beauteous
Princesses, Roselia and Arbolinda. Well remembered Brauotant what had him
befallen, and thinking he had by him been vanquished, would have challenged
the Emperor of Trebizound about it, but that he descried a great company
coming through the Forest: and supposing it to be the Emperor of Rome, he
took his leave of the Princes and Ladies, who were not able to stay him. And
coming to the sea side, he shipped himself in his Bark, which in short time
brought him to the Souldan of Nyqueas Fleet. Claridiano and Claramant would
also needs depart, imagining they were not known, shaping their course toward
Grecia, because they heard the world prepared against her.

Alphebo would not hinder their voyage, seeing it pleased them to conceal
their names, and so he took his leave of them. By this arrived the Emperor of
Rome, whom the noise of their battles, and the beasts howlings had brought
thither: and alighting from his Alfana, he embraced his daughter Roselia, and
Arbolinda, with such joy as may be thought. In the end (to be short) Don
Celindo recounted what had befallen, which made them all wonder, admiring
Alphebos valors: who also unwilling to be longer detained, took his leave and
departed. So shipping himself, arrived in Constantinople, where he at large
discoursed the whole process of the adventure. Don Celindo remained mith
Roselia, whose disinchantment was solemnized with many triumphs. Thus leaving
them all, we return to the valiant Princes, Claramant, and Claridiano,
nauigating by sea in their inchaunted Bark.

CHAP. XXVII. How the two Princes, Claridiano and Claramant, arrived at Grecia,
and of the fair adventure that befell them with a knight.
WIth more fury then the dreadful threatening Commet renteth his passage
through the fiery element, did the enchanted bark wherein those two Princes
nauigated, furrow the raging billows of Neptunes inhospitable regions,
directing their course toward the memorable Grecian Empire. So swiftly did it
cut the foming waves, that four days after, in sight of the Greeks Fleet,
that anchored in the Haven of Hircambella, and not far from it they ran a
shore. It not a little gladded them, knowing where they had arrived, for
Claramant greatly desired to see that Court, so famoused through the world.

Being on land, they mounted upon mighty horses, which Galtenor had provided
them, with a shield for Trebatios son, and so took their journey toward
Constantinople, hearing by the way of the proof of the disamorous Tower: the
discourse whereof, Claridiano told his uncle, which was the greater motion to
stir him to the trial. Whereto his Cousin said. And it comes well to pass,
that the earth may know, how both by land and sea, you are Mars his favorite:
but I would not for the world, be there known, for being banished by my sweet
enemy from her dear presence, I should not well obey her command, so to
disclose my self. Thus treating of this matter, and of Roselias strange
inchauntment, judging it the haughtiest ever heard of, Claramant began in this
manner. It would rejoice my very soul, to know that famous knight, called of
the Sun, for as I suppose, we were all vanquished by him, and the glory of
that great adventure solely attributed to him. Because I imagine you will be
glad to know who he is, (replied Claridiano) know, it is the Emperor of
Trebezound, whom the heavens decreed to be my father. I am exceeding glad
thereof, (said Claramant) and sure I was, so valiant a son could not but
proceed from so glorious a father. But I also desire to know who those three
knights were, that kept the arches of the Tower in the sea: for believe me,
they are the flower of Arms. Two of them (replied the Prince) I can tell you
of, the one Bembo by name, King of Achaya, and Lord General of the Souldans
Fleet: the other is a most strong Pagan, King of Mauritania, and mortal
enemy to the Greeks. The last, yet seeming of a bigger constitution of
composed members, I know not, saving that it was he which in our company
proved Rosilias enchantment, being he we met in the Forest, in battle against
the Emperor my father: But the time is long, and we may end any particular
combat, for I no less desire it then you, since I crossed him on the seas, when
I defended your ladder. In this conversation they came unto a clear river of
fresh bubbling water, which invited them to find out his spring, to pass away
the heat of the afternoon, for the Sun having progrest half his course,
had already dried the moisture of the earth. Within a while they found a fair
Fountain, where they allighted, both to wash their faces, and take such repast
as Pollisandros provision affoorded. Thus they drove away the time with some
content, for Claridiano for his uncles sake controwled his greefes, when his
Ladies remembrance troubled him. So being desirous to take a nappe, they
parted a little one from the other to sleep. Short it was, for the Music of a
sweet voice awaked them at once. Whereupon Claridiano said. Have you ever
heard (brave Knight) more sweet harmony? Believe me, we have met with some
good entertainment, for he that sings, in my opinion, should live by being in
love. We may not leave the enjoying of so sweet a note. So they rose together,
and putting on their helmes, took their shields and followed the sound they
heard, and then ceased. They came unto a little grove beset with lofty Pynes,
there saw they a shepherd, of the fairest disposition in the world: and so
beautiful, that his sight would have made him envious that kept Admetus
flocks. He seemed to be very young, holding a Recorder in his hand, to whose
sound tuning his voice, he sung his souls grief unto those senseless trees.

Credit me, Prince of Grecia, (said Claramant) that some chance in Love has
made him so disguise himself: for although there be gallant shepherds about
these and other fields, yet this his tender behauiors shows, he has not been
brought up to tend sheep.

Let us attend him (replied Claridiano) for he himself will resolve this our
doubt. They needed not much persuasion to make them listen, for the sweetness
wherewith he sounded his Instrument, was sufficient to move, as did the
Thracian Poet his melody, which when he ended, he warbled forth this Elegy.

Great must needs be the greef, extreme must needs be the torments
Which I do feel while I want (fair Polinarda) thy sight:
Esteeming thy sweet presence my sole happiness in life,
How may thy long absence but be a death to my heart?
On this stay yet I live, in thy disgrace that I live not,
For then in endless plagues damned I were to perish:
Rather as one whose sincere Love was kindly regarded,
On the highest heau'ns-spheare placed I was by thy hand:
Golden days were those. But now dispoiled of all bliss
Like sad Bellerophon, ioyles I wander alone.
In darkness I do straie, missing thy Sun to direct me,
My day to night turnde is, my delight into laments.
Vexed thus though I am: Complain on thee yet I cannot,
Of thee (Lady divine) for love I had love again.
Spightfull Fortune it is, that of all joys has me bereaved,
And with deadly malice crossed me with heavy mishaps.
Distressed by Fortune, yet never will I be daunted,
Maugre her, and her force, will I love, and be beloved:
Envious ill Fortune cannot compel me to despair,
When she has her worst done, then can I be but a wretch.
Then when I most am a wretch, most constant shall be my hope then,
Which without her compass firmly by faith I do keep:
Her force will not I fear, nor seek for her help that I loved be
Oh fairest of fayres, on thee alone I depend:
In presence was I loved, and shall be I doubt not in absence
(Lady, in whom virtue like to thy beauty shines,
Constant as comely). Bur alas, that I must like a Pilgrim
Wander a whole age thus through regions so remote,
Kingdoms far distant, where I wish in vain to behold thee,
Where new sprung dangers hourly delaie my return
From thy sight banished, whose silver rays be so splendent
That therewith dazzled, Cynthia hides her head!
Expect yet do I still and that day daily do look for,
In thy sweet presence once yet again to rejoice:
Converting sadness to gladness, sorrow to singing:
Rapte in bliss, then I shall perpetually triumph.
In mean time resting on this so sacred a comfort,
This thy want perforce with patience I do bear,
Till the raging tempest of Fortunes fury be ore-blow'n,
And I of all turmoyles shall have a happy release.
No more could the two valiant Greeks understand, for the vehement groans that
burst from his soul, together with hart-breaking sighs, drowned the very
sound of his words. Now that he had thus given a little passage to his griefs,
by publishing them unto those lofty pynes, that by bowing their spreading
branches, seemed to pity his distress, with a breathless (Ay me) he began
his laments in this manner. Oh Love! how extremely have thou executed the power
of thy rygor on me? Oh my tender years, eclipsed in the budding of your spring,
with the nipping winter of sower grief: Iniustly have thou made me an example
of the happiest Lover that ever was, never having against thy soueraintie so
much as in thought offended, nor yet in any thing gainsaid or contradicted thy
awful power. Oh I acknowledge it, and do confess what happiness is obtained,
submitting true duty to thy command, as to the sole deity able to give life,
or sweetest death: and yet for all thou art long since assured with what
submissiue humbleness I have obeyed thy behests, and with patience endured thy
crosses, so dearly bought, at the highest rate and price of my content, it
pleases thee, when the sovereign Goddess of my soul, would most favor me,
to exile me her presence by such cruel means. On me, and my poor heart, that
never did offend thee, hauest thou tyrannized with all inhumanitie, winking and
pardoning the Conspirators against thy rule.

What have thou got by absenting me from her stamped in my living soul? wherein
were thou offended, when I beheld her presence? were it not I fear to be
accounted Traitor unto thy Crown and Principallitie, I would call, and
proclaim thee (over and besides that thou art cruel) to be envious: and if
not so, that Jealousy (plague of mortals, and immortals) to see me love and
live thereby, and in recompense of so firm a faith, to hope for the glory of
being again beloved, has forced thee to make me in exile wander thus from
that her happy presence.

I never have seen tokens of a perfecter Lover in my life (said Claridiano)
and as I am a Knight, if it lie in me to help him, I will do it to the
danger of my life. Of this and more is the Lover worthy of (answered his
uncle): but I would not have had you bound your self unto so much, whereby you
should omit your journey to Constantinople, the which would grieve my very
soul, especially loosing your company. To do so would increase my sorrow in
the highest degree (said the Prince) because our love binds us to grieve at
others absence: yet will not I remit to procure his content, that know how to
love so intierly: and it may be, I shall this way find some measure for my
torments: knowing that her sight (Commandresse of my soul) will but augment my
pains, by being in disgrace: and what great glory it were to be embraced in
her grace.

But go we to him that learned to love, and not fear the plague of absence,
for never yet did any feel it, but judged it worse then death. Let us go
(replied the free youth) for it is charity to help him in all things.
Whereupon they made a little noise, that the careless shepherd might hear
their going. With some alteration he did rise, supposing some other matter. But
when (by Mooneshine) he fawe those two knight, the riches of their armor, and
so gallant disposition, he went to meet them (being no less courteous then
any) and said. What is it you this way seek (brave knights?) for although
Fortune has brought me to the last point, to make me despair of my self, so
I may in any thing work your contents, believe me, I will be glad she
should, for that time lengthen my despised life, then which I could not be more
plagued.

Whereto Claridiano made answer. We come this knight and my self, to offer
our persons to procure your content (courteous sheppheard) if your necessities
requires them, the which we shall hazard, with more will then you to employ
them. There is no satisfaction, nor yet gratefulness, sufficient to balance
your most kind offer (gallant Knights, replied the shepherd) but in doing it,
you have made known the valor and magnanimity of your heroicke minds, whereto
by bounty you were bound.

Oh, may Love recompense it (if it has not been possible to deny his
sovereignty) with more joys then I at his hands have received: but now any
comfort whatsoever, will but augment my grief, the which has so far extended
it self, that no remedy nor salve can cure it. Then Claramant took occasion
thus. But although physic does not always whole cure the inueterated Mallady,
yet many oftentimes it preuents, and expelles many dangerous accidents, that
would else exceedingly aggrauate the infirmity, and so for all it may not now
please you to communicate it to those that will feel your sorrow, it will be
some consolation to see the^ pity it, were it but to be answered with (take
comfort, for others have been used with like cruelty, and you are not alone
despised in the world).

It is even so, said the amorous shepherd: for amongst all the greatest
consolations invented to mittigate the pains in love, to communicate them, is
the cheifest: yet in me to discover them, it is an offense against the party I
love. But to tell the torments I have endured, and what happiness they had
obtained, and my extreme fall from that high felicity, were to wrong my self
in the recital, for it will be but an argument of little sufferance in me,
seeing that the least of my suffered pains was sufficient to withstand a
thousand deaths: But now to consider they have let me survive, oh, there is no
evil comparable to it, nor none can I devise worse. For had I then been
deprived of my abhorred life, I should not have been so familiar with sower
grief: yet to see that after the loosing of that sovereign good, my life does
still persecute me with woes, that death fearing to come near them, flies from
me when I most do call him: oh there is no patient that can endure this, nor I
have power to tolerate it, but with millions of continual tears, to bewail
this loss and my misfortunes. Farther he could not proceed, for his tears
interrupted him, which so moved the tender hearted Prince, that they entreated
him to make them pertakers of his greefs, that they might judge whether he have
reason so to grief.

Then the shepherd said. I am sure it is good to relate the tenor and
process of my woes, unto such Knights: yet my distressed soul refuses to
refresh the memory with so many euilles: but that you may know how small this
my languishment is, sit you down, and you shall hear the greatest injustice
that ever was used toward any: he being assured of my faith, that does reward
it not as it deserves, but according to his pleasure, as a Tyrant.

They all sat them down under the covert of a spreading Oak, where the
Greeks put off their Helmes, whose bewties admyred the shepherd, who with
some sighs moving them to silence, he began. Since you be pleased (Sir
knights) to have me recount the Pilgrimage of my oppressed life, and who I am:
so that seeming to receive content thereby, I shall not need to entreat you to
yield me that attencion, my manifold sorrows do deserve.

Know therefore (most Noble warriors) how that imperial power that does
command both Gods and men, pardoning none of no kind, I mean Love, sovereign
of all sovereigns, has enforced me into this disguised habit: And yet when I
ponder how extremely the blind Goddess is bent against me, I find my self
not secure therein: for I have ere this been honored, and as a Prince
acknowledged, until my ^^arre-crost loves, exilde me through the world. This
heart-infecting Deity (gallant Knights) when in greatest pomp and iollitie I
lived in Apulia, (whereof the Heavens allotted me Prince) sent and conducted
thither those, whose tongues were tuned with the dulced notes of the
gallantnesse and beauty of the Princess of Lucania. With such deep root did
her fair name insert it self within my free thoghts, that it is now impossible
to leave to love her, in that both she and I have by a hidden grace, accorded
in one thing. But I doubt it is the nature of our climate, or they that breathe
therein, by custom to be subject to like misfortunes.

What shall I remember Hanniball, who had he not known Apulia, then had he
not been ensnared in this passion, but been Lord of Rome, and not through
love, overthrow his eternal honor, won with such loss of his own blood.
Yet was not this example of any force to divert me from my new imaginations,
but rather in greatest haste I prepared my journey toward Lucania, whither I
went, only with a Page, my horse and Armor, soly to see Pollinarda, and if
her perfections equalled the fame of her beauty. I arrived in time when it most
flourished, because the Court was then full of knights that served her. And in
faith believe me, that how far soever the report of her praises exceeded
belief, so far and more did I find them to limp behind her excellencies I
noted.

In my opinion the heavens have not created a more absoluter beauty, because
Envy it self has found no means to seize thereon, and therefore is become
the Herald of her worthes. You may think (Noble Sir) these were new snares to
entrap my captive soul. Asumptuous tryumphe was ordained in the City, which
in ancient times was called Frossa, which in the Assyrian tongue, signifies
happy. It was so indeed, and even from the beginning, for she never had a
Queen, but was also in beauty so.

This occasion did Fortune offer me (oh she did further me to make my mishaps
the greater) placing me near unto a brother of hers: by name Lysander, a
knight both young and valiant, and in love too with the Infant of Campania,
that in court accompanied the princess Pollinarda: high Solesia, no less
bewtifull then kind, who knowing how she was beloved, would not ill repay
Lysanders faith, and so the gallant lived in some respects assured of his
hopes. Oh, yet never had any full assurance, if he still will be amorous. On
the adverse part, was Leader, the valiant Prince of Calabria, Agesilao by name,
the happiest that I knew, in that without the panges of passions, and souls
afflictions, he obtained to be beloved of Pollinarda, and in such open manner,
that the whole popularitie did know it. It did not grieve my Ladies father, but
rather it so pleased him, that in open show he expressed it, which more animated
the Lady to grace him with new favors, which were sharp poynted daggers,
stuck in the heart of woeful Florisiano, for so am I named. Oh it could not be
less, beholding with my own eyes my own sorrow.

At length the Iousts began, wherein my stars vouchsafed a little to advance
me, which did attract Lysanders affection, with such true zeal, that there
cannot be firmer friendship then that he has shown me: yea, although
against his sister.

The whole multitude turned their gazing eyes on my device, which was, blew
arms, crossed with yeallow bars. It accorded to the ill my jealous soul
endured. On my sheeld was portrayed suspicion in her natural color, as in
ancient times she was painted, bearing a scrowle, with this word.

Wisely, who can her despise,
That only does employ her eyes
To spy out Loves subtilties.
There was no Lady in the place, but noted my jealous colors, and so (as I
after understood) some that were more pitiful, prayed for my victory: which
makes me think their orizons and good will abode me the honor of the iousts.
So Lysander (that greatly affected me) and I, cleared the place, that none would
more adventure: and having don, yet did I not disclose my self, neither to him
nor any other, although the King himself was very importunate to know me:
only this they got, that I was called the jealous Knight. Sure I am, that my
Lady being so busied wtth Agesilao, she did not note my deeds, but rather
(for it was told me) she was displeased, that I unknown, had unhorsed her Lover
in the Liftes.

Needs would the Prince Lysander have me to his own lodging, professing
himself so intier a friend, that he has won me to the death: the which I
will gladly receive, to procure his content. In greater bonds did he tie me,
altogether expressing his much nobleness, by discovering unto me, the
sincerity of his love toward Solefia, Infant of Campania. I could not but
highly esteem of the trust he reposed in me, being but a Knight, possessing
naught but armor and horse. He entreated me to accompany him that night in a
Mask, because the king his father in honor of the iousts, feasted all the
Princes with shows and reuellings. It pleased me in my soul, in that I should
behold her presence that governed my heart. In two long robes of cloth of gold
we issued, masked: yet would not I go so unprovided, but that I had on a privy
coat, which in my wandering days I used, bearing arms.

In this manner we entered the Palace, when the revels began. Every Lady that
had her gallant there, favored him, to dance with him. Of these was my dear
friend Lysander one, whose Mistress was attired in the same color that we
were. They daunced with such grace, that Cupid himself could not but like it.
Next to him, did Agesilao take Pollinarda Princess of beauty, by the hand. I
cannot deny what the heavens had imparted them, for their grace and Majesty,
admired all the Hall. Many excellent changes and tricks they used, yet the
jealous passion of my grieved soul stirred up more in my face, by coming and
going of my running color. Had not my friend been there, rather then I would
have suffered it, my heart upon a two edged sword should have been split, or I
revenged. The beloved youth was famoused to be an excellent Musician, as indeed
he was. So his Lady (or rather espouse, for her father had agreed thereto) gave
him a Lute to play thereon. He accepted it, (for he was fully bent to perform
her will) and began to touch it with more sweeter music then he that
descended to the infernal Vaultes to fetch his wife. Then with a clear voice
he warbled forth this Dittie, the which my memory carried away, the more to
increase my pain.

That brow, which does with fair all faires excel,
Those eyes that shining lends the world his light,
That gracious mouth where all the Graces dwell,
That dimpled chin, the whetstone of delight,
Those two rare Mounts, of Lillies and of Roses,
That in their swelling, all content encloses.
That brow, eye, mouth, chin, and most dainty cheek,
Does call, keep, hold, bind, and in gives restrain
My heart, eye, ear, my thought, and judgment, eeke,
That no wise force, can free me thence again.
Yet do I love my pleasing pain so well,
That boue all joys, I prize my heavenly hell.
Let dunghill baseness and the earthy mind,
His summum bonum place in what he list:
My soul (which strange divinity does find)
Within thy faces centure to consist:
Will not consent that any other be
My only good, but only, only thee.
Thy brow, shall be the dreadful snowy Bar,
Where I will daily for thy mercy plead:
Thy shyning eye, my path-directing star,
Thy mouth, the Laws, which I must keep, shall read.
Thy chin and cheek, shall equal power bear:
The first to cheer, the last to keep in fear.
And thou thy self, (Goddess of my desire)
In my Hearts temple, daily I Will adore,
No other Deity will I admire,
No other power divine, will I implore:
Great Goddess keep me, in thy favor shine,
My heart, eye, ear, my thought and judgments thine.
Thus did he run upon the treble with such heavenly melody, that had he not
been Agesilao that sung, believe me brave knight, I would have liked it: but
being done by the enemy to my rest, it was worse then hell unto mine eyes,
that saw it. And in faith, his song was but the mere truth, although she was
too cruel toward him, yet was I the cause, as I shall tell you. No
imperfection was noted in the continuance of his Harmony: So having done, he
laid by his Lute, the which the Princess bequeathed to Solesia, who in
compassion of my (as she thought) ill placed affection, warbled out this cold
comfort.

Fear not faint-heart, Time may prove
A sovereign plaster for your Love.
Such a faith so firmly grounded,
Such a Love so kindly placed:
From a Heart so deeply wounded,
From a person so well graced:
Needs must get the Hearts desiring,
Though hope, yet seem not to say it.
And though this Time seem retyring,
Time hereafter may repay it.
Fear not faint-heart, Time may prove
A sovereign plaster for your Love.
I did not conceive the meaning of her conceit, until I understood she did
suspect I affected her Cousen, and so to put me in hope (being glad I
accompanied her Lover) she animated me, with that I did requite it, when it
pleased Love to do by me, as by then assuring her how intierly she was beloved
of my friend, whereof I had experience, in the many days I continued in
Lucania. I think Lysander did perceive the affection I bore his sister, yet
he showed him so like a Knight, that he not only dissembled it, but seemed to
rejoice, and wish my hopes might take place, if that the Callabrian had not bin
the^ between. But being no longer able to endure the pestiferous plague of
jealousy, on the four Gates of the City, I secretly caused so many shieldes
to be set up, whereon, under an unknown name, I named my self maintainer of the
ring, an exercise and pastime much used in that land, by reason it is near unto
the Spanish soil, whose nation, challenges the sole pre-eminence over this
exercise, as skilfullest and principal Authors thereof.

No knight in the City would admit it, seeing the Callabrian did refuse it,
unless I did express my name, the which, in that I could not do without
danger of my life, I granted notwithstanding, that any should openly defend
Pollinardas beauty, which I by another name covertly maintained. Thereupon
Agesilao presently subscribed, and and after him many prepared to win at the
ring. The day being come, you may think (brave knights) he would show
himself in the richest manner he could, as a Prince so famous and happy. So
did the Lady attired all in white, adding such virtue to her excellencies,
that had I not been inurde to suffer discontented pains, my perplexed heart
would have burst.

The sport began, wherein he behaved himself according to his Ladies
favors, with which it had not been much, he had performed much more. There
were we, my friend Lysander and my self I mean, in several colors, for his
attire was green, imbrodered with Artechokes of gold, manifesting a
maiesticke mind. But I still with jealousy tormented, durst not but differ
from him, apparrelled in yellow, laced with blew and gold, and mounted on a
mighty Courser, which from Apulia I had brought. My companions posie agreed
with his content.

My hearts heart, likes my heart, and I again,
Like my hearts heart, so both content remain.
His Lady well understood it, for she tendered him as her soul. Mine was
dispairing in this manner.

Despair, I yield, since all things do agree,
Into thy claws, to drive dispairing me.
Valiant was the gallant Lysander, to whom I granted the first course, whose
prize he won, which was a Pelican, by nature cruel to himself, only to
become kind to his kind. It, did Solesia receive with greater joy, then I
possessed, seeing my Ladies beauty so ill defended: yet was I revived in my
drouping thoghts, hearing how all the multitude adjudged Pollinarda still to be
fairest. After him I took my turn, wherein the heavens so aided me, that at
every carreire, I took the ring on my lances point. Then in sign of victory,
I had a Crown of gold delivered me. They could not have given me a thing ye
more might please me at that occasion, for I had an other ready made of purpose
to present her, if I issued victor. Making my horse set his knees on the
ground, I presented them both, but about my prepared Coronet, I had caused to
be engraven this posie.

Well deserves her head a Crown,
Who Crowns with praise all womankind:
Therefore, Love has sent me down,
As token of his loving mind,
A Crown, to Crown the Crown of Nature,
Sovereign of all earthly feature.
Near me was Agesilao, when I presented the prizes. He presently suspected I
was he that had vanquished the Iousts in the same color, since when he noted
it by many occasions, as also how I affected his lady. So trusting to many
friends and kinsfolks he had in the place, yet cheefely thinking I was
unarmed, and being spurred with a jealous frenzy, he stepped to me, so did my
friend, suspecting there would be some hurliburly: He thus said. I know not
knight, whereon thou have grounded thy presumption, so to deliver the pryzes in
such prejudicial manner. Whereupon to move him, I replied. To see how ill the
excellent beauty of this sovereign princess is defended: for if acccordingly
some were so rewarded with favor, you might with as great right go without it,
as an other that I know.

He was bold of his valor, and being touched to the quick, he drew his sword
against me. He had got nothing by the adventure, for saving my head, I was else
all armed, and with mine in my hand, at two steps I was within him, so
near, that he had not satisfied his boldness with less then his life: but we
were separated by the standers by, that it proceeded no farther then in words.

Every one blamed him, which encouraged me (without respect of displeasing my
Lady) to challenge, and cast him my honors gage, as a warning he should be
always provided, against wheresoever we met. We departed thence, and I so
angered, that I thought it long til I incountred him. Now the Revels of that
night being ended, the two were contracted with the Fathers public consent:
and the hour of rest approached, every one withdrew into his lodging, so that
Agesilao possessed with excess of joy, and forgetting my challenge, he closely
with two men got him under his Ladies window, where, knowing what pleasure she
received with his Music, he played this Dittie upon his Lute.

What ere he is that would behold,
Imperious Cupids sporting place:
Here to gaze, let him be bold,
On this bewteous comely grace.
Here does rarest beauty dwell,
On her brow does Cupid sit:
This is she that does excel,
Both for her beauty, love and wit.
In her Cupid takes rest,
Joy and bliss with her have end:
Who knows her, is double blessed,
Whose beauty day, to night does le^d.
My rage swelling heart, could not suffer him to proceed farther, for with more
fury then my fear would allow, I rusht upon him, saying: The time and place
does now fit (discourteous Prince) that the death of one of us shall testify
the valor of the other. I being alone, and himself accompanied with two, made
them the bolder all three to assail me: I refused them not, but valiantly put
my self among them: I mortally wounded one, which gave me way the sooner to
meet with the unhappy Prince, who so little lived to enjoy his loving hopes:
for driving him before me til he was under his Mistress window, with a strong
thrust I ran him through: where the blind Goddess of Chance, seemed yet to
favor him, as to be stuck to his Ladies wall. At the last groan wherewith he
yielded his soul, I heard another, the fearfullest, that ever before or since
I heard, because it proceeded from Pollinarda. It so daunted me, that I had
like to have been taken, all the knights guard, with others, being thither
come. As secretly as I might I shrunk away, til I had time to set my safety
on my feet, getting to my Lodging, saying nothing of what had happened unto my
friend, yet had he questioned me about it, he could not but have perceived it.
What else befell, the next Chapter shall rehearse.

CHAP. XXVIII. How the Prince of Apulia, with much pity continued the
discourse of his life unto the Greek Princes.
TO prove how many dangers, and perilous inconveniences the disordinate
passion of inconsiderate Love does cause, there shall need no arguments nor
preambles of large discourses to auerre it: for the experience that every one
sustaines by pains and griefs thereof, together with the opinion of that
famous Philosopher that said: If this disordered Motive of intemperate and
furious motions, had not been indengered in the breasts of mortals, as some
plague and scourge for evils, infinite and Capital deadly crimes had never been
committed, nor imagined. Well is this saying confirmed by the unhappy death of
the Calabrian prince, at the hands of the Apulian Florisiano: who with equal
grace and grief, prosecuted the tenor of his woes thus.

The bitter exclamatios that sounded in the Palace (brave knights) and the
hurliburly of the City, seemed no less, then had it been round begirt with
enemies. Dead as he was, he was carried to the Lady, so she gave in charge, for
loving him so dearly in his life, she would not in his death forsake him. She
did lamentably bewail over the murdered Corpse, when I disguised came
thither, for I could not but go and see her, of whose sorrow I had been the
causer. Oh cruel heavens (said the woeful Lady) with what barbarous immanitie
have you extended your rygorous power on me, more then on any Lady else? Oh
Sauadge and inhumane wretch, murderer of my soul, may it be there shall want
Justice, where such bloody deeds have abounded? Ay me unfortunate Prince, how
cruelly in thy tender years art thou by an untimely death persecuted. A
thousand times did she sound upon the deceased Truncke, holding it in her
lap. So extreme were my passions (Sir knights) that to see him in that
manner, I almost became jealous, judging I had favored him, by so sheading of
his blood, that in death (were it not senseless) to enjoy so sweet a favor.
Considering my great intyer love, my state for his I would have changed.

By little and little I approached so near her, that lifting up her eyes, she
met with him that was cause of all her sorrow: she supposing it, cried out
aloude and said: Why do you suffer the bloody murderer with such
presumption to appear thus before the murdered? Oh Gods, sufficient strength,
did I then desire, sufficiently to be revenged.

Some of the dead Princies Allies, did suddenly arise, which forced me without
farther regard, to show my self guilty of the fact by drawing my weapons.
Above forty swords did presently fly about mine ears. The Pillars of the
yard (whither I was got following Pollinarda) defended my back, whereby
having slain three or four, the rest with fear retired, giving me leave to
return unto the place where the Lady continued her laments.

There I said I would yield both my self and my weapons into the Princess
hand. So joyfully I resolved to accompany the dead prince, to please the Lady,
and thereupon taking my sword by the point, prostrated on my knees, I said:
Most excellent Lady, if any offense has been committed, it has been with
this, wherewith you may take what revenge you will on me, that was the
executioner thereof.

Believe me (heroicke knights) there is no cruelty like to that, kindled
within the breast of an angry woman, peremptorily resolved, for so she may have
her will, no life she does respect. She took the sword, and with enraged
courage, she offered to execute what I had accounted my happiness, so she were
contented: but her strength failed her in the execution of the blow, falling
after the blade in a trance, whose point scratching my Front, did let forth
my blood. And though greater wounds then that I had not felt, yet that I noted,
when the Lady returning to her self, I spied my dear blood on her face, as
the spoils of her intent. A sufficient mark was that (brave knights) to
assuage the greatest pain.

Millions of thanks gave I Fortune for it, attributing that hap to her: for
being so rare, it could not but proceed from such a blind distributresse of
unexpected benefits. I had no power to defend me from those that assailed me,
being weaponlesse, who had given me a thousand deaths, much more one, but that
my friend and faithful Lysander, arrived at the instant, who drawing his
sword, approved his friendship to be great, by shielding me from a shameful
death, though not from a rygorous prison, where the King commanded me that
night to be cast in, showing himself to be most exceedingly angry and grieved.

You may easily suppose (worthy Syrs) what I might feel, being in that sort
imprisoned, especially, when the next day I was adjudged in the open place to
be beheaded. I did not so much sorrow to be led to die, as to depart in my
Ladies disgrace. Who most like an eager Tiger of Hyrcania, still cried and
yelled out for revenge.

But it pleased my inconstant chance, (from whence I gather, I was reserved to
suffer greater pains) that I should know my Iaylor, being a knight both
gentle and kind, whom by deserts I had bound to pleasure me: for in former
times, I had no less saved him then his life, defending it from them that
would have spilt it. He much encouraged me: saying, he would for my sake
undertake any peril, being thereto long since indebted.

His kindness did much comfort me, although I never imagined to steal from
prison, for all he would have set me at liberty, for I was resolved to die
loving her, by that means working my Ladies content, that she might see I
suffered the deserved punishment, on me inflicted for so displeasing her. I
only entreated him, by the amity and love I had once shown him, seeing my
death was not to be avoided, and that I might leave the world contently, he
should procure the delivery of a letter from me to my Lady, for it would be
my latest happiness. He had before that (noble knights) heard me complain,
and utter my true hearts sorrow, together with the cause thereof: which made him
bid me write, for he would with his own hand convey it to hers, and also get
me an answer. To which courtesy I replied. Had I much more done for you then
I have (sir knight) this your kind offer is a sufficient satisfaction for the
same, binding me anew (over and above your love) to procure your content in any
thing I may: to effect which desire, oh would I had a long life, that a deed so
rare and in such distress offered and performed, might with sufficient
recompense be guerdoned.

Thus animated I writ my letter, whose coppie I have about me, the which,
though it may seem troublesome to you, I will read, together with the answer:
and then you will say, I have reason to complain. He drew his letter, and
opening it with a sigh, he read it thus.

Florisianos Letter to Pollinarda.
NOt without fear (most sovereign Princess of Lucania) even at the last
moment of my life, do I presume to write, not entreating that I may live, for
that, nor the intiernesse of my Love to your service, will permit it, nor yet
can I persuade my self it would sort to any good effect, because I am the
petitioner: for although it sometimes passed through my pensive thoughts to
demand it, to employ the same to your content, It presently vanishes like
air, with remembrance of the unhappy success of your distressed Lovers
untimely fall. And although my fault may have some hope of pardon, being
committed through the abundance of pure Love, yet is it crossed, because it was
against thee, when I only should have dissembled my pain, and not (procuring
to assuage it) increase thine in the highest degree. But I am resolved to die,
seeing you and my misfortunes, will have, and have ordained it so. I do not
offend, beseeching thee, that with thy leave, I may entreat to be carried to
the place of execution along by thy window, for the sight of thy presence, will
much abate my grief and tertor of so sharp a death. It shall be a favor that
with content will license my departure, when this hapless body trodde down
with woes, shall be dispossessed of life. The immortal Gods preserve thine as
they can, and he wishes that expects the approaching of the expiring minute of
his.


Having done, to the Court did the Iaylor (sir knights) high him. He was a man
in whom the King and all the Nobility reposed much trust: so might he enter
vncontrowlde into fair Pollinardas chamber, whom (as he told me) he found clad
all in mourning, still continuing her laments. By little and little in their
discourses, he forced her by occasion to demand for me: whereto he replied. I
was one that momentarily expected his death, from whom I took this letter,
finding it on his Deske, and seeing it was directed to your Highness, I here
bring it to be burnt, least it import some further evil. He did so cunningly
deliver it, and skilfully persuade the reading, that she thought him ignorant
of the tenor. She took and perused it, from whence redounded the proceeding
of the greatest cruelty ever heard of. From Medea and Progne has Pollinarda
taken their names of cruel: for her answer, denotes her much more inhumane,
the which I do entreat you to attend, that you may be assured what power a
woman's rage is of, to execute her will. The contents of her reply be these.

Pollinardas answer to Florisiano.
COnfounded was I twixt two extremes by thy Letter, (most bloody knight, and
the cruellest that was ever borne:) the one increased my pain, thinking on thy
presumption, and my ignorance in receiving thy lewd scribled paper, because it
came from him that bereaft me of my life, murdering that unhappy Prince. The
other which I account worse then hell, to be constrained to answer thee:
because to dissemble with thy letter, were to give aim to thy boldness, with
occasion that thou might think it pleased me, (by my silence) to grant thy
request, admitting thy least evil, the which my self denying it, and adding
ten times more tortures to thy deserved punishment, it would be termed no new
cruelty, proceeding from me so exceedingly wronged and offended. My sight
thou have no need to desire, if it shall any thing avail for thy content: for
he that spoiled me of my joy, has no reason to demand any. And since thou
murderedst his life that did not merit it, thou have merited the cruellest
death that may be devised, the which I will hasten to execution. I cannot wish
thee life, to end mine: because I do procure thy death to comfort me.


He has reason (noble Knights said the Prince, having ended) to pine, to
languish, to travel without joy and content, that lived to see so kind a
letter as mine, answered with such disdain and rigor. Who has ever heard of
such cruelty as this? I had no tongue to complain of her, nor power to banne
my luckelesse stars. For considering how I did offend her, I thought this
course of wrath too little: But I desired (so dearly did I love Pollinarda) it
should be said of her, she had with greatest bounty and nobleness,
forgiven the greatest enemy of her content, and sole spoyler of her joy, for
that had been a manifest token of selfe-conquest over her own anger, and
revenging thirst, which is the sole glory above all others, to eternize an
honorable mind, because it is generally accorded, that to be a greater
triumph obtained over our proper selves, then to vanquish either heaven or
earth. Only for this is that Lady much bound to me, that I never desired nor
imagined any thing, but to the advancement of her honor and fame.

My gentle Keeper greatly comforted me, knowing how intierly I loved. He
performed an act, the which having since (without affection) often deeply
wondered with my self, yet could I never resolve me of the cause, more then
the motion of a virtuous inclination, to comiserate a hapless chance. It was,
that being thoroughly grieved, to see I should the next day be openly beheaded,
(against which execution, my dear friend Lycanders intercessions nothing
prevailed) that entering my chamber with a courage resolve, he thus spoke unto
me. You see (sir knight) what the king has determined on your affairs, it
does so grieve my very soul, that to save your life, I would gladly loose
mine, and hazard my credit with his Majesty, wronging his reposed confidence
in me, and will give you liberty through this Tower, for it is impossible you
should escape by this Gate, by reason of the strong guard that keeps you. And
grieve not thus to discontent your Lady, for the process of time will lessen
her concealed sorrow for Agesilaos death, better then yours may now satisfy
her revenge. Let it be so, and by this means reserve your life, be it but to
employ it in loving her: for it is not the part of a noble breast to despair
of every thing, but it rather belongs to a courageous mind, to nourish his
decaying hopes with bold confidence.

He so well persuaded me (most famous knights) that I resolved to preserve my
life by that sower remedy. And first to comfort him, for the deprivation of
his estate, which he willingly did forgo to escape away with me, I told him
for whom I undertook that danger, discovering my self unto him. It gladded
him, and therevppon he took off my boltes and Gyues, wherein my adverse
fortune had bound me, and so the night being come, we descended the Tower by a
corded ladder, through a window that ouerlooked the sea coast, where he had
provided a well rigged Bark: entering therein a maine, we lancht from the
City of Frossa, not without many sighs and tears from my heart, thinking
how much I did displease the Lady of my life thereby, in that her pleasure
consisted on my death.

Three days did we nauigate with a fair gayle, which made me think, I
better fared on the seas, then on the land. The second time would not Fortune
let me repeat it, for conspiring with Eolus, they both would needs try their
fierceness on my patience, with the cruellest storm that has been seen: for
the waves beginning to swell, threatening the heavens and strongest rocks, what
might not we fear, that were tossed on their billows, sometimes hoysed to the
clouds, and then cast lower then the center of the earth? So that he which
suffered less pain, was glad to submit to deaths stroke. Such and so many
flashes of water came tumbling into our weather-beaten vessel, that full
against our wills, we were forced to taste the savor of Neptunes saultest
licquor.

On the sudden we were surprised with such a whirlewinde, that we lost all hope
of recovery, for the persecuted Bark lay wallowed up and down, above half
an hour, until a contrary wind ouermaistring the tempest, cast it near the
shore, and running on a shole, it splitted in the midst. Our clamors and
shrikes then, are not to be believed, nor will I rehearse them, for my tongue is
insufficient. He that by chance got then any advantage, was by fastening on
some piece of board, a little to prolong his life. It was so hideous dark, that
none could see the other, nor light any fire could we, for the wind
dispearcing it, would blow it out. Thus grapled on a planke, I left my friend,
and wrestling with the seas, fortune, and death: the Gods permitted me (yet I
know not why) to save my abhorred life. And about the dawning of the day, I
found my self on the sandy Haven of Argier, so bruised and tired, that I could
not stand on my feet, for besides my toils, I had not slept in four days
before, still by moments expecting my near approaching death.

I was willing to take a nappe, before I would go into the country, so
stepping among some growing weeds, I slept a good while, receiving a little
rest and ease. Quickly was it bereaft me, falling in the hands of those
barbarous Infidels of that Sconse, that neither pitlie nor pardon any, though
they be of their own sect, so much they trust to the strength of that their
Castle. They carried me unto a rich Turk, Lieftenant of the Fortress, who
bought me for two hundredth Chequins, to serve him with his other slaves. I
employed the utmost of my power therein, which redownded to such effect, that
he trusted me above all his other seruitors. My painful, diligent, and
careful service, came to the kings hearing, that he would needs have me from
his Lieftenant, paying the double that my first Master had done for me.

I will omit (valiant Princes) how I might grieve to be so hurried from Market
to Market to be sold. It pleased my fortune to let me so far obtain the
Kings grace, as that he let me go at liberty without bands, but marked in
the front as his slave. I learned to speak the language, which much auayled me,
would I have violated my faith consecrated to my Lady, for Troyla his daughter
did even dote on me: but to him that had vowed his soul to Pollinardas
excelle^cies, and wanting the consolation of her presence, that increased his
torment.

I purpose to shun her importunities, once of so many times, they had
iniustly bought and sold me to run away. One night among the rest, I
resolved to do it, the which I might easily accomplish, considering the much
liberty I had: yet would I not do it without a farewell of the beauteous
Troyla, because I would not seem ungrateful for her love and favors. You may
imagine how she might take it, affecting me (in my opinion) as her self:
nevertheless, her true love tears could not stay poor distressed Iaroe, so
was I called by the Turks. She seeing me thus obstinately determined,
requested to know who I was, then which she required no other comfort: I did
not hazard much thereby, and therefore satisfied her. It somewhat quieted her,
protesting to come to my kingdom, or never to receive husband, but at my
hands. Thereupon I took my leave, a thousand times embraced by her, for I
durst not do it, fearing thereby to wrong her, that is the load-starre of my
joys.

She gave me more necessaries for my journey then I needed, and therewith
departed from Argier, where I nothing got, but like a slave to be marked in the
forehead. I could not rest, so tormented was I with variable cogitations, yet
in the end I resolved to return into Lucania, sure to be known of none, for
that my cares, and the troubles of the seas, had impaired and altered my
countenance, as also my slaves mark.

And considering how long since I was yoaked and captiuated with Loves
slavery, I nothing grieved at the signs thereof: for accounting them given me
as by Pollinardas hands, I did therein repute my self most happy. In these
tempestuous toils, and turbulent shipwracks, spent I one year and an half,
which was too much to be forgot, though not in my Ladies Palace. I thought
that Fortune (by ayding me with prosperous gales) would now at length seem to
pity me, for in few days I arrived in Lucania, where I inquired how matters
passed.

I was informed, that one of the strongest knights now known (the Greek
Princes that admit no comparatiue, excepted) was thither come. The deceased
Princes younger brother he was: but far valianter: for there is no Giant able
to withstand him. He solicited and wooed by all means to obtain the Ladies
good will, knowing there past no more between her and his brother, then an
exterior affection confirmed with espowsed faith. Yet does he insist therein,
(...) haughty and proud is Asternio the fierce, so is he named. Many times
was I about to buy horse and armor, to try my fortune, which is unable to
suffer any Competitor in my love and hopes. But I let it alone, to see to what
end my slavish turkish habit would sort unto. Sometimes I beheld her, which was
no small redress to my afflicted mind, yet was it tempered, seeing her
disconted, which pure love made me think was for Agesilao.

So one day walking near her chamber window, I met with my friend the Prince
Lysander. Even from his secret cabinet, did my heart leap with his sudden
sight. He stayed to look on me, and seeing me attired like a Turk, with a
turbant on my head, and the rest of my apparel neat and clean, he demanded
whence I was. I answered of Carthage, and that by great good hap I had freed
my self from Argiers bondage.

He entreated me (I know not if through affection) to become his servant. I
agreede thereto, only again to try my fortune that way. Thence we went to
the Palace, where he acquainted his new seruitor with his Parents. My Lady
was present, whose presence made every joint and vain tremble within me, in
their several motion, yet now and then casting my eyes unto the Sunshine of
her beauty, I drew strength from it, to support my weak mind, to make reply
to their demands: for seeing me so young, in that no hair yet budded in my
face, they comiferated the relation of my troubles, imprisonments, and
slaueries: yet this nothing grieved me (said I) for I cannot remember when I
was mine own, and therefore supposing I was marked to no other freedom, I did
till now patiently bear my slavish bondage, as if I had been borne thereto,
and I believe it will never be otherwise, my fortunes so continued it.

Gladly would I have had my Lady understood it, (so she might not know me)
and with what affection I did utter it, as he that so long since was wholly
devoted to her perfections. There was none in all the Court but took liking in
me, especially my Lord Lysander, that favored me that night to take me with
him, with swords and bucklers, and privy coats, secretly to walk abroad,
crossing the backside of a Gard^^ that leaded him to his Lady Solesias
lodging. His kindness and familiarity was a means that he did not entreat
me as a servant, but as if he had known me, making me the Secretary of his
Loves, the surest token of true amity that may be in this age. I cannot
otherwise believe, but that Cupid now at length thought himself wronged,
seeing Pollinarda so rebellious and cruel toward him and me. So she that
could not love Florisiano, Venus son with his almighty power, forced to
affect poor Iaroe, which name I would not change, for under that title Fortune
had offered me, in obtaining the grace of Troyla Princess of Argier.

Quickly did Pollinarda express manifest tokens of her change, demanding me
whether I needed ought, if yea, my demand should be the effect of my desire.
Neither was I able to answer, nor did I ever make known Florisianos great
necessities: but rather perceiving what she meant, as one skillful in the Art, I
seemed strange and regardlesse of her offer, to be more assured of her faith,
that after no occasion might frustrate our expects. My strangeness effected
what I wished, for by this, Iaroes Love had made her more solicit. I doubted
not thereof, noting the wooing motions of her eyes. Oh, they be the sweet
silent Ambassadors, soliciting the souls want.

Many times would I set my self at a window, to ruminate alone the felicity
of my state: then would I say to my self: Oh, who might deal some of my
abounding favors with disconted Florisiano? Oh Gods, how envious became the
Prince of Apulia, to see Iaroe so beloved, and himself utterly abhorred.
Oftentimes recounting my many favors, I found them so infinite, that I was
contented to let the Prince share with Iaroes glory and happiness.

One night, (oh happy night among the rest) did the Lady at full make known
her vehement passions, for I being by my master commanded to watch till one of
the clock, because we should then walk abroad, I got me in that season not
far from her chamber. I think there was some false door, for when I was
giving thanks to Cupid for the benefits I received, I heard some busling
there. I started somewhat amazed: and looking what it might be, I saw her that
now gouernes my heart, appear more fairer then Diana. A silver Candlestick
with a Taper she held in her hand. With cap in hand (for she was my Empress) I
ran to take it from her. Oh love, to none but whom thou lists thou do
distribute thy favors. She plainly (excellent knights) showed her self to be
soly mine: for wanting the power to move the Organs of her voice, yet her eyes
firmly fixed on mine, she would not let the candlestick go. Oh Loves sweet
war! In faith (Noble Sirs) you would have smiled to see the bewtious
Pollinarda by silence and dumme action, confess she did love, acknowledging
his sovereignty, and her tributarie duty to his deity, granting those
favors as hostage of her faith, unto his servant Iaroe. Oh do not suffer him
(most sacred Lady, said I) so much to offend, that was only created to adore
you.

With this speech, she perceived the fault she had committed: whereupon with
consent we set the Taper on the table, while she replied. The imagination
(Iaroe) thou might ill suspect, of this my coming thus to visit thee, has
bereft me of all strength and understanding: but that thou may know
wherefore I come, it is thus: I must have thee tell me thy proper name, for I
am sure thou have some other. This will I not be denied, vowing to keep it
secret, that thou may receive no harm therefore. You may well think how I
might stand confounded with her demand: answer I could not, which made her
more eager to know it. Again, she urged me, that I was enforced to say, I
cannot conceive (divine Princess) why you are importunate to know the thing
that will most of all others grieve you: oh let me not be the cause to renew
your sorrow, for I will first be my own murderer.

The amorous Dame replied: Did I imagine to receive any, I would not demand
it: but doing so, I assure you, you shall not in any thing more content me,
then in that. I answered her thus. Well, for all this, I am sure (fair
Princess) the knowledge of my name will vex you. Wherefore I humbly entreat
you to hold this dagger in your hand, that ending my speech, you also end
poor Iaroes life. Know therefore (sovereign Pollinarda) I was borne as I said
in Carthage, but am called Florisiano: I changed it, because I heard, that in
times past one of this name had exceedingly displeased you, by sleying the
Prince of Calabria: wherefore, seeing how hated that name was in this house, I
durst not come hither with it, fearing to refresh therewith, the memory of
passed greefes. Oh exceeding power of love, for though (Sir Knights) I
remembered the things she did most love and hate, she showed no whit of
alteration, but returning my poniard, said.

Little need had you Florisiano, to alter your name for any such fear, knowing
that only for it, the first of the same had been forgiven. Farther she did
not proceed, nor more openly bewray her affection.

I dissembled my joy, sharing it with Iaroe, whom now me thought began to be
forgot: I would therein recompense him for his former kindness toward
Florisiano. The time would no longer permit us to chat, for the hour of my
departure being come, I was constrained to tell her so. She was content,
aduising me to be secret, because she would that way often visit me.

I imagine (Sir Knights) that you think both tongue and soul swore a solemn
performance of her dear command, and if you so think, I assure you, your
thoughts deceive you not: for my soul that still hanged upon her lips,
received her command, with no less sentence of the Delphian Oracle: then
rising, with a pleasant smiling she said: I pray Lord Florisiano, let us
entreat your Turkeship, Christianly to conduct us to our lodging, and then
we will license your departure. All ravished with joy, not able to speak a word,
I went with her to her chamber door: and then falling on my knees and kissing
her hand, desiring her to account me hers: I took my leave, leaving my soul
in her bosom, and returned to my Lords lodging: where we prepared our selves
for our walk.

He did an act, that I judged most kind, for he gave me a garment that had
been mine, saying: Hold Iaroe, for since Fortune robbed me of his owner, none
has better deserved it. I put it on, and greatly wondered how he knew me not.

Away we went, arriving to the window where his Lady expected him: I stayed to
guarde the passage, with such resolution, that all the world, yea Florisiano of
Apulia, had not passed there: with the first, and with the favored last, was
Iaroe now in disgrace, seeing the alteration of his fortunes.

So if with patience you will attend me, the next Chapter shall unfold what
else happened

CHAP. XXIX. How the Prince of Apulia ended the discourse of his amourous life
to the Greek Princes, and how Claridiano pitying his estate, departed with
him.
WHat strong residence the power of Loves affection has within an amorous
breast (fair Ladies) the beawteous Pollinardas sudden and unexpected change
(which Agesilao bought full dearly) does amply show: for not remembering how
greatly she had loved him, how bitterly she had taken his death, and with what
rigor she procured his revenge, she recanted, and without consideration of her
honors blemish, doted on a slave. A just guerdon, that seeing she would not
affect the Knight, that with such firm proofs had approved himself to be
hers, and by his deeds, worthy of her estimate, she now beheld the subject of
her joys, with slavish marks, and that her blind and vain passion, might so
far exceed as to say, that for the second Florisianos sake, the first had been
pardoned.

There is none that may safely build his assurance on such effects, if once he
have opened his doors to Loves flatteries. In pensive imaginations had the
Lover put the Greeks with his amorous History, that they would not so soon
have it end. But the youth that aggrauated his woes with repetition of his
former greefes, abreuiated, saying.

There stayed I (Heroicke knights) gazing on the vesture that belonged to the
Apulian, till that my Lord Lysander having excused himself to his lady, of
certain objections laid against him, I think it was but some jealous
imagination, they would assure all inconveniences, by an espousall contraction,
especially befitting them both. So he came for me to be a witness thereto,
but ere he discovered himself, he would needs try the vygor of my arms,
coming an other way disguised for the purpose: and being near me, he drew,
saying.

What madness has brought thee to so suspicious a place, where thy boldness
shall reap no other again, then a remorcelesse death? I was so careful to
let none pass, nor to disclose who I was, that without more ado, or other
answer, I set upon my dearest friend. In faith I rejoiced to see how well he
behaved himself, although I knew him not, but I being thoroughly incensed, I
began to follow him in such sort, that I drove him among the hedges of the
Orchard, faithfully discharging my duty.

It behooued him to speak, least some danger had happened, so he raised his
voice, miscalling me therewith, which more grieved me, then if he had mortally
wounded me: for seeing me with eager fury, press to take advantage at full to
hit him, he said. Oh Turkish dog, what do thou? I knew my Lord Lysanders
voice, and believe me (Noble warriors) I was never more vexed: but that I
tendered him as my soul, Iaore had surely kept him from enjoying his loves,
yet I stayed my hand, considering his friendship toward the Prince of Apulia.

So I took my sword by the point, and entreated him to pardon me, for my not
knowing him, had forced me to commit that fault. The faith (answered he)
wherewith (friend Iaroe) thou backest thy Master, brings with it thy excuse,
for never had any knight a better servant the^ I: But that thou may know how
I esteem thee, come, for I will have thee be a witness to the faith I will
plight unto Solecia, to be her firm Lover.

He bound me eternally by the act: And the Moon then shyning bright, it
shyned just in the midst of the Ladies window where she stayed: and credit
me, she seemed bewtifull. She had so affected Florisiano Prince of Apulia,
that seeing me with his own garments, she could not but pity him, calling
me to memory.

With my hatte in hand (as a servant ought) I stood still, but she called me,
saying. Come thee hither friend Iaroe, for I will have this assurance pass in
thy presence, and my joys should I account complete, were the owner of thy
apparel in thy place.

Oh, if that were so, my dear espouse (said my tenderhearted freende) what
greater content could we more desire.

Toward whom might the blind Goddess show her self more favorable then to
us, had she now sent us that valiant knight, crossed with so many troubles? Some
tears did I epsy in their eyes, which so greatly moved me, that I could no
longer dissemble, and going more near them, I thus spoke: My very soul would
joy (most sovereign Princes) although I lost this good, to see that knight
here, who is the happiest in the world to be beloved of such Princes: for then
should fortune neither bereave Iaroe of this content, (oh Gods I could scarce
make an end) nor yet should the dispairing Knight be so persecuted by her, as
not to enjoy your happy presence, and by experience see, with what faith he is
affected. And if you regard him, behold me here, for more troubles yet
reserved: And since I am eye witness of the strongest and purest amity that
can be, oh let the knight in yealow satisfy it with the like, and with
endless service perpetually to honor you. And wonder not to see me thus
attired, for the successes that have me befallen, makes me admire how I have
escaped with life. I will not (because I cannot sufficiently) express
(excellent knights) the joy those Princes conceived with my sight. They
embraced me as I were their brother, yet had I been so, they could not have
done more.

They plainly had perceived I was inamoured of Pollinarda, since to such
manifest hazard of my life, I durst adventure to come to the Court. He so
richly performed the part of a Noble Prince, that knowing I desired to be
concealed, and not to be entreated otherwise then a servant, he also seemed
content that I should affect his sister. Much better did the fair Lady take
my part, saying. Believe me, henceforth none but I will solicit Iaroes
affairs, which should have no il success, seeing he refuses his other name:
so will I procure to redress the most difficultest, that we may live contented.

She forgot it not the next day, going to visit my Lady in her chamber, where
she found her troubled with many amourous doubts: now misconstring of her
favors shown me, then judging it not sufficient to my deserts, and her love.
We departed thence overcome with joy, and being in our Chamber, and the Prince
laid in bed, I betook me to a window that looked into the Garden, to recount
the favors I received: where in brief I omitted none, singing unto the silent
night, the pleasure of my conceived happiness, unable to devise what means I
might choose to be known unto the Princess.

She was so far in love, and therein so much out of quiet (no Lover had ever
any) that she ouerheard my song, and I think she gathered thereby, her self
had only the power to glad my sorrowful soul. And as the Infant Solesia came
afterward, and began to talk of me, she so well dealt for me, speaking more
then I deserved, that she altogether made conquest of her heart for me:
insomuch that she had almost discored it. For that time the Lady would not
press her any more, which if she had, Pollinarda would of force explaind her
great love toward me.

That night which was the last of my content, she came to hear Music, and as
I always used, I took my Lute and went to the window, where (not thinking
because it was so late any had heard me) I began to sing, and openly to
express the sovereign joy of my heart, in this manner.

Oh, who would think that Bondage could be Free?
That, deep-hart-woundings could beget all gladness,
That, most accursed, could the most happiest be,
That, that which all count grief, should kill all sadness,
Let all men note these miracles in me,
Whom Love has raised from the depth of badnes
Unto the highest, of all high degree,
Even then, when nothing ruled my soul; but madness.
Blessed be the heavenly power, whose powerful might
Has duld the keen edge, of her just disdaining:
And ever blessed be her noble spirit
That heard (with pity) my sad souls complaining:
Blessed be the grief of past afflictions night,
Since it, more sweet, does make my present gaining,
Blessed be the Time, that lent me first her sight,
But treble blessed the Time of grace obtaining.
You marks of bondage: (too) which did inuest
Me in these blessings: ever be you blessed.
Longer had I made my song, but that I heard a noise, which not only made me
leave, but also with some alteration to draw my weapons, not thinking my life's
happiness would seek me at that hour. With my sword in one hand, and buckler
in the other, I awayted the success, when in the way accustomed, I espied that
sovereign Lady, so excellent bewtifull, that with her only sight, I thought
my self transported into the skies. Smiling she came, showing the heaven of
her face full of joyful hopes. She first said thus. Methinkes that strange,
and irefull kind of entertainment, for her that soly procures thy content: Oh
what sweet words? these be they that now feed me in this cruel absence: and
more she said thus.

And in faith I have not conceived small pleasure hearing thee sing, expressing
the secrets of thy amourous heart: and for the great love the Prince my brother
bears thee, I will endeavor (if you tell me who your Lady is) to get your
liberty, that you may better attend her service.

With my soul full of gladness I replied. It is the condition (most
sovereign Lady) of all powerful Love to pardon none, among which number, he
has from the beginning so subdued my heart, that I have always delighted to
treat of his affairs with my self, being most alone: although the Lady I
adore and idolatrize, be resolved never to favor me.

I have not dared even from the spring of my loves, to do more then sing the
joy my heart conceiues to account my self hers. Where to she answered. And is
it possible thou art so cunning in dissembling thy affection? Now by my troth,
were thou to be my gallant, thou should not suffer so many torments. And
believe me, there is never any thing lost by discovering to the Lady the
interior secrets of the heart, and how she is beloved: for otherwise thus to
dissemble, is rather occasion of further evil, because it is likely, (nay it
often happens) that the Lady may place her affection on some other, and so
thou loose that benefit, through silence.

I have already set my chief happiness therein (did I reply) most beawteous
Lady, and therefore I cannot but be silent, and love, although I die.

Well has my Lady understood what I require, and how I love: for mine eyes
sometimes forgetting their other motions, repairing unto the heaven of that
beauty for some favor, are credible Ambassadors of the hearts intent.

That is not sufficient (said she) to make her resolve to love, being beloved:
for as touching your gazing, that is so common and general among all men, that
the Ladies may judge it as an ordinary thing, not considering the owner of
those gazing instruments, does honor and love her: and therefore it is an
error to dissemble, when the pain is estraunged. If in recompense of the
greatness thereof, (most sacred Lady said I) the author of the same should be
discovered, and she acquainted therewith, none with more reason ought to do it
then I, for there can be none that has endured so much, nor any loved with
such firmness.

If there be assurance thereof (replied the Princess) I say thou do wrong
thy Lady, in not letting her know how she is beloved, if it be with such truth
as you publish. And therefore because I have this day heard I know not what of
the Princess Solesia, thou shall tell me what I demand, and on my faith none
shall know it, but whom thou will. You have no reason to bind me to any thing,
(excellent Lady replied I) knowing I will till death obey your command. She
answered. Why then we shall not so ill disagree as I thought: the thing
therefore I would know, is, thou must tell me if thy Lady be here or no, and
her name withal, without delay and circumstance: for I shall thereby receive
the greatest pleasure in the world, and with the contrary, exceeding
discontent, which will be immerited, and no just guerdon for what I mean to
do for thee? You may easily conceive (valiant Knights) what conflicts I might
endure of contrarious thoughts, not knowing the success that might ensue, if
by telling troth, I did condescend unto her demand. Somewhat amazed stood I
a while, in so much that she said: you must not devise excuses, for it will
fall out worse, if you offend me so. I answered. None did I devise (divine
Pollinarda) but I rather began to encourage my self, to pass my life in your
disgrace, for naught else can redowne hereby, but kindle your fleeping wrath.
Be it what it will, (said she) for I am pleased with the knowledge. Why then
(replied I) know (sovereign Princess) she is in this City, and of the
self same name that you are of, in which repitition I offend her. She
proceeded further, saying. And have you never spoken with her? now did I
tremble with fear, and then imagined a thousand devises, yet in the end I
replied,

Sovereign Lady, your excellency so far urges this matter, that I cannot
step from hence, fearing to meet with death, unless you seek his life's
overthrow that was borne to serve you. She replied: I will have you tell me all,
for I will take it as one that procures your good, as you have partly seen.

Whereto I answered falling on my knees: Presuming on your Royal word and
favors (sacred Lady) I cannot deny but I am yours, imploring pardon for this
fault (if it be any) worthy of worse punishment then death. It did not grieve
her to hear me say she was the Queen my heart had chosen to imperate over it,
and my soul: but rather taking hold by my King (the mark of my slavery)
which for my pleasure I often put on, she raised me, saying: Very plainly
have thou (Florisiano) expressed thou love me, and if thy constancy wherewith
thou do it, be as thou say, so I may enjoy a heart so sincere, and second
to none, I give thee leave to do so still, regarding the secrecy due to my
honor, until the heavens shall minister those means wherewith I may assuage
thy griefs. I required her hands, I could do no less, to kiss them) more
glad, then had I been invested sole Emperor of the wide world, and yet that had
not so pleased me. She commanded me to take off my King, seeing Fortune had now
favored me, whereto I replied: Oh let not your excellency command me to put
off that thing wherewith the heavens have begun to work my joy, lest Fortune
enemy to all content, seeing me no more a slave, should triumph over my glory:
And though I be a king in loving, and the most glorious and free in being
beloved, let me keep this as a memorial: I am and will be yours while my life
shall endure, the which loosing it in your service, will be the happiest and
richest loss in this terrene Orb. If it be so, wear it (replied the
Mistress of my life) and yet the taking it off, should nothing impair my
affection, which now is only employed in your Love.

Thus was the Sovereign of my soul, weauing this sweet web of my life, on
the delicate Loome of both our contents, when blind Fortune Mistress of
mischaunce, being weary and angry that she had helped me that little moment of
time, brought it about I know not by what means, that our Loves till then
became suspicious in Court, nay further proceeds my woes, (Oh I cannot without
tears say more) it came to the Kings ears: who desirous to be assured of so
dishonorable a deed, as to be beloved of the Princess, he had hid himself
in that room unknown to me that very night: and seeing by experience what he
had suspected, he issued forth enraged like a mad man. I yet was on my knees,
when he came forth, and finding me in that manner, he took me by the collor,
and drawing my poniard, said: Oh infamous miscreant, Turkish dog, have thou
thus wronged the trust reposed in thee? The punishment inflicted on thee, shall
be a sufficient example to all others such disloyal wretches as thy own
self. I had no eyes to look him in the face, nor tongue to answer him,
though I wanted not hands to shead his blood, had not my Ladies and my friend
Lysanders displeasure and discontent thereby stayed me. He snatched at her so
furiously, that she almost fell upon her face, saying.

I had not thought (Minion) thy wanton boldness would so have made thee pass
the limits of shame and grace, as to bestow thy affection on a slave? He cried
to those that awaighted without, whereat four knights rushed in, who straight
conveyed me to prison, where I thought they would closely murder me: the which
I had gladly received, so she were not hardly handled, that had so bountifully
favored me. The king did commit her, but knowing our affection had been no
other then he had seen, he straight (for he loved her dearly) forgave her,
turning all his rage upon poor Florisiano. Oh, magnanimious Knights, with how
many millions of brinish tears did I bewail that loss? it was believe me the
greatest in the world, for none in so short time could be so happy as I, nor
none again so unhappy. Nothing I did, but exclaim lamenting, and with woes
tormenting my afflicted self.

At length, being so many, some pierced the high heavens, moving the immortal
Gods to pity and comiseration, appointing a means on earth to redeem me:
for the Noble Lysander being moved at my disgrace, by policy procured my
Gailors to release me of my Irons and boltes, that I might escape through a
window, and save my life.

I grieved no less to depart from Pollinarda, at that time (though in her
grace and favor) then at first when like an enemy I ran from her. Yea more
then this did my friend solicit in my behalf: for he went to his sister, and
discovered to her the whole secret of my affairs, telling her, I was the
Knight in yealowe, and he that slew her Agesilao, then loving her more then
now. I never would tell any who else I was, because I vowed it from the
beginning, only to procure her favor or disfavor, without that regard and
respect wherein I might be had, being known to be Prince of Apulia, and
had not your valor and courtesies bound me thereto, none should have known it.

The Lady did not grieve at this sweet complot of Love, but rather it kindled
in her some new affection. So was I visited in prison from her: which revived
my hopes, and added new life to my dying powers. To pleasure the Prince
Lysander, my Gaylors took from me my gyues.

The Lady Mistress of my life, knew the night of my departure, and having
sometimes before written unto me by her brother, yet then she expressed the
utmost of her Love: for I was no sooner down in the Garden over which the
window was that I leaped through, when among a certain company of trees I
heard a noise. Supposing it could be none that would do me such pleasure as I
after received, I drew my weapons and went toward that place, where I was
quickly pacified, seeing a knight I well knew: who with as much breuety as the
case required, told me, that my Lady sent me a Letter with money and Jewels
for my escape.

I took all, not knowing how to deserve so much good as at her hands I had
received: and making my answer according to the merits of those deeds, I took
my leave of the knight and went out of the Garden, and traveled till I thought
I was out of danger, and hiding my self among certain steepie Mountains, I
unripped the Letters seal, and by the clearenesse of the Moon, that then
shyned, I read it thus.

Pollinardas Letter.
THe grief (kind Florisiano) to see thee so depart from her that had lodged
thee in her breast, is so great, that it will not suffer me to be tedious,
although it be my only desire: for seeing that going from mine with such
affection, it must rest in thy hands: it were some comfort to me, thus with
thee to prattle longer. But aye me, for Fortune thinking we should enjoy too
great a happiness thereby, she does bereave me of my judicial senses and my
bteath, yet not so much, but I have strength to say (though not liberty) to
auerre, that I remain thine till death: which shall first attach me with his
grim paws, then I will grant an other (yea) unless it be to him that has
long since with such zeal and constant love, obtained and won my firm
faith. The Gods preserve thee me, as they know I wish, and thou deseruest.

Thine till death, Pollinarda.


This Letter is it (brave warriors) that comforts me, when my grief is at
greatest, and this is the food unto my fainting life, whose tedious relation,
I am sure has wearied you.

Whereto Claridiano said: This kn^^^^ and my self (Noble Prince) have taken
such pleasure at your Loves discourse, that it cannot be expressed: insomuch, it
has bound me to offer my life in your behalf, for I protest, never to put on
Armor more, if I deliver not that Lady into your hands, in spite of all the
world: wherefore let us straight be gone, although it greeues my very soul to
leave this Knight: but your necessity forces me thereto, because her father
to be rid of that care, may marry her to the brother of the deceased Prince.

That only is the thing which most tormenteth me (answered the Apulian) for
doubtless it may happen as you (Sir Knight) have imagined: and may the heavens
recompense what now and hereafter you shall do in my behoof: and I much desire
to know who you are, that I may venture with more security: for all helps
will be necessary to cope with so puissant a King, and a knight so strong as
Astrenio.

By the way you shall know that (said the hasty Greek) for danger now
awaites on our delay. He took his leave of his uncle with more love, then when
Pe^^hous parted from Theseus: he promised to seek him, if matters succeeded to
his content.

They all rose, the Greek Prince with Florisiano, hasted to their ship,
wherein being embarked, they launched into the deep Ocean, where we must leave
them, to bring Claramants to Constantinople.

CHAP. XXX. What happened in the proof of the Disamorous Tower: and how
Claramant arrived, and proved it.
WIth fear to be condemned of too much prolixitie, in the amorous discourse
of the Prince of Apulias life, being the thing I most dread, and only seek to
shun: and yet no small trouble did it cost me to refuse it, to so brief a
summarie as I have the which I urge for my excuse, although it need not, if it
be read by Cupids vassailes: but whilst this is in question, attend (fairest
of all faires) and most beauteous Ladies, for the trial of the Tower is
nothing but Love.

There was none left, but went forth to see it, because the fame thereof drew
them thither. So many knights came from the ships, that the City was not
able to contain them all, and every one so richly armed, that it delighted
every beholder. The spacious yard was in a trice filled with people: and the
Ladies with their beauties, made it more glorious then the heavenly Synod of
the Gods. For the trial, there wanted no knights, in that ere noone, above two
hundredth shields accompanied the others that were before hung up, yet none
arrived so high as Brandimardo, (son to the great Affricano) that died upon
the conquest of Lyra, in Rosiclers presence, as was declared in the second part
of this History. As the Emperors were about to withdraw to dinner, there
entered the place, attended on with a maiesticke company, a cousin of
Abstrusios, no less valiant then he. All in green armor he was clad, bravely
garnished with half Moons: the devise on his shield was a Griffion without
head, which in his country in battle he had slain. As nimble as a Roe he
dismounted, ascending the stairs in such haste, that every one thought he
would end the adventure: but arriving where the deceased Pagan had done, hoe
was charged with so many strong blows, that Galtenor says he could do no
more, then raise one leg to step higher, which was the cause that with more
rigor he was thrust out, and his shield placed according to his deserts, next
to Brandimardos. Great honor won Salberno hereby, (so was he named) and had
in high estimation, for (his Cousin excepted, that was borne for the seas,
whose Lieftenant he was) none could better order a Nauall battle then he, as
he showed it in the wars of Grecia. The Emperor to favor the Captain
general of his Fleetes, invited him, which they much esteemed, judging the
Greek Monarch the absolutest accomplished in all virtues, of any in the whole
universe besides: and themselves most happy, to be joined in amity with such
Princes.

Away they would go, when a kinsman of Pollidolpho of Croatia showed himself,
whose arms were of an Indian color full of strawberries. With gallant
bravery he went toward the Tower, where he spedde not so ill, as not to be
accounted valiant, for his shield was hung next to the Troyan Oristides. To
dinner went the Emperors, glad to see what happened in that trial, where they
were served with such majesty as their estates required. By themselves sat
all the Ladies so exceeding fair, that Paris had doubted to which for beauty
he might give the golden apple. Nothing could please the beauteous
Archysilora, in absence of her Greek, but rather grieved to see those
feastiuals, missing the presence of her Prince. She was a thousand times
determined to go and seek him: but she left it, supposing the fame of the
disamorous Tower would draw him thither, thinking that was he that acccompanied
the knight of the Lions, so much she judged him to resemble Claridiano.

Great comfort was it to her to communicate her grief with Rosamond, that
encouraged her as one that was free of such tormenting passions, and yet sore
grieved for the want of her dear son Roselindo, of whom she knew not what
was become, and many times she was about to demand the wise men for him, had
she not thought it too much immodestie.

She could not but reveal it to her beloved Dacian, who dissembled it as much
as he could, yet not without signs of inward sorrow in his very soul: he
purposed to seek him, first inquiring of his friend Nabato, the place of his
abode, the which animated him, persuading himself he would have especial
care of his welfare, being the thing that so near concerned him.

Dinner being ended, and the table taken up, all that company of Emperors,
Kings, Princes, and Knights, with all the Ladies, came forth to see the new
comers, that were many, to prove the Tower. It was worthy the travel, and
to be desired, what was promised to the victor. Wherefore scarce were the
Ladies placed, when with Princely grace there entered the sto^t Lastorus, cousin
to Don Silue^io, and General to the Hungarians, and of whom there was good
hope. He showed himself to be no less vnbeloued then valiant, for his shield
was set next to the Troyans.

So many hasted to the trial, that no sooner one ended, but another was
ready. Among them that best behaved themselves, was the gallant Lusitanian,
Archylocus, on Siluerios brother, whose shield was also equalled with the last.
In such multitudes were those shields hung up, that the Christaline Tower was
almost full. Every one converted their eyes at one side of the place, because
they had espied the famous Oristoldo Lord general by land, to whom the
Emperor had given that honorable charge, in respect of what his father had
done for his son, and he for his Nephew. It was advisedly done by the Greek,
for the world did never know a better, nor more fortunate Captain, or more
skilfuller in ordering of battle, and presenting it in time. He was beloved of
all, and also of the Ladies, although he had not shown himself amorous: for
he said, there was nothing more contrary nor troublesome to him that swayed
any public command, then to be in love, and to be so, it was necessary
for a man to busy himself in nothing but in that new alienation, setting
apart all other cares. Accompanied with most of the Nobility came the valiant
youth, all in white armor garnished with knots of Gold and Azure. A gallanter
knight had not been seen in that trial. Mounted he was on a Roane Courser,
with Caparisons of color like his arms, with so many stones, that their light
dazeled the splendour of the Sun, whose rays reuerberating on them, deprived
the beholders sight.

On his head and his own Burgonet, great plumes of feathers, full of spangles
of gold. In midst of his shield within a grove of trees, he himself was
pictured with his hand under his cheek, leaning upon a bloody lance, at his
feet lay the God of Love with bow and arrows, as vanquished by him: on whom
he seemed to gaze so carelessly, as if he held his deity in naught. The posse
was thus, wreathed about his lance.

Mars and Cupid differ far,
Love cannot agree with war:
And till Mars and Love agree,
Look not (Love) to co^quer me.
None was more gazed on then the brave Prince of Antioche. Oh, how gallant does
he come (said Lyriano, who greatly tendered him) and I am glad of his liberty,
by reason of these Ladies that may well excuse it, for were he in love, he
could not then so well guard us. I am sorry (replied Rosiluera) that so free a
knight should have any here to take his part, for I know not how so great a
wrong as he commits against Ladies by that cruel devise, may be satisfied,
but by wishing the thraldom of his liberty. If the world had another
Oristoldo (answered the Princess) it were good that this were in love, and
the other the care to keep us. Leave we this (said Rosamond) to see what will
become of his liberty.

By this he was arrived at the Tower, where he allighted, and drawing forth
his sword, mounted the stairs with such courage, that every one cried out:
Lindabrides would be his. One step he ascended higher then Brandimardo. There
he stayed, for he was charged with so many blows, that he spedde worse then
any before, although his honor were greater. His mother and the Princesses
that loved him as their son, made him come where they were, and there the
Ladies did disarme him with such kindness, as if he were one of the Greek
Princes. To whom Lyriana said. I am sorry (Prince Oristoldo) that to show us
your liberty, to these Ladies greefes, you have sustained such trouble. He
answered. Pleasant is the sowrest (most sovereign Princess) if my will and
desire be considered, although the devise be against my self, the which shall
never keep me from being yours. Now you have lost the entrance (said Artemisa)
you show your self penitent and sorry for your liberty, but you shall not
think to have answered it with such small satisfaction. The beauty of these
two Ladies had something astonished the free Prince: yet he replied. You shall
not need to devise new punishments for him, that must and will be always
obedient to your commands (fair Ladies) and let it be enough, I confess I
have wronged you, that this acknowledgement may strengthen my excuse, and so
lessen my fault, that by purchasing your grace, I may hope for an extenuation
of my chastisement. That might be (said Rosiluera) were not your offense
greater then may be forgiven.

No more of this unprofitable that (spoke Archyrosa) for his liberty will
sufficiently hereafter plague him, as it has done many others: and let us now
inquire the reason of this tumult: whereat they all looked to see what it was.
There was none but said aloud. The adventure is at an end, now the brave knight
of the Lions is come. All the Princes turned to see his coming, especially
Rosabell, being so greatly bound unto him. What shall I say of Archysilora
Queen of Lyra? the changing colors of her face devoted her alteration,
thinking her Prince came with him. Already was this warlike Mars past the
prease of people, mounted on a mighty bay Courser, whose Caparisons colored
like his armor, were imbrodered with so many inestimable stones, that the
riches of them admired the spectators. On the top of his helm and horses
head, were large plumes of diverse colored feathers, that the bravery of both
amazed the whole place, that none doubted his victory. The Emperor Alphebo,
was he that most rejoiced, because he had and did greatly love that Princess,
whom he so easily could not forget, if she had not been allotted to his
brother. In midst of whose shield, was drawn a world round like a globe, by
which a knight climed up, to the top whereof he wanted little, whereon sat
Fortune, reaching him her hand, with this motto.

If Fortunes hand be not a stop,
I will attain the highest top,
The which, if Fortune do deny,
Fortune is too blame; not I.
No less pleasure was conceived at the word then the knights gallant
disposition: who with admired Majesty past on, making his horse bend to the
earth before the Ladies. It amazed him to see such divine beauty: he stood a
good a good while rapt in contemplation: judging it the rarest sight in the
world: and indeed he was not deceived, for so many and so fair were never
seen together, but there.

I would be loath (said the Princess Oliuia) the knight of the Lions should
detract much time in gazing on our beauties, so that when he would not, he be
forced to loose the forbidden entrance, not for want of valor, but by his
yielding to love.

There is none here but wishes his good in all things (spoke the Queen of
Lyra) for by his means we were all made joyful. Oh, let me keep company
with such happy knights (said Artemisa) whose disdain toward Ladies, nor
their coming against them so openly to approve themselves their adversaries,
in Venus laws, will not divert their affection from them.

The desire they have to become Lovers (answered the Empress Claridiana)
helps them to be beloved: but let us not not loose the sight of his high
deeds: for I have great hope of his victory. There is none here but has the
like, wishing it with their very souls (replied Lyriana) and thereupon I doubt
not but he should find some one here that would undertake the combat about
the same.

By this the furious youth was arrived at the Tower gate, where he dismounted,
and stuck his lance in the ground, whereat he tied his horse with such
beauerie, that every one applauded his behavior.

His shield he tied to his saddle pummell, and taking his Axe, with sovereign
grace he paced toward the entrance, whose passage many judged too small,
considering his fearful aspect. For raising aloft his mighty axe, making the
blade shine with her glittering brightness, and he being one of the best
proportioned knights on the earth (so he were no Giant) for he was nine foot in
height, and of most strong and even composed members, all which were apparent
tokens of his excessive strength.

Scarce did he begin to move to enter the Tower, when there was heard the
horrible sound of new warlike instruments, with such cries and clamors of
people, that it seemed a whole host was within.

Upon the top of the Tower appeared squadrons of armed knights, whence also
were discharged infinite pieces of Ordinance. Many hideous shrikes, gave warning
that the fierce scourge of their house was come.

This is no impediment to forbid his mounting the stairs, for as if he walked
on the plain ground, he ascended them to the very top, whence new cries
rezounded, and new keepers were seen to defend him from taking the key of the
Tower. A good while he labored in this rigorous conflict: in the end, settling
himself strongly on his feet, he past his axe into his left hand, and with
his right he got the key, wherewith he opened the Tower gate, whereat a new
alarm was sounded, which put the battle in some doubt. For four ugly deformed
Giants were placed at the door, in defense whereof they executed wonders,
having no other care but to prohibit the entrance. Oh who would not delight to
see our warlike youth, within the narrowness of the gate, take the axe by the
middle, wherewith he misses no blow, and that which he executes, daunts the
place with chill cold fear, but not those that were only set there to receive
them, though the God of battles had discharged then, yet could they not be
greater then these. Not without great labor and toil he thrust himself
among them, where his deeds were admirable: yet he toyled in vain, for unless
he cleaued their heads, he cannot free himself from them, because therein
consisted all their strength.

But now Fortune was of his side, and content that beauteous Princess should
be set at liberty, and end so many her troubles, by enjoying him, the heavens
had so long since promised her: for laboring in this cruel fight, giving and
receiving mighty blows, by good chance he reached one with the blade of his
axe upon the head. He cleft it down to the breast, thinking he had cut a
rock, so hard he found it. At the very instant he vanished out of sight,
whereby he supposed their inchauntment lay there.

Whereupon he began to stretch himself at length with his axe, as a cunning
master of his weapon. Every one in the place plainly beheld him, for the
walls of the Tower were so transparant, that all was seen, what ere was done
in the first Hall. Some alteration did Claridiano feel within her Iuorie
breast, remembering what troubles and dangers she had endured and past, all
caused by that Princess.

And Meridian was also confounded in imagination of opposed thoghts, which
exceedingly grieved him: for if his sister were liberated, his fathers large
Emperie should be hers: but so he might see her, he was content for that time
to omit those cogitations, and turned his eyes on the haughty knight, that
representing fiery Mars within the Tower, had by this slain another.

The valiant youth made sure account of the victory, knowing where their
strength lay. So he extended all his, to end the battle with them, thinking
their deaths would end the enterprise. He made as if he feared them, that
they might with unadvised haste follow him.

It fell out as he desired, and so fetching about the ungrateful Athenian
axe, he discharged it with the utmost of his fury, on the top of the ones
helm, that both it and helm was cleaft to the waste.

Having thus done, he determined to close with the last, but ere he cast his
arms about him, he ran against him so hard with his shoulders, that he
thrust him from him, with more fury then he had been driven by a culuerins
shot, and before he recovered himself, the unresisted axe did hit him on the
head, doing by it as by the others.

The Greek thought he had now ended his business, but it happened otherwise:
for two knights of gallant disposition, presented themselves before him,
without either Arms or weapons, saving Rapiers and Daggers. They issued forth
on the sudden, but with the sound of millitarie instruments, that gave signal
to a new fight.

The one said: Most valiant knight, seeing the happiest immured within this
Tower must not be with Armor, which we willinglier would have done, the
better to eschew your furious blows: but we are commanded the contrary: and
therefore, we are forced, and dare not but obey: wherefore, if you will
terminate the battle, and thereby conclude the adventure, you must presently
put off your Armor, for our Combatte is permitted only with Rapiers and
Daggers.

Somewhat astonished was the Greek, seeing he must leave his Armor, but it
lasted not long, because he would not be taynted with cowardice, and so he
thus made answer: I am content (Sir Knights) although it be no good custom,
if we may use our Arms, to put them off in such necessary occasion.

At that instant he set his axe against the wall, and vngyrting his sword, and
doing the like by it. The two Knights had such care, and were so vigilent to
watch these two weapons, that he was scarcely disarmed, when swifter thou an
Eagle they presently snatched them away, that his nimblesse was not able to
prohibit it. He never saw himself in danger of death until now: for they
of the Tower with those weapons are become more furious then himself.

They said: Dead art thou Knight, for thy fierceness cannot deliver thee from
our hands. Only with his dagger did the Greek youth find himself,
wherewith conjoined to his invincible and never daunted courage, he began to
defend himself, and with seldseene bravery to maintain what he had won, to
the extreme grief of all that beheld him: the which, together with the sorrow
conceived to see him so disarmed, and my self ouerwearied, constrains me
abruptly to leave this war unfinished, that after a little breathing, I may
with fresh courage end it in the next part, continuing the relation of the
rare deeds, both of the famous Greeks, and valiant Pagans, their Competitors.
And if herein I do commit any offense, let, oh let your pardon and your
favors exceed my faults, and then, Nec Laudare satis, dignasque rependere
grates
Sufficiam, referent superi.


FINIS.

