The conjectures of the end of the world, translated by George Joy.

Mark. xij. Be ye awake, for ye know not, when the Lord of the house shall
come, lest he comes suddenly, and find you sleapers. M. D. X^viij.



George Joy to the Readers wysheth knowledge and repentance.
Sithe al vnrea sonable creatures so greatly long and with groaning syghes (as
Paul says) unable To, viij*
to be expressed, desyer to see the day of their redemptyon, wherein they should
be losed from their present seruitute (wherewith man yet abuses and holds
them, as the dronkardes abuse the wine, glotons the beasts fowls, fysshes,
corn and all manner fruits, the unthankful all manner gifts, and creatures of
God, the Idolaters abu se the son, moan, stars, stones, trees, and the
supersticiouse the water, fire, etc. And the blasphemouse swerers the saints
in heaven, God and his creatures) much more do the elect children of God here
abused, oppressed, persecuted, and slain of the ungodly long, syghe and sorrow
^riynge out with the souls under the altar for the gloriouse day of the
rede^p Apo. vi.
cion of our bodies. Yea and to know the signs and conjectures immediately
coming before it, that we might in time lift up our heads, awake out of our
beastly and sinful lyuinge gladly to come forth with our bright la^pes to meet
our brydegrome. And they that yet of ignorance have been captyued and abused of
ye abominable beast of Rome might also now in time forsake her, and fly far
out of Babylon into Christ's church. And for as much as this book treats of
the signs and conjectures, that go befo re the end of this world, whereof some
be paste, some are present, and some are yet shortly to come, and do tell us
certainly the time of the fall of the Antichriste of Rome, and last end of
this miserable sinful world, laid in so dark Prophecyes, noumbers of days,
times and years in Daniell, and in the Apocalipse, which every man except he
be indurated with the Rome Church would be desyerous to know and to prepare
himself. I have made this latyne book of that godly and learned man Andrew
Oseander to speak Englysh, that ye might counforte your selves by readyng ye
divine mysteries and warninges contained herein. And becau se (as every man
knows) expert artifi cers, by their diligent exercise and continual
labors, will excel, amend and beter the beutye of their former works, and
as says Cicero, our later cogitacions are better, then our first, yea and as
Daniell affirms, The oftener his Dan. x^^
book be reuolued and diligently studied the more lernyng is there foundin it,
kno weledge is increased. And to be short, Because I would with the confession
of my faith profit and counfort the congregacions of Christ (we are all
borne to profit our brethren) lo here haste thou, ientle reader, a clear
brief exposicion of the most hard places and hide misteryes in Daniell, Paul
and Apocalypse. concerning this last monarchy of Rome, the description and
lively picture of that Antichristen horned whore, of her fall, and end of this
world, short lie to come. This therefore read and use it to thencrease of thy
knoweledge and counfort to the profit of other, and praise and glory of God
the father through Christ in his coming. Who be thanked and magnyfyed for ever.
So be it*.

AMEN.
M. D. Xlviij. In May printed.
^ The conjectures of the last days, and end of the world, gathered out of
scriptures by Andrewe Oseander, and translated by George Joy.
ALthough our Lord Jesus Christ (as witnesses Mat.) has most clearlye
pro^ou^ced, yt the day and howr, when rein himself shall return to judge ye
quick and dead, of no mortal man to be known: No, not of th^^igels: but to be
left only in ye pleasure of God the father: yet think I, yt the very christians
brought up and learned in ye holy scriptures, may by some certain co^iectures
gathered out of Gods word and of his works, not only come to ye forsight of
yt same time, and (as it were) co^prehe^de within certai^ limits: but also I
judge yt we ought to endeavor our selves to study, to att^yne thereunto. For
our Lord said not, that world, or that age, or that year of his coming,
of noman to be known, but only the day and hour no man to know them. For
verily, by the most apt similitude to search it out did he lovingly provoke us
both to observe and wait for that same time, yea and in a manner compelled us
so to do. Wherefore he said when I begin to do these things, then look up, and
lift up your heads, sor then draws nyghe p^ure liberty and redempcyon. And
even of the fygge tree learn the similitude, whose branches when they begin to
be soft and tender and thruste forth their knops, and leaves, then know ye
that Somer is nyghe. And eue^ so, when ye see all these tokens and things told
you before in doing: then be ye sure that the kingdom of God is at hand. By
this and such like warninges has he not only of the state of things to come,
as though they were present, committed and given to the com mon people to
conjecture of the last time but also the wyser and better learned has he
meruelously given occasion, long before to search out, and to fore see this
desired last time. For as the tylme^, by ye buddig of yt trees know somer to
draw nyghe, and the astronomers by the moving of y^ stars can diffyne the
springyng time and pronosticate it long before, even so ought we to decerne the
end of the world to draw nyghe, and the coming of the son of man to be at
hand by these signs showed us of Christ of his coming: and the learned in
holy scripture to signifye it long before the courses of times, and the ages,
which all the signs be suer to come, yea and to conjecture the same tried out
of the secret misteryes of the word. Which thig since it be so, I have
diligently considered and noted certain excellent saynges and deeds properly
and specyal ly pertainyng to this matter, which by the way were offered to me
readyng the scriptures, and thus have I commended to memory these conjectures
of the end of the world taken out of the holy letters, of the which
conjectures many I have communicated pryuately in wryt^yng to my familyar
fre^des, which when they were desyered of so many, and now spread abroad, I saw
that it was perell, lest any foolyshardy should mix with these my conjectures any
thing of his own, and so under my name to thrust them into other men's
hands, I not knowing which thing to avoid, I revoked into my hands mine own
wrytinges, little then though they were, and mended the^ in some places, and
i^^ome I so enlarged them, that they thus printed, might do my brethere^
pleasure. And lest hereafter they might be, perehaunce, by some falsifyers
corrupted, I thought mi self to ma ke them sure. They be. iiij. co^iectures
(for wherefore should I not tell them forth by tale as treasure) which now
orderlye I will rehearse.

The. i. Chap. and i. Conjecture.
THe first conjecture is taken out of Elie the Prophet, which the Jews recite
as out of the mouth of God, spoken in diverse places of their books called
Thalmude. For they be written in their book called Abodazara in the i. Cha. and
in their book called ^aichedrim in y^ last Cha. and also in other places on
this manner. The house or scole of Elie has affirmed, and left it thus written.
Elye has said, that six thousand years shall the world stand ^r endure. Two
thousand void of any law written, two thousand under the law written, and
two thousand under the days of Messiah. Hitherto Elias, afterward the rabbis
added these words. But for our sin nes, which be great and many, the fyfte
thousand and an half be thus past, and yet is not Messiah comen. But yet is
this An oracle is a sure saiynge as it were answered of God.
doutles an oracle worthy to be believed for many causes, although it be not
expressed in the scriptures. For first to begin therewith, this oracle is
sustained with the words of Moses in the Psalm. after the Hebrewe reckoning.
xc. to which Saint Peter cleaves in his ij. Epistle. iij, Cap. saying. That a
thousand years with the Lord be, but as one day. Also hereof it follows. That
as god cre ated all things in vi. days, and rested in the. vij. Even so shall
he six thousand years govern the world subject to generacyon and corruptyon,
and in the seventh thousand bring in that everlasting rest: of which Thapostle
so plainly speaks. Hebre. iiij. that he seems to show the self same
misterye, as it were with his finger. Besides this it consents right well
with all the other conjectures following, and it is constantly celebrated and
hyghly esteemed of the Jews as the assewered oracle of the Prophet, and yet it
fights plainly against them selves and their infidelity, which may not be
beter confounded then in yt they be compelled by theyrowne sainges of Elias to
grant y^ Messiah should raygne the hole last two thousand years, and yet
contrary to their sayng, they still look for him, as though he were not come^.
For by this clause added, (That for their sins God differreth Messiah birthe)
their selves confess freely and plainly the time of christ's birthe not to
hauehad be^ yet past in this last age of late, but rather then, wha^ their bo
ke of thalmude was publyshed, even about Simon iustus made their thalmude. 210.
before Christ.
ye year of our Lord. CCCC. xxxvi. Whereof it is manifelt that they have wai
ted more then these eleven hundred years for a another messiah then our Lord
Christ and al in vain. The cause whereof they falsely impute it to their own
sins. For Christ was in so certain a prediffined time promised to us and
the^, that neither for their sins must he have had been borne ye later, nor
yet for their good liuig have comen the sooner, of y^ which thing, more
peradventure shall be spoken in another pla ce. Although some of our religyon
would contend to draw this little clause of Chri stes birthe now paste unto
thend of the world, as though for our sins there should wa^te much of these
six thousand years, so that they be not fulfilled. But this sense, although
it makes well for our purpose, yet the Hebrew words receive it not. Wherefore
this is the meanig of the oracle. That the world from the time whereof Moses
said. The earth was emp tie gross and void, dured two thousand before the law
of circumcision with her adpertinences was given to Abraham, of which it is
written Genesis 26 and 27. That al nacyons shall be blessed in thy sead. And from
the time of delyueraunce of circum cision to Abraham unto Christ's birthe there
dured also, other two thousand yea res, which thing sith it is proved
manyfestly so to have come to pass (for Christ was born, and suffered about the
four thousand years from ye creacion) needs must the rest of ye oracle also
be true, y^ fro^christ to the end of the world, there shall be no more
(peradventure much less) then two thousand eue^ as Elias said. But in that as
certain years of the last two myllenaryes be paste, and yet Christ be not come
(as ye Jews dream because of their sins, as they would seem to excuse their
unbelieve with another sin of unbelief they be utterly deceived. For after
this oracle, Christ is verily comen, so yt about four thousand years from the
creacyo^ he was crucified and rose again from death ascended to heaven, and in
the end of the world thence to come to judge the quick and dead. And where
the Jews fro the creacyon hither to, reken. CC. years less then we, the cause
is, that among many of their errors, this is one great ouerfight. For they
reken dariu^ Hystaspis or Longimane under whom the temple was redifyed, and
Darium that was over comen of great Alexander both for one King of the Medys
and Persyans, and to have reigned but vi. years, when there can betwixt them
after Ptoleme. Cxcij years, which thing we shall discuss diligently in our
cronicle. This conjecture is also helped by Henoch and Elie himself, which
both were translated quick out of this miserable life to that blessed
immortality, death never tasted. For as the six first generacyons, that is to
say, Ada^, Seth, Enos, Lainam, Mahalaleel Iared, dyed, and the seventh
generac^on even Hen^ch him self (whom Judas in his Epistle mentioned not
without a cau se to be the seventh) is immortal. Even so through these. vi.
millenaries of the world shall death raygne, and in the seuenthe shall floresh
that blessed immortalite. And as the first. vi. ages of men from Adam to Elie
were subject to death, and the seventh which is Elie, obieyned immortali tie
(For Elias was rapt up aly^e in the charet of fire) even so through these
vimillenaryes shall the mortal life dure, And in the beginning of the seventh
shall we be taken up to mete Christ coming down to judgment. Ada^ lived to
Mathusalem, Mathusalem to Sem, Sem to Jacob, Jacob to Amra^, Amram to Ahia^ the
Silonite, Ahias to Elias, which was translated. These co^iectures also used
Ioa^ picus Meradulane in ye year of our Lord ^^. ccc, lxxxvi. and did put up
this one among his disputable. 90. conclusions sayng: if there be any humane
conjecture of y^ last time, we may search and find it by the must secret way
of Cabbalist, the end of the world to come hense of 514. years. Netheles for
right great causes (as we have said to fore) we conjecture that the sixth
millenarie shall not be fulfilled. For as in the law, the sixth day was not
hole granted to work therein to the full end as to the midnyght, but a good
part thereof was anticipated and cut of, added to the Sabbath day, even so
shall not the sixth millenarie be all full hole given to the laborouse last
mortal life, but yt most gloryouse beutyfull part thereof about the euenyng
sh^lbe anteuorted and prevented of that blessed and everlasting rest, as it
shall appear clearlyer in the co^ iectures followyng, and in the mysterye of the
supper of our Lord prevented and celebrated in the euenyng and in the para
bles of yt callinges to supper, after which refreshyng there follows no more
labor, but rest.

The. ij. Chapt.
The second conjecture is taken of y^ words of christ red. Matthew. 24 and Mar.
13. thus. But the day and hour noma^ knows it, no not thaungels in heaven,
nor yet the sone him self but only my father. But as were the days of Nohe
so shall be the coming of the sone of man. For as in the days of Nohe, before
the floude, they were eating drynkyng and marying unto the day in which Nohe
entered into y^ arc, and knew not thereof till the floude came over them taking
all away, even so shall be the coming of the sone of man. For in these words,
Christ seems not to compare only the qualyte but also the quantite of the
time. The quality of the time, I call the corrupt manners of that world and
age, the quantity is the number of the years. And as for the quality, there is
no doubt thereof, when Christ said plainly Luke. xvij. That as in the days of
Nohe and Lot they ate and drunk, took wives and married, bought and sold,
planted and builded, even so shall it be when the sone of man shall be reveled.
But as touching the quantyte or noumber of the yeris albe it the thing be hid
and obscure, yet in some behalf it shyueth and shows her self, where Math.
says perfectly. As were the days of Nohe, so shall be the coming of the son of
man. Namely when Paul Romans v. affyrmeth Ada^ to have had been the form and
image of Christ to come, as in y^ i. Cor. xv. of christ he makes an other Adam
even into the spirit that quickens. The first Adam was erthey out of the
earth, but the second man is the Lord him self out of heaven. Now if Christ
be the other Ada^ of whom the first was the form and similytude, and the
coming of Christ be as the days of Nohe about the floude, who will not
believe but that how much time passed from the earthey adam unto the days of
Nohe even to the floude, so much time shall there passover to the celestial
Adam our Lord Jesus unto the ^nde even to that last fiery floude whereof Peter
says. The day of the Lord shall come like a thief in the night at whose
coming the heuens shall passover like a storm and thelements shall melt away
with heat, y^ earth and al y^ works theri shall be bru^t up. And the heuens
shall be consumed whith fire, and thelementes molte^, it is so manifest that from
Adam to the floude there passed over. Mcccccclvi. years. wherefore it is very
like that in y^ year of our Lord. Mcccccclvi. the end of the world shall be
comen before our doors which now is not much more the^ an. C. years hence,
except it be rekoned from yt re surreccion of Christ. And as Nohe knew and the^
have we cxli, and so shall it en de in the Mccccccc. year from christ
not the day ne hour of the floude till the Lord bode him go into the arc
(but the year, he knew it) when God told him before that he would grant him
yet to the men. cxx. years space to repent, even so we albeit the day and howr
we know not, yet the year may we know or conjecture very nighe it.

Cap ^ij*
The third couiecture is taken from the time of Christ's birthe unto his
passion and resurreccion, which is. xxxiij. ye res and some days more, whose
noumber we yet know not. For when he was baptized, he was full. xxx. years
old or very nyghe: so that he was full thyrtye, ere he took the office of a
leuite, as to preach and to teach openly. Thus the sone of GOD which of
everlasting was in the bosom of the father (manisshappe taken up to him) is
becocome conversant with us like as one of xxx yeris old. For as touching his
godheit he told the Jews, sayng: Before Abraham was borne I had my being
essenciall name called Sum. And yet to cer tyfye us the more in this thing
behold the Astronomer Ptolemeus, which in call king the year, expressed plainly
in ye course of ye. xxxiiij. years of Christ, to be even such, an easter day or
passover day as we find now described of theua^gelistes at yt passion of
Christ, which day fill then justly upon the friday, as did then Christ upon
the same day keep it with his Discyples. Albeit the Jews then differred and
trauslated it into the next sabbath, which was saterdaye, and then ate they
their Pass lombe at evening, in y^ which forenone was offered the very trwe
pass lombe Christ, the end of all the fygures thereof, the Jews not yet
seeing ye verite but abiding still in their dead and blind The day begineth at.
v. aclo ke in the eauenig*
shadows. The jews differred ye feste as they do yet, when it so falls upon
the friday, lest two great festes in which they may not do so much as make their
own fire or cut their bread, should be continued together, which thing that
Christ should eat his Pass lombe on the friday and suffer also on the same
day, making saturday the hole restyng day, upon son day erly to rise, many
hitherto have not ^speyd. But this matter, Paul Bishop Paul bishop of Se^pron.
of Se^pronie serched for, with great study and could not find it out, only
because he perceived not, the Jews not to tell ye first day of the month from
the coniun^ cion of the sone and moan next before, but from the eauening even
at. v. of the cloak before the cha^g in which the learned astro mers did
evidently show it, or else lawful witness proved it to the elders or senators of
Jerusalem, that the new moan was seen or might have had been seen. But return
we to our purpose. Wherefore when our Lord Christ born of the virge^ concerning
his flesh was in this our miserable lif co^uersant with us. xxxiij. years and
some days more, it is very like him self also to be borne spirytually of the
in corrupt vyrgyne the holy church by the free confession and pure doctrine of
the gospel even so many years, but yei great years, and so to remain and
abide with us still in his spirytuall birth these. xxx. great years in this
world. But here must ye know that there be two manner of great years.
two manner of great years in holy seryptur. One is the Angels year, and the
the other is Moses year. One Angels year co^ teineth somany of our common years,
as we have days in our year, that is 354. cccliiij. ^a^es in our luna re year.
of our years for so many days be there in our lunare year. For with us, which
be co^ cluded under ye heuens, yt course of yt sone from east to west
finissheth our day i^. xxiiij. hours. But with the Angels which dwell above the
circles and orbs of the Planets, their day finissheth her course, whiles the
sone moves in her zodiak, from the southe to the north and again from the
north to the southe, which is fynisshed in one of our years, so that their day
is one of our yearis and econtra. Soche days Christ understands Luke. xiij.
when he bode them tell Herod that fox. That I cast out deuyls this day and
to morrow and the third day I am at an end. For I must to day and to morewe
and t^he next day walk. For the prophet may nowhe re else be put to death but
in Jerusalem, which words can not be understood of our common days, but of
the. iij. hole years wherein he preached and miracled before his death. For.iij.
of our years ar but.iij. Angels days, and every Angels year is.cccliiij. of
our lunare yeris, which Angels year is called of the Angels often in Daniel both
in hebrewe and caldey speech, a time. But Moses great year is Moses great year.
the space of.l. of our years that runs from one Iubeley to another. For as
in our year, the labor of the hole tilthe retur neth in a perpetual circle to
where as it begone, that is from seadis time to the same agaeine, even so in
the iubeley year, all the Israelites return in their own former possessions
agene of their fathers and the hole form of their common life and state and
living was newly restored and as it were borne again. But the Angels year may
not serve us in this our third conjecture. For if the church should in this
world dure. xxx. Angels years and a little more, the space should excede twelve
thousand of our years, when Elias ge ueth it not to stand seven thousand.
Wherefore Moses great year, which is yt Iubelei year does justly agree to our
purpose, M. CC CCC. C
For xxxiij. Iubeley years make. 1650. of our years, unto the which add those
few years that be. vi. yeris for the portion of y^ days, in which Christ
beyend. xxxiij. years lived, and so ar we comen to the days of Nohe even.
1656. yeris. But let M. CC CCC. ^WI.
us see how those great yeris, laid to the yearis of Christis life (the times
compa red to gither) shall agree whylis we try it out and examine it, by apt
similytudes and comparysons of every thing done of Christ and of the course
and state of the world following his death unto this day, first. As our Lord
Jesus being bor The comparison betwixt his bode ly birth and spiritual birth,
af ^ir his re surreccio^
ne of Mary the virgin, the gloriouse clear nes of Godillumined the herdme^
taught from heaven Christ their savior to be borne. Luce. ij. whom they should
find wrap ped in clutes in the kribbe, eue^ lo, Christ being borne spiritually
after his resurrec cion thorrowe the preaching of ye gospel even of the
incorrupt virgin the church of the Apostles, the glory of the Lord did shine
roundabout and illumined the very hardemen and true flokfeders ye Apostles, the
holy ghost powredforth upon them in fyery cloven tongues, which testified of
Christ and gloryfyed him, teaching them althings that they might understand
the scriptures, and behold Christ in them as it were wrapped and inuolued in
his cloutes: Also as christ ones bor The. ii. co^pariso^
ne, Herod slew the children, hoping to have so s^ain Christ emonge them,
even so Christ ones preched after his resurrec cion, ye prince of this world
slew the sele young Christians, eue^ y^ newly regenered by faith into christ
trusting thereby (as he does now) so to have roted out and destroyed Christ's
gospel with their destruction and burning. But as then Herod failed of his
purpose even so are now owre Herodes cruel enforcementes frustrated. iij.
Also as Christ borne, he dwelt un der the Egipcions until the death of Herod
and reign of Archelay, that is unto the syxt year of his age almost complet,
even so Christ preached lurked and was hyd under the spyrituall Egypt, that is
under the tweyfold double persecucyon both of the temperall tyrants and
spyrytuall her etiques until the sixth Iubiley of the church, that is to the
end of Dioclesian, the hebrwe word which signifies egypt, is by
interpretacion as much to say as blind persewers or double persecucions Egypt
blind per sewers.
in the dual nowmbyr. Also as Ma ry the vyrgen had almost lost Christ being.
xij. years old in Jerusalem and sought him in vain among his kinsfolk iiij.
and acoyntance, but at last fownde him in the temple among yt doctores asking
and answering them, even so the virgen the church in the twelf Iubiley that was
about the year of our Lord cccccc. being sore laid against troubled and wexed
with diverse and many heresies chiefly of the Arrians Eunomians and Sabellians,
out of whom anon aftyr Mahumete and the pope be sprung up, had almost lost
Christ, yea she had lost him in deed, as now have the Mahumetis and Papists had
she not at last the^ found him in y^ temple of God, that is in the holy
scripture among the doctors and teachers even the Prophets, Euangclistes, and
Apostles, (where the papistis never yet sought Christ) askinge and answering
dysputyng of our faith and religion she asking the Prophets. For he nether did
suffer, ne taught any thing which was not of yt Prophets to fore said and
testyfyed, he answered to the same in that he accomplesshed althynges in deed
that they prophesied of him. Also as Christ borne, h.
many of the Israelites believed the herdemen, Simeon and other testifying of
Christ and with no small desire longed to see him openly present teaching them
whiles all the other Israelytes (albeyt they only then seemed to be the people
of God) yet infect and seduete with the sects of the pharisays and zaduces,
knew not Christ, nothing regarding him until Joan bapt. begane to preach and
testyfye of him now. xxx. years old: even so Christ preached, many verily
believed the Apostles and Martyrs and souked out the pure knowleg of Christ
drawn forth into their posteryte, whilis other, (in name only Chrystians)
although for an vtward shynyng she we of gliteryng ceremonies and will works
of their own choice, would be seen only to be the church of God, either for
their zaduceicall epp^urisme and voluptuose living, for their pharisaical
hipocrisy infect and seduct ha ue not known Christ ne any thing at all
regarded him until the xxx. Iubyley of the church was comen, that is to say
until about the 1500. year of the Lord, M LL LLL.
which popish Iubeley yet dureth in many churches, albe it in some where the
gospel takes place, it is extinct. Furthermore, vi.
as aftir the. xij. years of Christ until his. xxx. year, we read nothing of
him but that he was under his parents subject, as a layman and carpentor
conversant with the lay sort, even so aftyr the twelf Iubiley of the church
unto the thirtey Iubeley, that is from Phocas themprour which with public
proclama cion stablisshed the popysh primacie, the doctrine of Christ has
standen among the laytie almost unto this our tym, which laymen contented
with their creed and the sacraments, either utterly knew they not these
idolatryes, sects the iustifycacion by works, merytis, and these popish
pardons, or else they verily neglected and abhorred them, declaring chiefly this
fruit of their faith, that they simply and gladly obeyed their beter learned
elders, so far as it might be done, without hurt or spotte of the trwe
relygion and honor of God, when in the mean ceason, the popis Cardinals,
Bisshops, Preistes Friars, Monks, enen the Pharyseis, Zaduceis scribes and
lawyers all, not one skant clear (the doctrine of Christ neglected and lost)
were, and yet be utter ly drowned blinded and dampnably cap tined under the
doctrine and tradicious of men, yea and of the diuill to, as Paul called them.
Agene as aftir the. xxx. yeris vij.
of Christ's burthe Joan Bap* preched repentance in the desert baptyzing them
to prepar the people for Christ, who^ ^ftsone after he shewedforth with his
finger, eue^ so after the. xxx. Iubiley of the church, was the very sincere
doctrine of the law, of the knowledge of orygynall sin and of other vices,
the trwe repentance the doctrine of the trwe iustificacion, and of the
mortifycacion of the old man which is the trwe and spiritual baptism of
repentance, restored to the church, that the people might have been prepared and
made apt to receive the doctrine of the gospel, which the doctrine of the law
did show to us and pointed it forth before us as it were with fyngers, for the
fulbrynging or perfeccion of the law, is Christ unto Romans x.
salvation to iustifye all that believe in him. Also as Christ anon aftir Joan,
began viij.
his preaching of the gospel, even so in this our time, anon aftyr the right
holsom doctrine of the law, there has followed the trwe and holsom doctrine of
the gospel of the remissyon of sins only only for Christ's sake, even the
ryghtuousnes ix.
of only says. Also as nether Joan nor Christ taught openly admitted of the
high preistis to preach in the temple of Jerusalem, because the Bisshopes,
scrybes, and Pharysais could not bear them, but taught either in desertis or in
ga lyle where the Profane magistrates, and not the Bisshopes ruled, even so in
this our time, nether the doctrine of the law ne the gospel can have place in
the kingdoms of the Bisshops and Pharyseis where these blody beastis yet bear
ru le, but either in private places, as it were in the deserte, or else verily
under some godly prince or ruler only is this pure and wholesome doctrine herd.
Item as Satan x.
in y^ tim of Christ steredup diverse tumul tes, first by Theuda, which took
tomich upon him self, and then by Judas the galylene which auerted the pople
to make the doctrine of Christ, as it were by their vprores and tumults the
more to be suspecte of sedicion: Even so now in our time has he stered up the
relygious and seculare papists in England, and other where the muntzers, the
Shappelers, the anabaptists, the David's georgians, the popyshe sacramentaries
as Steven gardener Bishop of Winchester Doctor smith, perin, and both the
universities in England, with like other authors of sedicion to make the
doctrine of the Gospel now happily in spryngynge up again, to be odiouse and
suspect, yea they would make it heresy and sedicio^, but yet all in vain, for
siche sowers of sedicyon perish in them selves, and their disciples come anon
to naught, the doctrine of yt gospel stauding salf and suer. Also as christ xi.
anon about y^ beginning of his preachi^g y^ is, in yt first pash tide
threuforth y^ biers and sellers out of yt temple, even so y^ doctrine of yt
gospel, now spro^ge^ up aftir ye thirty Iubile of y^ church, has cast out of
christ's church the buyers and sellers of popysh pardons, merits, misses, lip
labors with all other like papistrye and dyrty dregs of the whore of Rome.
And here might I recyte many of her deuillysh doctrynes and dampnable heresies,
rites ceremonies and supersticio^s, which for short nes I omyt, both because
these be suffycient enough to prove that the Iubyleis of the church agree
justly with the yeris of the life and age of Christ, and also because the
godly and trwly learned in the scripturs by them selves may find out many mo
things like. And to beireif, for this cause omit I them that I would not over
much provoke the obstinat adversaries of Christ karied away of ye infernal
furies, to make them the more chary to beware, and with their serpentyne
subtiltye the more crafty to hurt and to cast forth yea to spewe forth all
their venom at once. For they stomble and all to break Esaias. xxviij.
them selves aienst their sto^bling stone Christ to fall thereat, never to rise
again, for that they wetingly and wyllyngly of a set malyre have rejected him.
Now therefore since it is so clear and evident, the Iubileis of the church so
justly to agree with the years of Christ's life: who can otherwise think but
that the church shall not in this world acomplesh the. xxxiiij. Iubilei? that
is not to pass farreouer the Mccccccl. years after Christ's resurrec cion,
nonotherwyse then as Christ accom plesshed not his. xxxiiij. year of his age,
but ere the half of the fowrth year was fi nisshed, he entered into his rest,
ascended into heaven. Wherefore it is very like that aftir the. xxxiij. Iubeley
year of y^ church which shall be shortly after the year from Christ's birth or
resurreccion. Mccccccl. the end of the world shall be at hand, which little
space after the said nowmber, how short it shall be no man can determine, except
he knew certainly y^ very day of Christ's nativity and in what month he was
borne, whether in march or no. Fro whe^re I think to reken ye more The con
iectur of the trans latour.
justly. The noumber of. vij. is appointed of God to the perpetual rest,
wherefore men may conjecture that when ye noumber shall fall, as in the year
from Christ's resurreccion. Mcccccclxxvij. or. Mcccccclvij. the end shall be.

Cap. iiij.
The fowrth conjecture, which is of all the most evident* is taken of the city
of rome. For the scripture testifyeth clearly, Two do minacions of Rome, y^
first was the ij. is.
the city of Rome, twyse to obtain very great high dominacion and power. And
in either of them both to endure a certain noumbir of years. Also when the
city of Rome shall be the second time extincte and destroyed, then doutles is
the end of the world at hand. The first dominacion, The during of the first
dominacion.
was of the Roman city. But the second is now of the Roman court. The first
dominacion the prophet Daniel describes, which dured to Constantine y^ great
and a little more. The second descrybeth Paul. ij. these. ij. and the
Apocalipse. xiij. xvij. Which now shall not long dure. Wherefore let us hear
them all three severally spekyng of both these dominions, and first daniel of
the former, but so, that (if need be) some what be spoken by interloquncion,
both to interpret it y^ clearer, and to admonish the the beter, and to stere
the up to hear the attentyuelyer, for such manner of interlocucion by the way of
a dialoge conduces very much both for brevity and clearnes. After this manner
writes Daniel. I saw in my vysio^ Daniel*
in the mydnight, and lo, the. iiij. winds of heaven faught in a great sea,
and. iiij. great beastis ascended out of ye sea, diverse and contrary among
them selves. Osiander. The Angel in the Apoca. says unto Joan. The waters
which you saw where cap. xvij*
the whore sits, ar people, folk, and tongues. Wherefore the great sea is the
fowl canell or stinking donghill of all the people of the hole world, out of
whom be sprongen up the. iiij. Kingdoms in this world. Daniel. The first is
like a lie^es, and she had the wings of an egle. I beheld till her wings
were plucked from her but her heart was given her. Osiander. This is the
Babylonik Kingdom. Dani. And behold there was another beast like a bear
stonding aparte having iij. pieces in his mouth betwixt his tethe to who^ they
said thus, arise and eatvp much flesh. Osi. This is the Kingdom of the Medis
and Persis. Dani. Aftirwardis I lo ked about, and lo, there stood a notherlike
a leopard having. iiij. suift wings upon him, and.iiij. headis were in the
least and pow^ was given him* Osi. This is the Grekis Kingdom. Da. aftir this,
I behold and looked in my vision in the night, and lo, y^ fowrth b^ast, terryble
and meruellous and strong excedingly. Osi. This is the Roman monarchy. And
here (Christen reader) consider dilygently, expende and take heed to the
noumber of the name of this best. Da* he had tethe of yerne, and that very
great eatinge and brekynge all to poulder. Osi. For it was clear and mighty in
battle. Da. The leauyngs he trod under his fete. Osi. For them whom she
overcome in battle, she oppressed tyra^nosly. Da. But she was unlike the other
beastis which I saw before her, for she had.x. horns. Osi. As in y^* vin. of
Dan* he says he saw the mighty he got having a marvelous great horn betwixt
his eyes, which broken of, there sprang up.iiij. horns under it, signifying
that af ter great Alexander. iiij. Kings at one time should arise and raygne
each one in his place, that is to say, Antygonus in Asia, Seleucus in Siria,
Ptolomeus in Egypt and Antipater in greece: Even so here by these. x. horns, he
signifies y^.x. provinces ruled by the counsel of the empire of Rome, every
province anointed to her counselor being president over the same with the molt
high impery. And that the Roman impery was dyuyded into.x. provinces,
governed of so many counselors, nether into mo nor less both the story
writers in sundry places, and Strabo in the end of his deserypeyon of the earth
clearly teltifyeth. Da. I conside red the horns, and so, there sprang up an
other little horn out of the middys of The little horn.
them, and* iij. of his first horns were smyten of from his face. Osi. This
sytle horn was. C. Julius Caesar, which being a counselor, and one of the.x.
horns, whilis he was in france setting althings prosperosly in order seruyng
the common weal, thought that the counsel at home in Rome should have had a
consideracion of his necessary absence and so to have done nothing at home
without his consent and counsel, which just request, his enemies of envy at
home deuyed it him and with stood his desire. Wherefore (his vocacyon in france,
where he now was left) he made bataill against his country of Rome and
overcame the^, and became a new horn but yet but alitle one, which anon
begane to were great, and grew into their head having mouth and eyes as we
shall declare him hereaftir. And thus by that civil batayl among themselves.
iij. horns that is to weet. iij. great rulers in most high gouerna^ce with
their host ^edforth against Iulium Ce. that is to say two of the cou^ sellers
and Pompeius were smyten of from y^ face of the Roman imperie that is were
ouercomen, but not so that the. iij. horns were utterly roted out, and but
vij. only to remain, but (as the Angel aftirwarde interprets it) they were
humbled and laid down. For there abode still x. horns. Da. and lo, there were
eyes like the eyes of a man in this horn and a mouth speking stought things.
Osi. This is that I said, this little horn anon to be made great and to be
changed into an head. For by Julius Caesar the monarchy of themprours was
brought in, which monarchy was not one of the x. horns, but one of the. vij.
headis of whom we shall hear clerelier out of the apoca. I know certain men of
great name (from whose judgment I dissent not gladly without a cause) to think
this little horn to have been that wyked Mahumete and pope, but because this
Roma ne Kingdom whereof Da. here speaks, was utterly destroid before Mahumete
was borne and pope to bear great rule. And because Mahumete ne pope was never
member of the Roman empire, nether the Apoca. in her.x. later horns makes
mention of Mahumete, I dout not their sentence (by their favor I speak it)
plainly to be refused. Da. I beheld till the judgment seatis were set and
the old aged sitten down. Osi. The old aged is God the father and Christ
which sits yet in judgment and dampneth those. iiij. great Kingdoms because
they would not obey Christ but repelled his word, slaying his Apostles and
Christ also with many thousand martyrs. This hyd partyclare judgment of GOD in
Christ, the world yet sees not, the father saying to Christ. Sit one my
right hand whiles I lay thyue enemies under thy foot. Da. his vesture was as
whyght as snow and the hears of his head like woll, his trone like the flame
of fire, the whelys thereof smyt forth beams of fire, a fyery floude ra^ne
forth with vyolence proceeding from his face, thousand thousands ministered to
him and ten hundred thousand assysted him, the judgment was set and the
bokis opened. Osi. Not only God the father in Christ sits in this daily
judgment but also be present the Angels and the spirytes of the faythtfull
slain for Chri stes sake. And the books in which were written the horrible
crimes of these beastis or Kingdoms for the which they are and shall be dampened
and utterly roted out ar opened and red. Da. I looked for the voice of his
stought wordys, which this horn spoke. Osi. This horn is the monarchy of
themprours brought in thus fyrlte by Julius Caesar which Monarchy blasphemed
Christ and his doctrine, did setforth publyke proclamacions against the
Chrystyans, slew the Apostles and tormented most cruelly many thousand
martyrs, commandynge devils to be worshyped for God, and compellyng many to do
sacryfyce to them. And who can nowmber all those great and horrible blasphemies
against the very God, which that wicked Antichrysten Rome then being drunken
with the blood of the saints spewed forth? Da. And I saw that the beast was
slain and his body destroid and casten out to be burned, and the power of the
other beasts taken away, and the times of their lives were set them unto
time and time. Osi. GOD the father has now in time paste taken away the most
high impery from all the. iiij. Kingdoms of the world and did give them to
his only begotten sone Christ by his heavenly proclaimed decree, when he said.
This is my well-beloved sone, in whom I am pleased, him hear ye. But not so that
theraftyr there shuldbe no more Kyngdoms and imperies: For GOD will have
Kyngdoms and imperies still to stand, gouerners to rule, commonweals to be
served, laws and judgments to be executed, good men to be defended, evil to
be punisshed but so that they do not althynges as they list, as did the. iiij.
beasts which nether fered ne regarged GOD ne man but he will rather they
believe in Christ him to obaye, with his words to be enstructe and theraftyr to
govern their subiectis yt them selves might know also, and to show them
selves to have a lord in heaven. But wicked Rome contemns this heavenly decree
of God the father, and Christ risen from death, to whom is given all power in
heaven and earth she aknowlegeth not, the Apostles she believes not, to their
miracles she gives no place, with the constancy of martires she is not moved,
ne with any crueltye of tormentyng ye Godly is she sated, but continues still
rebel and blasphemose. And therefore GOD the father the most high judge and
monarke, in his celestyall judgment seat, by his diffinite sentence given,
has he judged her to death. Which sentence once given, the majesty of her
empire, like the soul of the body of this beast departs, translated to
Constantinople by Constantyne the great, her body left sone aftir corrupt,
contempt powered forth upon her, is putrifyed consumed as karyon, all nacyons
almost rebelling agenst her, and spoylyng Ita lie, until at last, Rome by the
Goths wasted, was brent up with fire aftyr almost. MCC. that she was built.
And The fyr ste and se cond destruccio^s of Rome
this is lo, her end. This was the burial of the former Roman Kingdom and
end of her first dominacion in the year of our Lord. ccccxij. And her last
destruc cion in the. cccccli. of Christ. In the year from the first buylding
of that city. cccccccliij. was Christ borne. Whose former buryall (I say) by
the Goths etce. to remember diligently (Christen reader) I monysh and monysh
the yet again. And the other beasts had then also lost their high empyres,
and skant retained they any miserable remembrance of their former majesty
which because they rejected Christ, they also lost their glory. For in all
the hole world was there not a corner in which the kingdoms and empyres at
that time when Rome fill, were not either utterly overthrow or sewerly
meruerlously changed. But let us yet hear Daniel. Da. I looked then about in
the vysion of the night, and behold, with the cloudis of heaven came there one
like the son of man, and he came to the old aged, and they presented him
unto his presence, and he gave him power and honor and Kingdom, that all the
people trybis and tongues should serve him. His power is ever lastyng which
shall not be taken from him and his Kingdom incorruptible. I Daniel was afraid
in my self for these things and the visions of my head troubled me. Osi. This
is the other part of this divine and heavenly judgment, wherein Christ our
Lord (the dominacion of the city of Rome extynct) is sent in to the
possessyon of his imperie, and the church thenseforthe received Christen
Constan tim was in ye year of Christ ccc. or xii cccxix. and reigned xxx.
emprours as Constantyne the great and such like, which acknowledged Christ
to be the King of all Kings and Lord of all Lords. Goodly descrybeth he
Christ calling him the sone of man which with the clouds ascended from the
earth to heaven, and is comen to the old aged commanded to sit down on his
right hand whiles he makes his enemies his footstool. Which thing when it was
by the gospel tented in vain for a time with and by these mighty men which
would nether believe ne give place then were they destroid and at last roted out.
Christ verily is offered unto God y^ father as he that only is worthy Apo. v.
to rceyue power and riches, wisdom strength honor and glory, even as it is
allowed in the judgment of the father geuinge him effectually all power. For
the Roman dominacion extincte, the Gospel was propaled and preached forth
thorowt all nations, and the old idolatry was eueriwher quenched. Nether should
it move us that many aftyrwarde rebelled again, and the Christen relygion
forsaken, became Mahumetanes or papystes, or fill bake into other ungodliness.
For this minyshed not the majesty and empire of Christ, but made them mo re
clear, when a little aftyr he should come with great glory, and these rebellis
punish with everlasting torments: Even as him self testified by this most apt
similitude. A certain noble man went in to a far country to receive his
Kingdom and to return. And his cytezens (which may Luc. xix.
not be vnderstande^ but of them which some time before believed) hated him,
and sent a message after him, saying. We will not have this man to reign over
us andee. But he returned at last, said, these mine enemies which will not
have me reign over them bring them hither and slaye them before me. The
Kingdom of Christ therefore which we pray daily to come unto us even his word
wherein he raygneth by faith, love and innocence of living, and in this world
obteineth, governing the beleuers monisshed with his word and spirit, and
either mendinge the unbelievers monisshed with diverse plages, or thrustyng down
the incorrigible unto hell, is an eternal Kingdom, which in the last judgment
shall be purged from al sclaunders and offendicles and so thence forth nether to
be taken from him ne corrupted. But beware lest any man persuade ye, Daniel in
this place to speak of the last judgment. For here it is iuged secretly and
partyclarely of the.iiij. beasts. But in the last judgment it shall be iuged
openly and universally, all the judgment given unto Christ both of the quik
and dead. This judgment is daily done in heaven, the world not saying it, for
the Father gave Christ after his resurreccion all power in heaven and earth,
eue^ to judge the quik and the dead, being the son of man, as ye read Ioa^.v.
cha. The other and last shall be done upon the earth all the world Angels and
deuillis being present. The particlare judgment these.iiij. beastis was done,
when Christ went and ascended to his Father in the cloudis from the earth, the
last shall be done when Christ shall return in the cloudis with great majesty
into the earth. And to be short, there is nothing in this place of Daniel that
thou may wreste unto the last iugment, except thou would obscure and
deprave the hole vision. Da. I went to one of the bystanders asking him the
trwthe of all these things, which interpreted to me these things saing.
These. iiij. beastis, be iiij. King domes which shall rise out of the earth.
Osi. That is to say, The Babylonik, the persik, the greek, and the Roman. Da.
And the most high faithful of God, shall receive and obtain their Kingdom
for ever and ever. Osi. That is the former Dominacyon of Rome ended, not only
Christ, but his faithful with him shall reygne, for the godheyt of Christ
once declared by the preaching of the Gospel, and throwing down of the old
Idolatry, there began Christen magistratis to rule, and thence forth all
imperies were holden to obey him. Also since Christ would raygne not by
violence and weape^, but by his word and holy ghoost, him self then not
speaking presentely, but only by his holy faithful, it follows these
faithful to raygne with Christ, because they teach and interpret the word
and will of god, wherefore he said. Who so hear you, hears me, and who so
despise you, despyseth me. Wherefore whatsoever any one of the least of the
very faithful shall teach by Christ's word, and his spirit, shall command
or forbydde, even the same also ought not the high monarchies of the world
more to contempne or transgress, then if Christ him self presently has
commanded it them in his own person. And except they obey it, doutles they
shall suffer therefore, other her, or to come. Note also that Daniel call leth
the holy faithful, the most high (for so is it in the hebrwe) as though he
would say, I speak not of every called ho ly one, but of the very holy heavenly
which be sanctified with the word and spyryte of Christ, for there be some
holy ons in a certain externe chosen holiness, because they be shaven,
anointed, and oyled, of whom we have called many the most holy highest
fathers in Christ, when they be the most profane accursed execrable
wretches and abominacyon before God. Da. After this I would have learned
diligently concerning the fowerth beast, which was so much vulyke all the
other, and so hugly terryble, whose tethe and klawes were yerney, he eating and
crasshyng the bones and flesh, and treadyng the rest under his fete. And of
the.x horns, which he had in his head, and of the the other that sprange up,
before whom the iij. horns did fall, even of the horn, that had eyes, and a
mouth speaking stought arrogant words, and was greater then the other, I
beheld it, and lo, this horn made battayll against the holy faithful. Osi.
I had beheld the beast, ere he was judged to death, etc. Da. And he prevailed
against them, till the old aged came and gave the judgment to the high
saints, and the time came, that these holy ons obtained the kyngedome. And he
said thus. Osi. That is to say, The Angel so said, which was one of the by
standers. Da. The fourth beast Of the former domina cyon of Rome.
shall be the fourth kyngedome upon the earth, greater then all the other
kingdoms, and shall devour the universal earth, and trede it down to duste.

Also the ten horns shall be ten Kings. Osi. After the Hebrew manner, he
calls them the ten Proconsuls, gouernynge the Roman city, and empire with
the most high administracyon. Da. And another shall arise after them. Osi.
That was the Emperor Caesar, and Monark. Ye must by this horn changed into
the head, understand all the Roman Emperoures reygnynge in contynuall
succession, as by every one of the ten horns, all the proconsuls one after
another succedyng, gouernyng the same province. Da. And he shall be mightyer
then the former. And the.iij. Kings. Osi. They be the.iij. counselors, beryng
the mo^st high imperye, that is, the two counsayllers of the city, and
Pompeius. Da. He shall bring them full law. Osi. Thou seyst here, that he shall
not dissolve the dignity and power of the x. but only the persons shall he
overcome, so yt they humbled and brought under, shall grant him the imperyall,
or (as Cicero calls it) the kyngly dominion. Da. And he shall speak words
against the high God, and break down the most high holymen, and shall
think to may change times and laws. Osi. That is to oppress, and extirpe
the christen religion. For the Hebrew has times, and the manner of the re
ligyon, that is, the name remayninge, bring the religion of Christ into a
da^pnable supersticiouse abuse. To change the times, is of eating days to
make fasting, of merye and glad days to make sorrouful and sad days, of
work days to make idle days. And so to alter Gods determined times as to
think to prevent with sword and fire and to dispoint God of his immutable and
infalli ble providence, which al yet do Thempe rours, Popes, and Kings. Da.
And they shall be delivered into his hand unto a ty me, and times, and to half a
time. That is. D. xxxij. years after Christ's ascensyon, and M. CC. Xl. years
after the buyldyng of Rome, which is unto the end of the first dominacyon of
Rome. For Rome stood fyest upon Kings, senators, and counsayllers, and
Emperors M. cc. xl. years, until the year of Christ. ccccc li. and sense
that time put to the first nou^ber D. a time. M. are times. cc. l. half a time.
In the nou^ber there be xxij. years more for yt To me had not her dominion so
sone after her bylding
of D. xxxij. years, and so have we from Christ. c. lxxxiij. but from the
beginning of ye first duminacyo^ we have. M. ccccccc lxxij. but let us hear
theautor. Osi. This must be understood after the manner of the holy
scripture, not that this only horn having eyes and mouth shall dure so long.
But the hole dominicacyo^ of the Roman city from her, first buyldyng unto
the end of her former dominicacion. As in the book of the iuges the scripture
says, Cap. iij. The children of Israel did evil in the sight of God, and
forgote their God, seruyng Balim, and ast aroth. And the Lord bent his anger
against Israel, deliueryng them into the hands of Cusan Rasatham, King of
Mesopotamye, whom they served viij. years, And they cried to the Lord, which
stered the^ up a savior and delivered them, and the land had rest xl. years.
For this can not be understood, that after their delyuerau^ce they had peace
xl. years co^tinu ally, but all this together, that they sinned, yt they
forgote God, served ydols, were delivered up to their enemies, cried to ye
Lord, were delivered, and had peace for a certain time, was done in xl. years.
Likewise here of Rome, it may not be vnderstande^ yt this one horn dured so
long torme^ting the holy me^, but this holy time altogether, wherein the Roman
impery sprang up, grew, so that it was distributed into x. consularye empires,
yt the Monarchy of The^perours stood in it, yt she more then. ccc. years most
cruelly impugned the christen religion, and for y^ was she dampened of God in
the heanenly judgment, and at last extincte. All this (I say) hole together
was in doing and done by time, and times, and by half a time, True it is that
this form of speech That is by. ccccc. xxxij. years.
signifies iij. years and an half. Nethe les not, without a cause did the
angel separate the^. For the Hebrews tell their years, not by the sun, but
by the moon out of the. xij. months, that is, standing of. ccc. liiij. days,
which days not withstandyng in Februarye, when the leap year comes, in the
third or fourth year, they restore to the son years, Also CCC. liiij. day
es in the lunar year.
nether one nor two years admit any leap year day, wherefore he will them to
be understood without the leap month, that is to say, of m. cc. xxxix.
days or there about, for so many days be in three years and an half. But Da.
in such manner misteryes uses not our common An Angels day is one of our
years: and an angels year is ccc. lij. of our years.
days and years, but angels days and years, as we have showed it at large
in the iij. conjecture, whereof there is a very evident proof in the end of
the xij. Chap. of Da. where one angel asks of another, how long shall it be
to y^ end of these marvelous things? which swering by ye eternal liuig God
answers: saying, un to the time of times and an half. For in no wise is it
red in yt place time and times and an half as have our common books, but as we
interpret it, This is therefore the mind of the Aungel. That from the third
year of Cyrus unto the eude of all those meruellouse things which were reveled
to him in that visyon, even unto Christ, which anon after these meruelles
were ended, should come, there should bepast over, the time of times and an
half, that is, to say, the year of years, and an half, yt is an Angels
year, and an half, which con teyneth of our common years. D. xxxn. if we
behold the moon years, for it is the year of years, which stands not upon
ccc. liiij. days, but of so many of our common years. Certain it is out of
Ptolome fro the beginning of the reygne of Nebucha^nezar, The Angels year is
call led the year of years co^ teynyng ccc. liiij. of our years.
whom he calls Nabopollassar unto the birth of Christ to have had passed
over. cccccc. xxv. almost of our years, out of which, if thou takes xix.
before the destruccyon of Jerusalem, and the lxx. of the captivity, and the
iij. first years of Cyrus, there shall be left D. xxxij. and a few months,
which justly make the time of times and the half time, that is an Angels
year and an half. For as much then, as it is plain, Daniell in such
misteryes to be expressed to use Angels days and years, and contrariwyse,
when he means our com mon years and time brought into days, he uses to
add the morning and eve nyng, that we should not take them for the Angels
days nor time: there is no doubt, but that in this place also it behooves it
to be understood of the Angels years. Namely when out of the for so the
saing of Rhomulus it was pronostickt of Vectio, that noble forsooth sayer, that
because the city of Rome had passed ever prosperouslye her. cxx. years, she
should come to M. cc. years. Wherefore it is the mind of Daniell, that the
city of Rome under the monarchye of themperours should persecute the church of
the lyuinge God, and to bear dominati on until she had accomplyshed in.
angels yeris, and an half of her age, that iij. Angels yea res and did. m.
cc. xl
is to say, almost. M. cc. xl. of our yeris, which thing we see it in deed
iustlye fulfilled. For about the year from the buyldinge of Rome. c. lxx. the
imperial Majesty was translated fro Rome to Co^ stantinople. And if Rome had
thenceforth any Emperors west fro Constan tinople, yet did their original and
auto rite depend of the Constantinople imperye, Now was Rome, then like no li
uely body, which should govern herfelf, but as a dead ka^kas, of whose corpse
and burial other men had the governance and cure. After these, about y^ year
of her buyl The fall of ye former dominacio^ of Rome
dyng m. c. lxiiij. of y^ Gotes brought thither of Alaricho, was she taken
spoiled and brent. And afterward about the year M. cc. viij. of G^nserycho was
she taken again and spuyled. And at last in the year of y^ city M. cc. xxix.
the rest left in the miserable Rome city were brought into so great calamity
and contempt, yt when Augustulus was then slain, she was no ^aryon fo. c. xlvi
says in a^. chri. ccccc. li. was To me utter ly destroyed in the city year.
m. ccc. iij
more worthy to have not so much as a Lord, that is any welte Emperor. For
thus far of was she now to have any dominion Imperial over other after her
old manner. And this was now her extre me and last fatal destyned end or
rather an utter dissipacion or skateryng away of her memoryall, and as it were
the strewynge abroad of the ashes of y^ city of Rome, and of her former
dominacyon, as it was prophesied of Daniell. Da. And the judgment was set.
^si. That is, so long were they in this condempnacyon in the judgment of God,
as were the holy saints oppressed and persecuted of this horn. Da. That their
power might betake^ away. ^si. That is the power of this fourth beast. Da. And
be all to broken and destroid to perish into the end. ^si. That is, utterly
without any help to perysh. Da. But the king do^ and power and the amplitude
thereof vuder all the heaven shall be given to y^ people of the most high holy ons
whose raygne is everlasting, and al ^ynges shall ser ue and obey him. ^si.
These are declared before. Da. Hitherto is the end of this matter. ^si.
Hitherto is it treated and spoken of the former dominion of Rome, which after
Daniell dur^d iij. Angels years, and an half, even after their own prophecye
of the same city from her first buyldyng. M. cc. which is almost M. CC.
all one space.

Now let us treat of the later dominacion of Rome out of the Apocal. and of
The wy lines of Satan.
Pau. And as tofore, where need is, will we use like interlocucion. And here
(christen reder) I would you should first consider how great and earnest was
satan's subtyle crafty deceytfull wylynes, who when he perceived this former
dominacyon of Rome now to be utterly subverted, he studied diligently to paynt
forth and to set up long before whiles the the other yet endured, another
dominacyon of the same city, yea and that far worse then the former. And he
did so garnysh it, that be fore this formar was utterly fallen and expyred,
this later domiyacyon should be even then almost ripe in all wickedness by the
Popis, and be waxen strong enough in all Idolatry supersticion false religion
and al mischief. For when that former dominacio^ of the Romans city, was yet
valiant in strength and armor, this later dominacyon took encreace and began
to arise and crepe up under the cloak and name of the christen religyon, in
supersti cion, chosen holiness, and false miracles and falser doctrine. In
which false pretext to be descrybed, y^ author of the Apoc. xvi. most ernest
and diligent, setting before us this one thing, even as it were the open mark
to behold that the domi nicacion of Rome, after it was once false^ and
utterly extinct, she should crepe up out of her grave, and put forth her head
again after a new facyon in another v^sare. But Joan would in no place open
lie name her the city of Rome in plain words, l^st she made more cruel and
angry for her open name (for the wicked, the more she is monyshed by name and
vtte red, the worse is she) should have persecuted the church, the greuous^yer
and the sharplyer, which persecucyon was yet, even then most bitter and
tyrannouse. He therefore here treats.ij. necessary things. First he
diligently describes, what manner one was this later beast before y^ former
fall of the dominacion of Rome, whom he will not openly name, which also after
that fall and utter destruction, so swyftely wexed so strong again, as though
she had been risen from death to life, so that all the circumstances dilligent ly
expressed, only her name suppressed, he most certainly assewerth is, that he
speaks of the city of Rome.

Secondly he paynteth before us most artificiously all the conditions of the
later dominacio^, in what thing she agrees with the former, and in what she
agrees not, so that she once diligently known, we might avoid and abhor her
as hell gates and the pit of everlasting d^mpnacyon. Nether was he content
with that so diligent picture, which he did set before our eyes in his xiij.
Cha. but also did adioyne in his. xvij. Ca. the interpretacio^ which he
received of the Angel like Daniels, which we for the more briefnes Apo. xiij
shall (as it were) weaue it into our narra cion. Thus says Joan. I saw the
beast apo. xvij
arisyng out of the sea. Osi. This beast That he uenly de cree was of Christ
esenne myes, even the Emperors and Popis not yet to be fully ma de his fete
stole
in the xvij. Cha. He saw again, the angel interpretyng her sayng. The
beast whom I saw, was, and is not, that is, she was even such one as Daniell
deseri bed her, but she is not, for the imperye was then, but anon after taken
away of God, as we have heard it to fore. But because that heavenly decre of
God the Fa there, concerning Christ, was not yet put in execucyon, therefore
the Angel a little after speaks it clerelyer sayng. She was and is not, For
albeit, she then being in her flowers, yet was she then cer taynly appointed
and destined to her destruccyon, though not yet utterly extirped. Apo. xiij
and xvij
Joan. Having. vij. heads and x. hor nes. Osi. This the Angel also
interpreted thus, saying. And here it behooves a mind that has wisdom.
The.vij. heads are the vij. hills, upon which the woman sits, and they be
vij. Kings. And a little after in the end of the xvij. Ca. he says. The woman
whom thou saw, apo. xvij in y^ end.
is the great city, which has the kingdom and dominion over the Kings of the
earth. Wherefore the vij. heads have a double interpretacyon. First they
signify the.vij. hills, or y^ vij. hill tops, which Rome co^teyneth within
her walls buyl ded upon the same, as Virgel descrybeth her situacyon, Rome to
compass about within her walls seven little hills, like seven Towers, which
is one of the notable tokens and sh^wes of the City of Rome, that she is
builded upon these vij. hills, which thing was never herd said of any city
else in all the world. Secondly the vij. heads signify vij. Kings. But be
cause the x. horns also signifye x. Kings, which thing seems to make confu
sio^, therefore ye apt difference is to be sought consentyng with the verity,
which verelye is sone espied in the interpretation of the angel, which says
of the. vij. Kings, v. to have had been fallen, and one is, Ap. xvij.
and the last not yet to have had been comen. Whereof it is plain, these vij.
Kings to have had reigned one after another. But of the x. Kings thus he
says. These shall receive power in one hour Ap. xvij.
that is, they all shall reygne at one time together one in his place, as did
the. x. proconsuls in the former dominacion of Rome. But here must ye know and
diligently note it, that in such manner mysteries, A King signifies not one
singular person, but all the Kings one succe dynge another in a continual
live, so long as that manner of reign be not changed as it is in Daniell. xi.
Where the King of the southe signifye all the Kings of Egypt fr^ Ptolomeo
Lag^ unto Cleopotram. And the King of the North signifies all the Kings of
Syrie fro Seleuco Nicanore unto Antiochum Epiphanem. Wherefore even her also
must they be so taken. Manifest it is, the city of Rome in her former
dominacyon to have had vij. heads, that is un. kinds of kings or rulers of
the most high impery successively. For first of all kyn ges did constitute her
first governance and dominacion. Then the counselors the second. After that,
the tenmen with the most high autorite were created to write and make her
laws which constituted the third regiment. Then the Dic tatores the fourth.
The Thremen after the death of July did constitute the fifth. And the Cesares
the monarkes made the sixth. And at last, the externe or strange emperors which
were not of the house of the Cesars, constituted the seventh head. Wherefore the
angel speaks right ly and clearly when he says: Five are fallen, that is to
weit: The Kings, the counsulers, the Tenmen, the Dictatores and ye Thremen
were past and gone. The in y^ y^a^ of Christ lxxxvi.
sixth was the monarchy of the Cesars, which then stood, when John wrote these
words (for he wrote them under Caesar Domiciane) But the seventh was not then
comen. For then as yet was there no strange or externe Emperor created* And
the x. horns, which be the x. kings then yet for to reign al at once in
diverse The x. Kings in y^ former dominacio^ and the x. Kings in the later,
places and not one aftir an other in any one place were in the former domina
cion the proconsulers. But in this later dominacion, they be the. x. Kingdoms,
which reverently yet confess or have confessed Rome to be the head* of all
the churches, as Spain, Portugale, France, England, Scotlond, Denmark, Poole,
Boheme, Hungarye, and even he that yet huldeth now the Kingdom in name only, or
empir of Rome, and is not, that is to weit. Charlis. v. Let him hold fast the
title. How be it there were other in other places, as when one fill, ^po. xiij.
there stert up another, albeit they were ever about. x. in nowmber. Joan. And
upon his horns he had. x. diademes. Osi. For they were decked and garnesshed
with y^ most high imperie in their popish prela tes as cardinals and Bisshops
exalted above their Kings. Joan. And upon his own head the name of blasphemy
Osi. That is blasphemouse names and titles. For when they had herd anon out of
the prophetis and Sibils of the kingdom yt should be eternal to spring up out
of the earth which was Christ with his Kingdom and gospel, then applied they the
same salvation to their Romish church and Bishop of Rome and to his
antichristen Kingdom. Whereof Jupiter in virgill says. I have given the an
empire without end, and again, unto it will I nether limits ne time put
thereto. A great blasphemye verily is it, arrogantly to usurp the honor praise
and majesty of the everlasting imperie and Kingdom of Christ, dew only to the
sone of God, and to apply and adioine them to the ungod ly wiked tyranye of
the Romish city and profane court of Rome, I might here speak other thigs
of this blasphemy, but because it is certain non of these. vij. headis to be
seen in the later dominacion, but only the aight head, which is the pope, as
we shall hereaftir se, the blasphemies of the later beast ought not to be
applied to the former. Joan. And the beast whom I saw was like a leoparde, and
his fete like the fete of a bear and his mouth like a lions mouth, and the
dragon gave him his own strength and his own seat, and also great power. Osi.
For as the dragon is called of Christ the prince of this world, and reigns
all spiritually and inuisibly under heaven with his other wyked sprites the
rulers of those derkenesses, even so gives he his strength, seat and power to
this beast the pope, that she by the moeions and instigacions of this dragon,
aftir his manner and will might reign also bodily and visibly. Io. And I saw
one of her headis as it were smite^ to death, but that deadly wound was healed.
Osi. This head was first ye Monarchy of y^ Cesars, which spra^g up in C. Iulio
Cesare, which when he was smyten with. xxiii woundis, and slain of the coniured
agenst him, the monarchy seemed utterly to be subverted and perished, which yet
was not so, but it waxed strong again, and was stablisshed more mightily in Octa
uio Augusto. Io. And all the earth with Apocal xiii.
admiracion beheld the beast, and worshipped the dragon which gave her that
power. And they fill down before the beast, saying: Who is like this beast?
and who may fight with her? Osi. As I said tofore, the fame was spread over all the world, even the same which had her original out of the prophetis and
^ibillis, that there should arise in ye earth about that time an everlasting
kingdom, which seemed to the ungodly to be fulfilled in this Roman monarchy
of Octauian Auguste, namely since it was under him so happily stablysshed and
all the hole world so prosperously set in peace, where fore they thought it to
be so done by the singular counsel of the most high God. But the very God
would reserve this glo rye and maieltie of theternal imperie for his own sone
and not to give it to the tra^ sitorie imperie of Romans Wherefore it was so, that
when the ungodly in their hertis and thoughtis worshipped yt God which now
stablesshed the Roman monarchy as they iuged, they worshipped not the very
God, as they seemed to the^ selves. For the very God, in nowise had stablis shed
the Roman imperie, which a little aftir he thought to destroy, as yt prophe
it is foresaid it, and the final fall thereof proved it. But they worshipped satan
and their own vain imaginacion which strewed and spread this monstrose opinion
of the eternal empire of rome into yt world, which satan therefore had promoued
the monarchy of the same and given her his power that by one Kingdom he might
the sooner and cruellier tame his tirannouse wodnes upon the christians. For if
the highest empire had standen upon the. xii. counselors and Senators they had
never have had been carried and concited of the devil with so great wodnes and
furye against the christianes as eft sone were Nero, Domiciane and such like en
censed agenst them. They also fill down before the beast. For they had wendt yt
the empire had been now constituted of God by oracles, and they made goddis of
the Cesars, either by the most foul flatering of them, or by extreme blindness.
For when they said. Oh, who is like the beast? It is asmich to say as this
beast is God. For this can not be said but of God only. Who is like yt oh lord?
And when they say who may fight with her? they make her inuict and constituted
of God. And because he makes men cio^ of batail, he she wed, him self to have
had painted hitherto the city of Rome by the markis of the former dominacion.
For the later flouresshed not by armor in batail but by colorable collusions
and feigned pretenses of holiness So that Joan hitherto said nothing else then
that this city builded upon. un. hillis, having. vii. kinds of the most high
magistrates, even the impery over the x. provinces, as it were distributed into
Kingdoms, which also by a blasphemou se presumpcion thought her self
perpetually and evermore to reign. In which most mighty monarchy of Cesars
against the will of S. P. Q. K. it sprang up with great admiracion of all men.
And when she was deadly wounded in Iulio Cesare, yet, was she so restored and
stablisshed in Octauio Augusto, that the thing apered to the unwise and ongodly
to be done of God. For that same city (I say) aftir she was utterly Now ^^
her later dominacion.
set of from all her former dominacion and utterly extynct, yet aftyr that
deadly wound and head destruccyon she did putvp her head again. And whilis
Satan made her mighty, and armied her into the persecucion and destruction of
bodies and soulis, but chiefly into the persecucion of the christians, aftir a
new manner came she agene to her most high dominacion. Which thing he might
have said in fewer and clearer wordis, if he would have openly and plainly named
y^ Rome city. But that was not then expedient for the church as we told you
before. Now therefore there remains, y^ we hear what manner one this beast is,
and how she did put up her head again which thing ye aungel ye interpretor of
ye vision ^po. xvij
clearly teaches us saing. The beast who^ thou saw, was and is not, and
shall ascend out of the deep derke pit, and shall go in to his own
destruction, that is into everlasting dampnacion, whose cause we shall hear
afterward, and the inhabitors of the earth shall meruell thereat, whose names be
not written in the book of life: from the creation of the world, seeing the beast
that was and is not, that is, when she did put up her head again. For as the
gentyles some tym merueled at the monarchy of the Cesars, so now meruell the
supersticiouse and ye ungodly at this last dominacio^ of Rome. But the aungel
proceeded saing. Here it behooves understanding with wisdom. The.vij heads* ar
the vij. hillis upon which ye woman sits, and they be.vij Kings.v. be
fallen, one is, and the the other is not yet comen. But when he shall come, he
must tarry but a short time. And the beau (that is the former empire) that was
and is not, he is y^ aight (that is to say, the former impery or dominacion
shall come and fall to the pope to be in like power or grater the^ were the
Cesars.) But he is the aight, and The beast her is taken for the empires of Romans
of the seventh, and gothe in to his own destruccio that is, that beast which
was and is not, even the former empir of the Cesars, when she shall rise up and
put up her head again in the popes dominacion and last empire, she shall have
none of those.vij. head is, that is to say another Kings, consuls, Senatores
ne Cesares but in name only etce. For they must all first fall, and the former
beast, that is the seculare impery be utterly de stroyd, before the later
dominacion of y^ pope (Satan exciting it) be sprung up. For in this last
dominacion of Rome, shall there reign nether kings ne counsel lers nor tenmen,
nor dictatores, nor the threme^ nor Cesars etc. as before, but the aight beast,
even the popes alone, which netheles is said to be one of the.vij. because he
is in many things as in seclare profane buysines and batail and bloudsheding
like the strange former Cesars and emprours, which were the last head among
the.vij. But in this only does he chiefly differ, that where they reigned in
an open civility and impugned the word of God only with weapen, this beast,
the popes, under the cloak and color of religion reigns, and under the
pretext of the trwe interpretacion thereof he corrupts falsifyeth and
peruerteth the doctrine of Christ, the sacraments he defyleth with his own
addicions, and abuses and the articles of our faith he blotteth out of the
bible with his own false added articles. The doctrynes of ye devil he
stablissheth with menis authority, with sword and policies of realms. And
like the forlorn child and sone of perdicion, with all his followers and
confedered (oh terrible word) he gothe on into everlasting death and
dampnacio^. But let us hear Joan again speking yet farther of his vision. Joan.
And there Apoca. xiij.
was given him a mouth speaking great things and proud blasphemies. Osi. These
wordis perteine no ferther to the mar kis of the former dominacion now past,
but they paint us forth what manner a beast was then to come, aftir that Rome
should yet agene put up her head into the popes dominacio^, and arise, as it
were out of the waters. For he says not, she has a mouth, but she has a
mouth given her so speking. To speak great things, aftir the hebrewe phrase,
is to speak arrogant ly and proudly bosting him self and to glory Psalm: ^ xij.
in his own mischief, which verily do the popes, whilis they boste the^ selves
to be the vicares of Christ and to occupye gods stead, yea and to be a God him
self whiles they compare them selves to the son and the emprours to the moon,
with sich like infinite arroga^t exaltacio^s above god and man. Also he speaks
blasphemies, whilis he da^pneth christ is gospel for here sie and also ye right
use of ye sacraments, settig forth his own da^pnable doctrine and su
persticio^s to be observed and believed above and aie^^t gods eternal word and
institucio^s. And in this behalf, this beast abides still like her self. For
even in the former dominacion also there was a mouth speking great and stought
things. Joan. And there was power given to her to make bataill, or to do mischief
months. xlij. And here is the principal thing and head xlij. months cclx
yeris.
of this matter for the which we fr^ate all these places of Daniell and Joan.
For even in this thing is this later dominacion. of the pope like the former,
which dured a time times and half a time. For as there, it was necessary to
understand aungelike times even so here must we understand Angels months of
which. xlij. make. Mcclx. Angels days, that is, somany of our yearis, or that
is all one. iij. Angels yeris and an Apoc. xij Mcclx.
half, even as it is clear out of the. xij. ca. of the apoca. where the same
time first of. Mcclx. days is determined, and aftirward is called the time,
times, and an half. But note it well, that Joan beholds not, ne has respect
to the ieves year but to the Roman monethe which contains. xxx. days. For
where as. xxxi The To mane mo neth is xxx days. The very mo neth has but xxix.
days and almost a^ halfday.
days be ascribed to some months in yt Roman Calendarie, it is done for
the. v days to serve the leap yeris. Or else yt true and just month has only
but xxix. and almost an half day. But let us set these things a part for a
little while. I can not but meruell excedinly and vehemently also how it should
happen, that men, I will not call them. learned, but rude and unlettered, which
should have but only a crum of humane reason and wit, should be brought to
believe, that al these things, which Joan here, and Paul to ye Thessa. ha ue
prophesied of this beast might be fynisshed and done with in the space of. iij.
of our yeris and an half, sith they be siche manner things, that if they were
now finisshed and written word by word, they should require an vnweary and a
meruellouse swifte reader which might fully read them with in. iij. yeris. For
impossyble is it that sich gestes and stories done should be deuulged and spread
abroad over the hole christendom with a lively voice in ye space of iij. years
so far of is it yt they should be done all in. iij. or. iiij. years, yea
although antichrist should have a swif winged host. But the ingratitude of
mankind has deserved to be smiten with this so great blindness, because he has
not aknowledged with thanks the benefyts of Christ. But of this matter we shall
spe ke more heraftir when we come to Paul. Now to our purpose. Joan. And he
opened his mouth to speak forth blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name
and his tabernacle and them that dwell in heaven. Osi. There may noman blaspheme
the word but the same blasphemeth also the name of God. Many manner wise
blasphemeth the pope yt word of God whilis he peruerteth ye wordis of the
souper of ye Lord wrestmg the^ violent ly to his flesshly eati^g and blody
drinking, damning as heresy the true use of both the bread and cup
instituted of Christ. He blasphemeth Gods word also whilis he forbids
priestis to marie, and forbids certain meatis stablisshing thereby the
doctrine of diuilis. When Paul clearly says. A Bishop to be ye housbo^d of
one wife, and all things to be clean to the pure. The pope therefore blasphemeth
the name of God. Also what it is to blas pheme the tabernacle of God and them
y^ dwell in heaven, it is plainly perceived in the. ix. of Daniel where it is
thus prophe cied of Antioche. Out of one of the^ there went forth a little horn
and it was magnifyed and extolled up unto the strength, tower, or tabernacle
of heaven, and he threw down some of the stars treding them under his feet.
For trwth it is, yt he understood thereby the temple of God and the holy men in
the people of Israel. And even so do ye pope blaspheme the church of God and his
holy faithful, calling them heretics, saing yt there is no hope of
salvation except we hold upon the pope and be under the court of Rome, obe
dient to his deuilish laws and doctrine, when it is here clearly said, non to
have the true hope of salvation that abide in the popes doctrine. But there be
infinite like things which ask a another treatise. Joan. And it was given him to
make ba taill with the holy faithful and to overcome them. Osi. So great is
the might and power of the lies, of the iuglings, of the false coulored
doctrine, of the false miracles, and of the ipocrisye of the popedom that even
the very holy faithful me^ shall seem to be ouercomen and taken for here tiques
when y^ pope so dampneth and decla reth the^. Which thing except we perceive
and remember well, we can not abhor and fear his blasphemies. But because he
blasphemeth non evil men, as the self thing witnesses it, but only the good
and the very trwe church, even Gods holy faithful, we ought to joy and
rejoice when we be thus blasphemed of him. For it happens to us in to the
testinionie that we have nothing to do with y^ abominable beast, but that we
estiewe, apoc. xiij
loathe and abhor him. Joan. And there was given him power over all the trybes
and people and tongues and folk. Osi. This does thaungel interpret where he
says. The. x. horns which thou saw ar. x. Kings, which yet have not
received their apo. xvij
Kingdom, but with the beast shall they in one hour receive power as Kings.
These have one counsel and shall deliver up their power to the beast, that is to
say, As the first dominacion had. x. prouinees ruled by the counselors, even
s^ shall the second dominacion (when the beast is now waxen strong) have her.
x. Kings, as I said to fore. For that as before was but one Roman imperie, is
now divided into. x. kingdo^s of which every one has her king, which in Ioans
time had not yet received kingdom. For y^ beast hirself had not then put up her
head and horns but they were to receive it at howr one with the beast, yt was
at the same time, not so, yt one should raygne after another, as did the un*
heads in the secla re imperye, but altogether and in the self time, as we see
it in very deed. For these Kings with one counsayll or sentence deliver up
their power to the Pope, yt is with a still secret consent in their course and
lot, they humbly acknoweledge y^ Pope to be their head, reuerencyng him for the
vicar of Christ, submittynge them selves, and theyrs unto him, And thus did the
beast get him power over every kynred trybe people tongue and folk as far
as was the Christendom wide. Apo. xiij
For when he would govern and rule under the holy pretense of religion, so
might not his power extend to the infidels. Ian. And all that inhabit the
earth shall worship the beast, whose names be not written in the book of y^
living lo^be, which was slain fro the beginning of the world. Osi. God which
is rich in mercy, for his exceeding love, wherewith he loved us, when we were
dead in sins, he revived us that truly believed in Christ, and has made us
to sit in heavenly seatis, as writes Paul to the Ephes^. Wherefore when the
Pope blasphe meth us, he blasphemeth the dwellers in heaven. But they whose
names be not written in the book of life, they dwell in the earth, for they
sauoure but earthely things, and therefore worship they the beast. Joan. Who so
have ears let him Apo. xiij
hear, who so leads into captivity, him self goes into captivity, he
that slays with sword, shall be with swerd slain. And here is the patience
and the faith of the saints. Osi. That is, if any man by these things spoken,
can not yet know, who is this beast, let him at least wise yet understand this
one thing, yfhe now have any ears to hear. That where the holy faithful, for
the faythes sake and true doctrine of Christ be led into bondage of mennis
traditions, or smyte^ with sword, or by any other meanis slain, which is
suffered without shame, and that openly (for in this our time many have been
slain, and many presoned and persecuted only, because with a good
conscience, they marye their lawful wives, preach and profess the truth,
will worship non Idols, will receive both the parts of the souper and not
the half) there is the kyngedome of this beast, whom God so hates and
detesteth that he will utterly remesure her with the same measure, wherewith
Ap. xviij
she measures his saints. For at her ty me, he shall say. Render to her as
she has given to us, give her twyse double according to her own deeds. For
the cup that she has mengled for you, fill it to her twyse full, and how
much she has magnifyed herself, and sitten in her delicate ease and
pleasures, so much reward her with torments and waylinges. Apo. iij.
Joan. And I saw another beast ary sing and ascendynge from out of y^ earth.
Osi. And this beast signifies as do al y^ other, a certain kingdom, not of
one man, but of a certain great confuse filthy swarm by a certain
conspirisie and sediciouse consent swarming together on heap, as though they
were one body. And who be this beast, Joan himself interprets Apo. xix*
it cha. xix. callig her y^ false prophetis which make wondres and miracles
befo re the beast. This beast therefore signifies The sata mke swarm of the
false pre achers.
the false flock, the stinkyng donghil, the coniured covent and kingdom of all the false teachers and preachers, eue^ y^ Popes bocherly spiritualty in the
hole pope dom. And this beast is said to ascend and clyme out of the earth, to
put difference fro the bealtis ascendynge out of the sea. For the water is a
more thick and grosser element then the air, and therefore it brings forth
greater and grosser beasts. And as the water signifye much pe ple in heaps
making rumore and tumul te and folk of grosser wit, in who encreaceth the
love of voluptuousnes and lust to raygne, even so, to rise fro the earth,
signifies men of more subtyle wit, for that not in the water, but in the
air they be created, and therein to live. This beast therefore is risen up out
of men ler ned wittye and ingeniouse, but yet ungodly. Of whom at Rome and
her to there is the most mighty and mischeuouse multitude. Joan. And she had
two hor nes like a la^b, but sue spoke as did ye dra Apo. xiij
gone, Dst, The lamb is Christ, which fyghteth not with any corporal sword,
but with his spiritual horns, that is, with his word, which is divided into two
horns, that is, into the word of the law, which is the word of wrath, and
death, and into the word of the gospel, which Luke. i.
is the horn of health grace and life. And even so has this beast or college
of fall se Prophets a double doctrine, of which one they call the doctrine of
faith, and the the other, the doctrine of good manners or moral, but they both
be contamyned and corrupt with errors. But yet thus retain they the color and
gliteryng show, as though they were Christen doctores teaching Gods word. For
in this pretense their horns be like the lombes horns. But in very deed, they
speak as does the dragon. The dragon or Satan, Christ to witness, which stood
not in the troth, but is a liar and the father thereof, And when he speaks
lies, he speaks them out of his own head. And even so, these false teachers
stand not in the pure doctrine of Christ, but speak forth, and teach us
their own dreams and cogitacions out of their own sense. Joan. And he does
all the power of the former beast in the Apo. xiij.
presence of him. Osi. This beast blown together of the false teachers serves,
ministers, vpholdeth and defends the Po pis kingdom, whiles himself
sittinge careless in all ease, exempt from all charges takes his delicate
lusts and pleasu res, and (as say the Italyaus) triu^pheth Apo. xiij.
at home in all security. Joan. And he makes the earth and the dwellers
therein to fall down and worship the first chief or head beast. Osi. That is
the beast, y^ Lordely rules in the seat of Rome. For his Bishops, Cardinals,
Priests, and preachers teach him to have that prima r^e and to be supreme
head of the church, iure diuino, by Godis law, and they lie to. Joan. Whose
deadly wound was healed. The hea lyng of his dead ly wou^d
Osi. As the heythen had once in admiracion the inuicte stabilitie of the
Roman monarchye, as I said tofore, even so had they it again when Rome had now
fallen from Emperors, and had by the popedom erected herself gloryouslye and
proudly up again. The supersticiouse and the ungodly, whose names be not
written in the book of life, began to won^der and to have in like admiracyon
the inuicte majesty of the Popedom and prima cie of the proud Romyshe Bishop,
thinkyng God therefore to have had stablished the Roman monarchy to this end,
y^ at last it should grow up into the Popedo^. Joan. And he does great wonders
and miracles, so that he will make fire fall down from heaven into the earth
in the sight of all men. Osi. S. Paul in his ij. to the Thessalo. Chap. ij.
calls these wo^ ders signs and miracles, prodigiouse lies, for partlye be
they mere mistyeing gling castis, as when they bore through images of tree, and
water powrd in, they can ma ke them to weep tears falling down, and with oil
make them to sweat, or when they strewe kreuesses in church pardes crepyng in
the night with wax candels eudes light and stoked upon their books, as did the
priests of late in dordrake to make the people believe that the souls of the
dead, cruciated inpurgatory so returned to seek their help by their wont
misses and suffragies on all souls day. And partly are they mere lies, as
when they tell us such weping images to speak, to move themselves, and y^
soulis returned fro purgatory, to tell us yt they shall be delivered by this
many misses, which done, and the priests paid, yt kreuesses crepe there no
more. But those and in finite mo lyinge signs and wounders ste red up so great
devotion in the fond ignorant people, that the fire of the holy ghooste seemed
by these beasts false doctrine, and falser miracles written and preached with
so great confidence to be slyden down into the hertes of this manner of
supersticyouse folk. Joan. And he seduceth the dwellers in the earth with his
prodigyous tokens and wounders, which were given him to make in the presence
of the beast, spekyng to, and biddynge the dwellers in the earth, that they
make the image of ye beast, which has ye deadly wound of the sword, and yet
li ueth. Osi. Of this manifold mencyon Things com mon to both the beasts in
their domina ^yuns.
and repeticion of his deadly wound, which netheles was yet healed, it
plainly apereth, it to be also found a like in both the dominacyons of both
the beasts, as is the mouth spekyng so stought things, and the ten horns,
and also Gog and Magog common to them both. For they of whom Ezech. prophechied
perteyn to the former dominacion, but they that be mentioned of Joan, shall be
found at last in this later, as yet many other things moo. So that as the
Monarchy of the Cesares in C. Iulio Caesar, seemed utterly to be extinct by the
swerd, and yet was reuyued, even so the monarchye of the Pope was wounded to
death by the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, when Christ said
to all his Apostles and to their successors, yea and even to Peter, that the
Kings of the heythen shall play the Lords over their folk, but so do not you.
And the Africane counsel decreed out of the same word of God, that no Bishop,
no not the Bishop of Rome, ought to be called the Prince of priests, or chief
head or ru ler, or ouermost of the church, or the highest priest over all, or
the universal Bishop, so far of is it that any should be called, Papa, that
is father of al fathers, Pope in Englysh distin. xcix. Ca. prim. This beast had
never so deadly an head wound as the swerd of Gods word has now given
him in these last xxx. years, sense Erasmus. Mar. Luth. Zwi glius,
Decola^padius, Melanchto^, Pelli cane. Bullinger, Bibliander, Bucer, Call uine
with many gretilerned and godly me^ mo have begu^ to write, teach, and preach,
and yet, the more strongly and fiercely al his sworn sourgens and Popish
Pharisees and Antichristen writers and teachers, as Cocleus, Einser, Alphons,
Eccius, Piggi^s, Latomus, Bartholomeus Latom. John fisher Bish. of Rochester,
Sir Tho mas More chaunceller of England, Sta^dysh, Steven gardener Bissop of
Wynchester, doctor Smith peryn, with all their sworn swarm of friars Cardinals
and Bishops having now the Emperor Charles v. one their side hyered of ye Po
pe and his spirituality, confedered with An tichrist to fight against the lord
and his anointed, as he have of late begin vnhappelye M. D. xlvi.
against the Germans, having (I say) on their side many yet blind Kings
and Princes of the earth, the more fiercelye (I say) these his sinful
supersticiouse sourgens secular and spirytual with pene fire and swerd conte^d
and enforce to heal their beasts deadly wound given him with Gods word, the
more vncurably do his wound feister, the deper it rotteth, the wyder it wexeth
into his present destruction and death, as ye see this day the almighty
merciful power of God resisting their cursed cure, fyghtyng against the
enuyouse enforceme^tes of the Emperor, Po pe, and all Kings contendynge to
heal the Popis wound with their fryerlye Pharisaicall Phisicions. But who would
have believed this dominacyon first of Christ, and then of the council so
openly and justly condemned and so wounded to have had any more lived? And yet
after these deadly wounds she lived and yet lived to this day, but never so
syke as now. And therefore his false doctors, fo lysh sourgens, and falser
Prophets then feigned him to have holden his domina cyon and primacie by the
law and word of God, And persuaded men, as they yet with Wynchester labor the
country, that the image of this beast be made and set up. For as the image of
God is the word of God, so is the image of the popedom the word doctrine and
tradicions of the Pope. For he is set up in the temple of God, boastyng and
ostentyng him self for God. And in this he country fayteth God, that he be
gets his word, doctrine, rytes, cere. and traditions out of his own brain
like unto his own Antichristen image. Sith the^ the doctrine of the Popedom,
which these false defenders defend and these false teachers do teach, be
double, that is to say, of faith and manners, necessarelye are their two books
co^pyled, that is, the book of their sentences, and their book of decrees and
decretals, which be even the very self image of the popedom lively expressyng
al their facyon and form, their faith, their life, religyon and merciles
manners. And thus it clearly apereth this later beast to be blown together of
the lyinge doctors of the scolasticall divinity turning and studiyng the
master of their sentences, the holy Bible so neglected, that many of them never
read it, ne have had it in their scoles: and of the doctors of their common
law, treating y^ filthy deuely she decrees of Popes, among the which doctors,
the inquirers of their heretical prauitie (as they call them) worcester thely obtain
the highest place, being in the stead of the head to execute his mercyles and
tyrannouse office in burning. All these men enstructe and armed with his
demlly she double doctrine of the popedom as it were with their two mighty
horns, fight for, and defend y^ Popis kingdom. Joan. And it was given to him,
that he should give spirit, and breath to the image of the beast, that the
beasts image might speak. Osi. That is, this latter beast blown together of
these falfeteachers, has in effect brought it to pass, that the image or
doctrine of the Pope, should take breathe boldenes and spyrite to live and
speak. For by their counsels conspirisons, conuocacions and perswasyons have
they es^ectuonsly ma de it, that the popysh doctrine must be taught in all
scoles and universities, and raygne, and rule in all preachynges and pulpyts
sit in all spiritual courts, sessyons, yea and even in the consciences of
men. For in very deed, this is it for him to live and to speak, when with
public authority not only is he thus preached and taught, but also according
to the same, his life must be esteemed, he judged in i^ gementes and stand in his
kingdom. And here it apereth wherefore he calls this beast the dough^ll of
false teachers, that is to say, to be a certain filthye viciouse kingdom. For
it is plainly no little king dom that they obtain in the church, eue^ so ferme
fast and terryble that eue^ that same former Emperyall beast, Emperor as he
was and is, must be compelled to fear them and to fall down and kiss the
cloven stinkyng fete of their head the Pope. And therefore no man is created
Doctor of divinity or of the cano^ law in the Popedom, except before among
all other things, he be also swor ne plainly into these words. I shall be an
helper to defeude to maintain and to retey ne the Popedom of Rome against all
men. Which thing whiles they do it, they verelye stablysh and confirm all
this latter beasts power before her at her be^ and pleasure, as is tofore
said. Joan. And he shall bring it diligently into effect, that whosoever will
not worcester ^hyppe and fall down before the image of this beast, he shall be slain.
Osi. Who so believe not this popysh doctrine to be egall, yea and above GODS
word, and so worship him, and it, he is judged and condemned for an
hereiyque of the inquisitors, and if he recant not, he is burned. For the Pope
dare say, all his constitucyons so hyghly to be taken as though they should
proceed by the voice of God, out of S. Peter's mouth. Character is the Popis
bronde unable tobeskra ped of but by disgreasyng.
Distin. xix. Cha. Sic. Joan. And he makes all both small and great, rych
and poor, free and bond to take his charactere, in their right haudes or in
their foreheadis, and no man to may bye or sell, except he has his character
or the name of the beast, or the noumber of his name. And here is wysedom. He
that has understanding, let him reken and account the noumber of this
beast. For it is the tale and noumber of a man and his noumber is. CCCCCC.
lxvi. Osiander. To receyne the Character or mark of the beast, is a metaphoryk
and translated speech, as much to say, as a man outwardly in all facions and
factis so to be have and conform and fashion hi^ self, that all may see and
understand, him to perteyne to the beasts family or church, and to be
subject and sworn to the beast, as have all these serving men in courts
their Lords or masters badge or coginzane in or upon their cotes. The
character or mark of the beast, and her noumber, and her name be taken all for
one thing. And he commands them that understand the words hither to spoken
to reken and account the nou^ber of the name of the beast, so that if they can
find justly in her name the noumber of CCCCCC. lxvi. then be they sewer to have
the very knowledge of this beast, and to see her in her own colors sitting
like the whore of Babylon, even in her seat at Rome. Joan. Shows himself to
have respect to the Hebrewe and greek tongue, as in other places in the name
of the angel called Abaddon, and in y^ name of the place called Ha^ageddon.
For Sepher in Hebrew signifies a book or scripture or a nowmber, wherefore he
alludeth so diversely in the word, now calling it the name of the beast, now
the nowmber of the beast, now the mark of the beast, and character of the
beast, that is the scripture of ye beast. I admonished the (o Reader) before in
Daniel to consider diligently the nowmber of the Hebrew name of the fourth
beast. For all y^ letters of the Hebrews design certain noumbers, as do our
Latin letters M. D. V. C. X. L. signifye our noumbers as M. a thousand C. an
hundred etc. But with the Hebrews every writing or scri pture, and every word
is a certain noumber. Now since this beast by her common name in the Hebrew
tongue is called the Rhomane kingdom, and this name kingdom be common to her
with other beasts, it is manifest the very true and proper name of this beast
to be Rhomanum imperiu^, where thou see how diligent this author was in his
speech to hyde her name under these letters lest me^ should then have espied
him to have spoken of Rome or she had been reveled by her own factis, no where
openly naming Rome because he would not at first exasperat her, till now hi^
wickedness be full ripe, and she has uttered herself declaring her last deadly
wound in resistyng Gods holy Gospel. He calls this name of the beast ye
noumber of a man, either because it is a known name, which all men comonlye
use, or else because of a man (which was Rh^mulus) the city had her first
name. The greek letters, wherewith this nou^ber* cccccc. lxvi. is written, make
also this word, Latinos, which name also Virgil gives to Rhome. But the
Hebrewe letters make, Rhomah, which signisyeth a proud beast. The mark
therefore of this name, they are said to receive in their fore headis, which in
all their vtwarde supersticiouse proud habits and gesture and anon in their
first fro^te (as they say) they show it, even in their first proud solemn
countenance and high lookis and crowns declare they themselves to be sworn
subjects and servants to the Romyshe beast, as do these hoo ded friars and
monks, and shorn polled priests and Bishops. And in their right hands they
bear his mark, which by some certain Popysh works of his commandments,
rytes, and institucions testify themselves to be obedient to ye Pope, as in
certain days not to eat flesh, to confess in lent into the priests ears,
to miss and mo^ble up a payer of matens not understood etc. For unto such
an vtward kind and show of obedi ence are they conitrayned anon fro their
yougthe. For they that have not such a mark, nor will not receive it, they be
taken as haithe^ miscreants. But if they conte^p ne it, then be they accursed
and excluded out of all men's company. And if the common people would not estiewe
the^, then y^ Pope interdicteth their churches, no divine service there to be
said ne song. And so in deed might they nether bye nor sell which had not this
Romith beastis bron de. Also that we may somewhat understand of the last end
and destruccyo^ of this abominable beast, I shall yet bring forth a few mo
wordis of the Angel interpreting this vision, saying. The x. horns which you
saw are. x. Kings, these shall fight with the lo^b, that is, they shall
persecute y^ true doctrine, partly of ignorance, seducte of the Pope, and
partly for his money and ayed to do him pleasures, whom they covet greatly to
please (as now of late does The Emperor.) But ye lombe shall overcome them. For
he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. And the called and chosen
faithful, which be with him, shall fight against this beast. For Christ shall
not fight, but with we now must fight with the weapen of Gods word.
such instruments, not with swerd figh tyng, but with the word of God, and
with just arguments taken out of the scriptures, especyally now in this our
time wherein after the.xxx. iubiley of the church Christ begins agene to
preach, as we said in the third conjecture, And ye Kings by little and little
shall be ouercomen, as even now be many rulers and Kings ouercomen, and with
the most laud and praise have they given place to the troth now known. So
that there is very good hope the rest also to give place to the most euydent
truth, if we now strongly fight with prayers. Whereof at last it shall follow,
that they shall hate this whore even the court of Rome for her abominacyons and
seduccyons and Apo xvij
shall make her desolate and naked and eat up her flesh, that is her riches
and rob her of all her possessions and substance, and burn up her city as
it was once before burned. For God (says the Angel) has given it into
their hearts so to do his pleasure, and to do the same will, that they should
give their kingedome to the beast till the words of god be ended. And here (oh
reader) I would thou should diligently way the words of the Angel, as
they be most worthy to be noted. For where before he spoke of ye ten Kings,
then to have one counsel and sentence, to deliver their strength and apo. xvij
power to the beast, he says it not to be the counsel and sentence of God,
but here where he says them to rob ye whore and to burn her up with fire,
he says, that this thing god did give it into their hertis to do the mind
and sentence of him. For in that they in times past extolled ye pope, they did
it by their own proper pri uate counsel and pleasure. But where they a little
after, shall spoil and burn her, yt shall they do by the counsel and pleasure
of God. Both of them yet notwithstanding, that is to weit, that they in time
past extolled her, and that they shall rob her, flowde forth of the hid
judgment of God. For the first, that is, that they exal ted reverenced and
magnifyed the Pope, and gave him their authority strength and power, they did it
verily by the private counsel of God, which yet tended to this end, yt the
words of God should be fulfilled, which the holy ghost spoke before by the
mouth of Paul the Apostle, even thus. Because many shall not receive the love
of the truth, that thereby they might be saved, therefore shall God send them
men, teaching errors and workyng false mi racles, that they believe lies and be
condemned all that believe not the truth, but consent to wickedness. Also last
of all that they shall rob and spoil the Pope and burn up the city. This
shall they not do till God put it into their hertis by his word and so illumine
them, that they shall understand and know themselves rightly and in dew order
to do it, and to fulfill the will of God in utterly subuer tyng and
ouerthrowyng ye popedo^. Wherefore it is like, that the Turk shall not be the
instrument to destroy the popedom, as some men think. For one devil shall
But yet did goddestroye ye* wiked jews with other wi ked ki^gs and emprours
not cast out an other, nether any that is not of the nou^ber of those x Kings
shall go against the Pope, to destroy him with batayl. For it is given him to
overcome the holy faithful until the words of God be fulfyllled, which be
now this day almost fulfilled all. But yet is there this one thing, which
principally perteyneth to the shame, ignominy, misery, and confusyon of the
abominable popedo^. That even by the same Emprours and Kings, by whom it was
stablyshed and in whom he most trusted, and whom he most dignifyed and
magnifyed with his flateryng and lying titles to be his defe^ders of his faith,
his first begotten sons, most catholyke Kings, most Christen Kings, etc.
By yt same Kings shall he at last be plukt up by the rotis, and that with the
most high joy of al ye holy faithful saints, which for ye same fall shall
brekeforth into this laud and praise before God, and Apo. xix.
sing. Health, honor, glory, and power be to the Lord our God, for true and
just are his judgments done upon the great whore, which has corrupted
and polluted the earth with her vnsha^faced whoredom, and has avenged the
blood of his servants delivered out of her hands. These words out of Joan
be suf Cap. ij.
fycient. Now let us also hear Paul writting to the Thessalonians thus. Paul.
we pray you (brethern, for ye coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our
gathering together into him, that ye be not sone carried away of your own
opinion, neither be ye troubled by spirit nor by pistle as it went forth by us,
as though y^ day of Christ were now at hand, let noman de ceyue you in any
wise. For the Lord shall not come to the last judgment, except there come
before a departing or a falling away. Osi. By which the prouynces shall fall
away from the Roma ne imperye, and Roman kyngedom be fallen and destroyed.
Paul. And the man of sin and son of perdicio^ be uttered and reveled. Osi.
That is ye pope of Rome. Paul. Which is against God and is extolled and lifted
up above ye most high God, and above whatsoever is worshipped as god, so that
eue^ in the temple of God. Osi. That is in the church (as it is said) the
temple of God is holy which temple be you. Paul. he will sit. Osian. That is
he will occupy ye chayer seat, pulpit, place or office to teach and rule al
men. Paul. Oste^ting himself and bosting him as he were God. Osi. For his
doctors of his canon law affirm the pope not to be a pure man, but to be
taken up of God into the fulness of power. Paul. Remember ye not that when I was
yet with you, I told ye these things? Osi. Eue^ the same that the Apoca. has
written. Paul. And now what yet lets ye to know it that he be not reveled till
in his time? For eue^ now he works his secret mistie mischief. Osian. For
the bishops of Rhome with their carnal clerkis, bishops and cardinals (for very
few of the^ were good) eue^ then fro the time of the Apostles aspired privily
unto the dominacion and lordeship whereby by succession of time they have
oppressed the hole universal church. Read the Epistle of Zepherin and of
Pontiane and such like annexed to the bokis of the recognicions of Clement,
and thou shall see how erely and spedily by what craft and subtiltye they
begane to work this their secret mistie mysteryes. But yet then dyrst they
not openly brekeforth, and in very deed chaleng to themselves the dominacyo^ so
long as the monarchy of the Cesars floryshed at Rome. Paul Only so yt he that
now holds, let him hold fast, ty^ he be taken out of the seat. Osi. The
monarchy of ye Cesars and Emperors which rule over all (says he) let them
stand and hold fast their kingdom till the Empire be tra^s lated fro Rome to
Constantinople, or un till the former dominacyon of the city of Rome be
deuolued into the Popis pri macie, which was, when they feigned the^ selves to
have had such a rich gift of Peter's patrimony by the legacy of Co^stantyne
The Emperor. Paul. And then Which was about the year of romans M. ccvij. in the
year of Christ cccclvi.
shall that wicked Antichrist be disclosed. Osi. And even then did the aight
head, the Pope, steke forth his horns and put out his head as it is to fore
said in the Apocal. Paul. Whom the Lord shall slay with the breath of his
mouth. Osi. That is with the power of his word, which after the xxx. iubilei
of the church, openly again and with a mighty spirit shall be preached* Paul.
And he shall destroy him with the brightness of his co myng. Osi. For as the
gray morning comes before the son, even so shall y^ sprirer preaching of the
pure Gospel come before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ the sun of
ryghtuousnes. For Math. xxiiij.
Christ said. This Gospel of my kyngedom (that Christ is our King and not yt
Pope) shall be preached in the universal world into a testimonye for all
nacyons, and then shall the end come. For this clear preaching of the Gospel
shall destroy the dominacyon of the Pope, as xxx. year agoo.
it has now begune. So be it. For his dominacyon shall not dure unto Christ's
coming, or else how should it be fulfilled, apo. xvij
that at Joan, says of the x. Kings that they shall leave this beast desolate
and naked, her flesh eaten up, and at last burn here up, God so putting it
into their her it is? Pau. Whose coming is with the work of Satan in great power
with lying signs and feigned miracles and with a migh ty deceyt with wyked
strong illusyons to the^ yt be forlorn. Osi. This is ye most holy sanctity,
of our most holy prelate y^ Pope, Pau. And for yt they have not recei ued the
love of the troth thereby to be saved, therefore shall god send the^ ye operacio^
of error to believe lies* that they al be dampened yt have not believed the
trowth but have consented to wykednes. These things has Paul prophesied of the
last dominacion and fall of Rome and of her popedom. Wherefore ye people of
Christ get ye out spedily far from her, lest ye be partakers of her wykednes
and be plaged also with the beast and her unclean clergy, as the Aungel cries
in the Apoca. unto us. And as for the Emprour of Ca* xviij
Rome, albeit he be yet so called, yet posse death he not Rome, nether dare he
once look thitherwarde without the popis con sent, which is so come to pass by
the extreme wykednes and execrable subtlety of the serpent and his vicar the
pope of Rome, for this same cause that if any man should be so bold as to once
open his mouth to lay any of these oracles and prophecies against the execrable
wikednes and intolerable Romish dominacio^ over our faith, he should apere to
obiecte it against the Emprours majesty, because he bears ^til the name of the
dominacion of Rome, and is no lord thereof. But the thing it self declares
clearly the evident difference enoughe betwixt the Emperors dominacyon over
Rome, and the Popis, albeit they be both said to be, ye one of Rome Emperor,
and the the other of Rome the Pope. So that there is no perell in calling the
Emperor or the Pone of Rome Antichrist, as their confederation and coniuracyon
this day ay^^st the Lord and his word declare them. But let us at last
return to our coniectu re. Sith it is given to the beast, now again putting
up her head to exercise and execute her tyranny. xlij. Roman months which
stand upon xxx. days, yt is to weit, days m. cc. lx. and the thing
compels us to take them for Angels In Daniel M. cc. x^.
days, that is, for m. cc. lx. of our common years, it can not be doubted but
that, these years once fulfilled, the end of the world is anon at hand.
But the doubt is, where we shall begin these years. Some there be that
think them to begin anon from the time of the Emperor Constantyne the
great, because of the gift that is feigned to have had been given to Pope
Syluester, and because of the translation of the seat Emperyall to
Constantinople, for that Paul Constan tines gift was Rome and half the empire.
says. He that holds must be taken away and then that man of sin shall be
reveled (and truly, fro that time wherein they feign themselves to have had
that rich gift of Constantyne, and they endoted and enryched with the best part
of the Empire, even with hole Rome, Italy and half ye Empire (as they say)
there was a voice herd in the air. That now is the most The worcester ds of the
translator and his conjecture.
pestilent poysone entered into the church of Rhome) From that day (I say) if
the noumber be told (which I would gladly it should there begin) then is the
Popedom at an end within these xxxin. yea res, or after Daniel within lxiij.
years. For then should the end of the world fall about ye year of our Lord. m.
ccccc. lxxvij. or after Daniel, m. cccccc. vij. as it apeared dani. xij.
to me by turnynge ye days into we^is when I gathered my exposicion upon
Daniel, as ye may there read my co^iectu re. But by what fraud else soever, ye
beast then got her emperyal possessions and pri^ cely riches, it seems not
true to me (says Osiander, yt Constantyne gave it them) for eue^ ye style only
of ye instrument made of the same devotion gift or legacy, proves it plainly
to be a stark lie, and of all lies, yt ever were made under heaven, the most
shameless, as the most well learned man Laurence Valla, and Nicholaus de Cusa,
and also Jerome Gatlatanus, and other most grave writers, now and sense, have
most clearly showed and proved it. Wherefore albeit Constantine made a
beginning to take away the former domi nacyon, which let ye moving of ye
riches to ye popedom, yet because the beast had not then as yet, ben utterly
destroid, she might not be said properly to put forth her horns, or to lift
up her head again, except she had first have been utter ly subverted and
overwhelmed as it were with waters. And therefore we shall justly begi^ne to reken
fro ye year, in y^ which after the translation of the empire, Rome was taken,
spoiled, and bre^t of ye Goths brought thither of their Capitain Alaricho. For
this is ye very just end of ye former dominacion after Daniel. And this was
done in the year of the city about m. c. lxiiij. and in yt year of Christ
about CCCC. xij. put now together the years of Christ. cccc. xij. and the
years of the Pope. M. cc. lx. and thou have the just noumber of M. CCCCCC.
lxxij. And when we shall write and tell so many years from Christ, then is the
fatale end of the Pope and of When we shall write m. cccccc. and lxxij. then
look for an end of all.
the city of Rome present at hand (if it rather be not so) as I have
coniectured it about. xxx. years to come. And this conjecture makes me, that
I think the yea res fro the celestial Adam unto the fyerve floude in the
second conjecture, and the iubile years of the church in the third
conjecture must not be rekened fro the birth of our Lord but from his re
surreccyon. For before that time he bore the form of a servant, as himself
said to not have been comen to be served but to serve. From his resurrection
therefore he began justly to possede his kingdom, when he said. All power is
given me in heaven and earth. For so shall it come to pass, that the end of
both the Pope and of Rome, and of the world shall fall into the year of our
Lord, about m. cccccc. lxxxviij. Whiles the fall of the Pope is like to come
in the year of Christ, about m. cccccc. lxxij. So that ye Popedom slain and
extinct, yet shall there remain, as it were* xvi. yeris in which men (the
adversary of Christ and antichrist Mcccccs lxxxviij. Mccccc. xlviij.
taken away, and the gospel freely preched) they shall begin again to live in a
wealy securytye and in almaner voluptuose lustis as they were wont to do. And
when they shall say, peace and secu C. xl.
ritie, then shall the soden destruction come Mcccccc lxxij.
over them as the panges of a woman traveling of child, and they shall not
avoid it. Wherefore let us awake and watch M. cccc^ xliij.
and be sober lest this day take us as a thief in the night. These things have
I C. xxvn. xvi.
setforth of the conjectures of the last times and end of the world. For
there be yet many other things which I will C. xi.
not open nor communicate to the multitude. But as for these things what credit
there ought to be given to them, I leave it to be esteemed of the spiritual and
church of Christ which can judge all things, them selves judged of noman.
Couiecturs ar they, I knowleg and confe^^e it, and no oracles. Not
withstandinge yet, unless I be begyled, they shall not litely begile ne deceive
any Christen reader.

Come down Lord Jesus unto judgment and deliver they persecuted little sely
flock. So be it.

Another co^iectur added of ye translater.

When the city of Rome was old M xxxvij. abouth ye year of Christ. cclxxxvij.
when Dioclesane themprour begane to reign: there were such dissencious sectis
heresies and false doctrine in the church of Rome, as of the Manicheis
Pelagia^s Arrius etc. as had not ben herd of before the popis then being Felix,
or rather In felix. Euticianus an heretic, Caius, not good. By whose
contencious scismes and sectis and their so gredy ambicion (for even then
begane they to beg and steall from the emprours part of their most pleasant
cities and richest possessions and lands, and to set themprours and Kings
together by the earis.) Dioclesiane was so greuosly offended, that he abhorred
them and their false religion and persecuted it, which they called the
christen religion (as they do now the popis faith) when it was nothing like
Christ and his gospel, but rather Satan's Kingdom and worse then the haithen.
Here begane the popis of Rome todeclare them selves very antichristis, and the
beast was reveled eue^ unto the very haithen emprours. For here begane the
Roman empire by the wikednes and fraudelent study of the popis to be divided,
as the French men from the Alemans. There was then such tumult inquietnes and
bataill stered up by the spirituality, that Dioclesiane was compelled to give
over the empire and lived sole a private person many yeris, and at last for
sorrow slew him self, such good gostely fathers had themprours of the popis in
those days. Here, I say, was the reuelacion of that beast begune whereof Paul.
ij. Thessa. ij. speaks. And the emprowrs that then held the empire bysuc
cession had waruing long before to hold fast the empire. For even then was the
first dominacion in falling and in translating to Constantinople. Fro this time
therefore (I conjecture) If ye reken Danielis days which be. Mccxc. yeris,
Dan. xij
and the angels days, so comes the end in y^. Mcccccxcvij. year of Christ
But and if ye reke^ Ioans, xlij. months from thence in the angels dais, we
shall come but to the year of our Lord aftir Ioa^s rekening. Mccccclxxvij. or.
Mccccclxvij, even xxx years less. For Daniel appears to have xxx years mo
the^ Ioh. which may chance for that we reken in Daniell from Christ's birthe
and in Joan, from his resurreccion. Wherefore me thinks it should be at an end
within these. xxxvij. years or with in. lxxvij. if we reke^ fro the resurreccion
of Christ, to whom be glory honor praise and thanks for ever. So be it.

Mcccccxlv. Translated by George Joy whereine many things be added out of the
said George his conjectures and now at last printed in the year. M. D. XCviij.
Math. xxv. A wake and watch for ye know not the day nor yet the hour when
the sone of man shall come.
The fautes escaped in the printing.
In B. y^ le^f iiij second side. Read. vi. hundred in the margen. And in the
twenty li ne, in clowtes. In the aight leif of B. i xiiij. line read brief. In
C. the second lef and first line of y^ second side read beast for least. In the
same and third line read beheld for lehold. In the. xv. line read overcame,
read in ye vij. lef of. C. in ye mar gen in the first side. ccc. xij. or. ccc.
xix. years* and in the aight lef and first line of ye first side, read is
obtained, and in the same side and last line save one read, of the se iiij
bestis. In D. the third left in the xi. line read M. lxxxiij. and in the.
xiiij. line M. ccccccc. lxxij. and in the first lef y^ last line save v. read.
M. lxx. In ye fifth lef, in yt margen read. iij. Angels yers and an half In
the. vij. lef and last line save. iiij. read assures us. In the aight lef,
second side, eleven line read, every one in his place. In the third lef first
side and xix line tead the dragon is satan* and in the aight line of the second
side, read, as say y^ Italia^s.

These shall ye find in the ap against the great Cundit at the sign of the fox
vubownde.


